Human–Computer Interaction Series
Hannah R. Marston
Shannon Freeman
Charles Musselwhite    Editors 
Mobile 
e-Health

Human–Computer Interaction Series
Editor-in-chief:
Desney Tan
Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA
Jean Vanderdonckt
Université catholique de Louvain, Belgium

More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/6033

Hannah R. Marston  •  Shannon Freeman 
Charles Musselwhite
Editors
Mobile e-Health

ISSN 1571-5035
Human–Computer Interaction Series
ISBN 978-3-319-60671-2        ISBN 978-3-319-60672-9  (eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-60672-9
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017954941
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of 
the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, 
broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information 
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology 
now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication 
does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book 
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the 
editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors 
or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims 
in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer International Publishing AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland
Editors
Hannah R. Marston
Health & Wellbeing Priority Research Area, 
School of Health, Wellbeing & Social  
Care, Faculty of Wellbeing, Education  
& Language Studies
The Open University
Milton Keynes, UK
Charles Musselwhite
Centre for Innovative Ageing
School of Human and Health Sciences 
Swansea University
Swansea, UK
Shannon Freeman
School of Nursing
University of Northern British Columbia
Prince George, BC, Canada

v
Contents
Part I  Introduction
	1	
An Introduction to the Potential for Mobile  
eHealth Revolution to Impact on Hard to Reach,  
Marginalised and Excluded Groups.......................................................	
3
Charles Musselwhite, Shannon Freeman, and Hannah R. Marston
Part II  mHealth Apps QS
	2	
Universal Design Mobile Interface Guidelines (UDMIG)  
for an Aging Population...........................................................................	
17
Ljilja Ruzic and Jon A. Sanfod
	3	
mHealth and the Digital Cyborg Body: The Running  
Apps in a Society of Control....................................................................	
39
Igor Sacramento and Vanissa Wanick
	4	
Can Quantified Self Be a Facilitating Technology  
to Help Older Adults Stay Longer in Their Home?..............................	
71
Christel De Maeyer
Part III  Games for Health
	5	
Using Technology to Increase Activity, Creativity  
and Engagement for Older Adults Through Visual Art.......................	
97
Alexander Paczynski, Laura Diment, David Hobbs,  
and Karen Reynolds
	6	
Can Mobile Digital Games Benefit Older Adults’ Health?..................	 115
Emmanuel Duplàa, David Kaufman, Louise Sauvé, Lise Renaud, 
and Alice Ireland

vi
Part IV  Ageing Perspectives to the Barriers and Enablers  
of Technology Use
	7	
Digital Game Technology and Older Adults..........................................	 149
Hannah R. Marston, Michael Kroll, Dennis Fink,  
Rakel Poveda, and Yves J. Gschwind
	8	
The Evolution of Telehealth....................................................................	 173
Melinda Martin-Khan, Shannon Freeman, Kevin Adam,  
and Georgia Betkus
Part V  Ethics, Theory & Service Provision
	9	
On the Need for Developmental Perspectives in Research  
on the Potential Positive and Negative Health Effects  
of Digital Games.......................................................................................	 201
Adrienne Holz Ivory and James D. Ivory
	10	 Open Issues in Designing Home Care Technologies.............................	 215
Angela Di Fiore and Francesco Ceschel
Part VI  Privacy & Legal Requirements
	11	 mHealth, Trust and the Security of Personal Data...............................	 237
Jennifer K. Lynch and Malcolm Fisk
	12	 Are mHealth Apps Safe? The Intended Purpose Rule,  
Its Shortcomings and the Regulatory Options Under  
the EU Medical Device Framework.......................................................	 251
Eugenio Mantovani and Pedro Cristobal Bocos
	13	 Regulation of Medical Digital Technologies..........................................	 277
Joris Wiersinga
Part VII  Conclusions
	14	 Transcendent Technology and Mobile eHealth.....................................	 299
Charles Musselwhite, Shannon Freeman,  
and Hannah R. Marston
Contents

Part I
Introduction

3
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017 
H.R. Marston et al. (eds.), Mobile e-Health, Human–Computer Interaction Series, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-60672-9_1
Chapter 1
An Introduction to the Potential for Mobile 
eHealth Revolution to Impact on Hard 
to Reach, Marginalised and Excluded Groups
Charles Musselwhite, Shannon Freeman, and Hannah R. Marston
Abstract  eHealth is the use of technology to serve and promote health and wellbe-
ing needs of a population. Mobile health is the use of wireless technologies to con-
nect, communicate and promote this amongst different stakeholders within the 
population. This has great potential for improving the lives of all populations, espe-
cially those from traditionally marginalised or hard-to-reach groups, including 
those from developing countries, older people and those with chronic conditions for 
example. Mobile ehealth (mhealth) can link together healthcare practitioners and 
individuals better, provide information or offer feedback to improve self-awareness 
and manage health conditions individually and can offer games or challenges to 
encourage or motivate individuals to improve health. There are still concerns, how-
ever, that need addressing before mhealth can meet its potential, including, for 
example, security and privacy, information overload, emphasis on solving health 
issues rather than maintaining good health and not fully understanding how it fits 
into everyday lives of people, especially those not traditionally associated with tech-
nology such as older people. More research is needed on acceptability of such sys-
tems and developing standards and design and usability guidance. Overall mhealth 
can be seen as both enablers and disrupters, with the potential to revolutionise inter-
actions people have about their own health but there is a need to reflect on the 
human and social issues surrounding such technology.
C. Musselwhite (*) 
Centre for Innovative Ageing, School of Human and Health Sciences, Swansea University, 
Swansea, UK
e-mail: c.b.a.musselwhite@swansea.ac.uk 
S. Freeman 
School of Nursing, University of Northern British Columbia, 3333 University Way,  
Prince George, BC, Canada 
H.R. Marston 
Health & Wellbeing Priority Research Area, School of Health, Wellbeing & Social Care, 
Faculty of Wellbeing, Education & Language Studies, The Open University,  
Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire, UK

4
This collection draws together contemporary research and thinking from leading 
scholars in the field of mobile eHealth. Here eHealth in this book is defined by the 
World Health Organisation (WHO 2005) as “the cost-effective and secure use of 
information communication technologies (ICT) in support of health and health 
related fields, including health-care services, health surveillance, health literature, 
and health education, knowledge and research” (pp. 109).
eHealth is a broad term, which in the healthcare sector includes a broad scope of 
purposes ranging from purely administrative services across the spectrum of health-
care service delivery (Health Canada 2010). Put simply, eHealth is the use of com-
puting and associated technologies serving and promoting health and well-being 
needs. Mobile health (mHealth) is the use of mobile, wireless technologies to con-
nect, communicate and promote this computing with the aim of supporting indi-
vidual’s health and well-being. The growing emphasis on mHealth programmes is 
reflected in the WHO’s 2016 report of the third global survey on eHealth noting that 
over 90% of member states countries reported at least one mHealth initiative (WHO 
2016).
Since the early 2000s, there has been unprecedented growth in the eHealth sector 
as the use of information and communication technology (ICT) expands across both 
high and low to middle income countries (WHO 2016). Traditional eHealth has 
been hugely advanced through improvements in mobile technologies and increased 
availability of applications. Continued growth of cellular networks across the globe 
fuels the rapid take-up of mHealth (WHO 2016). Seven billion people, 95% of the 
global population, now live in an area covered by a mobile cellular network 
(International Telecommunication Union 2016), comprising of mobile broadband 
networks of 3G or above each connecting 84% of the global population. However, 
there are large differences found between different countries and states. In high 
income countries around 90% of people have a mobile broadband contract, and in 
Singapore and Japan, the rate is over 100% (with people having over one subscrip-
tion). In developing countries, the rate averages around 39%, but with great fluctua-
tions – Africa remains the lowest continent of mobile subscriptions at around 20% 
network (International Telecommunication Union 2016).
People are beginning to engage with digital technologies such as Fitbits and 
mHealth apps to assist with self-monitoring and tracking one’s health, physical 
activity and nutrition, in addition to managing chronic health conditions, such as 
diabetes or fall prevention (i.e. iStoppFalls). While research in this field is still in its 
infancy, digital care platforms available on the internet or through download to a 
digital device are growing in popularity. The notion of the quantified self (QS) may 
be increasingly realised through digital resources such as www.medhelp.org, a digi-
tal platform that partners with healthcare partners such as Merck and Fitbit to sup-
port patient engagement and deliver health solutions and drive changes in clinical 
outcomes to millions of users (see, e.g. www.medhelp.com/).
The use of digital games utilised for cognitive or physical rehabilitation in con-
junction with the usability and accessibility issues is also relatively new. Hence, 
little is still known about the utility, use and best-design practices of these technolo-
gies for certain demographics. Although since 2008, research in the area of use and 
C. Musselwhite et al.

5
best-design practices has grown enabling researchers to explore and understand the 
needs and requirements of older adults in the domain of games for health and digital 
gameplaying (Marston and Graner-Ray 2016; Marston 2012, 2013; De Schutter 
2010; Nap et al. 2009; IJsselsteijn et al. 2007). In addition, research and thinking in 
this area stem from a variety of disciplines including public health, computer sci-
ence, and human-computer interaction (HCI), psychology, sociology and gerontol-
ogy, resulting in very different questions being addressed and different research 
frameworks being utilised.
The intention of this proposed edited book is to collectively bring together a 
series of works primarily associated with life-logging activities, mHealth apps and 
digital gaming across the lifespan. Since the turn of the twenty-first century, 
researchers have been exploring the possibilities of utilising commercial and  
purpose-built digital game hardware and software for primary use within health 
rehabilitation aimed at adults approximately 60–70 years. There remains a gap in 
understanding of the barriers and facilitators of eHealth technology use by older 
compared to younger cohorts. There has been little emphasis on expanding under-
standing of how older adults engage in life-logging activities via technology devices 
such as Fitbit or access online health resources to support self-care. Since the intro-
duction of smartphones (e.g. iPhone), the popularity of mHealth apps amongst 
younger populations has grown exponentially, resulting in a variety of apps to 
enable users to self-monitor their health and integrate their day-to-day habits easier, 
for example, online purchasing (e.g. Amazon); women’s health (e.g. monitor men-
strual cycle, pregnancy); order and pay for transport (e.g. coach companies, taxi 
firms); online dating, social media and utilities (e.g. flashlight, calculator); down-
load and read documents (e.g. Adobe, Microsoft Word); and access up-to-date cur-
rent affairs (e.g. BBC News).
These are just some of the apps available and there are many more which have 
been specifically developed for towns and cities worldwide. Although the develop-
ment and phenomenal take-up of smartphones have enabled the utility of mHealth 
apps to users across the lifespan, there is little published work associated to theoreti-
cal concepts, research methods and in-depth studies (e.g. feasibility, prospective 
and randomised control trials) focusing on the usability and accessibility of using 
apps, in addition to the accuracy and reliability of data collected over a period of 
time. Therefore, bringing together mHealth apps and ascertaining where in society 
these apps sit and whether users are gaining their full potential warrants further 
exploration and study.
The World Health Organisation (WHO) corporate strategy establishes the goals 
of building healthy populations and communities and combating ill health through 
the adoption of four strategic approaches:
•	 Reducing excess mortality, morbidity and disability, especially in poor and mar-
ginalised populations
•	 Promoting healthy lifestyles and reducing factors of risk to human health that 
arise from environmental, economic, social and behavioural causes
1  An Introduction to the Potential for Mobile eHealth Revolution to Impact...

6
•	 Developing health systems that equitably improve health outcomes, respond to 
peoples’ legitimate demands and are financially fair
•	 Developing an enabling policy and institutional environment in the health sector 
and promoting an effective health dimension to social, economic, environmental 
and development policy
It is important to stress that health and well-being must be viewed beyond simply 
as services delivered by the health sector alone. The contribution of other sectors is 
vitally for improving the health and well-being of the population.
The United Nation’s (UN) global partnership for sustainable development, 
Agenda 21 emphasised many elements which are necessary for the integration of 
local and national health concerns into environment and development planning. 
These are (1) identification and assessment of health hazards associated with envi-
ronment and development, (2) development of environmental health policy incorpo-
rating principles and strategies for all sectors responsible for development, (3) 
communication and advocacy of this policy to all levels of society and (4) a partici-
patory approach to implementing health and environment programmes. The poten-
tial for eHealth and mHealth to help meet these priorities across the globe is exciting. 
Increased data collection and sharing of such data at a macro- and micro-level 
(e.g. life logging) can lead to better understanding and therefore early detection or 
avoidance of hazards and can help develop and maintain evidence-based environ-
mental health policy. Such technology advances communication between different 
sectors and different users across society and helps foster more of a participatory 
approach to health and well-being, giving individuals more responsibility for their 
own health and well-being, supported by a variety of experts.
Mobile eHealth technologies have the potential to support the health and well-
being of vulnerable and marginalised populations who traditionally have been more 
difficult to reach groups on the margins of the greater population. This edited col-
lection will highlight how mobile eHealth technologies can support such groups 
who traditionally might be excluded or find it difficult to reach mainstream services. 
The main group concentrated upon is the older population. Ageing is a global phe-
nomenon; society is ageing at a faster rate than ever. People are living longer and at 
the same time birth rates and infant mortality is at an all-time low in many countries. 
Across the globe we live in an ageing society.
Western countries especially are seeing a rapidly ageing society due to a combi-
nation of people living longer due to better health and social care and lower birth 
rates. This results in both a higher number and a higher percentage of people in their 
later years. There are now 840 million people over 60 across the world, representing 
11.7% of the population. In 1950, there were only 384.7 million people aged over 
60, representing only 8.6% of the global population (UN 2015).
Projections suggest there will be two billion people aged over 60, representing 
21.2% of the global population by 2050 (UN 2015). The rate of increase in older 
people is faster in wealthier countries. For example, the United Kingdom (UK) 
will reach 25% of the population being over 60 by around 2030 (ONS 2015). The 
health of an ageing society is naturally of utmost importance as the prevalence of 
C. Musselwhite et al.

7
chronic disease is increased. It is imperative that older people not only live longer 
but live well for longer, that they are healthy and have good quality of life, that they 
are not excluded from activity and that they stay connected to the things that matter 
to them.
On the face of it, it seems telehealth and telecare systems should be able to sup-
port individuals to remain independent and able to live at home longer without 
recourse to using services. But not only does the right technology need to be avail-
able and accessible to the right person at the right time in their preferred location of 
care but that it must also be provided in a safe and secure manner which meets legal 
standards and policies. As one may see from Part VI Privacy & Legal Requirements 
(which comprises of three contributions by Lynch and Fisk, Mantovani and Cristobal 
Bocos and Wiersinga), this may not be as straightforward as is hoped. We need to 
understand the specific detail of the in-person interaction between individual and 
health professional. When compared to traditional provision of face-to-face care, 
important questions arise including the following: Can telehealth provide the same 
or better level of care? Does provision of care through telehealth identify the same 
detail as in-person consultation does? Can eHealth web platforms and apps identify 
the nuances that in-person consultation can do? Above all, the question remains, 
how and when should it supplement or replace in-person consultation? The answer 
is, yet, we just do not have a strong enough evidence base to reliably know, and 
more research is needed to identify how eHealth may fit into practice within and 
across countries.
An example of where we are now, in terms of how mobile eHealth, can be seen 
in the prolific availability of apps available to support someone living with long-
term chronic pain. Rosser and Eccleston noted in 2011 that in this case a person may 
have access to at least 111 different apps to support living with their pain. These 
range from passive systems that provide information (54% of them) to monitoring 
and tracking (24%) and interventions (17%); some provide linking with healthcare, 
some are individual, and some provide peer-to-peer support (Rosser and Eccleston 
2011). Since 2011, one can only imagine the vast number of apps which would now 
be available given the vast expansion in digital app and eHealth technology. Faced 
with the plethora of apps, it can be overwhelming for a patient or even a health pro-
fessional make the correct choice of which eHealth resource best fits the needs of 
the person.
Despite the abundance of available applications, the scientific evaluation of apps 
is scarce. Moreover, there are barriers to the use of mHealth for chronic pain man-
agement, which are similar for other conditions. Vardeh et al. (2013) identify (1) 
security and privacy concerns, (2) the burden of too much information (especially 
via sound and text), (3) an overwhelming amount of information, (4) an overempha-
sis on pain rather than exploring diversionary tactics, (5) poor compatibility with 
other records (e.g. medical records), (6) physical or cognitive restriction in using the 
device and (7) that costs may be increased rather than reduced. In this book, the 
chapter by Ruzic and Sanford (Chap. 2) examines this in more detail.
More research is not only needed on the efficacy of such systems but on the 
acceptability as well. Developing evidence-based standards, codesigning of apps 
1  An Introduction to the Potential for Mobile eHealth Revolution to Impact...

8
with people who would use them and having systematic design strategies start to 
order such a milieu of technology. This collection of papers deals with this; see 
Lynch and Fisk (Chap. 11), for example, on setting standards and Ruzic and Sanford 
on design strategies (Chap. 2), especially relating their new set of standards to peo-
ple living with multiple sclerosis as they age.
Digital technology is often seen as a panacea for global health issues, not least in 
developing countries with dispersed communities and limited resources. Indeed, 
there are more mobile apps per head in Africa than any other low to middle income 
country outside of India. Successful examples include speeding up of early infant 
HIV diagnosis by turning around test results quicker in the SMART project Nigeria 
and improving access to health information and services amongst rural women and 
children in the Mobile Technology for Community Health (MOTECH) initiative 
with the Ghana Health Service. Access to healthcare varies considerably across dif-
ferent low to middle income countries and regions.
As a result, inequalities exist in provision healthcare across low to middle income 
countries. Generally, people living in urban locations have better access to health-
care than the rural areas. The dispersed nature of populations and healthcare in low 
to middle income countries have resulted in the World Health Organisation promot-
ing eHealth projects aimed at crossing the physical accessibility to healthcare. As an 
example in Africa where inequalities are high, these include the Telemedicine 
Network for Francophone African Countries (RAFT), Access to Research in Health 
Programme, ePortuguese Network and Pan-African e-Network Project.
This collection of chapters can help to demystify the mobile eHealth revolution. 
It offers up a mirror which helps researchers, developers and society look at techno-
logical advances and identifies technology as the primary means of leading the 
mobile eHealth revolution. We need to pause and slow down the technocratic 
approach to allow for an evidence base to be developed to show whether the pleth-
ora of eHealth technology is assisting to improve the health and well-being of indi-
viduals in contrast to simply be a means of generating revenue for its creators. 
Chapters in this book will assist to support better understanding of how eHealth 
technology fits within society and within individual lives. It is paramount to reflect 
on whether technology enables its users to improve their daily lives, to function bet-
ter collectively and individually.
We start this collection with Ruzic and Stanford (Chap. 2) who look at four dif-
ferent design strategies for involving older people in developing usability of tech-
nologies – universal design, design for ageing, universal usability and handheld 
mobile device interface design. All four have merits, but not one approach does 
everything. It is a case of choosing the right approach for the questions being asked 
or utilising the best parts of all four approaches. In bringing the best parts of each 
together, the integrative guidelines Universal Design Mobile Interface Guidelines 
(UDMIG) are proposed, and their refinement and applicability are discussed in the 
chapter.
The nature of mobile eHealth that allows personalisation and connectivity with 
other people fosters a perfect platform for developing support for people in the form 
of challenges or games. Across Europe the Interactive Software Federation of 
C. Musselwhite et al.

9
Europe (ISFE) has reported digital gameplay across Europe to decrease as people 
age, with most gamers being in the youth categories (ISFE 2012). But there has 
been an increase in looking at older digital gamers (Musselwhite et  al. 2016). 
Marston (2012, 2013) identified a series of rationales, pleasures and in-game per-
spectives as to why older adults would engage with games: a purpose, educational 
elements, goals, addressing real problems, gain knowledge, enjoyment, satisfaction 
and obstacles. For the game to be successful, the implementation of objectives, 
challenges, goals and rewards should be introduced over the duration of play. 
Malone (1980, 1982) and IJsselsteijn et al. (2007) suggest implementing varying 
and increasing levels of difficulty to facilitate this goal. Allowing users to build 
upon their skill and mastery is an important element of gaming. Offering users, the 
opportunity to complete different levels will enable users to build upon one’s self-
confidence and the skills needed (Malone 1980, 1982; Melenhorst 2002; IJsselsteijn 
et al. 2007).
Implementing specific content into a game has the potential to build upon ones’ 
knowledge; therefore, learning enables users to enhance their skills, knowledge and 
personal achievement. Understanding the design requirements of older adults is one 
of the fundamental areas that need to be addressed and supported by the games 
industry and research and development projects for future development. Van 
Bronswijk (2006) states “active engagement of older adults in the design process is 
imperative to successful take-up of the technologies, bridging the generation-gap of 
young creative and older users” (pp. 184). Integrating older adults from the initial 
concept stage, continuing throughout the development and marketing processes, 
could enable industry and projects to learn and understand end user concerns. 
Integrating learning and educational elements could provide end users of all genera-
tions the ability to learn while playing and provide a purpose to gameplaying.
Combining a purpose within play will aid users to understand the end goal and 
objectives of the game. While combining a variety of levels of difficulty, challenges 
have the potential to aid the learning process, build upon self-confidence and keep 
the end users focused and engaged. Subsequently, providing a clear and positive 
feedback during play would enable users to build up their self-confidence and 
knowledge. There are four chapters addressing how far games can improve the 
health and well-being of older adults. Duplaa et al. (Chap. 6) note how most research 
on games and health have centred on the benefits of digital gameplay on computers 
and game consoles. They take the discussion a step further looking at the potential 
for mobile digital games in the health and well-being of older adults, specifically in 
terms of physical, mental and social interactions. There are two chapters giving fur-
ther examples of gamification and health. Marston et al. (Chap. 7) introduce knowl-
edge gleaned from the iStoppFalls programme on what type of games older people 
enjoy playing and how and why they play such games – what is their motivation to 
interact? What do they enjoy doing? What do they themselves get out of it? It’s an 
important reminder not just to look at objective outcomes in relation to games but to 
look at interaction with games from the perspective of the older person themselves.
A further example is shown by Paczynski et al. (Chap. 5) examining how an 
interactive and immersive art programme called Splashboard can aid health and 
1  An Introduction to the Potential for Mobile eHealth Revolution to Impact...

10
well-being of participants living with one or more medical conditions including 
dementia, depression or recovery from stroke. The simplicity of the technology is 
key; the art is created on a video screen of the real world, simply by moving the 
body in different ways to create a “painting”. Naturally, the nature of such technol-
ogy improves physical activity but also important is the improvements in immersion 
and enjoyment when creating with technology such as this. Sometimes, immersion, 
flow and enjoyment of creating art are the motivation for physical activity, thus 
improving health and well-being without it feeling like a chore. Again, it seems 
common sense but amazing how many times enjoyment is overlooked as being 
important in relation to motivating people to improve their health and well-being.
Holz Ivory et al. (Chap. 9) explore and discuss a variety of research which has 
specific focus within the health domain and how digital games can have effect on 
the respective participants in the studies. Furthermore, the respective authors (Holz 
Ivory and Ivory) suggest developmental approaches and methods for future work in 
this domain in a bid to guide future research in the area of gaming and health 
research in particular across older population.
Big data is often championed and heralded as helping to improve society. Data is 
collected and now shared in many different health and care situations. This data can 
be highly personalised and used at individual and collective levels. One growing 
trend associated with this is the quantified self where mobile devices can collect 
data about our daily lives. Simple and relatively cheap devices can now include col-
lection of all sorts of data from steps taken, distance travelled, sleep patterns to heart 
rate and calorie intake. A little more complex and with some direct user input can 
see people add their own thoughts or feelings to the data, creating life-logging 
e-diary technologies. How might these systems be used to improve health and well-
being of people? Again, especially people on the margins or those for whom tech-
nology is not always seen as second nature. These elements are covered in terms of 
philosophies of the self in Sacremento and Wanick’s Chap. 3 and then applicability 
of this to keeping older people independent and at home viewed in DeMaeyer’s 
contribution (Chap. 4). How this changes the behaviour through changes in under-
standing of the body is described.
Technologies are increasingly being viewed as a means to keeping people inde-
pendent and keeping people from accessing services unnecessarily. Technology can 
reduce the geographical distance required to travel to healthcare providers, surger-
ies, hospitals and outpatient clinics, for example. Technology can compile health 
monitoring of individuals and send them to healthcare professionals without the 
need for the individual or the healthcare professional to travel. Consultations can 
happen in the home with doctors and other healthcare practitioners through live 
video links. Reduction in unnecessary visits and keeping people from having to 
access healthcare is seen as the positive outcome. The reality is not as simple as it 
might seem, as Di Fiore and Ceschel (Chap. 10) remind us in their chapter of tech-
nologies supporting home care. Home care is a complex task, often supporting 
someone with co-morbidities and a variety of needs. The chapter reminds us to start 
with the person and their needs and requirements first and foremost, stressing how 
much of the research in the field is on the technological innovation itself rather than 
C. Musselwhite et al.

11
its interaction with people. The coordination of care is vital in this context but again 
is typically seen as secondary to the technology itself, so again there is a need to 
involve users of the technology, the support workers, in the development of such 
technology.
Mobile eHealth has the potential for revolutionising how people understand and 
interact with their own health and their own bodies. They are both enablers and 
disrupters as pointed out by Lynch and Fisk (Chap. 11). There is the decentralisation 
of medicine, a reduction in top-down nature of medical provision and a wider poten-
tial for sharing data. Ultimately it has potential to change individual’s own health 
behaviour. Naturally, this has very strong ethical and governance implications. Who 
owns such data when it is ultimately the person’s own behaviour, yet it is only inter-
preted through interaction with the device and sometimes additional interaction 
with health professionals? What are the security issues; what if there are breaches 
of data? What are the privacy issues? These are again covered by Lynch and Fisk 
(Chap. 11).
Given that much mobile eHealth appears as apps, Mantovani and Cristobal 
Bocos (Chap. 12) and Wiersinga (Chap. 13) cover the legal issues surrounding such 
mobile apps. Medical devices are clearly covered by law that enables them to be fit 
for purpose and have undergone rigorous testing, but apps fit a grey area just outside 
of this and can be developed and sold as a non-medical device meaning they are not 
subject to such stringent checks and laws. There is much debate about top-down 
regulation vs bottom-up innovation, with new laws perhaps being needed to fit such 
technologies.
This is an exciting time for health and technology. Potential issues with individ-
ual ownership of and individual responsibility for health can be resolved with 
mobile eHealth. They can be of benefit to groups who are marginalised or excluded 
from regular health and complement existing health services and support. But, it is 
also a dangerous time. Technology continues to advance quickly, while the research 
evidence to support its use and philosophical debate surrounding the value of its use 
have not yet caught up to highlight the relative merits and dangers of such apps and 
how individuals and society can gain best outcomes from them and maximise their 
use to facilitate understanding and improvement in health behaviours. This book 
aims to provide evidence to begin to plug this gap, drawing on expertise in the field 
to pause and reflect on the social, philosophical and human issues surrounding the 
accelerated development of mobile eHealth, telehealth and abundance of health and 
well-being apps.
References
De Schutter B (2010) Never too old to play: the appeal of digital games to an older audience. 
Games Culture 6(2):155–170
Health Canada (2010) Ehealth. Available at http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hcs-sss/ehealth-esante/index-
eng.php. Accessed 15 June 2017
1  An Introduction to the Potential for Mobile eHealth Revolution to Impact...

12
IJsselsteijn W, Nap HH, de Kort Y, Poels K (2007) Digital game design for elderly users. In: 
Proceedings of the 2007 conference on future play. ACM, Toronto, pp 17–22
Interactive Software Federation of Europe (ISFE) (2012) Videogames in Europe: 2012 Consumer 
Study. Retrieved from http://www.isfe.eu/industry-facts/statistics. Accessed 15 June 2017
International Telecommunications Union (2016 ICT facts and figures 2016. ITU, Geneva. 
Available at http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/facts/ICTFactsFigures2016.
pdf. Accessed 15 June 2017
Malone TW (1980) What makes things fun to learn? Heuristics for designing instructional com-
puter games. In: Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGSMALL symposium and the first SIGPC 
symposium on small systems. ACM, New York, pp 162–169. doi:10.1145/800088.802839
Malone TW (1982) Heuristics for designing enjoyable user interfaces: lessons from computer 
games. In: Proceedings of the 1982 conference on human factors in computing systems. ACM, 
New York, pp 63–68. doi:10.1145/800049.801756
Marston HR (2012) Older adults as 21st century game designers. Comput Games J  Whitsun 
1(1):90–102
Marston HR (2013) Design recommendations for digital game design within an ageing society. 
J Educ Gerontol 39(2):103–118
Marston HR, Graner-Ray S (2016) Older women on the game: understanding digital game perspe-
tives from an ageing cohort. In: Nierling L, Dominguez Rue E (eds) Ageing and technology: 
perspectives from the social sciences. Transcript-Verlag, Bielefeld, pp 67–92
Melenhorst AS (2002) Adopting communication technology in later life: the decisive role of ben-
efits. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The 
Netherlands
Musselwhite C, Marston HR, Freeman S (2016) From needy and dependent to independent Homo 
Ludens: exploring digital gaming and older people. Games Cult 11(1–2):3–6
Nap HH, de Kort YAW, IJsselsteijn WA (2009) Senior gamers: preferences, motivations and needs. 
Geron 8(4):247–262
Office for National Statistics (ONS) (2015) Annual mid-year population estimates for the 
UK.  Available at https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/populationandmi-
gration/populationestimates/bulletins/annualmidyearpopulationestimates/latest. Accessed 15 
June 2017
Rosser BA, Eccleston C (2011) Smartphone applications for pain management. J Telemed Telecare 
17:308–312
United Nations (UN) (2015) World population ageing. United Nations, New York. Available at 
http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/publications/pdf/ageing/WPA2015_
Report.pdf. Accessed 15 June 2017
Van Bronswijk JEMH (2006) Persuasive GERONtechnology: an introduction. Springer, Berlin/
Heidelberg, pp 183–186. Copyright ©2006
Vardeh D, Edwards R, Jamison RN, Eccleston C (2013) There’s an app for that: mobile technology 
is a new advantage in managing chronic pain. Clinical Updates, Pain, Dec, pp 1-7
WHO (World Health Organization) (2005) Resolution WHA58.33. Sustainable health financ-
ing, universal coverage and social health insurance. In: Fifty-eighth World Health Assembly, 
Geneva, 16–25 May 2005. Resolutions and decisions annex. World Health Organization, 
Geneva. Available at http://apps.who.int/medicinedocs/documents/s21475en/s21475en.pdf. 
Accessed 15 June 2017
WHO (World Health Organization) (2016) Global diffusion of eHealth: making universal health 
coverage achievable. Report of the third global survey on eHealth. World Health Organization, 
Geneva. Available at http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/252529/1/9789241511780-eng.
pdf?ua=1. Accessed 15 June 2017
C. Musselwhite et al.

13
Charles Musselwhite is an associate professor, at the Centre for Innovative Ageing, Swansea 
University, and heads-up the groups Environments and Ageing research strand. He is Operational 
Director of the Centre for Ageing and Dementia Research (CADR), an initiative to develop and 
enhance research, policy and practice for older people across Wales. He has a particular interest in 
ageing, travel and transport, addressing technological, environmental, health and sustainability 
contexts of transportation and built environment studies. Prior to joining CIA, his research address-
ing ageing and transport spans four interconnected areas including (1) attitudes to transport and 
travel; (2) older people, travel behaviour change and health and wellbeing; (3) giving up driving 
for later life; and (4) road user safety and ageing. Dr. Musselwhite has been involved in a variety 
of other built environment, mental health and shipping projects. Charles has advised the 
Parliamentary Advisory Council for Transport Safety on older people’s transport issues. He is a 
member of the British Society of Gerontology. His research on older people and their travel and 
driving behaviour has involved several invited international and national presentations at confer-
ences and invited presentations to the House of Commons and the House of Lords. He has appeared 
on BBC TV and UK and Swedish radio stations on the subject.
Shannon Freeman is an assistant professor in the School of Nursing at the University of Northern 
British Columbia, co-president of the British Columbia Psychogeriatric Association, current vice 
president of the International Association on Geriatrics and Gerontology Coalition of Student 
Organizations and an interRAI Canada researcher. Dr. Freeman’s research interests focus on the 
health and wellbeing of vulnerable populations with current research projects in the areas of geron-
technology, mental health and wellbeing of older adults and First Nations Elders and long-term 
care. She is a director of the Prince George Hospice Society and also takes an active role in research 
examining hospice palliative and end-of-life care.
Hannah R. Marston is a research fellow, in the Health and Wellbeing Priority Research Area  
(http://healthwellbeing.kmi.open.ac.uk/) in the School of Health, Wellbeing and Social Care, at 
The Open University, UK. In March 2017, Dr. Marston organized the first digital health and well-
being symposium as lead of the Digital Health and Wellbeing Special Interest Group in the Health 
and Wellbeing Priority Research Area. The event was attended by external academics from across 
the UK and comprised of several external speakers and a panel discussion. She is currently orga-
nizing the 2nd Digital Health and Wellbeing conference to be held between 1–3 May, 2018, at The 
Open University campus. Hannah has published over 20 journal papers and 5 book chapters and 
currently serves on two editorial boards. Previously, Dr. Marston has worked internationally under-
taking fixed-term positions in Germany as a research scientist on the iStoppFalls EU project at the 
Institute of Movement and Sport Gerontology at the German Sport University Cologne and in 
Canada as post-doctoral fellow at the University of Waterloo. Hannah interests are multi-cross 
disciplinary and include digital games, gender, ageing, lifespan, gamification, technology use and 
health.
1  An Introduction to the Potential for Mobile eHealth Revolution to Impact...

Part II
mHealth Apps QS

17
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017 
H.R. Marston et al. (eds.), Mobile e-Health, Human–Computer Interaction Series, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-60672-9_2
Chapter 2
Universal Design Mobile Interface Guidelines 
(UDMIG) for an Aging Population
Ljilja Ruzic and Jon A. Sanfod
Abstract  As people age, many of them experience decline in both health and func-
tion, which can negatively impact their use of and interaction with user interfaces. 
Four of the most widely accepted strategies for the design of user interfaces for an 
aging population and individuals with functional limitations were analyzed as part 
of this project: universal design (UD), design for aging (DfA), universal usability 
(UU), and guidelines for handheld mobile device interface design (MID). Analysis 
of the guidelines suggested that none of the four strategies alone were sufficiently 
comprehensive and inclusive enough to meet the range and diversity of usability 
needs of older adults within the environment of mobile touch screen interfaces. 
Based on the four strategies, a set of integrative guidelines, universal design mobile 
interface guidelines (UDMIG), were proposed to ensure usability of mobile eHealth 
devices by older adults. This chapter reports the continued development, refine-
ment, and extension of the first version of the guidelines into UDMIG v.2.0, a more 
robust and inclusive set of design guidelines.
2.1  Introduction
Technology use among the aging population is growing and becoming more wide-
spread (Fisk et al. 2012). However, with increased age many individuals experience 
decreased ranges and levels of abilities, such as vision, hearing, haptics, cognition, 
and dexterity, which can negatively impact their use of and interaction with user 
interfaces. Typical user interface problems include misunderstanding of general 
icons, long task completion times, poor task performance, errors, difficulty reading 
text due to small font size and poor color contrast, and confusion associating inputs 
with outputs (Becker 2004; Bederson et  al. 2003; Chadwick-Dias et  al. 2003). 
Nevertheless, these problems can be overcome by accommodating the wide range 
L. Ruzic (*) • J.A. Sanfod 
The Center for Assistive Technology and Environmental Access, CATEA, Georgia Institute of 
Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
e-mail: ljilja@gatech.edu; jon.sanford@coa.gatech.edu

18
of sensory perception, motor, communication, and mental needs into the design of 
the user interfaces (Morrell 2001).
Various design strategies are often used to address usability issues of interfaces 
by older adults and others with functional limitations. Four of the most commonly 
applied strategies include universal design (UD), design for aging (DfA), universal 
usability (UU), and guidelines for handheld mobile device interface design (MID). 
The four sets of existing guidelines were analyzed to determine their applicability 
to the design of mobile eHealth interfaces for older adults. Analysis of the guide-
lines suggested that none of the four strategies alone were sufficiently comprehen-
sive and inclusive enough to meet the range and diversity of usability needs of older 
adults within the environment of mobile interfaces. To address these usability needs 
and reconcile inconsistencies among the four strategies, an initial set of integrative 
guidelines, universal design mobile interface guidelines (UDMIG), was proposed to 
ensure usability of mobile eHealth devices by older adults (Kascak et al. 2014). This 
chapter reports the continued development, refinement, and extension of those 
guidelines into UDMIG v.2.0, which is a more robust and inclusive set of design 
guidelines.
2.2  Four Design Strategies for Usability by Older Adults
Four of the most widely accepted strategies for the design of user interfaces for 
aging population and individuals with functional limitation were analyzed as part of 
this project: UD, DfA, UU, and MID. UD (Mace 1988) is a strategy that supports 
the diverse ranges and combinations of abilities and limitations that characterize the 
aging population. The purpose of UD is to design physical environments (e.g., 
buildings, spaces, products, graphics) for everyone and, by doing so, to overcome 
the barriers to usability that come with aging (Law et al. 2008). In contrast to UD’s 
“design-for-all” approach, DfA (Nichols et al. 2006) specifically focuses on the 
design of user interfaces based on the needs and functional limitations of older 
adults. DfA is a strategy that explores the factors that constrain the use of products 
and user interfaces by older adults, as well as aspects of human-computer interface 
design that accommodate older users with age-associated disabilities and limita-
tions (Zajicek 2001). Like UD, UU focuses on usability and inclusivity of all users. 
However, unlike UD, the domain of UU is information and communication inter-
faces (Shneiderman 1986). It consists of the eight guidelines, called the Eight 
Golden Rules of Interface Design. Finally, MID (Gong and Tarasewich 2004) are 
based on UU but are extending its application to interfaces on mobile and touch-
screen platforms.
L. Ruzic and J.A. Sanfod

19
2.2.1  Universal Design
UD was defined by Mace in 1988 as design of products and environments to be 
usable by all people, to the greatest extent possible, without the need for adaptation 
or specialized design (Mace 1988). The purpose of UD is design of usable and equi-
table environments, products, and interfaces by reducing their complexity and mini-
mizing individuals’ reliance on their physical and cognitive capabilities in interacting 
with them (Universal Design Policy 2001). UD is an integral component of every-
day design, considering users’ ranges and combinations of abilities from the begin-
ning of the design process (Ruptash 2013; Sanford 2012). As a result, UD creates 
environments, products, and interfaces that any person, regardless of cognitive and 
physical impairments, can use and access. It advocates for usable design by the 
greatest number of people, addressing a wider range of limitations and combina-
tions of limitations that one might have (Falls Among Older Adults 2013).
To promulgate UD, 7 principles and 30 associated design guidelines were devel-
oped by a team of designers at NC State University (Connell et  al. 1997) (see 
Table 2.1).
2.2.2  Design for Aging
DfA is a tool that not only articulates the problems that must be considered when 
designing systems, products, and environments for older adults but also provides 
design guidelines for addressing those problems (Fisk et al. 2009). DfA consists of 
the 52 design guidelines, grouped into six categories (see Table 2.2) that cover the 
factors that constrain the use of user interfaces by older adults, as well as aspects of 
human-computer interface design that accommodate older users with age-­associated 
disabilities and limitations (i.e., memory, cognitive, hearing, visual, dexterity, and 
physical impairments) (Zajicek 2001).
2.2.3  Universal Usability
To extend UD beyond the physical environment and make it applicable to informa-
tion and communication technology (ICT), UU was developed to make ICT inter-
faces usable and accessible by all people, with and without disabilities (Meiselwitz 
et al. 2010). Shneiderman (2000) believed that UU would be pervasive, enabling 
more than 90% of all households to be successful users of information and com-
munications services at least once a week. To promote UU, Shneiderman and col-
leagues developed the Eight Golden Rules of Interface Design (see Table  2.3) 
applicable to most interactive systems to enable the widest range of users to benefit 
from information and communication services (Shneiderman and Plaisant 1987).
2  Universal Design Mobile Interface Guidelines (UDMIG) for an Aging Population

20
Table 2.1  The principles of universal design©
Principle one: Equitable use
The design is useful and marketable to people with diverse abilities
  1a. Provide the same means of use for all users: identical whenever possible; equivalent when 
not
  1b. Avoid segregating or stigmatizing any users
  1c. Provisions for privacy, security, and safety should be equally available to all users
  1d. Make the design appealing to all users
Principle two: Flexibility in use
The design accommodates a wide range of individual preferences and abilities
  2a. Provide choice in methods of use
  2b. Accommodate right- or left-handed access and use
  2c. Facilitate the user’s accuracy and precision
  2d. Provide adaptability to the user’s pace
Principle three: Simple and intuitive use
Use of the design is easy to understand, regardless of the user’s experience, knowledge, 
language skills, or current concentration level
  3a. Eliminate unnecessary complexity
  3b. Be consistent with user expectations and intuition
  3c. Accommodate a wide range of literacy and language skills
  3d. Arrange information consistent with its importance
  3e. Provide effective prompting and feedback during and after task completion
Principle four: Perceptible information
The design communicates necessary information effectively to the user, regardless of ambient 
conditions or the user’s sensory abilities
  4a. Use different modes (pictorial, verbal, tactile) for redundant presentation of essential 
information
  4b. Provide adequate contrast between essential information and its surroundings
  4c. Maximize “legibility” of essential information
  4d. Differentiate elements in ways that can be described (i.e., make it easy to give instructions 
or directions)
  4e. Provide compatibility with a variety of techniques or devices used by people with sensory 
limitations
Principle five: Tolerance for error
The design minimizes hazards and the adverse consequences of accidental or unintended actions
  5a. Arrange elements to minimize hazards and errors: most used elements, most accessible; 
hazardous elements eliminated, isolated, or shielded
  5b. Provide warnings of hazards and errors
  5c. Provide fail-safe features
  5d. Discourage unconscious action in tasks that require vigilance
Principle six: Low physical effort
The design can be used efficiently and comfortably and with a minimum of fatigue
  6a. Allow user to maintain a neutral body position
  6b. Use reasonable operating forces
  6c. Minimize repetitive actions
  6d. Minimize sustained physical effort
(continued)
L. Ruzic and J.A. Sanfod

21
2.2.4  Handheld Mobile Device Interface Design
To accommodate the growing number of mobile devices, the MID were developed 
by Gong and Tarasewich (2004) based on the Eight Golden Rules of Interface 
Design. Among the 15 design guidelines (see Table 2.4), the first four mirror rules 
1, 3, 4, and 7 of the Eight Golden Rules of UU, while the other four are modified 
versions of the remaining four Golden Rules to fit the mobile environment. The 
Table 2.1  (continued)
Principle seven: Size and space for approach and use
Appropriate size and space is provided for approach, reach, manipulation, and use regardless of 
user’s body size, posture, or mobility
  7a. Provide a clear line of sight to important elements for any seated or standing user
  7b. Make reach to all components comfortable for any seated or standing user
  7c. Accommodate variations in hand and grip size
  7d. Provide adequate space for the use of assistive devices or personal assistance
Source: Connell et al. 1997. The Principles of Universal Design
Table 2.2  Design for aging categories
1. Guidelines for visual presentation of information secure required visual information for 
aging population, focusing on adequate levels of illumination and improved conditions for 
visual perception, increasing sizes, brightness, and contrast of visual objects (e.g., text, 
images, icons), isolating messages from other message channels, keeping consistent 
positioning of target items, and engaging alternative sensory systems for users who have 
serious visual impairments
2. Guidelines for auditory presentation of information help ensure that older adults receive 
needed auditory information, with focus on making speech more intelligible, on avoiding 
compressed and speeded speech, on using context to interpret speech (e.g., good structure in 
written and spoken texts, videoconferencing), on using other sensory modalities, and on 
improving the efficacy of warning signals
3. Guidelines for haptic presentation of information assist with increasing the quality of 
interaction with technology user interfaces while using the haptic processing and concentrating 
on the use of vibration to signal events and a choice of vibration frequency
4. Guidelines for the design of input devices help with user interaction with input devices by 
minimizing the number of steps of the process as well as the number of controls, providing the 
consistency of the layout control elements, designing for expectations or affordances (visual 
elements that suggest function), and providing alternative ways to navigate with input devices
5. Guidelines for the design of output devices focus on specific issues related to devices and to 
visual and auditory displays, such as choosing the type of display and the angle from which the 
display is read, shielding displays in outdoor environments, effectively presenting the important 
and warning information, and providing the tactile output devices for simple signaling
6. Guidelines for effective interface design address the human-computer interface problems 
related to menu designs, display layouts, system navigation, information organization, error 
recovery, compatibility, and design of help systems to accommodate older adults’ expectations 
about how the system works and to ensure their goals match how the system functions
Source: Fisk et al. (2009)
2  Universal Design Mobile Interface Guidelines (UDMIG) for an Aging Population

22
additional seven guidelines address the unique characteristics of the mobile inter-
face environment.
2.3  Comparison of the Four Design Strategies
The limitations older adults have can vary not only among individuals but within 
individuals over the course of a day, from day to day, and over time (Sanford 2012). 
Among the four, DfA is the only population-specific (i.e., a focus on older adults) 
strategy. However, more importantly, it is also the only strategy that explicitly links 
individuals’ needs and abilities to design solutions. As such, it provides both an 
understanding of what the functional problems of older adults are and guidance on 
how design can be used to solve those problems. This person-environment fit 
approach not only provides an understanding of why interface design needs to be 
different to be usable by older adults but also the tools to create unique and innova-
tive interfaces without relying on a rigid set of prescriptive rules.
In contrast to DfA, the other three design strategies address design for all users, 
including those with and without functional limitations. As such, these strategies 
Table 2.3  Eight Golden Rules of Interface Design
1. Strive for consistency
Consistent sequences of actions are required in similar situations, and identical terminology 
should be used whenever possible
2. Cater to universal usability
The needs of diverse users including novices, experts, users of all age ranges, and users with 
disabilities need to be recognized
3. Offer informative feedback
For frequent and minor user actions, there should be modest system feedback, whereas for 
infrequent and major actions, the response should be more substantial
4. Design dialog to yield closure
Sequences of actions should be organized into groups with a beginning, middle, and end, with 
an informative feedback at the completion of a group of actions
5. Prevent errors
The system should be designed such that users cannot make serious errors, and if a user makes 
an error, the interface should detect the error and offer simple, constructive, and specific 
instructions for recovery
6. Permit easy reversal of actions
As much as possible, actions should be reversible
7. Support internal locus of control
Experienced users need to feel they are in charge of the interface and that the interface responds 
to their actions
8. Reduce short-term memory load
Interfaces in which users must remember information from one screen and then use that 
information on another screen should be avoided
Source: Shneiderman and Plaisant (1987)
L. Ruzic and J.A. Sanfod

23
propose a universal usability approach to everyday design. In addition, all three 
focus solely on how to design, without linking design to individuals’ needs and 
abilities. Therefore, while these guidelines may instill a sense of what to design for 
universal usability, without an understanding of why, it is difficult to develop designs 
that will actually achieve that goal.
Among all four strategies, UD is the only one that does not focus on interface 
design, having been developed primarily for the physical environment. As a result, 
Table 2.4  Guidelines for handheld mobile device interface design
1. Enable frequent users to use shortcuts
Reduce the number of operations needed to perform regular (i.e., repetitive) tasks because time 
is often more critical to a mobile device user
2. Offer informative feedback
For every operator action, provide substantial and understandable system feedback
3. Design dialogs to yield closure
Organize sequences of actions into groups with a beginning, middle, and end, with an 
informative feedback at the completion of a group of actions
4. Support internal locus of control
Provide the interface that responds to user’s actions, so that they feel in charge of the system
5. Consistency
Provide the same “look and feel” (elements of mobile interfaces) across multiple platforms and 
devices and device-independent input/output methodologies
6. Reversal of actions
Ensure that mobile applications rely on network connectivity as little as possible
7. Error prevention and simple error handling
Ensure that nothing potentially harmful is triggered by too simple operation (e.g., power on/off)
8. Reduce short-term memory load
Provide interface that relies on recognition of function choices instead of memorization of 
commands and uses different modalities (e.g., sound) to convey information where appropriate
9. Design for multiple and dynamic contexts
Configure the output to users’ needs and preferences (e.g., text size, brightness), allow single- 
and no-handed operation, and ensure that the application adapts itself automatically to the user’s 
current environment
10. Design for small devices
Provide word selection instead of requiring text input
11. Design for limited and split attention
Provide sound and tactile output options
12. Design for speed and recovery
Stop, start, and resume an application with little or no effort
13. Design for “top-down” interaction
Present high levels of information and let users decide whether or not to retrieve details
14. Allow for personalization
Provide users the ability to change settings to their needs or liking
15. Design for enjoyment
Design visually pleasing and fun as well as usable interfaces
Source: Gong and Tarasewich (2004)
2  Universal Design Mobile Interface Guidelines (UDMIG) for an Aging Population

24
adaptation and addition of some of the guidelines would be necessary to accommo-
date design for the interactive mobile environment. UU originally focused on access 
for users with disabilities. However, over time, it was expanded to include older and 
younger adults, users with slow network connections, small screens, no screens, and 
other limiting technologies (Shneiderman 2003). Of greater relevance here, UU was 
initially developed for desktop applications, not for mobile interfaces. Therefore, 
like UD, UU only partially supports mobile interface design and would require 
adaptation to provide full guidance for mobile applications. Finally, while MID are 
an adaptation and extension of some of the UU guidelines for mobile and touch-
screen interfaces, these guidelines fall short of accommodating the multiple and 
combinations of limitations experienced by older adults.
Individually, none of the four strategies are sufficiently comprehensive or inclu-
sive within a context of mobile eHealth interfaces for the aging population. However, 
taken together, the four strategies provide a complete platform for a more inclusive 
set of guidelines. The process and outcome of integrating the four strategies into a 
comprehensive, inclusive set of design guidelines for interactive mobile interfaces 
for the aging population are detailed below.
2.4  UDMIG v2.0
The first version of the guidelines, UDMIG v1.0, previously reported by Kascak 
et al. (2015), used the seven principles of UD as the baseline to which particular 
components of the other three sets of guidelines were added. However, this approach 
of adding a few guidelines to the UD principles was too simplistic and did not 
resolve the inconsistencies between UD’s origins in the physical environment and 
language that needed to focus more on the digital environment. Moreover, because 
the four sets of guidelines included both prescriptive and performance-based 
approaches, sometimes within the same set of guidelines, the language and level of 
specificity of the original guidelines included in UDMIG v1.0 were inconsistent. 
Finally, UDMIG v1.0 failed to incorporate the person-environment interaction 
approach that was the unique contribution of DfA. As a result, the UDMIG guide-
lines were further developed within a framework based on the two organizing prin-
ciples: a broader, more basic person-environment (P-E) fit model (Lawton and 
Nahemow 1973) and the guideline approach (i.e., prescriptive vs. performance 
based).
Person-Environment Fit
The person-environment (P-E) fit model (Lawton and Nahemow 1973) defined the 
degree to which individual and environmental characteristics match to promote 
healthy aging. The P-E fit model examined the match or fit between a person’s abil-
ity and the demands of the environment. Barriers in the environment cause different 
ranges and quantities of usability problems depending on an individual’s ability 
(Iwarsson and Ståhl 2003). When considering mobile devices, usability is achieved 
L. Ruzic and J.A. Sanfod

25
when there is a match between a person’s ability and the design of the interface. In 
UDMIG v.2.0, the person component is a part of all the guidelines in the description 
of how to accommodate people with different abilities. The fit component includes 
those guidelines that describe the design of the touchscreen mobile interface as a 
whole, as well as those that guide the design of the specific features of the mobile 
touchscreen interface with which users interact. These include both the context, 
which pertains to the design of the overall interface, and the design feature, which 
guides the design of the characteristics of the specific features. The environment 
component acknowledges the space requirements and context of use. It represents 
the larger environment that provides the context of interface use (e.g., lighting and 
glare). For purposes of this chapter, only the fit component will be addressed.
Guideline Approach
Guidelines in UDMIG v2.0 were also categorized as prescriptive or performance. 
Whereas the objective of both prescriptive and performance guidelines is to achieve 
usable design outcomes, they do so in very different ways. Prescriptive guidelines 
focus on means and methods of achieving usability. They do so by dictating what 
must be done to achieve a usable outcome, without necessarily indicating what that 
outcome might look like. As a result, the more prescriptive guidelines are, the fewer 
design alternatives there are and therefore fewer ways to achieve a usable outcome. 
In contrast, performance guidelines focus on the product or results of the design 
process. Performance guidelines typically suggest what the usable outcome should 
be without regard to how that outcome is achieved. As a result, performance-based 
guidelines allow greater flexibility in design outcomes by providing opportunities 
for designers to rely on their own interpretation and creativity to achieve a usable 
outcome. Among the four design strategies, only DfA included prescriptive 
guidelines.
Inclusion Criteria
The final version of UDMIG v.2.0 included all of the guidelines, either in whole or 
modified, from UU and MID. Three UD guidelines (UD 7a,b,d), which were related 
to the context of use, were taken out of the final set of UDMIG v2.0. This version 
also included 43 of the 52 (82.7%) guidelines from DfA. Five design guidelines 
were excluded because they applied to the environment, and four other guidelines 
were excluded because they applied specifically to desktop interfaces (see Table 2.5).
As an example, half of the Eight Golden Rules of Interface Design (i.e., enable 
frequent users to use shortcuts, offer informative feedback, design dialogs to yield 
closure, and support internal locus of control) were included in whole as they apply 
to mobile applications (Ruzic et al. 2016). In contrast, the other half of the guide-
lines (consistency, reversal of actions, error prevention and simple error handling, 
and reducing short-term memory load) were modified to fit the mobile touchscreen 
environment. In addition, four UD guidelines that cover low physical effort 
(Principle 6) and one guideline that considers size and space for approach and use 
(Principle 7) were slightly modified to fit the mobile touchscreen interfaces.
2  Universal Design Mobile Interface Guidelines (UDMIG) for an Aging Population

26
Final Guidelines
The final version of UDMIG v2.0 is organized into context and feature guidelines. 
Context guidelines relate to the design of the overall interface, which is the context 
of use. These guidelines are concerned with the design of the mobile touchscreen 
interface as a whole. For example, user interface needs to be designed to be usable 
by all people, regardless of their abilities and limitations. Feature guidelines cover 
the design of the specific features within the mobile interface that users interact 
with. For instance, user interface is designed to provide sufficient color contrast 
(e.g., color contrast for normal and large text should be more than 4.5:1). 
Additionally, guidelines provide the user with the option to change the color con-
trast (e.g., white on black vs. black on white). These are the characteristics of the 
interface features.
2.5  Feature Guidelines
	 1.	 Choice in methods of use. Provide different inputs and choices of input to 
accommodate variations in abilities, preferences, situations, and contexts of 
use. Viable alternatives for mobile devices are speech input, replacing the text 
or graphics, tactile input (Poupyrev et al. 2002), and hands-free and eye-free 
interaction (Gorlenko and Merrick 2003). Eye-free interaction provides the 
greatest freedom of movement as visual attention constrains body movement 
(Gorlenko and Merrick 2003). Allow for personalization to accommodate dif-
ferences in usage patterns, preferences, abilities, and skill levels (Gong and 
Tarasewich 2004). In addition, users of mobile devices often need to focus on 
more than one task (Kristoffersen and Ljungberg 1999), and mobile application 
may not be the focal point of their current activities (Holland et  al. 2001). 
Mobile devices that demand too much attention may distract users from more 
important tasks. Interfaces for mobile devices need to be designed to require as 
little attention as possible (Poupyrev et al. 2002).
Table 2.5  Proportion of design guidance retained from each of the contributing sources
Design guidelines 
analyzed
Number of 
guidelines
Number (%) of 
guidelines included in 
UDMIG 2.0
Number (%) of 
guidelines modified in 
UDMIG 2.0
Universal design
30
27 (90%)
3 (10%) excluded
5 (16.7%) modified
Design for aging
52
43 (82.7%)
9 (17.3%) excluded
Universal usability
8
8 (100%)
4 (50%) modified
Guidelines for handheld 
mobile device interface 
design
15
15 (100%)
0 (0%) modified
L. Ruzic and J.A. Sanfod

27
	 2.	 Range of literacy and language skills. Allow for a range of literacy and lan-
guage skills to accommodate all users. Regardless of user’s language skills, 
knowledge, experience, and literacy level, the way in which design is used 
should be easy to understand (Sanford 2012). Choice of vocabulary and content 
of information is important due to various native languages (Fisk et al. 2009). 
Technical language used in instructions and help systems might be difficult for 
older adults as their educational attainment levels may be lower than that of 
younger adults. Reading level of text material needs to be kept at grade 10 or 
below (Fisk et al. 2009).
	 3.	 Right-, left-, or no-handed use. Provide right- or left-handed and single- or 
no-handed access and use to accommodate different abilities, preferences, and 
contexts of use, such as a significant number of additional people, objects, and 
activities in users’ environments. Due to varying limitations while using mobile 
applications, such as a significant number of additional people, objects, and 
activities in users’ environments, they could have the ability to use one hand or 
no hands at all. Therefore, allowing operations with 0, 1, or 2 hands becomes 
extremely important to the viability of the interface.
	 4.	 Adaptation to users’ pace. Provide adaptable pace to accommodate novice 
and expert users, different ages, abilities, preferences, situations, and contexts 
of use. Time constraints need to be taken into account in initial application 
availability and recovery speed for mobile platforms (Gong and Tarasewich 
2004). When time is critical, waiting a few minutes for an application to start 
may not be in the user’s best interest. Users may need to quickly change or 
access functions or applications in different contexts of use (Poupyrev et al. 
2002). In these situations, work performed would have to be saved and resumed 
later without any loss (Poupyrev et al. 2002). Add personalization to accom-
modate differences among users (Gong & Tarasewich 2004). Ensure speech 
rates of 140 wpm or less (Fisk et al. 2012). Avoid compressing and speeding the 
speech rates because of older adults’ slower rate of processing. Have appropri-
ate temporal constraints for carrying out commands (e.g., drop-down and pop-
­up menu durations should be long enough to carry out the commands). Screen 
characters and targets should be conspicuous and accessible (e.g., auditory 
information should be presented at the proper pitch, frequency, and rate). Make 
system adaptable and flexible to different user levels in a way that it grows with 
the user’s experience and skills (Fisk et al. 2012).
	 5.	 Minimization of hazards and unintended actions. Discourage unconscious 
action in all tasks to prevent adverse outcomes. Design should minimize haz-
ards and unintended actions that could have unwanted outcomes (e.g., “are you 
sure?” prompts) (Fisk et al. 2012; Sanford 2012). Give preference to text warn-
ings as opposed to symbols and icons that take longer to learn and are less 
likely to be remembered. Avoid short-duration menu displays because of the 
slower processing speed of older adults (Fisk et al. 2009). Frequent and impor-
tant actions should be visible and easily accessible (Fisk et al. 2012). Very sim-
ple operations (e.g., power on/off) should not trigger anything potentially 
harmful (Gong and Tarasewich 2004). Rapid pace in addition to the small 
2  Universal Design Mobile Interface Guidelines (UDMIG) for an Aging Population

28
­physical design of the mobile environment creates a serious need for error 
­prevention and minimization of unwanted actions. For example, the proximity 
of buttons on these small devices creates a potential problem.
	 6.	 Informative feedback. Provide informative feedback for actions and task com-
pletion to confirm proper use. For every operator action, there should be some 
system feedback (Shneiderman 1986), such as a beep when pressing a key or an 
error message for an invalid input value. For frequent and minor actions, the 
response can be modest, while, for infrequent and major actions, the response 
should be more substantial (Gong and Tarasewich 2004). It needs to be under-
standable to the user (Gong and Tarasewich 2004). Have feedback about task 
completion, confirmation of activity, and the current state (Fisk et al. 2012). 
Minimize clutter: visual (many display items in one location), auditory (many 
sounds), cognitive (many things to keep in memory), and movement related 
(many small response items).
	 7.	 Different modes of use. Provide different modes (pictorial, verbal, tactile) for 
redundant presentation of essential information to accommodate different abili-
ties, preferences, and contexts of use (Sanford 2012). For a design to effectively 
communicate necessary information to users with various abilities and prefer-
ences regardless of ambient conditions, it should provide as many modes as 
possible. It is beneficial to use alternative interaction modes such as sound 
(Poupyrev et al. 2002). Use frequencies less than 4000 Hz for audio output 
(Fisk et al. 2012). In addition to sound (Poupyrev et al. 2002), use vibration and 
light as sensory channels (Fisk et al. 2012). Use low-frequency (25 Hz) vibra-
tion due to unimpaired sensitivity to this level of frequency with age, and avoid 
high-frequency vibration (60 Hz and above) (Fisk et al. 2009). Provide parallel 
visual and auditory language presentation (e.g., speech recognition and closed 
caption text for public addresses). Use speech recognition control and input 
when users are very restricted in manual dexterity and the ambient noise level 
is low in the environment. Provide both tactile/haptic and auditory feedback 
with keypads. In noisy environments and glare situations, when auditory and 
visual output would be difficult to process or would be disruptive to users’ per-
formance, prefer tactile output device for simple signaling (e.g., moderate fre-
quency vibration of around 25 Hz) (Fisk et al. 2012).
	 8.	 Simple error handling. As far as possible, design the system so the user cannot 
make a serious error (Shneiderman 1986). Provide warnings of hazards and 
errors to ensure safety and prevent inadvertent mistakes/outcomes (Sanford 
2012). Arrange elements to minimize errors and hazards. For example, have 
most frequently used elements as most accessible, and have hazardous ele-
ments hidden or removed. If an error is made, the system should be able to 
detect the error and offer simple, comprehensible mechanisms for handling the 
error (Shneiderman 1986). The need for error prevention becomes more critical 
due to the more rapid pace of events in the mobile environment (Gong and 
L. Ruzic and J.A. Sanfod

29
Tarasewich 2004). Error prevention also needs to take the physical design of 
mobile devices into account. Smaller device sizes make the proximity of but-
tons to one another more of a potential problem. Warning signals should have 
frequency ranges from 500 to 200 Hz and intensity of at least 60 dB at the ear 
of the listener (Fisk et al. 2012). Repetitively flash the information for impor-
tant visual warning messages. For important auditory warning messages, select 
output systems (e.g., speakers), which emit sounds in the range of 500–1000 Hz, 
and repeat the message until acknowledged. Minimize the use of attention-­
catching techniques, such as flashing and scrolling text and images in the 
periphery (e.g., advertisements on web pages), because older adults are less 
able to ignore distractions (Fisk et al. 2009). In addition, they have less effective 
useful fields of view, which make them less likely to process events in the 
periphery in a successful manner similar to that of young adults. This is espe-
cially applicable to the pages with important information, such as warnings and 
errors.
	 9.	 Easy reversal of actions. Provide fail-safe features to minimize hazards and 
errors. Since the user knows that errors can be undone, their anxiety is relieved, 
and they are encouraged to explore unfamiliar options (Shneiderman 1986). 
The units of reversibility may be a single action, a data entry, or a complete 
group of actions. Allowing easy reversal of actions may be more difficult for 
mobile devices because of a lack of available resources and computing power 
(Satyanarayanan 1996). The greater susceptibility of wireless communications 
to connectivity losses makes tracking of past states more difficult 
(Satyanarayanan 1996, Kristoffersen and Ljungberg 1999). Mobile devices 
should rely on network connectivity as little as possible (Gong and Tarasewich 
2004).
	10.	 Multiple and dynamic contexts. Provide multiple and dynamic contexts to 
accommodate variations in the environment. Mobile platform users can have a 
significant number of additional people, objects, and activities vying for their 
attention outside the application itself (Tarasewich 2003). In addition, environ-
mental conditions (e.g., brightness, noise levels, weather) can change depend-
ing on location, time of day, and season. The usability or appropriateness of an 
application can change based on these different context factors (Kim et  al. 
2002). For example, in the presence of strangers, users may feel uncomfortable 
speaking input aloud, and certain places (e.g., libraries) might restrict the use of 
voice input. Small text sizes may work well under office conditions but sud-
denly become unreadable in bright sunshine or in dimly lit spaces. Thus, allow 
users to configure output to their needs and preferences (e.g., text size, bright-
ness) (Gong & Tarasewich 2004). Have the application adapt itself automati-
cally to the user’s current environment. Implement context-awareness, 
self-adapting functionalities, and universal control features, which would work 
regardless of the context and environment.
2  Universal Design Mobile Interface Guidelines (UDMIG) for an Aging Population

30
2.6  Context Guidelines
	 1.	 Same means of use. Provide the same means of use for people with diverse 
ranges of abilities, identical whenever possible, and equivalent when not. 
Ensure provisions for privacy, security, and safety that are equally available to 
all to avoid segregating or stigmatizing anyone. Participation in all activities, 
experiences, and application uses should be provided to everyone to eliminate 
the need for specialized design and signage (Sanford 2012). Design useful and 
accessible interfaces for people with diverse ranges of abilities.
	 2.	 Design appealing to all. The design is appealing to all to enhance usability and 
marketability. Part of designing an enjoyable user experience is aesthetics (Gong 
and Tarasewich 2004). “Aesthetics in use” was defined as dynamic interaction 
that invokes a positive effective response from the user (Karlsson and Djabri 
2001). In addition, color and its manipulation are important considerations for 
visual interfaces. Shneiderman (1992) offered color use guidelines for interfaces 
that can be carried over to mobile devices, although some of the effects of color 
may be different on smaller screens. Moreover, besides usability and aesthetics, 
emotion involves a large part of our interaction with objects (Norman 2004).
	 3.	 Simple and natural use. Eliminate complexity, and arrange information con-
sistent with its importance to allow for natural use (Sanford 2012). For example, 
next and back buttons should be larger, in colors that stand out, and arranged in 
linear order. Mobile devices are limited with the amount of information that 
they can present at one time on their small screens (Gong and Tarasewich 2004). 
Reading large amounts of information from such devices can require large 
amounts of scrolling and focused concentration. To reduce distraction, interac-
tions, and potential information overload, a better way of presenting informa-
tion might be through multilevel or hierarchical mechanisms (Brewster 2002). 
For example, users may not need or want the entire content of a message, but 
they may wish to receive a notification that a message is available, along with an 
indication of its importance. That way, they can make decisions whether or not 
to stop the primary task in order to access the contents of the message. Frequent 
and important actions should be visible and easily accessible (Fisk et al. 2012). 
Organize information within natural or consistent groupings (e.g., group-related 
information and have most frequent operations highest on the menu structure) 
(Fisk et al. 2012). Menu structure should match the medium of presentation that 
the task demands, as well as the users’ capabilities. Avoid scrolling text because 
it is difficult to process, especially horizontal formats (Fisk et al. 2012). Use a 
slow scrolling rate if it is necessary to use. Minimize clutter: visual (many dis-
play items in one location), auditory (many sounds), cognitive (many things to 
keep in memory), and movement related (many small response items).
	 4.	 Consistency with expectations. Provide consistency with expectations and 
intuition to allow natural, intuitive use. Consistent sequences of actions should 
be required in similar situations; identical terminology should be used in prompts, 
menus, and help screens, and consistent commands should be employed 
L. Ruzic and J.A. Sanfod

31
­throughout. The system functions should match users’ expectations (e.g., mental 
models based on previous experiences should match how the interface system 
works) (Fisk et al. 2009). As a secondary option, provide training which enables 
users to create the appropriate mental models. Always, where possible, promote 
proper design over the provision of training. Provide consistency across multiple 
platforms and devices for the same application when users switch between their 
desktop and mobile devices (Chan et al. 2002), including the “look and feel,” 
names, color schemes, dialog appearances (Gong and Tarasewich 2004), and 
standard layouts (Fisk et al. 2009). Create device-independent I/O methodolo-
gies, and avoid using methods specific to mobile platforms (Isokoski and 
Raisamo 2000). Ensure standardized format, and keep consistent location of tar-
get items within and if possible between the applications (e.g., help information 
and error messages should always appear at the same location) (Fisk et al. 2012).
	 5.	 Accuracy and precision. Facilitate the accuracy and precision required to 
accommodate different abilities, preferences, situations, contexts of use, ages, 
and novice and expert users, and enhance users’ experience. As the frequency 
of use increases, so do the user’s desires to reduce the number of interactions 
and to increase the pace of interaction (Shneiderman 1986). Abbreviations, 
function keys, hidden commands, and macro facilities are very helpful to an 
expert user. The limitation of human information processing in short-term 
memory requires that displays be kept simple, multiple-page displays be con-
solidated, screen-­motion frequency be reduced, and sufficient training time be 
allotted for codes, mnemonics, and sequences of actions (Shneiderman 1986). 
Users should rely on recognition of function choices instead of memorization 
of commands (Gong and Tarasewich 2004). Very little memorization should be 
required during the performance of tasks (Chan et al. 2002). Use modalities 
such as sound to convey information where appropriate. When in the mobile 
environment, a user has to potentially deal with more distractions than with a 
desktop computer (Tarasewich 2003). A mobile application may not be the 
focal point of the user’s current activities (Holland et al. 2001), and a user may 
not be able to suspend his or her primary task to interact with the mobile device 
(Gorlenko and Merrick 2003, Kristoffersen and Ljungberg 1999). Using alter-
native interaction modes such as sound can be beneficial (Poupyrev et al. 2002). 
In addition, provide personalization to allow for variations among users (Gong 
and Tarasewich 2004). Allow users to adjust sound volumes, and provide 
instructions regarding how to perform these adjustments.
Provide at least 50:1 contrast (e.g., black text on white background) (Fisk 
et al. 2012). Make sure that color discriminations can be made easily by signal-
ing important information using short wavelength (blue-violet-green) contrasts, 
using black-­on-­white or white-on-black text, and avoiding colored and water-
marked backgrounds for display of text (Fisk et al. 2012). 3D and VR displays 
may induce spatial confusion in older adults, which may require greater invest-
ment in working memory to resolve. However, with guided training and prac-
tice, older adults may benefit from 3D interactive environments (Czaja and 
Sharit 2012). Avoid style sheets that ­prevent users from increasing the font size 
2  Universal Design Mobile Interface Guidelines (UDMIG) for an Aging Population

32
with the browser software (Fisk et al. 2012). Provide instruction to user about 
how to change screen resolution. Minimize clutter: visual, auditory, cognitive, 
and movement related. Provide appropriate temporal constraints for carrying 
out commands (e.g., drop-down and pop-up menu durations should be long 
enough to carry out the commands). Screen characters and targets should be 
conspicuous and accessible (e.g., font size should be 12 point and higher).
	 6.	 Internal locus of control. Let users feel they are in control (output), so provide 
a choice of alternative solutions for control over decision-making. Users want 
to be in charge of the system and have the system respond to their actions, 
rather than feel that the system is controlling them (Shneiderman 1986). The 
system should be designed such that users initiate actions rather than respond 
to them. It should let the user navigate it on their own. The system should not 
be deterministic; it should provide a choice. For example, to enhance user con-
trol, provide a choice of linear vs. random access.
	 7.	 Maximized “legibility” of essential information. Provide contrast between 
essential information and its surroundings, differentiate elements in ways that 
can be described, and allow for compatibility with assistive techniques/devices 
to increase “legibility” of essential information (Sanford 2012). Screen charac-
ters and targets should be conspicuous and accessible (e.g., icons should be 
large enough to select easily) (Fisk et al. 2012). Use at least 12-point serif or 
sans serif fonts (e.g., Arial, Helvetica, Times Roman), preferably 14-point and 
bigger (Kascak et al. 2013a, b). Avoid cursive and decorative fonts, and use of 
all uppercase letters since it slows down reading. In mixed-case situations, 
uppercase text attracts more attention than lowercase ones. Provide at least 50:1 
contrast (e.g., black text on white background) (Fisk et al. 2012). Make sure 
that color discriminations can be made easily by signaling important informa-
tion using short wavelength (blue-violet-green) contrasts, using black-­on-­white 
or white-on-black text, and avoiding colored and watermarked backgrounds for 
display of text (Fisk et al. 2012). Provide a site map. Menu structure should 
match the medium of presentation, the task demands, and the users’ capabili-
ties. Frequent and important actions should be visible and easily accessible 
(Fisk et al. 2012). Provide good structure (e.g., grammar) in spoken and written 
text (Fisk et al. 2009). Pause after phrases and ends of sentences when speak-
ing. Prefer videoconferencing to talking on a phone because of using visual 
cues as a contextual support. Ensure adequate pauses in speech at grammatical 
boundaries (e.g., after phrases and at the end of the sentence). Match voice 
characteristics to situation (Fisk et  al. 2012). For announcements use male 
voices rather than female ones. To get attention select female over male voices. 
Avoid synthesized speech.
	 8.	 Clear and understandable navigation structure. Provide clear and under-
standable navigation structure to allow seamless and intuitive use. Allow users 
to navigate seamlessly (e.g., next, back buttons). Provide navigation assistance 
(e.g., help, review buttons) for how to navigate to specific points in the system 
(Fisk et al. 2009). This includes navigation to not only the home page but any 
relevant page. Attentional cues (e.g., highlighting) should be used to support 
L. Ruzic and J.A. Sanfod

33
the information search. Make system status clear to users (such as history mode 
vs. review mode vs. transfer mode). Provide search history to allow users to 
know which pages they have visited (Fisk et al. 2012).
	 9.	 Dialogs that yield closure. Design dialogs to yield closure to allow the satis-
faction of accomplishment and completion. Sequences of actions should be 
organized into groups with a beginning, middle, and end (Shneiderman 1986). 
Organize information within natural or consistent groupings (e.g., group-­
related information and have most frequent operations highest on the menu 
structure) (Fisk et al. 2012). Users should be given the satisfaction of accom-
plishment and completion, a sense of relief, and an indicator to prepare for the 
next group of actions, no matter where they are (Shneiderman 1986). Indicate 
clearly where the user currently is at any point of time (Fisk et al. 2012). The 
sequences of actions should be available and visible in the interface, and the 
user should not be expected to remember them (Fisk et  al. 2009). Provide 
search history to allow users to know which pages they have visited (e.g., 
change the color of pages previously visited on a list of pages). Clearly com-
municate current system status. It needs to be clear which option is active and 
what the consequences of an action are.
	10.	 Low physical effort. Use reasonable operating forces; minimize repetitive 
actions and sustained physical effort to provide ease of use, efficiency, and 
comfort, and minimize fatigue (Sanford 2012). Avoid double-clicking (Fisk 
et al. 2012). Scrolling text should be avoided. If necessary to use, use slow 
scrolling rate. Minimize steps (basic tasks, such as pressing a key) (Fisk et al. 
2009).
	11.	 Variations in hand and grip size. Accommodate variations in hand and grip 
size to allow ease of use (Sanford 2012). Use large keys with clear markings 
and appropriate inter-key spacing on a keypad (Fisk et al. 2012).
	12.	 Natural body position. Maintain natural body position to provide comfort and 
minimize fatigue. Design should be able to be used from a natural body posi-
tion to provide physical ease of use and low physical effort (Sanford 2012).
2.7  Discussion
As people age, they experience declines in both health and function. This not only 
suggests that mobile eHealth applications are a potential means to meet seniors’ 
health-related needs but also that their usefulness is dependent upon the usability of 
the application interfaces to fit users’ abilities. Whereas UD, DfA, UU, and MID are 
design strategies that are used to guide the design of mobile interfaces, none are 
sufficiently comprehensive to ensure that mobile eHealth user interfaces will be 
usable by older adults. UU, DfA, and UD guidelines were not originally developed 
for mobile interfaces, although UD has recently included this platform to a certain 
extent. MID fails to acknowledge diversity and the ranges of limitations that the 
aging population faces. Adaptation and addition of some of the guidelines were 
2  Universal Design Mobile Interface Guidelines (UDMIG) for an Aging Population

34
necessary to accommodate design for the interactive mobile interfaces for older 
adults.
UDMIG v.2.0 are an inclusive and comprehensive set of guidelines developed to 
guide design processes of mobile eHealth interfaces for the aging population. They 
are divided into three sets of guidelines: context, features, and environment. Context 
guidelines relate to the design of the overall interface, feature guidelines guide the 
characteristics of the features of the user interface, and environment guidelines help 
with the design of the space and context of use. Person component is present in all 
the guidelines, which all describe how to accommodate people with different 
abilities.
The guidelines were based on the four established design strategies for desktop 
and mobile user interfaces for general and aging population and published research 
on interactive mobile eHealth interfaces and designing for the aging population. The 
significance of the UDMIG v.2.0 is in its completeness and integration of the four 
common strategies for designing interactive mobile interfaces for older adults. This 
unique set of the guidelines is useful to human-computer interaction (HCI) research-
ers working in a field of usability and mobile eHealth user interface design, as well 
as to industry leaders who develop mobile eHealth devices and applications for our 
aging population.
UDMIG v.2.0 are developed to help with the mobile eHealth interface design for 
the aging population. In addition to the interface itself, the context of use and its 
environment are important as well. A number of guidelines, originally called envi-
ronment, addressed the appropriate lighting and glare, adjustable positioning, mini-
mized background noise and reverberation, and space for use of assistive devices. 
Environment guidelines describe guidelines that direct the design of space in which 
the mobile interface is used. For example, eyes of older adults admit about one third 
of the light to the retina under low-light conditions than the eyes of the young adults. 
Therefore, the environment guideline 1: Appropriate lighting and glare requires 
adequate lighting, minimized glare (Fisk et al. 2012), a clear line of sight to impor-
tant elements (Sanford 2012), and adjustable display when feasible (Fisk et  al. 
2012).
Environment guideline 2: Adjustable positioning requires adjustable height, 
depth, width, and angle from a standing or seated position for a comfortable reach 
to all components. Appropriate size and space should be provided for approach, 
reach, manipulation, and use regardless of the user’s body size, posture, and mobil-
ity (Sanford 2012) and adjustable display when possible (Fisk et  al. 2012). 
Guideline 3 states that minimized background noise and reverberation should be 
provided for understanding audio output (e.g., use sound-absorbing materials on 
walls, ceilings, and floors; provide wireless headphones in public settings; avoid 
background music during spoken language) (Fisk et al. 2012). Environment guide-
line 4: Space for the use of assistive devices requires adequate space to accommo-
date independent and assisted use (Sanford 2012). When multiple devices are 
required, consider the issue of “homing,” moving the hands to the home row key 
position, following use of the pointing device (Fisk et al. 2012).
L. Ruzic and J.A. Sanfod

35
2.8  Conclusion
UDMIG v.2.0 were developed to ensure the usability of future mobile eHealth tech-
nologies by older adults through a universal design strategy that accommodates all 
users to the greatest extent possible. Nonetheless, while the guidelines are intended 
to promote universal usability, they require validation through application and eval-
uation with users who represent a range of abilities.
Future planned work includes the development and testing of an eHealth applica-
tion for people aging with multiple sclerosis (MS). MS is a complex inflammatory 
disorder of the central nervous system (CNS). Individuals with MS are an ideal 
­end-user population for an eHealth application that would be developed based on 
the UDMIG. They represent a diverse user group that has symptoms that vary 
widely from an individual to an individual, but also within individuals over time. 
Moreover, MS presents with symptoms that share many of the functional limitations 
associated with aging, including decline in muscle strength, problems with balance, 
weakness, fatigue, reduced sensation, vision impairments, bowel and bladder dys-
function, cognitive impairment, pain, osteoporosis, and sleep disturbances (Stern 
et al. 2010; Stern 2005; Finlayson 2002; Fleming and Pollak 2005). To accommo-
date this group of users, UDMIG v.2.0 will be used to design a mobile eHealth 
application based on their health self-management needs. The application will be 
then evaluated for its usability and utility by people who have been diagnosed with 
MS for at least 5 years. Results of the study will be used to further refine both the 
eHealth application and the UDMIG.
References
Becker SA (2004) A study of web usability for older adults seeking online health resources. ACM 
Trans Comput-Hum Interact (TOCHI) 11:387–406
Bederson BB, Lee B, Sherman RM, Herrnson PS, Niemi RG (2003) Electronic voting system 
usability issues. Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing sys-
tems. ACM, 145–152
Brewster S (2002) Overcoming the lack of screen space on mobile computers. Pers Ubiquit 
Comput 6:188–205
Chadwick-Dias A, Mcnulty M, Tullis T (2003) Web usability and age: how design changes can 
improve performance. ACM SIGCAPH Computers and the Physically Handicapped. ACM, 
pp 30–37
Chan SS, Fang X, Brzezinski JR, Zhou Y, Xu S, Lam J (2002) Usability for mobile commerce 
across multiple form factors. J Electron Commerce Res 3:187–199
Connell BR, Jones M, Mace R, Mueller J, Mullick A, Ostroff E, Sanford J, Steinfeld E, Story 
M, Vanderheiden G (1997) Universal design principles [online]. Center for Universal Design, 
College of Design, North Carolina State University Available: https://www.ncsu.edu/ncsu/
design/cud/about_ud/udprinciplestext.htm. Accessed 12 June 2016
Czaja SJ, Sharit J (2012) Designing training and instructional programs for older adults. CRC 
Press, London
2  Universal Design Mobile Interface Guidelines (UDMIG) for an Aging Population

36
Falls Among Older Adults (2013) An overview [Online]. Centers for disease control and preven-
tion. Available: http://www.cdc.gov/homeandrecreationalsafety/falls/adultfalls.html. Accessed 
21 Apr 2014
Finlayson M (2002) Health and social profile of older adults with MS: findings from three studies. 
Int J MS Care 4:139–151
Fisk AD, Rogers WA, Charness N, Czaja SJ, Sharit J (2009) Designing for older adults: principles 
and creative human factors approaches. CRC press, Boca Raton
Fisk AD, Rogers WA, Charness N, Czaja SJ, Sharit J (2012) Designing for older adults: principles 
and creative human factors approaches. CRC press
Fleming WE, Pollak CP (2005) Sleep disorders in multiple sclerosis. Semin Neurol:64–68
Gong J, Tarasewich P (2004) Guidelines for handheld mobile device interface design. Proceedings 
of DSI 2004 Annual meeting. Citeseer, 3751–3756
Gorlenko L, Merrick R (2003) No wires attached: usability challenges in the connected mobile 
world. IBM Syst J 42:639–651
Holland S, Morse DR, Gedenryd H (2001) Audio GPS: spatial audio in a minimal attention inter-
face. Environment 1:3
Isokoski P, Raisamo R (2000) Device independent text input: a rationale and an example. 
Proceedings of the working conference on Advanced visual interfaces. ACM, pp 76–83
Iwarsson S, Ståhl A (2003) Accessibility, usability and universal design-positioning and definition 
of concepts describing person-environment relationships. Disabil Rehabil 25:57–66
Karlsson P, Djabri F (2001) Analogue styled user interfaces: an exemplified set of principles 
intended to improve aesthetic qualities in use. Proceedings of Mobile HCI 2001: Third interna-
tional workshop on human-computer interaction with mobile devices. Citeseer
Kascak L, Rebola CB, Braunstein R, Sanford JA (2013a) Icon design to improve communication 
of health information to older adults. Commun Des Q Rev 2:6–32
Kascak L, Rébola CB, Braunstein R, Sanford JA (2013b) Icon design for user interface of remote 
patient monitoring mobile devices. Proceedings of the 31st ACM international conference on 
Design of communication. ACM, pp 77–84
Kascak L, Rébola CB, Sanford J (2014) Integrating Universal Design (UD) principles and mobile 
design guidelines to improve design of mobile health applications for older adults. Healthcare 
Informatics (ICHI), IEEE international conference on, 2014. IEEE
Kascak LR, Liu EY, Sanford JA (2015) Universal design (UD) guidelines for interactive mobile 
voting interfaces for older adults. Universal Access in Human-Computer Interaction. Access to 
the Human Environment and Culture. Springer
Kim H, Kim J, Lee Y, Chae M, Choi Y (2002) An empirical study of the use contexts and usability 
problems in mobile internet. System Sciences, 2002. HICSS. Proceedings of the 35th annual 
Hawaii international conference on, 2002. IEEE, pp 1767–1776
Kristoffersen S, Ljungberg F (1999) “Making place” to make IT work: empirical explorations 
of HCI for mobile CSCW. Proceedings of the international ACM SIGGROUP conference on 
Supporting group work. ACM, pp 276–285
Law CM, Yi JS, Choi YS, Jacko JA (2008) A systematic examination of universal design resources: 
part 1, heuristic evaluation. Univ Access Inf Soc 7:31–54
Lawton MP, Nahemow L (1973) Ecology and the aging process
Mace R (1988) Universal design: housing for the lifespan of all people. US Department of Housing 
and Urban Affairs, Washington, DC
Meiselwitz G, Wentz B, Lazar J  (2010) Universal usability: past, present, and future. Now 
Publishers Inc., Hanover
Morrell RW (2001) Older adults, health information, and the world wide web. Psychology Press
Nichols TA, Rogers WA, Fisk AD (2006) In: Salvendy G (ed) Design for aging, in handbook of 
human factors and ergonomics, 3rd edn. Wiley, Hoboken. https://doi.org/10.1002/0470048204.
ch54
Norman DA (2004) Emotional design: why we love (or hate) everyday things. Basic books
L. Ruzic and J.A. Sanfod

37
Poupyrev I, Maruyama S, Rekimoto J (2002) Ambient touch: designing tactile interfaces for hand-
held devices. Proceedings of the 15th annual ACM symposium on user interface software and 
technology. ACM, pp 51–60
Ruptash S (2013) Universal design through passion, knowledge and regulations? Trends in 
Universal Design, 24
Ruzic L, Lee ST, Liu EY, Sanford JA (2016) Development of universal design mobile interface 
guidelines (UDMIG) for aging population. Universal access in human-computer interaction. 
Access to the human environment and culture. Springer
Sanford JA (2012) Universal design as a rehabilitation strategy: design for the ages. Springer, 
New York
Satyanarayanan M (1996) Fundamental challenges in mobile computing. Proceedings of the fif-
teenth annual ACM symposium on Principles of distributed computing. ACM, pp 1–7
Shneiderman B (1986) Eight golden rules of interface design. Disponible en
Shneiderman B (1992) Designing the user interface: strategies for effective human-computer inter-
action. Addison-Wesley, Reading
Shneiderman B (2000) Universal usability. Commun ACM 43:84–91
Shneiderman B (2003) Promoting universal usability with multi-layer interface design. ACM 
SIGCAPH Computers and the Physically Handicapped. ACM, pp 1–8
Shneiderman B, Plaisant C (1987) Designing the user interface: strategies for effective human-
computer interaction. Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc, Boston, p 672
Stern M (2005) Aging with multiple sclerosis. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am 16:219–234
Stern M, Sorkin L, Milton K, Sperber K (2010) Aging with multiple sclerosis. Phys Med Rehabil 
Clin N Am 21:403–417
Tarasewich P (2003) Designing mobile commerce applications. Commun ACM 46:57–60
Universal Design Policy (2001) Winnipeg, Canada: City of Winnipeg, Mayors access advisory 
committee
Zajicek M (2001) Interface design for older adults. Proceedings of the EC/NSF workshop on 
Universal accessibility of ubiquitous computing: providing for the elderly. ACM, pp 60–65
Ljilja Ruzic is a Ph.D. Candidate at the College of Design, Georgia Institute of Technology, with 
a concentration in human-centered computing and a special interest in user experience research 
and design, human-computer interaction, accessibility, universal design, design for aging, mobile 
health technologies, and industrial design.
At the Center for Assistive Technology and Environmental Access (CATEA), Ljilja works as a 
Graduate Research Assistant on universal design of mobile health technologies for people aging 
with multiple sclerosis. Furthermore, her research includes the work on the universally designed 
voting interface for older adults and people with vision, cognition, and dexterity limitations.
Among her awards, Ljilja has won the SIGDOC 2013 Graduate Student Competition Paper 
Award, 1st Place at the Convergence Innovation Competition at GaTech 2012, TechSAge Mobile 
App Development Funding, and Auxiliary Services IMPACT Scholarship.
Jon A. Sanford is a Professor in the School of Industrial Design and Director of the Center for 
Assistive Technology and Environmental Access at Georgia Tech. He is internationally-recognized 
for his expertise in universal design, accessible design and design for aging and is the Director of 
the Rehabiliation Engineering Research Center on Technologies for Successful Aging with 
Disability, supported by the Department of Health and Human Services. He has over 300 scholarly 
presentations and publications and is the author of: “Design for the Ages: Universal Design as a 
Rehabilitation Strategy”.
2  Universal Design Mobile Interface Guidelines (UDMIG) for an Aging Population

39
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017 
H.R. Marston et al. (eds.), Mobile e-Health, Human–Computer Interaction Series, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-60672-9_3
Chapter 3
mHealth and the Digital Cyborg Body: 
The Running Apps in a Society of Control
Igor Sacramento and Vanissa Wanick
Abstract  Mobile apps and new technologies are changing the way people deal 
with their personal health. There is a new and symbiotic relationship between tech-
nologies and individuals, which results in a constant sense of monitoring, improving 
self-knowledge and transforming bodies into digital cyborgs. The current chapter 
aims to analyse the propagation of running apps as a reflection of a permanent 
monitoring of bodies in the contemporary society. With this in mind, we provide a 
critical review of issues related to the Quantified Self (QS) movement, combined 
with principles borrowed from gamification, control and mHealth technologies. In 
this chapter, we show a transformation of the body into data, particularly through 
design strategies, such as data visualisation, graphic feedback and social media inte-
gration. The main contribution of this chapter relies on the discussion about datifi-
cation, which could help to provide a guideline for the understanding of the 
perspectives of the self in a society of control.
Mobile apps and new technologies are changing the way people deal with their 
personal health. There is a new and symbiotic relationship between technologies 
and individuals, which results in a constant sense of monitoring, improving self-
knowledge and transforming bodies into digital cyborgs. The current chapter aims 
to analyse the propagation of running apps as a reflection of a permanent monitoring 
of bodies in the contemporary society. With this in mind, we provide a critical 
review of issues related to the Quantified Self (QS) movement, combined with prin-
ciples borrowed from gamification, control and mHealth technologies. In this 
I. Sacramento (*) 
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
e-mail: igor.sacramento@icict.fiocruz.br 
V. Wanick 
University of Southampton, Southampton, UK 
Winchester School of Art, Winchester, UK
e-mail: v.w.vieira@soton.ac.uk

40
chapter, we show a transformation of the body into data, particularly through design 
strategies, such as data visualisation, graphic feedback and social media integration. 
The main contribution of this chapter relies on the discussion about datification, 
which could help to provide a guideline for the understanding of the perspectives of 
the self in a society of control.
3.1  Introduction
Currently, there are mHealth devices like wearable fitness gadgets, smart wrist-
bands, intelligent glucose metres and mobile apps that not only monitor but also 
quantify all types of activities, from financial expenses to professional and personal 
productivity goals, mood swings, calorie expenditure, physical activity, level of 
hydration, menstruation, stress levels, sleep quality and others. This reflects a con-
stant incorporation of technology into people’s daily lives, transforming the rela-
tionship between doctor and patient, for example. When users interact with such 
devices and log their food intake, pain or glucose levels, they provide data that can 
be useful for doctors to gain a holistic view of patient’s performance (Bentley and 
Tollmar 2013).
This new apparatus of online digital technologies that deliver healthcare, preven-
tive medicine and health promotion has facilitated the measurement and monitoring 
of functions and activities centred on people’s bodies, encouraging self-care actions 
among patients with chronic diseases. For instance, a study of people aged 65 and 
over with mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer’s dementia showed that 
wearable media can help them to remember events (Maier et al. 2015). These tech-
nologies can also provide a new approach to identifying and preventing illnesses 
and diseases. While the digital health approach to the body and health spans the arc 
from patient care to public health surveillance techniques, the discussion is largely 
directed at the implications for mobile health in relation to the practice of health 
promotion or what Lupton (2016a, p.2) refers to as “digitised health promotion”. It 
seems that prevention of diseases and the promotion of health are more person-
alised. The numerous healthcare apps offer people an opportunity to engage in self-
monitoring of their health-related behaviours. However, this is used to track 
individuals and to collect mass data on these behaviours for use in monitoring popu-
lations. The personalised aspect of this approach focuses, in fact, on collecting as 
much data as possible about individuals and their health states, everyday habits and 
the social and geographical environment in which they live: their personal health 
informatics is a way of monitoring people’s habits and practices. Nevertheless, per-
sonalisation is also a way to individualise responsibility for health, linking the idea 
of “good health” to the use of mobile and self-tracking technologies.
The concept of mHealth represents applications, sensors and networks that com-
bine mobile computing and health behaviours (Istepanian and Woodward 2016). In 
this scenario, smartphones gained importance for enabling the production and con-
sumption of information in real time. For instance, several applications have been 
I. Sacramento and V. Wanick

41
created, for example, Fitbit, Nike+ and Runkeeper, which are particularly focused 
on running performance. Another example is the application MyFitnessPal, which 
provides a tailored training program based on user physical data. This shows that 
adopting a healthy behaviour could be increasingly convenient. However, mHealth 
applications are not restricted to smartphones. With advances in technologies such 
as bio-wearables (e.g. technology that merges with the body, like electronic tattoos) 
and the Internet of things (e.g. sensors coupled with objects), mHealth applications 
are starting to merge with individuals’ bodies. For example, it is possible to monitor 
an individual’s heartbeat, location, blood pressure and temperature through an intel-
ligent vest composed of several sensors that collect physiological data (Pandian 
et al. 2008).
This constant monitoring enabled by mHealth applications is also enhanced by 
the use of social media. People are able to monitor and share their performances 
online with anyone, as mHealth applications offer features for data publication on 
social networking sites. For example, Nike+ connects runners to Facebook, and 
every time someone “likes” their performance, it is possible to hear applause of 
encouragement. In fact, this strategy tends to be successful, as people tend to change 
their behaviours just to receive a “like” from a friend (Hamari and Koivisto 2015). 
However, social networking sites are not free from any form of surveillance and 
monitoring (Finnemann 2014). What happens is just the opposite. The surveillance 
and monitoring systems are immanent to such networks, being an integral part of 
both system efficiency and data analysis. This data is provided by users in order to 
optimise social relations and social networking services. Thus, social networks rely 
on mutual consent and supervision, which contributes to a certain voyeurism and 
exhibitionism. Although this social feature could function as an encouragement for 
people to maintain their behaviour, it might not work for everyone. For example, 
users might feel embarrassed while sharing specific aspects about their health on a 
social network (Dennison et al. 2013).
Another characteristic of mHealth apps is that the majority utilise gamification 
as a strategy to engage and motivate users to maintain and improve their health 
performance (Hamari and Koivisto 2013; Miller et al. 2014). The idea behind gami-
fication is the utilisation of game design strategies in order to transform non-leisure 
situations into gameful environments (Deterding et al. 2011). As games are engag-
ing tools, gamification could unlock the power of changing people’s behaviour 
(Almarshedi et al. 2016), particularly through feedback loops and positive rein-
forcement (Schrape 2014). In the context of health applications, leaderboards, lev-
els and digital rewards (e.g. badges and points, real-world prizes, competitions and 
social/peer pressure) are the usual gamified strategies (Lister et al. 2014). For exam-
ple, Dithmer et al. (2015) have created a platform to assist heart patients through 
leaderboards, achievements and relationships, involving both patients and relatives 
in a collaborative way. Another example is the application SuperBetter, which moti-
vates users to become more resilient and overcome personal difficulties through 
quests and challenges, which could be personalised through choices in the applica-
tion. This means that gamification functions as an enabler of desired behaviours and 
self-monitoring through user participation and rewards.
3  mHealth and the Digital Cyborg Body: The Running Apps in a Society of Control

42
This relationship between gamification and self-monitoring could develop a high 
level of surveillance, as users’ behaviours are being monitored and stored in the 
form of user data (Whitson 2014). In this context, the contemporary bodies could be 
considered and treated as systems of data and bundles of information. Combined 
with the power of mHealth technologies, the transformation of bodies into data 
becomes blurred, particularly when considering issues like security, data privacy 
and data ownership. For example, user data gathered from mHealth devices can be 
used by third parties to sell health insurance deals to prospective clients (Lupton 
2016a, b).
This transformation of bodies into data through self-monitoring is the core dis-
cussion of the concept of Quantified Self (QS). The Quantified Self (QS) promotes 
self-monitoring of daily habits, through the discovery of trends and correlations on 
people’s behaviour and health, enhancing the knowledge that people have upon 
their own bodies. This form of self-knowledge is impregnated with the discourses 
of biomedicine, in which individuality is translated into numbers, echoing the idea 
that what can be measured can be improved (Lupton 2013).
In the last decade, the emergence of a new generation of wearable devices and 
mobile applications has allowed the appearance of a new form of self-objectification, 
which is known as self-monitoring (Lupton 2013). Small, discreet observation 
machines with persistent, uninterrupted attention, carried close to the body, began to 
be used by individuals to quantify behavioural and biometric indicators such as 
weight, number of steps taken on a given day, mood swings, stress levels, happiness, 
sleep quality, expenditure and calorie intake and physical and mental performance. 
From the exchange of experiences on the use of these devices and on the data pro-
duced by them, the group that constitutes the object of study of the Quantified Self 
(QS) emerged. This movement originated in 2008 in the Bay Area of San Francisco 
(USA), whose motto is the search for self-knowledge through numbers; particularly 
any intervention or experimentation that can make people healthier, happier and pro-
ductive appears within the broad scope of this movement (Lupton 2013).
Self-monitoring has a strong relationship with self-knowledge. After all, for the 
quantified selves, the data, their collection and analysis are not simply instruments 
to produce and communicate knowledge about the body, health and disease – the 
data are, above all, subjective tools. In a world where the collection, treatment and 
production of knowledge from the analysis of large masses of data is a reality for 
governments and corporations, the quantified selves propose their appropriation in 
the personal sphere and affirm that they are instruments to unveil the self, to dis-
cover and to produce. In a consonant approach, the emerging self-monitoring device 
and application market demands data as the basis of subjective and identity pro-
cesses. Its products are not only advertised as instruments to produce information 
about bodies, their biology, their habits and functional mechanisms, but as tools that 
subsidise the production of knowledge about the subjects from these indicators, in a 
reflexive attitude. This formula, moreover, was well summarised by the application 
The Eatery1; the system consists of a photographic diary that promises to help  
1 Available at https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/the-eatery/id468299990.
I. Sacramento and V. Wanick

43
individuals to eat better, refusing to approach calorie counting with the slogan 
“other apps tell you about food. We tell you about yourself”.
As Smith and Vonthethoff (2016) note, discourses of personal responsibility 
were prevalent motives and outcomes in many of the QS presentations. There is a 
mutually related discourse of self-imperfection and self-improvement in the QS 
community, specifically prevalent in the narratives expressed by those seeking to 
enhance their health states through the objectification of data. So, as Smith and 
Vonthethoff (2016, p.13) explain, “data are fetishized to the point where they come – 
literally and metaphorically – to speak on behalf of the embodied referents they 
represent, and to provide the divine instruction, discipline, and impetus needed to 
enact a lifestyle intervention. They are in this sense a medium of subjectivities. In 
this context, presuming data reflects the internalisation of cultural obsessions with 
“finding the self”, “finding happiness” and “finding health” with a view to manag-
ing it better via data-driven modes of knowing.
But who is this self that emerges from self-monitoring actions? And perhaps 
more importantly, how did this self come voluntarily to the task of self-monitoring? 
And yet how and why have numbers become, for these individuals, the privileged 
way of becoming present to themselves? Where does their usefulness and authority 
come from as self-analysis tools? It is around these questions that this thesis is con-
structed. Throughout it, we hope to highlight how self-monitoring practices describe 
what the body, health, and its relationships to subjectivity are. We understand that 
self-monitoring is a way of becoming subject, of choosing and shaping action on 
oneself and of assigning meaning to suffering, to one’s own existence and to one’s 
own body. The result is an understanding of the phenomenon of self-monitoring as 
a response to the demands for risk management and performance optimisation. In 
this way, the vertices where the practices of the government of self-intertwine with 
the government of others are drawn.
Within this context, mHealth applications, together with the QS movement and 
gamification strategies, are constantly changing people’s relationships with their 
own bodies. If people’s bodies are data, can they become machines? Is there a sym-
biosis between bodies and technologies? Are people becoming digital cyborgs? 
What is the role of gamification in this context? With this in mind, the main objec-
tive of this chapter is to analyse the proliferation of mHealth applications as ways to 
promote and illustrate a permanent system of monitored bodies in the contemporary 
society. How does gamification and mobile technologies contribute to the creation 
of the digital cyborg? In order to address this question, we start by conducting a 
critical review of mHealth in contemporary society through the lens of self- 
monitoring, biopower and control. This review is followed by a critical analysis of 
elements from popular running apps (e.g. Nike+, Runkeeper and Fitbit) that could 
support and define a digital cyborg. The main contribution of this chapter is the 
analysis and definition of the movement of datification and the digital cyborg body 
from the perspectives of gamification, self-monitoring and mobile technologies.
The current chapter provides not only a guideline for the understanding of the 
perspectives of self-monitoring in future research but also discusses the main theo-
ries behind QSs in the contemporary society. We live in a society that is based on 
3  mHealth and the Digital Cyborg Body: The Running Apps in a Society of Control

44
mediatisation. The role of media in communication has become a basic practice of 
how people construct the social and cultural world (Couldry 2012). The use of 
social media, in this case, is understood in an inclusive way, including, for example, 
practices of self-knowledge based on wearable media and apps. Beyond this overall 
context, the term practice mainly refers to how different forms combine to build a 
more complex and socially situated pattern of interacting with media. Here we can 
think of the practice of mHealth, which involves different forms of personal data 
representation in online platforms, certain forms of searching in these platforms, 
other characteristic forms of online shared personal data and so on. Therefore, the 
term practice emphasises the social embedding of a set of communicative forms as 
well as their relation to human needs. In a society of control, as we will demon-
strate, data, digitisation, technologies and the media have rebuilt the process of sub-
jectivation, sociability, power and knowledge but also the senses of health and the 
practices of self-care. In the discourses and practices of digitised health promotion 
conditioned by the mediatisation of society, health risks have become increasingly 
individualised and viewed as manageable and controllable if lay people adopt the 
appropriate technologies to engage in self-monitoring and self-care. However, this 
is not enough; lay people must adopt a healthy lifestyle through the use of mobile 
health technologies like running apps. With the advent of the vast amount of data 
produced by digital technologies and the use of sophisticated algorithms to manipu-
late these data, it has become ever more convenient to focus attention on personal 
responsibility for health states.
As we will show, our society is transformed by the logic, technologies and dis-
courses of the media. The increasing mediatisation we all experience nowadays has 
changed the exercise of biopower, in a very different way from the one analysed by 
Michel Foucault (1975).
3.2  mHealth and Bodies in a Society of Control
Michel Foucault (1975) described two dimensions of biopower. The first one refers 
to the administration of bodies, which are considered as machines by articulated 
mechanisms of disciplinary powers. The second one is related to the management of 
life. This second dimension shaped the concept of biopolitics, in which the human 
body is considered as part of a set of standard practices. Foucault reveals a signifi-
cant level of functioning of the iniquitous political relations in contemporary societ-
ies. As stated by Foucault, there is a power technology centred on the body, which 
produces individualising effects through manipulation of the self.
Biopower refers to the practice of modern states and their regulation of those 
who are subject to it by means of an explosion of numerous and diverse techniques 
for subjugating bodies and controlling populations. In the European societies of the 
eighteenth century, new technologies of power arose. It is the physical bodies of 
people, the first space in which a new form of power has been exercised (Foucault 
1975, p.17). This occurs with the institutionalisation of schools, hospitals, barracks, 
I. Sacramento and V. Wanick

45
prisons and other environments called “kidnapping” institutions. This domination is 
exercised by the use of disciplinary techniques to make tasks people more interest-
ing. Besides disciplinary power, a type of power nominated by Foucault, biopower, 
appeared in the eighteenth century.
It is in the context of these societies that disciplinary power arises, born of a 
technology of power that treats the body of man as a machine, aiming to train it to 
transform it into a useful tool for economic interests. Concomitantly comes bio-
power, whose focus is not the individualised body, but the collective body. Biopower 
does not differ only from disciplinary power but also from sovereign power, for 
while in sovereignty there was a right of the sovereign to “let live” or “live” and the 
“letting die”, which will be a power that will take care of the preservation of life, 
eliminating everything that threatens the preservation and wellbeing of the popula-
tion. However, a disciplinary technology is not only centred on the body, but on life. 
Biopolitics is a technology that brings together the effects of living in a population 
and being an individual, seeking to control individuals as a group. Biopolitics aims 
to provide not only individual training but also an overall balance between disciplin-
ary and biopower, such as a homeostasis that sets the security in relation to its inter-
nal dangers.
Disciplinary technology identifies the body as a set of capabilities to be devel-
oped. From the end of the seventeenth century, during the eighteenth century and 
especially in the early nineteenth century, this disciplinary technology developed 
and structured a completely new use of power technology to turn the body into 
labour forces. Such technology would be organised primarily around the discipline, 
that is, the technical process unit by which the body’s strength is with minimal bur-
den reduced as a political force and maximised as a useful force. Factories, schools, 
hospitals, hospices, prisons and other key institutions in the life of the capitalist 
industrial society are structured through operating logic techniques and tactics from 
this disciplinary process. Thus, this suggests that there is a new relationship between 
power and bodies. The human body transforms itself into a machine of power that 
scans, dismantles and reassembles the whole body. This discipline makes the bodies 
more submissive and docile (Foucault 1975, p.126). Therefore, in this context, it is 
possible that strategies such as gamification could provide a more ludic and pleasant 
way for people to deal with tasks.
We understand that since the last quarter of the twentieth century, our society has 
experimented with a notion of power based on a transformation from discipline to 
control, as formulated by Gilles Deleuze (1990). According to Deleuze (1990), this 
control takes place through power modelling and constant change. The control lan-
guage is numeric and digital, since what matters is the access to information. Thus, 
this power is reinforced through a continuous information flow and instant commu-
nication. According to Deleuze, no one is more than a mass-individual pair. 
Individuals have become “vidual”, divisible, and the crowd has become samples, 
data, markets or database. This control logic also sets the capitalist speed coupled 
with technoscience. With this, control becomes short term: it is not only about con-
stant vigilance but also a continuous and unlimited possibility to locate something 
or someone (i.e. tracking). Power relations are injected and reinforced by  
3  mHealth and the Digital Cyborg Body: The Running Apps in a Society of Control

46
techno-scientific innovations, which start to cover the entire social body without 
leaving anything out of control. The focus of the post-disciplinary regime of power 
is to produce the appropriate individual, as technologies of modulation contribute to 
the individual desire to be autonomous, flexible and adaptable. The range of bio-
power is magnified, extrapolating institutions and specific areas and spreading to 
spaces, times and people’s lives. Deleuze (1990) noticed a general breakdown of all 
sites of confinement that were a reflection of the characteristics of the disciplinary 
regime. These characteristics are transformed into a condition of permanent modu-
lation, which comprehends wages, markets, time, labour contracts and human 
beings alike. Thus, societies of control become a result of conditions of constant 
meta-stability, which demands adaptability according to ever-changing conditions.
Although advances in biotechnology are not accessible to all individuals, there is 
a tendency to control and track information about the body itself. One of the most 
common examples of the use of communication and information technologies asso-
ciated with healthcare is the monitoring of information regarding dietary intake and 
exercise routine through smartphones. In the context of the healthy lifestyle impera-
tive, mobile communication devices gain importance by enabling the production, 
recording and consumption of information in real time. Thus, there are several 
applications, such as MyFitnessPal and GAIN Fitness, which offer nutritional diets 
and physical training programs based on individual data – such as sex, age and 
weight – and their goals (e.g. weight loss or gain of muscle mass). MyFitnessPal is 
an example of a mostly manual physical activity record that requires the user to 
enter all the data manually. Runkeeper, Endomondo and MapMyFitness are exam-
ples of mobile phone apps that require the user to specify when they are starting a 
specific activity but then automatically capture duration, speed, location traces and 
other details about the exercise bout. Fitbit, BodyMedia FIT and Jawbone UP, for 
example, are devices that a user wears all day (Andrew et al. 2013).
Fitbit has several models. Fitbit Flex and Fitbit Force are bracelets, while Fitbit 
Zip and Fitbit Ultra are attached to a garment as a clip. The main differences are in 
the presence of a display (which only the Force and the Zip have) and in collecting 
data on the number of steps that the person has climbed on a day (that only Ultra 
and Force provide). In all cases, focus is predominantly sports practice, and the 
synchronisation of the data collected by the bracelet can be done on an online plat-
form or through a smartphone application. The functioning of the devices is based 
on the search for the transformation of daily life, operationalised by counselling, 
celebrating achieved marks and sharing results with friends. The idea is to do a little 
every day, making health defined as a set of habits and lifestyles. In this sense, these 
devices present themselves as products capable of promoting an adequacy that is 
both physical and subjective and which, as Rose (2000) advocates, takes the body 
as part of an identity and self-actualisation project in the task of being and becoming 
someone.
The bracelet also calculates calorie expenditure in a personalised way, consider-
ing age, height and weight of the user, along with the intensity and duration of 
physical activities. In addition, it allows you to add nutrition data that can range 
from a simple photo of each meal to detailed nutrition information that can be  
I. Sacramento and V. Wanick

47
provided by the user manually or by using the barcode of the product consumed. 
Therefore, we see, how the creation of computerised systems for other purposes 
ends up allowing unusual convergences with the devices of capture and registration 
of biometric data. Fitbit uses a more health-centred discourse. On the front page of 
the product site (www.fitbit.com) are the goals it can help its users achieve: to 
become more active, to feed themselves better, to manage their weight and to sleep 
better. The strategy of selling the product consists of presenting it as that which can 
connect the “desired self” to the “present self”. Everyone can be healthy, happy and 
perform at their optimum levels, as the following sentence on the homepage of the 
site illustrates: “Fitbit motivates you to achieve your health and fitness goals by 
tracking your activity, exercise, sleep, weight and more”.2 An unreachable normal-
ity – since it tends to always want more – seems evident here. At the same time, 
however, such normality is presented as a democratic project, within reach of all 
overwhelmed contemporary individuals: “A morning jog, a walk during lunch, tak-
ing the stairs – these small changes add up to make a big difference. Taking just 
10,000 steps a day, as recommended by the American Heart Association, can lead to 
a healthier you. No matter how busy your schedule, Fitbit helps you make fitness 
part of your daily routine”.
MyFitnessPal takes a similar approach. Recognising that monitoring meals and 
physical activities can be tedious and difficult, it presents itself as a system that 
“learns from you”.3 The situation is similar for applications like Lose It!,4 which 
includes weight loss goals and also the option to maintain weight, but does not 
accommodate those wishing to increase their body mass index.
It is interesting to note that, while focusing on a specific health goal, most self-
monitoring applications and systems tend to extend support for this primary goal by 
tracking other variables or connecting the application to other devices that allow the 
user to gather more and more indicators about their health. Lose It!,4 which advo-
cates a vision of holistic wellbeing, claims to know that for its users, “weight loss is 
just one facet of your larger wellness goals”. It states that we tend to consume the 
same foods, and that’s why the application system remembers what you’ve eaten in 
the past, making the registration task easier. Similarly, it has a physical exercise 
database that helps users estimate caloric expenditure.
The evolution of digital technologies in the field of health, however, allows us to 
explore the data constantly emitted by the human body in a deeper way, tracing 
information that in the past we could obtain only through medical examinations. 
Wearable devices can go beyond the basics of calorie counting; they can measure 
mental and psychological states, for example. In this sense, Rettberg (2014) com-
ments that the possibility of measuring information gives the impression that we can 
control them, like the data on productivity and health that we can strive to improve. 
In the context of wearable technology, there are a variety of products for this pur-
pose available on the market. They are used as wristbands, necklaces or stuck in 
2 Available at www.fitbit.com/story.
3 Available at http://www.myfitnesspal.com.br/welcome/learn_more.
4 Available at https://www.loseit.com/how-it-works/.
3  mHealth and the Digital Cyborg Body: The Running Apps in a Society of Control

48
pockets and synchronise with websites or smartphone apps, where graphics are  
generated and averages calculated. Thus, the combination of data generated through 
wearable devices and online services has led to an increased interest in tracking and 
analysing personal data. Such interest is not driven only by technology: “society in 
general is increasingly invested in quantitative measures that we hope will allow us 
to improve our performance” (Rettberg 2014, p.64).
3.2.1  The Quantified Self (QS) and Biopower
According to Swan (2013), one of the contemporary trends in the science of large 
volumes of data is the emergence of the “Quantified Self (QS)”: the individual 
engaged in tracking any kind of biological, physical, behavioural or environmental 
information about himself/herself. In fact, this is a term that goes back to the general 
progression in the history of mankind of using “measurement, science, and technol-
ogy to bring order, understanding, manipulation, and control to the natural world, 
including the human body” (Swan 2013, p. 86). Thus, health is often quantified. 
Objectives may range from tracking the resolution of some pathology to improving 
physical and mental performance. Consumers can, for example, track data on their 
weight, diet and exercise routine to factors such as blood pressure, glucose levels, 
sleep patterns and headaches.
The quantification of health has several implications for public health: first, it 
makes health a matter of quantitative performance (raising or lowering indexes, 
meeting goals, achieving goals); secondarily it disregards social, cultural, economic, 
infrastructural, environmental and social factors. Complex biological processes are 
involved in determining health and disease, and it makes health a purely individual 
rather than social and a collective issue to avoid the risk of becoming ill or worsen-
ing one’s own health (Lupton 2016a, b). The idea of improving or worsening health 
is characteristic of this process of health quantification, which did not begin with 
mobile health technologies, but was deeply influenced by the way in which quanti-
fication is associated with the production, recording and transmission of personal 
health data.
According to Foucault’s perspective on biopolitics and the disciplinary and nor-
malising functions of the medical gaze, sociologists have written about the surveil-
lance strategies that operate in the context of the clinical and the medical encounter 
(Armstrong 1995; Lupton 1997). In any case, the innovative standards of self- 
monitoring engendered by digital technologies are exposed to the hierarchical pan-
optic push matured in Foucauldian theories of castigatory criticism techniques in 
what has been termed a “post-panoptic” conjunction (Adams 2012). Technologies 
such as solutions for self-tracking belongings recognise that users hoard things in 
miraculous countless and fantastic ways. The power for self-monitoring offered by 
unsettled digital information accordingly configures a possibility pliant of reflection 
range which is chosen rather than imposed, seeming absolutely than nigh unto 
(Lupton 2012; Rich and Miah 2009).
I. Sacramento and V. Wanick

49
Rather than a small number of hidden observers watching and monitoring many 
others, as the Foucauldian metaphor of the panopticon has it, the new digital tech-
nologies directed at promoting health often depend on individuals turning the gaze 
upon themselves and then inviting others to participate in their own surveillance by 
sharing the data (Lupton 2012). This is a version of the synopticon model of surveil-
lance, where instead of “the few watching the many”, the “many are watching the 
few” (Doyle 2011). Indeed, as stated by Lupton (2016a, b), since more and more 
personal information is uploaded and shared on social media, people also “watch” 
each other. It has been argued that the way we usually use the mobile health devices 
contributes to reinforce the centrality of “confessional” (Beer 2008) and of the 
“sharing” (John 2013) in our culture, in which it is expected that intimate and mun-
dane aspects of one’s life are constantly shared with others, including those that 
may previously have been kept private.
Although recording a memory or writing a narrative could evoke different emo-
tions in the author/reader, the digital data produced by mobile apps is not only a 
support for self-reflection and action, but it is determined by activities and by inter-
activity. Interactivity is the principal value and rule of contemporary technoculture 
(Sodré 2002; Véron 2014). In this context, these apps are not a form of self- 
representation in the same way as self-portraits and journals, and wearable tech-
nologies preserve and present images of us through the data, which are very precise 
and narrow regardless of whether they are step counts: heart rate, productivity, loca-
tion and so much more. All that information could be shared on social media, such 
as Facebook and Twitter. There are also apps that support communities or groups, 
creating their own social media network or associating with others. It is common 
that the users share their experiences of using apps through social media and online 
groups.
3.2.2  Gamification and Biopower
Gamification is a design strategy that influences people’s behaviour and motivates 
individuals to perform an action, transforming boring situations into gameful and 
fun environments (Deterding et  al. 2011). When considering the relationship 
between power and individuals’ bodies, gamification could modify the relationship 
people have with disciplinary technologies.
The majority of mHealth applications include gamification in their core design 
strategy. For example, setting up personal goals, participating in challenges and the 
presence of competition with other users, badges, rewards and avatar representa-
tions could motivate users to perform healthy behaviours, such as losing weight or 
doing more physical activity (Marston and Hall 2015). This not only illustrates the 
influence of gamification in individuals’ behaviours but also shows that gamifica-
tion can facilitate biopower, converting disciplinary actions into a game. Yet, this 
concept could be criticised as exploitation ware or a way to use gameful elements to 
3  mHealth and the Digital Cyborg Body: The Running Apps in a Society of Control

50
mask undesirable behaviours (Bogost 2011). Thus, the main challenge when deal-
ing with biopower and gamification is to understand who has control over the action. 
Who has the power to change individuals’ behaviour? Briefly, the main outcomes of 
gamified systems for health promotion and sickness prevention include the ability 
to set and control personal goals, self-monitoring and self-reward (Payne et  al. 
2015). In other words, gamification can be employed in order to provide feedback 
loops and incentives to users. This aspect shows that the use of gamification for 
mHealth applications is centred on the self.
Nevertheless, the main challenge of gamification employed in mHealth applica-
tions is that it relies on the ownership of the body. For example, gamification has 
been criticised as a strategy that might overlook the abilities of users to effectively 
perform their desired behaviour (Lister et al. 2014). This suggests that gamified 
applications could tend to focus on the behavioural outcomes and incentives instead 
of the actual journey that users need to undertake to perform particular actions. 
Although these are important points to reflect on when dealing with gamification 
and the sense of control that users have upon their bodies, the current chapter will 
focus on the game design elements utilised in gamified mHealth apps that could 
transform bodies into digital cyborgs due to this sense of control.
3.2.3  Self-Knowledge and mHealth Applications
In his work on self-care practices in Western societies, Michel Foucault (2003a, b) 
discussed the underlying logic of technologies developed by man in order to obtain 
self-knowledge. The digitalisation of writing tools and the popularisation of mobile 
media evoked new questions, like economic values and organisational, moral, ethi-
cal and implicit political systems. Digital technologies of continuous personal mon-
itoring interfere directly in the process of recollection, analysis and information 
feedback. Each digital record suffers direct influence of the action programs that 
guide the operation of the new media.
It is often only when we experience symptoms of a disease or notice changes in 
medical examination results that we care about and reflect on eating habits, physical 
exercise or any other preventive measure that would prevent the illness that has 
affected us. One of the widely valued possibilities for wearable media technologies 
is that self-care does not have to rely on medical equipment and computers nor 
expect the onset of symptoms to collect and analyse the data that our bodies emit. 
That is, we wear the sensors that gather this information and visualise them on 
smartphones. This ability will reduce health spending because it will reduce the 
need to buy drugs, get tests and consult doctors frequently: doctors will be able to 
monitor our data and call us for a consultation only when they identify some abnor-
mality occurring within our body. Of course, this increases individual accountabil-
ity for health.
An example of the use of wearable technology as prophylactic technology is the 
Spire device. Attached to clothing by a clamp, the sensor identifies changes in the 
I. Sacramento and V. Wanick

51
users’ breath and sends a notification to his smartphone; if it recognises tension or 
stress in the way the subject is breathing, Spire suggests the user stops for a few 
moments and takes a deep breath, until it identifies that the users’ nervous state has 
returned to normal.
NuvaRing, on the other hand, is not properly a preventative health wearable, 
although it also allows the wearer to have greater control over the phenomena that 
occur within their own body. This device consists of a ring inserted in the female 
sexual organ, able to track changes in her fertility cycle through body temperature 
and, when she identifies the most fertile period of the user, sends an alert to her 
smartphone. In fact, the technology empowers the woman, since it gives her greater 
control over the decision of when to conceive a child. The app helps women to 
remember to use the contraceptive NuvaRing.
There are also pregnancy and parenting apps. BabyBump Pregnancy Pro, for 
example, includes a community forum and a pregnancy journal to track your weight 
and the size of your baby bump. It even has a library of baby names to choose from, 
along with a handy birth planner. Full Term provides a track of labour contractions, 
in which pregnant women can track the start and end of each contraction. The app 
is designed to keep track of the times, durations and frequency of the entire labour 
period. The user can even email her own contraction history to a healthcare profes-
sional or keep it for herself for her own records. It also provides a weight tracker. 
iHomeopathy is an example of parenting apps. It gives the user a guide to treating 
first-aid emergencies, childhood ailments and common illnesses.
The changes that are currently occurring in relation to health and understanding 
of what it means to take care of health are clear. As Swan (2009) shows, the respon-
sibility for this aspect of human life has already been considered an effort mainly 
attributed to trained and licenced health professionals. However, the ease of access 
to information related to this field, possible through communication and informa-
tion technologies, as well as the citizens’ interest in obtaining greater knowledge 
and control over this aspect of their lives, stimulated the formation of a network of 
exchange of health-related information, in which it is possible to connect the laity, 
professionals and public and private institutions concerned with exploring issues 
related to this topic.
In the scenario of the quantification and digitisation of the health, the choices are 
restricted to follow the norms, which became something like the goals, and specific 
numbers, to make sure that one has attained “good” or “perfect” health. Of course, 
there are numbers of uses of mobile health that provide better life and alternative 
treatment for patients. But there is also an industry of health. Some health apps are 
more concerned with selling an idea or an illusion of “perfect health”, free from 
risky factors, diseases and suffering, in a way that makes people desire to maintain 
or develop a healthy lifestyle (Sfez 1995). Of course, these discourses on health are 
not new, but are related to the emergence of a health promotion model.
For Lupton (1995), the term health promotion is generally used to describe spe-
cific activities directed to goals, with a strong emphasis on rational management of 
population health. The major emphasis of health promotional rhetoric is on stimu-
lating “positive health”, preventing illness rather than treating it, developing  
3  mHealth and the Digital Cyborg Body: The Running Apps in a Society of Control

52
performance indicators based on specific goals, using the media to promote certain 
ideas of life behaviours and life attitudes associated with some products rather than 
focus on working with communities, encouraging their participation in propositions 
to develop healthy environments and reducing the growing expenses in healthcare. 
Hence, in this context, the control of the risks related to lifestyle tends to follow the 
same rationale, often being presented as something related to the private sphere and 
to the responsibility of the individuals, posed in terms of behavioural choices. 
However, it is important to consider some of the benefits of these approaches. There 
are undoubtedly positive health effects for people who may eventually change their 
risk exposure patterns through so-called behavioural changes. These changes, for 
example, can be achieved by using mobile digital technologies, as we are showing. 
On the other hand, it is necessary to observe that the generalised practice of produc-
tion and consumption of these technologies has been consolidating an individual-
based health vision and deepening certain tendencies of a control society.
Considering this, the contemporary social function is given in terms of the func-
tion of the market and technological vectors. As Deleuze remarks, in this context, 
capitalism ceases to be directed to production and becomes centred on sales, market 
and consumption: “Marketing is now the instrument of social control” (Deleuze 
1990, p.180–181). Thus, there is a constant tension between the assertion of free-
dom of choice and the normalisation (or standardisation) of individuals. For exam-
ple, we are always required to participate, to enter, to play, to share, to post a picture 
and to be checked, evaluated and corrected in the system of digital communication 
of health applications. This is quite revealing of how contemporary individuals are 
strongly characterised by incessant moratorium, never to be finished, free from the 
power. While freedom is a general principle in contemporary societies, responsibil-
ity for health is increasingly seen as an individual matter. We are experiencing what 
Rose (2000) calls the technologies of freedom:
As far as individuals are concerned, one sees a revitalisation of the demand that each person 
should be obliged to be prudent, responsible for their futures and providing for their own 
security and that of their families with assistance of plurality of independent experts and 
profit-making businesses from private health insurance to private security firms (Rose 2000, 
p.324).
So, technologies of freedom have been invented to improve self-awareness 
regarding responsibility for individual choices and their consequences. For this 
unstable model of identity construction, there is the idea that one can choose life-
styles within the dominant sociocultural menu of choices. However, this choice is a 
form of normalisation and control of bodies by dominant discourses, knowledge 
and powers in the field of health and the media. These applications act as an axis in 
the constant search for self-ordering made available by the prevailing environments, 
where there is a proliferation of goods and merchandise being produced, high circu-
lation in the distribution sector and inevitable frenzy at the point of consumption. Its 
use is a way of responding to the contemporary need to be always alert in relation 
to food, body, weight and risks. There is a much greater sense of constant debt to the 
body and health as a performance measured by numbers.
I. Sacramento and V. Wanick

53
The next section of this chapter shows the main components of mHealth applica-
tions that could transform individual bodies into digital cyborgs, particularly 
through design elements that could provide a sense of control to users over their 
bodies, considering gamification and Quantified Self (QS) components.
3.3  mHealth Running Apps and Components
This section describes the design components related to mHealth applications, gam-
ification and features that could provide a sense of control for users over their bod-
ies. The objective of this section is to identify and explore the design factors 
embedded and incorporated in mHealth applications that collaborate for the cre-
ation of a digital cyborg.
3.3.1  Gamification Elements
The employment of gamification for health through applications has been previ-
ously investigated through a literature review of gamification principles for chronic 
disease management (Miller et al. 2014), a review of fitness applications (Lister 
et al. 2014), a systematic content analysis of behavioural theories in physical appli-
cations (Payne et al. 2015) and an illustrated review of gamification components 
that could be integrated into applications for health promotion and wellbeing 
(Marston and Hall 2015).
According to Payne et al. (2015), there are at least nine gamification design ele-
ments that could be used to motivate users to change their health behaviours. Those 
are the employment of a storyline, the existence of a fantasy environment, competi-
tion with other users, the possibility of failure, the presence of leaderboards, scores, 
ranking, levels and real-world prizes (Payne et al. 2015). For example, in their anal-
ysis, Payne et al. (2015) found that SuperBetter (an application designed to improve 
individual’s wellbeing through resilience) was the most effective application, since 
it included all the gamification elements. SuperBetter has a surrounding narrative, 
illustrated by the words and language utilised in the application. The utilisation of 
words like “activate power” or “load power pack” shows an invisible but present 
storyline, as users could become their own super heroes. This could be one way to 
involve users in a task and build emotional links with their own actions.
Other gamification elements are setting up goals, social engagement, challenges, 
competition through leaderboards, badges and rewards, levels, app customisation 
and personalisation, feedback, role-playing and transparent tracking environments 
(Marston and Hall 2015). For instance, customisation can include the users’ ability 
to choose and create their own avatar and change a simple aspect of the interface 
design, such as colour, font and background (Marston and Hall 2015). This aspect 
3  mHealth and the Digital Cyborg Body: The Running Apps in a Society of Control

54
could give a sense of control to the users, as they can personalise their own digital 
environments, bringing their own personality and taste.
Furthermore, it is important to mention that badges and rewards are concepts that 
might overlap as they could be treated from the same perspectives. Points, achieve-
ments, badges, medals, visual elements like animations, likes from friends and vir-
tual gifts are examples of rewards in gamified applications (Lewis et al. 2016). In 
other words, rewards are incentives that keep users motivated, which could be digi-
tal or real, like real-world prizes and money, for instance.
Lister et al. (2014) also presented similar elements to Marston and Hall (2015) in 
terms of social influence; however, the difference was that the pressure from peers 
(e.g. family and friends) should also be considered as a social engagement, which 
could help to motivate users to change their behaviour. For example, family mem-
bers could be extremely active, giving comments, advice and rewards for users in 
the application and in real life.
Similarly, Miller et al. (2014) also mentioned that badges, leaderboards, points 
and levelling-up, challenges and social engagement are the main gamification ele-
ments that could be used to enhance self-management. After a review of gamifica-
tion elements, Miller et al. (2014) argued that challenges and quests are extremely 
important as they can be incorporated by other elements, such as badges, function-
ing as small steps to achieve a bigger goal. This shows that, if well integrated, gami-
fied applications for health could enhance the potential of the bodies, augmenting 
the relationship between power and control that users have upon them.
3.3.2  Level of Control
As mentioned previously, biopower is a concept that relies on power and control 
over our bodies and lives particularly through a disciplinary technology. There is, 
though, a transformation that shifts the focus from discipline to control. Thus, in 
this section, the level of control from the perspective of design represents the capa-
bility of the mHealth applications to provide a sense of control to the users over 
their bodies through aspects like tracking and monitoring. This could be controlled 
by the user or by the application. For example, MyFitnessPal requires that users log 
their own data manually, whereas Fitbit can use mobile phones or other wearables 
as sensors that provide user’s data automatically.
The capability of the mHealth application to provide a sense of control for the 
user is crucial when considering gamified environments. For example, gamification 
should support user participation in the whole process (Huotari and Hamari 2012). 
Payne et  al. (2015) argued that the possibility of setting personal goals, self- 
monitoring and self-reward (e.g. gifts, treats, personal wellbeing) structures could 
be considered as outcomes of health behaviour. In other words, the application 
should support users while performing actions of self-control and self-reward. For 
example, the ability to customise personal goals and the digital environment, 
together with the capability to visualise personal data, are design elements that  
I. Sacramento and V. Wanick

55
support self-monitoring and self-reward. Therefore, for the analysis of the level of 
control, we searched for design elements that could augment goal-oriented actions, 
self-monitoring and self-reward.
3.3.3  Mobile Features
Pagoto et al. (2013) evaluated technology-related techniques for weight loss apps, 
which included a food barcode scanner, social media integration, reminders, calen-
dar, tracking and diary recording (e.g. voice, photos, text). For example, users could 
connect their applications with social media networks such as Facebook and Twitter 
and post their achievements online, which could provide likes and encouraging 
comments. In fact, the integration between social media and health apps could not 
only reinforce social cues but also combine data from the application and data from 
the social network. Another strategy mentioned by Pagoto et al. (2013) was the 
incorporation of reminders. For example, users can set up their own reminders for 
the time to eat their meal or exercise. Such reminders could function through email 
or mobile alerts, depending on the application.
Another aspect to be considered is geolocation. This is a similar feature to that 
adopted by the early mobile app Foursquare, which utilised geolocation data to 
provide badges to users, rewarding their loyal behaviour (Zichermann and 
Cunningham 2011). Another use of geolocation for mHealth applications is through 
game-like mechanics, like treasure hunt and collection of items based on users’ 
location, reinforcing physical activities (Boulos and Yang 2013). This could be very 
beneficial for mHealth applications as users could receive real-time notifications 
based on their location, becoming more pervasive and part of their reality. In other 
words, geolocation features could enhance user experience, combining patterns of 
everyday life with digital elements.
3.3.4  Characteristics of the Self
The consistent monitoring and tracking of the bodies has transformed the way peo-
ple deal with themselves through self-knowledge. This aspect is represented by the 
Quantified Self (QS), in which people can measure their body performance through 
sensor activity. For example, it is possible to control users’ posture through the 
monitoring of particular positions, which could be transformed into equations, neu-
ral networks and digital maps (Van Diest et al. 2015). That is, in order to identify the 
characteristics of the self, it is crucial to understand the design elements of mHealth 
applications that are capable of monitoring and quantifying the self. To investigate 
this, we borrowed features from applications that sustain the QS.  For instance, 
Lupton (2013) has proposed that the presence of indicators could inspire self-
knowledge. Blood glucose levels, energy, mood, body temperature, heart rate and 
3  mHealth and the Digital Cyborg Body: The Running Apps in a Society of Control

56
physical and brain activity are a few examples of indicators that could inform users 
about their body performance. Thus, in order to analyse the elements that could 
quantify the “self”, we explore the indicators that could promote such knowledge.
Considering this, in the next section, we will utilise the four categories men-
tioned in this section: gamification elements, level of control, mobile features and 
the characteristics of the self to analyse how design elements can augment the digi-
tal cyborg.
3.4  Running App Analysis and Health Optimisation
The aim of this section is to provide an understanding of the design elements from 
mHealth applications that augment and sustain the digital cyborg. In order to explore 
such elements, we borrowed elements from gamification, mobile features, aspects 
that could give a sense of control to users and the capability of applications to quan-
tify users’ data.
3.4.1  Method and Sampling Strategy
In order to analyse the design elements that could enhance the transformation of 
bodies into digital cyborgs, we utilised the elements explored in Sect. 3: gamifica-
tion design elements, level of control, characteristics of the self and mobile features. 
For this analysis, our chosen sample was composed of popular running applications: 
Runkeeper, Fitbit and Nike+. The reason for this choice is related to the level of 
popularity of these apps in mobile app stores. For example, Fitbit was the top wear-
able device most utilised by American users in 2015 (Forrester 2015). Moreover, 
Runkeeper had 2.1 million of users in the USA in 2014 (Nielsen 2014). When look-
ing for the most popular apps in the iTunes App Store under the category Health and 
Fitness, Fitbit was the top app, followed by Nike+ and Runkeeper.5 Thus, for the 
purpose of the current analysis, those three apps were selected, downloaded and 
tested by the researchers. In this sense, the running apps were selected for analysis 
in this chapter based on the link they establish between media, body and organisa-
tion, being particularly favourable to research of the mediatisation strategies oper-
ated in the new media ontology context (Finnemann 2014). In the words of Schulz 
(2004: 96): “Although the new networks and storage technologies allow a more 
individualised and decentralised media use, they are nevertheless subject to central 
controls restraining choices and modes of application”.
5 Search was undertaken in December 2016 at https://itunes.apple.com/us/genre/ios-health-fitness/
id6013?mt=8.
I. Sacramento and V. Wanick

57
3.4.2  Analysis
In order to identify and explore the design elements that could augment the digital 
cyborg from the constant monitoring of bodies, we searched for features from gami-
fication, characteristics of the self, mobile features and the level of control provided 
by the running apps. Considering this, in order to summarise the identified ele-
ments, we produced a table with a comparison of the main features of the analysed 
running apps (see Table 3.1). In this section, we demonstrate and discuss how those 
apps produce forms of health optimisation and with it new forms of control over 
users’ bodies.
We identified that all the apps analysed provide a connection with friends. This 
supports the idea that social factors, such as sharing information with friends and 
family in social media or competing against friends, could motivate people to keep 
active (Hamari and Koivisto 2013). Fitbit, for example, provided challenges that can 
be undertaken at different times of the week. However, those challenges were fixed 
and did not provide a high level of control to the user, as a limited number of people 
can participate in each challenge. The same happened with Runkeeper; however, 
more users could participate in the suggested challenges. If using Nike+, users were 
only able to create their own challenges. Thus, Nike+ should be able to show users 
how to create their own challenges as this feature could impact on their level of 
control. In this case, while interacting with Nike+ for the first time, users are intro-
duced to tutorials, which could help them to learn how to use the application and set 
up their own challenges.
In order to provide integration between the apps and the real world, Runkeeper 
utilised contextual information, such as weather information, with the aim of pro-
viding a context to the user’s data. For example, it is possible that a bad performance 
could be related to a rainy day, particularly if the user runs outdoors. This shows that 
technology can fit into people’s lives, particularly if considering mobile characteris-
tics (Bell et al. 2006). However, it is the user who makes the association and inter-
prets the information shown in the application.
Another aspect provided by both Runkeeper and Nike+ was the possibility to buy 
products online. For instance, Runkeeper provided tangible rewards, like discounts 
in their own online store for members who could finish a challenge on time.
In all apps, part of the feedback structure was associated with colour, such as 
green vs. red if the mission was accomplished. The utilisation of colour as a means 
of providing more information is a design strategy that could convey meaning to the 
user without the need for words or images. In other words, the information is 
implicit within the colour. For example, the colour red could be associated with 
danger (Crozier 1997). This also opens the possibilities to researchers to look at the 
role of colour as a symbolic element, particularly through the lens of semiotics (Eco 
1976).
Semiotics is the study of signs, which usually stand for something (signifier) that 
has a representation for someone (signified) (Peirce 1991). In other words, semiot-
ics is about representations and how people interpret these representations. That is, 
3  mHealth and the Digital Cyborg Body: The Running Apps in a Society of Control

Table 3.1  mHealth components from running apps
Components
Runkeeper
Fitbit
Nike+
Gamification 
elements
Fantasy environment, 
competition, 
leaderboards, possibility 
of failure (e.g. 
non-completion of 
challenges), social 
engagement (e.g. share 
achievements with 
friends), clear goals, 
score, ranking, 
challenges, rewards, 
feedback, real-world 
prizes (e.g. discount on 
products), visualisation 
of progress
Fantasy 
environment, 
competition, 
possibility of 
failure (e.g. 
non-completion of 
challenges), 
leaderboards, 
social engagement 
(e.g. share selected 
achievements with 
friends), clear 
goals, ranking, 
challenges, badges 
and rewards, 
feedback, 
visualisation of 
progress
Fantasy environment, 
competition, possibility 
of failure, leaderboards, 
social engagement, clear 
goals, score, ranking, 
levels (e.g. beginner, 
intermediate, advanced), 
challenges (e.g. create 
your own), feedback
Level of control
Set personal goals, 
self-monitoring
Set personal goals, 
self-monitoring, 
customisation of 
dashboard
Set personal goals, 
self-monitoring, create 
own challenges
Mobile features
GPS, geolocation, social 
media integration, 
notifications, integration 
with real world (e.g. 
map visualisation, 
weather integration and 
discounts)
Social media 
integration, 
tracking, 
geolocation and 
integration with 
the real world (e.g. 
map visualisation)
Social media integration, 
reminders, calendar, 
tracking, information 
recording (e.g. photos 
and notes), geolocation 
and integration with the 
real world (e.g. map 
visualisation)
Characteristics of 
the self
Presentation of 
challenges in the system 
(the need to overcome 
challenges/obstacles); 
meeting the challenges 
gives discounts on 
products of Runkeeper 
online store 
(performance as a 
reward); the limitation 
of freedom of choice 
(users are always 
challenged by the 
system); system 
rhetorical notification in 
order to achieve goals 
(“Are you 
progressing?”); 
publication of achieved 
goals in social networks 
(exposure as a reward 
and competition with 
other users)
Nutritional 
information and 
measurement of 
progress by means 
of a progress bar 
that indicates the 
colour 
development of the 
users in their 
individual goals 
(the quantification 
of health and 
performance); 
challenges with 
other users 
(performance as 
competition); 
reward as trophies 
that can be shared 
on social networks
Customisation of goals 
through information 
setup (e.g. gender, 
weight, age, height, daily 
caloric intake); 
quantification of 
existence as a guarantee 
of high performance; 
system as a personal 
trainer; performance 
established at levels 
(beginner, intermediate 
and advanced); there is 
no reward or prize, but 
users can take pictures 
and add notes after the 
workout and share photos 
that carry the brand Nike 
on social networks (this 
allows brand 
enhancement and 
association)

59
colours, sounds, animations and forms could carry implicit and symbolic communi-
cations between the system and the user. For example, the applause when achieving 
a goal could represent not just the applause itself, but winning a medal after a com-
petition. It is possible that depending on the user’s background, the applause would 
represent a situation like being in a podium after winning a gold medal or just the 
applause after a good performance. In interactive systems, semiotics can be 
employed in order to explore the dimensions of the digital representations, not only 
in the interface level but also in the level of interactions (Andersen 2001). This 
shows that visual representations together with the tasks that users need to perform 
in the systems could make their experience more relevant. Thus, it is possible that 
gamification design elements could utilise colour and interactivity as design strate-
gies in order to express implicit information to users.
This characteristic also reflects the propositions reviewed by Marston and Hall 
(2015), as graphs, texts and icons could be used as feedback strategies. However, 
these structures also showed a transformation of data. Additional feedback struc-
tures included data visualisations from previous or current exercises. Numbers, 
colour, animation, size and shape of the graphics and metaphors were the main 
design strategies employed in badges and rewards and data visualisation, such as 
graphs and tables. For example, in Fitbit, users could run the distance of a country 
or have their data compared to a “monarch butterfly migration”, which could be 
employed in a badge. This aspect not only shows that illustrations and metaphors 
might give a ludic environment to the user, but it also shows an integration of design 
strategies, since data could be transformed into a reward. For example, users could 
be awarded a “monarch butterfly migration badge”.
Furthermore, in all apps, leaderboards and challenges were the main strategies 
employed in order to support competition. Although this aspect could increase moti-
vation based on social relations (Marston and Hall 2015; Hamari and Koivisto 
2013), no option was given to users to be part of a team, for example. This suggests 
that those apps could improve in terms of cooperation and collaboration, as users 
could undertake challenges with their friends.
If considering Payne et al.’s (2015) components of gamification (e.g. storyline, 
fantasy, competition, possibility to failure, real-world prizes, rewards, badges, chal-
lenges, levels, ranking, score, clear goals, social engagement and leaderboards), the 
analysed running apps did not have a storyline. This could indicate an opportunity 
for developers to design more apps that could integrate the user’s running environ-
ment, which goes beyond location. For example, if users want to start running 
because they want to run a marathon in a few months, the running apps could tell 
the story of their progress since the beginning through a narrative using fantasy 
cues, including characters (e.g. users, friends and family), environment (e.g. run-
ning scenario, weather, location) and achievements (e.g. badges and rewards).
All the analysed running apps supported quantified self-expressions, which 
could be understood as a personal productive efficiency. In other words, self- 
expressions could reflect a systematic governance of subjectivity that gives a certain 
security in the face of complexity, reducing and simplifying knowledge in order to 
make it manageable. According to Lupton (2014b), when the body is established as 
3  mHealth and the Digital Cyborg Body: The Running Apps in a Society of Control

60
a data repository, the presentation of it becomes a central issue for the concept of 
identity. According to the information generated by the system, the presentation of 
this data was designed in order to provide a deeper understanding and interpretation 
of the individual’s body and habits. From this perspective, the degree of detail and 
picture fidelity itself therefore depended on the level of engagement and the amount 
of data produced by each user.
Based on the ideal of health optimisation and perfecting the self through the 
quantification and objectification of the body, the analysed apps offered an oriented 
system with continuous monitoring of daily activities. With regard to monitoring, a 
set of processes was designed in order to engage the user in the practice of personal 
records. Since the system was oriented to produce data, it utilised some procedural 
arguments, such as “use the device to enter the system” or “just leave the device 
connected to the body”. Initial commands like these were also indicated in mes-
sages of encouragement displayed on wearable devices, phone notification systems 
and graphical interfaces. These notifications called upon the user to interact through 
the monitoring performance. Unlike apps that focused on the habits of control, these 
apps required an action that could meet the media procedure and self-written expres-
sions enhanced by user data.
The system behind the wearable devices tended, therefore, to focus on the conti-
nuity of data collection. For this, the system captured events and procedures that do 
not demand user intervention. A bracelet, for example, could remain active, provid-
ing real-time feedback of the collected data, the mobile device monitored back-
ground activities and the system suggested competitive challenges and 
performances.
This continuous capture of data could convince users to keep the device on their 
body. Mobile monitoring operated as a redundant strategy, allowing the system to 
predict any gaps caused by battery failure or, in some cases, the non-use of the wear-
able device. This strategy introduced practices that are justified in the case of expan-
sion of the systems’ attributes, such as adding the location of activity via the phone’s 
global positioning system (GPS), for example. Competitive performances also 
sought to ensure the maintenance of practices that could raise actions involving 
competition between users of Fitbit, Runkeeper or Nike+ in social networks, which 
helped users to overcome personal goals.
Similar to input strategies, the procedural arguments focused on system mainte-
nance and user engagement could be seen as processes related to the procedural 
nature of the media and expression of personal monitoring experiences. For exam-
ple, passive recording invited the user to shift attention to the body activity, while 
the suggestion of challenges proposed the experience of overcoming certain objec-
tives. Otherwise, the apps that we analysed called the user to remain engaged with 
a performance that produces data for the system. The system also suggested repeat-
edly supported behaviours as a way to improve self-knowledge and develop skills 
through exercises and continuous effort.
This repetition of practices and procedures, in turn, alluded to training programs 
conducted by a personal trainer. On the user level, visualisation tools could support 
the update of self-image, drawing from the data the objectification of individual 
I. Sacramento and V. Wanick

61
organic dimensions and processes. Thus, the analysed running apps could also oper-
ate as a repository of objective memory about the users’ overall performance 
(Lupton 2014a). As Whitson (2013, p.175) notes, “quantification of the self allows 
us to replace the holes in our memories and the vagaries of our intuition” with the 
apparent objectivity and perspicacity of data-based knowledge, a techno-driven 
movement that makes instinctual powers of the body–mind progressively more 
peripheral and obsolescent as sources of enlightenment, awareness, edification and 
truth. In this deterministic turn to processes of externalisation and objectivation, 
knowledge of the body/self is only validated if it appears outside of the body/self, 
especially in the form of a multiplex data visualisation.
Data visualisation strategies could also function as procedural rhetorical mecha-
nisms. These strategies invite users to make decisions about their own bodies. 
Developed from the concept of dashboards (i.e. information presented through a 
control panel format), the graphic interface is extremely dependent on user data. 
Without this data, graphics could not be created, the statistics do not make sense and 
programs for monitoring different aspects of the body remain dormant. Thus, at the 
information display level, the system makes use of procedural arguments, calling 
users to perform an action through words, alerts or just data visualisation. That is, 
users would feel persuaded to perform an action by just interpreting the way the data 
is displayed to them. Moreover, the visualisation of dashboards implies a hierarchy 
that extends user control over data repository variables, bulky and transient, allow-
ing exploration of aspects and areas intuitively and without the need for specialised 
analytical skills.
In contemporary society, there is a passage from disciplinary surveillance anal-
ysed by Michel Foucault (1975) regarding this private risk management. In this 
context, individuals are urged to become managers of each other, planning their 
lives as online entrepreneurs, building strategies for their business, assessing risks 
and making choices that aim to maximise their quality of life, optimising personal 
and private resources and managing options according to cost-benefit parameters, 
performance and efficiency. Thus, contemporary subjects seek to assume the 
demands of competitiveness. Considering this, individuals’ own health becomes a 
capital that people should manage by choosing the best living habits and calibrating 
the risks that may arise from them. This aspect reflects the business logic of change 
management and profit, for example. In running apps, individuals must demonstrate 
ability to adapt to changes constantly, utilising resources like monitoring and 
recommendations.
Contemporary equipment should be compatible with computers and a myriad of 
devices based on digital logic. Nowadays, equipment is permanently at risk of obso-
lescence, being challenged to maximise flexibility and recycling ability. Thus, the 
analysed running apps could contribute to produce the digital cyborg body as a 
contemporary requirement for the pursuit of high performance and a healthy life-
style. The individual is reached by new biopolitics modalities of the imperative of 
health in order to become a manager of himself/herself, such as the idea that who 
cannot reach or exceed goals can be regarded as subhuman, unproductive and irre-
sponsible (Lupton 1995). Thus, new knowledge and technologies bring to the mar-
3  mHealth and the Digital Cyborg Body: The Running Apps in a Society of Control

62
ket a series of preventative devices that allow each individual to manage risks 
inherent to self-knowledge. Information becomes a key instrument of today’s digital 
life.
The running apps Runkeeper, Fitbit and Nike+ are, therefore, configured as pre-
ventative therapies, designed with the goal of controlling life, augmenting the devel-
opment of the digital cyborg. The fact that individuals expose their exercise routine 
and diets shows a regime of visibility that transforms the individual experience of 
losing weight and getting fit. This experience would be different if it was restricted 
only to the individual’s private life, since the mere fact of regularly exposing body 
weight and daily diet to friends and followers on social networking sites causes 
people to remain in a state of permanent self-control, which is maintained and con-
tinued by the control and expectation produced by exposure.
In this sense, we can argue that digital technologies, through various applica-
tions, function as an externalised self-awareness that allows individuals to make 
decisions based on the permanent monitoring of daily habits and the control and 
crossing of physical, alimentary and physiological data. With this monitoring, indi-
viduals can substantially improve their quality of life as the decisions taken today 
regarding health and wellness are reflected in a healthier future, with a greater con-
trol over diseases such as obesity, hypertension and certain types of diabetes.
We would thus be living the “unfinished revolution”, which Dertouzos (2001) 
describes, with communication and information technologies more integrated into 
our daily lives. Self-monitoring is only possible once there are devices that allow 
sufficient mobility so that they can be brought to any place without difficulty and 
whose interface is friendly enough to produce constant information. Today’s mobile 
devices, such as smartphones, are increasingly pervasive and integrated into our 
daily lives, on the way to “disappearing”, as predicted by Dertouzos (2001). 
However, one of the consequences of having more friendly and imperceptible tech-
nologies in our day-to-day lives implies, as we have seen, a permanent vigilance 
regime, with its constant monitoring actions, which are becoming so much a part of 
our common practices.
Self-monitoring represents both a way of taking care of biological life and the 
instrumentalisation of decision-making processes in various areas of our daily lives. 
Among the Quantified Selves, we find individuals interested in optimising some-
thing simple, such as choosing what to wear each morning, as well as those who, 
although healthy, anguish about their normality or future, acting in the search to 
avoid ageing and death. Whatever the aim pursued, the constant that gives cohesion 
to the movement lies in the analytical attitude of its adherents: they give a scientific 
character to their actions, bodies and choices by asserting that the world has become 
too complex to act only on the designs of our own intuition. They show that taking 
responsibility for one’s health and one’s own success should be, in fact, a task of 
planning, producing knowledge and calculating. It is also a task of acceptance and 
challenge of established knowledge, which forces the boundaries between medical 
care and self-care. On the other hand, individuals are empowered and actively seek 
information and tools to position themselves where the instituted knowledge arouses 
controversy and doubt. In this sense, self-monitoring is challenging the knowledge 
I. Sacramento and V. Wanick

63
of the other, which involves, for example, measuring individual susceptibility, i.e. 
calculating your case rather than content to be allocated probabilistic ranges of risk 
stratification. On the other hand, Quantified Selves also appropriate the praxis 
proper to the domain of science to analyse their own behaviour and the body itself, 
comparing them with what the medical or pseudoscientific knowledge that circu-
lates in the various counselling bodies to which they refer.
In contemporary society, risk is the counterpart of liberation. The most immedi-
ate consequence is the increasing accountability of individuals for their lives and 
their future, which exacerbates the need for the conversion of each into a calculating 
subject. Autonomy, then, emerges as imperative, a pattern against which deviations 
and deficits are measured and gain significance (Rose 2000). Its main consequence 
is the vulnerability to the demand to choose and to evaluate the innumerable possi-
bilities that open to human existence. Choices need to have a scientific character, 
which can be objectified, placed in relationship and justified to themselves and to 
others, articulating responsibility and a reflexive consistency, which is based on the 
objectivity of numbers, graphs and spreadsheets. On the other hand, in the face of 
uncertainty about what, after all, good life is, life seems to stand out as a value itself.
3.5  Final Considerations
This chapter discussed the transformation of the body into data, enhancing the 
aspects that transmute the body into a digital cyborg. This was discussed through 
the analysis of mHealth running apps (Fitbit, Nike+ and Runkeeper) through the 
lenses of gamification, quantified self (QS), control and mobile features. The  
results of this analysis supported the dichotomy between numeric and visual data as 
a way to represent the body in both virtual and real worlds. In fact, both worlds 
could merge into one, as apps and individuals are more integrated each time. 
Wearable devices, contextual information (e.g. weather information, maps) and 
real-world rewards could represent this connection. In this scenario, gamification 
reinforced such data transformation. For example, the completion of challenges and 
quests was only possible through the analysis of the data gathered during the run-
ning exercise. Runners were able to achieve their goals if their data was tracked or 
logged in the system. Thus, the presence of gamified elements like challenges and 
achievements needed to be integrated with the user data. Similarly, while interacting 
with the running apps, users could only compete with their friends if they had data 
logged in the system, which could be represented through points or badges and 
published in a leaderboard. This shows that gamification could function as an 
enabler of the digital cyborg, providing meaning to user data. In other words, gami-
fication could help to personalise digital bodies, building a connection between the 
real and the digital world. This aspect not only helps to transform the digital cyborg, 
but it also provides a sense of control to the user. For example, users can customise 
their own digital environment while interacting with mHealth applications, such as 
3  mHealth and the Digital Cyborg Body: The Running Apps in a Society of Control

64
uploading their own picture, creating their own avatar or changing the fonts, colours 
and sounds of their digital interface.
Computing devices that are used on the body (i.e. wearable technologies) could 
also operate independently or attached to a smartphone. Wearable technologies, for 
example, could be used on the body (such as a smart tissue), around the body (such 
as a watch) or as part of the body (such as a sensor under the skin like a tattoo or a 
sensor connected to the heart that measures the heartbeat). In fact, it is possible that 
in the future, sensors could not only monitor but also surpass human capabilities. 
For example, in an article published in Wired UK (Enriquez 2016), there is technol-
ogy available to build superhuman hearing aids that could focus on specific aspects 
of conversations. Wearable technologies could also function as accessories, being 
different from wearable computers. For example, it is possible to choose the colour 
of the Fitbit wristband, respecting people’s colour preferences.
mHealth applications also collect and handle information in real time. Thus, the 
analysed running apps are part of the consolidation of a new scientific paradigm, 
possible in a society of control: datification. Datification is the transformation of 
social action on quantified data online, allowing real-time monitoring and predictive 
analytics (Van Dijck 2014, p.198). Thus, this new paradigm brings up the belief in 
the objectivity of quantification and the potential to track all kinds of human behav-
iour and sociability through online data. This concept can be called dataism (Van 
Dijck 2014), which is based on another old belief: that numbers bring objective 
truth. In the same way, data generated by self-monitoring devices such as racing 
cars are presented as a guide for the uncertain terrain of life and promises (Van 
Dijck 2014). Having this data objectified in a visual presentation, such as a chart or 
table, could help users to view what is going well and what needs to be improved, 
such as company managers. Thus, self-monitoring apps become effective tools for 
the individual who wants to be the “manager of his/her own life” (Ehrenberg 1991). 
This context highlights a major transformation upon the body, which could begin 
with the marriage between electronics and molecular biology: the establishment of 
a computer model, which is not only the human body but also the entire living uni-
verse that eventually converts all the complexity of life into information.
Wearable media (i.e. Fitbit, Runkeeper and Nike+) is also configured by a com-
plex network of human (e.g. developers, users) and non-human factors (e.g. soft-
ware, algorithms, manufacturers, servers). Each of these factors carries policies and 
values that are implicit in their action programs, constantly interfering in the way 
individuals and institutions update the concepts of health in self-monitoring rou-
tines. In fact, there are algorithms that could learn from the data, particularly through 
artificial intelligence and neural networks. For example, artificial neural networks 
could be employed in order to interpret and analyse complex data from human 
movements (Van Diest et al. 2015). This means that algorithms can learn from the 
data, model and predict actions. Thus, the analysis of self-monitoring practices 
using digital media must take into account the user’s identity, the individual and 
collective perception about the body’s own physical limits and the goals of self-care 
and self-optimisation.
I. Sacramento and V. Wanick

65
The running apps analysed in this chapter could lead the user to perform in artic-
ulation to the output data. This articulation is a result of a computerised control 
system of self and the perception of the body, which could be enhanced by data 
visualisation. Moreover, the actions involving data visualisation of the self are con-
figured by the contemporary moral that transforms the conception of health as an 
association between body, image, performance, goals and data.
Another aspect to take into account is data ownership. As mentioned by Lupton 
(2016a), hospitals are integrating the data from mHealth applications into patients’ 
data in order to prevent illness and promote positive health behaviours to patients. It 
is possible that together with medicines, doctors would be able to prescribe mHealth 
applications to patients. Yet, data ownership is still a challenge in this context.
mHealth applications also reflect the contemporary culture that valorises the 
body. What differentiates the current somatic culture from others is not the amount 
of time given to body care, but the peculiarity of the relationship between psycho-
logical, moral and physical lives. Thus, it is possible that this ultra-valorisation of 
the body could blind users while dealing with data ownership. The culture of the 
body and the ideal of wellbeing generate increasing concern about fitness and 
health, and with it, the body could be directly influenced by technoscience in order 
to reduce failures. Every culture is a body culture, since culture involves training, 
maintenance and reproduction of physical and mental habits. The expression 
“body cultured” cult of the body, is not a definition of contemporary occidental 
societies; it is a focus. This inaccurate designation draws attention to the fact that 
the body has become a privileged reference for the construction of personal 
identity.
Body culture also engenders issues of happiness, beauty, self-esteem, prosperity 
and glamour. Hence, the contemporary body culture is related to fashion, lifestyle, 
aesthetics (in terms of physical appearance), cosmetics industry, dietetic food, plas-
tic surgery and others. Body culture can also be related to a set of online technolo-
gies for monitoring the body’s performance. The predominance of discourses and 
practices of self-care do not seem to have focused on curing diseases or correcting 
deviant behaviour. Instead, our culture spreads many possibilities of everyday dis-
comforts, particularly through the medicalisation of the most trivial annoyances of 
everyday life and, above all, the optimisation of human capabilities in the search for 
a certain ideal of happiness and high performance.
In the current post-disciplinary regime of power, there was a transformation in 
the notion of health as a way to correct and normalise bodies and subjectivities, in 
order to understand health associated with body reprogramming and behaviour opti-
misation. Many individuals adhere to projects that optimise and improve their bod-
ies, and supposedly their health, which can be supported by science, ludic systems 
(e.g. gamification) and contemporary biotechnologies. Therefore, technological 
advances like wearable devices, smartphones and gamified apps transform and tran-
scend the human being. As Lupton (2012, p.14) stated, the digital cyborg body 
configured by mHealth technologies “supports a reflexive, self-monitoring aware-
ness of the body, bringing the body to the fore in ways which challenge the non-
reflexive, absent body”. While the cultural imaginary of the cyborg sets an idea of 
3  mHealth and the Digital Cyborg Body: The Running Apps in a Society of Control

66
an embodiment of the self by machines and technological devices, the use of health 
wearable technology is a necessity for the biological body as a body that has to be 
monitored in order to be improved.
It is not possible to think about these changes in the human body, in the senses of 
health and illness and presence of mobile technologies in our everyday life, and not 
think about the processes of mediatisation. Mediatisation is characterised by the 
development of technological prosthetics of the sensible reality, altering our own 
experience with the body, with others, with motherhood, with paternity, with physi-
cal activity, with food, with illness, with relationships loving or sexual and so on. 
These applications document for themselves significant changes between the human 
being and technology. But they not only document; they participate actively in the 
process of transformation of lived reality, since they are media forms of reconfigur-
ing the lived experience and conditioning it more and more to the use of technolo-
gies. As Sodré (2002) explains, the term prosthesis (from the Greek prosthenos, 
extension) does not designate something separate from the subject, in the manner of 
a malleable instrument. What McLuhan (1964) had observed in his seminal study 
was something like a complement or extension of human activities, organs and 
senses through communication and transport technologies (television as an exten-
sion of vision, the hearing telephone, the voice radio and so on, the feet wheel and so 
on). However, what we are experiencing today is a radical change in our experience 
of reality; it represents the resulting form of networked and wearable technology 
media and takes the form of a specular or spectral extension that if it inhabits, as a 
new world, with new ambience, own codification and suggestions of conduct. As 
Sodré (2002) comments, techno-mediations have intensified drastically in the last 
decade. They are more than technological devices because they are cultural values 
that constitute the moment in which the communication process is technically mar-
keted and redefined by information, acceleration, connectivity, interactivity and 
performance.
Performance is an activity that includes showing oneself to the other, a process 
linked to the formation of contemporary subjectivities. Performance, therefore, 
refers not only to an observed, but produced, and displayed yield. It consists in a 
technology of quantification. Human performance is measured in terms of effi-
ciency or performance. In this sense, the performance symbolises, fundamentally, 
the conversion of the qualitative into quantitative. The identification of characteris-
tics of a system, a machine or a human being constitutes competitive advantages. It 
is precisely with this sense of calculation of predicates in competitive situations that 
the concept became central, in the last decades, both in the scope of the techniques 
of business administration and, more broadly, in the orbit of social discourses and 
subjective practices. The idea of analysing oneself for personal improvement 
already implies a comparative situation, which can be a competition when com-
pared to the other, or an analysis of one’s own evolution, which consists in compar-
ing oneself with oneself. The field of self-monitoring equips subjects with 
measurement, calculation and management techniques so that they can make better 
decisions, take better care of themselves, make better use of their time, make better 
choices and finally achieve their goals.
I. Sacramento and V. Wanick

67
From the examples presented in this chapter, it was possible to perceive that we 
live a reordering of the regimes of visibility and vigilance in the present, which 
implies a reorientation of the experience of the spaces in which we live and of the 
technologies that are part of our daily life. In this sense, digital mobile technologies, 
through various programs and applications, function as an externalised self-aware-
ness that allows individuals to make decisions about their daily lives, from the per-
manent monitoring of daily habits and the control and crossing of physical, food 
and physiological. All this monitoring is made possible by the popularisation of 
digital mobile devices, the practical ones so that they can be taken to any place 
without great difficulty and with friendly interface enough for the production of 
information to occur from way.
Nevertheless, it is important to consider the demographic information about the 
user. Culture, age and gender backgrounds influence the way people interact with 
technologies. For example, older individuals have life experiences that could be 
used in their favour while dealing with mHealth applications (Maier et al. 2015). 
Particularly when dealing with health issues mediated by technology, the consider-
ation of age is mandatory. Older individuals have different needs, such as the need 
to feel safe, remember short-term events and interact with easy and simple technolo-
gies (European Commission 2005). As mentioned by Maier et al. (2015), being old 
is not an illness; it means that older individuals have different needs and experi-
ences. In addition, carers should not be overlooked when dealing with older indi-
viduals in health-related contexts (European Commission 2005). Thus, it is possible 
that when interacting with mHealth applications, carers could also participate in the 
process. For example, if the mHealth app includes gamification, carers could be part 
of a team, cooperating with the patient’s family to help the individual to perform an 
action (e.g. remember to take a pill or remember a particular event, in case of 
dementia or Alzheimer’s disease).
Considering this, it is possible that mHealth could go beyond self-monitoring 
and could promote more participative interactions. Still, the self-monitoring prac-
tice sustains the idea that something can be improved through a thoughtful attitude 
that includes measurement and analysis. This improvement often refers to the life 
condition of a chronic patient who has to cope with an illness, to try to bring his 
body closer to normal, eliminating present or future symptomatic effects that medi-
cine knows little about or knows about statistical terms, rather than individualised 
ones. It is in this context that technological advances through machine learning and 
artificial intelligence, such as IBM Watson6, could utilise this data to improve 
healthcare.
It is important to remember, however, that self-monitoring also aims at “better 
than well” (Elliot 2003), meaning that bodies are more than they really are and that 
more time is more important than well spent time. Hence, the boundaries between 
health, body enhancement and the choices we make in our daily lives become issues 
of high expectations.
6 http://www.ibm.com/watson/health/.
3  mHealth and the Digital Cyborg Body: The Running Apps in a Society of Control

68
Acknowledgements  Vanissa Wanick gratefully acknowledges the grant from Coordenação de 
Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES), Brazil (number: 9520-13-9). Igor 
Sacramento gratefully acknowledges the grant from Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento 
Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq), Brazil.
References
Adams S (2012) Post-panoptic surveillance through healthcare rating sites. Inf Commun Soc 
16(2):215–235
Almarshedi A, Wanick V, Wills G, Ranchhod A (2016) Gamification and behaviour. In: Stieglitz S 
et al (ed) More than just games. Springer International Publishing, pp 19–29
Andersen PB (2001) What semiotics can and cannot do for HCI. Knowl-Based Syst 14:419–424. 
doi:10.1016/S0950-7051(01)00134-4
Andrew AH, Eustice K, Hickl A (2013) Using location lifelogs to make meaning of food and 
physical activity behaviors. In 7th international conference on pervasive computing technolo-
gies for healthcare and workshops
Armstrong D (1995) The rise of surveillance medicine. Sociol Health Illn 17(3):393–404
Beer D (2008) Researching a confessional society. Int J Mark Res 50(5):619–629
Bell M et al (2006) Interweaving mobile games with everyday life. In CHI 2006. ACM, Montreal, 
pp 417–426
Bentley F, Tollmar K (2013) The power of mobile notifications to increase wellbeing logging behav-
ior. Proc SIGCHI Conf Hum Factors Comput Syst – CHI’13. doi:10.1145/2470654.2466140
Bogost I (2011) Gamasutra – persuasive games: Exploitationware. http://www.gamasutra.com/
view/feature/6366/persuasive_ games_exploitationware.php/. Accessed 23 Dec 2016
Boulos MNK, Yang SP (2013) Exergames for health and fitness: the roles of GPS and geosocial 
apps. Int J Heal Geogr 121(12):295–305. doi:10.1186/1476-072X-12-18
Couldry N (2012) Media society world: social theory and digital media practice. Polity, Cambridge
Crozier WR (1997) The psychology of colour preferences. Surf Coat Int 80:577–585
Deleuze G (1990) Post-scriptum sur les sociétés de contrôle. In: Pourparlers, Paris: éd. De Minuit
Dennison L, Morrison L, Conway G, Yardley L (2013) Opportunities and challenges for smart-
phone applications in supporting health behavior change: qualitative study. J Med Internet Res 
15:1–19. https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.2583
Dertouzos M (2001) The unfinished revolution: human-centered computers and what they can do 
for us. Harper Paperbacks, New York
Deterding S, Dixon D, Khaled R, Nacke L (2011) From game design elements to gamefulness. In: 
Proceedings of the 15th international academic MindTrek conference on envisioning future 
media environments – MindTrek ’11. ACM Press, New York, p 9
Dithmer M, Rasmussen JO, Grönvall E et al (2015) “The Heart Game”: using gamification as part 
of a telerehabilitation program for heart patients. Games Health J 5:27–33. https://doi.
org/10.1089/g4h.2015.0001
Doyle A (2011) Revisiting the synopticon: reconsidering Mathiesen’s “The Viewer Society” in the 
age of web 2.0. Theor Criminol 15(3):283–299
Eco U (1976) A theory of semiotics. Indiana University of Press, Bloomington
Ehrenberg A (1991) Le Culte de la performance. Calmann-Lévy, Paris
Elliot C (2003) Better than well: American medicine meets the american dream. W. W Norton & 
Company, New York
Enriquez J (2016) Could we soon “upgrade” our bodies? Extreme bionics will create modular 
superhumans. http://www.wired.co.uk/article/bionic-limbs-make-us-superhuman. Accessed 
28 Dec 2016
European Commission (2005) i2010 – A European information society for growth and employment
I. Sacramento and V. Wanick

69
Finnemann NO (2014) Digitization: new trajectories of mediatization? In: Lundry K (ed) 
Mediatization of communication. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin/Boston
Forrester (2015) Data digest: announcing our annual benchmark on the state of US consumers 
and technology in 2015 | Forrester Blogs. http://blogs.forrester.com/gina_fleming/15-09-28-
data_digest_announcing_our_annual_benchmark_on_the_state_of_us_consumers_and_tech-
nology_in_2015. Accessed 26 Dec 2016
Foucault M (1975) Surveiller et punir. Gallimard, Paris
Foucault M (2003a) Self writing. In: _____. Ethics: subjectivity and truth. New Press, New York
Foucault M (2003b) Technologies of the self. In: _____. Ethics: subjectivity and truth. New Press, 
New York
Hamari J, Koivisto J (2013) Social motivations to use gamification: an empirical study of gamify-
ing exercise. In Proceedings of the 21st European conference on information systems, Utrecht, 
Netherlands, June 5–8
Hamari J, Koivisto J (2015) “Working out for likes”: an empirical study on social influence in 
exercise gamification. Comput Human Behav 50:333–347. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2015.04.018
Huotari K, Hamari J (2012) Defining gamification: a service marketing perspective. In Proceeding 
of the 16th international academic MindTrek conference (pp. 17–22). ACM
Istepanian RS, Woodward B (2016) M-health: Fundamentals and applications. Wiley, Hoboken
John NA (2013) Sharing and web 2.0: the emergence of a keyword. New Media & Society 15:167
Lewis Z, Swartz MC, Lyons E (2016) What’s the point?: a review of reward systems implemented 
in gamification interventions. Games Health J 5:93–99. doi:10.1089/g4h.2015.0078
Lister C, West JH, Cannon B, Sax T, Brodegard D (2014) Just a fad? Gamification in health and 
fitness apps. JMIR Serious Games 2(2):e9
Lupton D (1995) The imperative of health: public health and the regulated body. Sage, London
Lupton D (1997) Foucault and the medicalisation critique. In: Petersen A, Bunton R (eds) Foucault, 
health and medicine. Routledge, London, pp 94–110
Lupton D (2012) M-health and health promotion: the digital cyborg and surveillance society. Soc 
Theory Health 10:229–244
Lupton D (2013) Understanding the human machine. IEEE Technol Soc Mag 32(4):25–30
Lupton D (2014a) You are your data: self-tracking practices and concepts of data. In: SSRN
Lupton D (2014b) Self-tracking cultures: towards a sociology of personal informatics. In: 
Proceedings of the 26th Australian computer-human interaction conference on designing 
futures: the future of design. ACM, New York
Lupton D (2016a) Digital health technologies and digital data: new ways of monitoring, measur-
ing and Commodifying human embodiment, health and illness. In: Olleros F, Zhegu M (eds) 
Research handbook on digital transformations. Edward Elgar, Northampton, pp 1–16
Lupton D (2016b) The quantified self. Polity Press, Cambridge
Maier A, Özkil AG, Bang MM, Hysse Forchhammer B (2015) Remember to remember: a feasi-
bility study adapting wearable technology to the needs of people aged 65 and older with mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer’s dementia. In: Proceedings of international con-
ference on engineering design, vol. 1, pp 331–340
Marston HR, Hall AK (2015) Gamification: applications for health promotion. Handbook of 
Research on Holistic Perspectives in Gamification for Clinical Practice, 78
McLuhan M (1964) Understanding media: the extensions of man. McGraw Hill, New York
Miller AS, Cafazzo JA, Seto E (2014) A game plan: gamification design principles in mHealth 
applications for chronic disease management. Health Informatics J:1–10. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1460458214537511
Nielsen (2014) Hacking health: how consumers use smartphones and wearable tech to track their 
health. http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/news/2014/hacking-health-how-consumers-use-
smartphones-and-wearable-tech-to-track-their-health.html. Accessed 26 Dec 2016
Pagoto S, Schneider K, Jojic M, DeBiasse M, Mann D (2013) Evidence-based strategies in weight-
loss mobile apps. Am J Prev Med 45(5):576–582
3  mHealth and the Digital Cyborg Body: The Running Apps in a Society of Control

70
Pandian PS, Mohanavelu K, Safeer KP et al (2008) Smart vest: wearable multi-parameter remote 
physiological monitoring system. Med Eng Phys 30:466–477. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
medengphy.2007.05.014
Payne HE, Lister C, West JH, Bernhardt JM (2015) Behavioral functionality of mobile apps in 
health interventions: a systematic review of the literature. JMIR mHealth and uHealth 3(1):e20
Peirce CS (1991) Peirce on signs: writings on semiotic. UNC Press Books, Chapel Hill
Rettberg JW (2014) Seeing ourselves through technology: how we use selfies, blog and wearable 
devices to see and shape ourselves. Palgrave Macmillan, New York
Rich E, Miah A (2009) Prosthetic surveillance: the medical governance of health bodies in cyber-
space. Surveill Soc 6(2):163–177
Rose N (2000) Government and control. Brit J Criminol 40:321–339
Schrape N (2014) Gamification and governmentality. In: Fuchs M, Fizek S, Ruffino P, Schrape N 
(eds) Rethinking gamification. Meson Press by Hybrid Publishing Lab, Lüneburg, pp 21–46
Sfez L (1995) La santé parfaite: critique d’une nouvelle utopie. Éditions du Seuil, Paris
Shulz W (2004) Reconstructing mediatization as an analytical concept. Eur J Commun 
19(1):87–101
Smith GJD, Vonthethoff B (2016) Health by numbers? Exploring the practice and experience of 
datafied health. Health Sociol Rev 26(1):6–21
Sodré M (2002) Antropológica do espelho: por uma teoria da comunicação linear e em rede. Vozes, 
Petrópolis
Swan M (2009) Emerging patient-driven health care models: an examination of health social net-
works, consumer personalized medicine and quantified self-tracking. Int J Environ Res Public 
Health 6(2):492–525
Swan M (2013) The quantified self: fundamental disruption in big data science and biological 
discovery. J Big Data 1(2):85–99
Van Diest M, Stegenga J, Wörtche HJ, et al (2015) Quantifying postural control during exergaming 
using multivariate whole-body movement data: a self-organizing maps approach. PLoS One 
10:0–17. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134350
Van Dijck J (2014) Datafication, dataism and dataveillance: big data between scientific paradigm 
and ideology. Surveill Soc 12(2):197–208
Véron E (2014) Mediatization theory: a semio-anthropological perspective. In: Lundby K (ed) 
Mediatization of communication. De Gruyter, Berlin/Boston
Whitson JR (2013) Gaming the quantified self. Surveill Soc 11(1/2):163–176
Whitson JR (2014) Foucault’s fitbit: governance and gamification. The gameful world  — 
approaches, issues, applications
Zichermann G, Cunningham C (2011) Gamification by design: implementing game mechanics in 
web and mobile apps. In: Gamification by design: Implementing game mechanics in web and 
mobile apps. O’Reilly Media, Inc, p 208
Igor Sacramento has a PhD in communication and culture from the Federal University of Rio de 
Janeiro (UFRJ). He is a full researcher at the Communication and Health Laboratory at the 
Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (Laces/Fiocruz). His research interests are multidisciplinary, incorpo-
rating communication, cultural studies and history. He is an author and editor of over ten books. 
His recent researches and writings focus on the articulations between media culture and discourses 
on health, illness and the body in contemporary society. PhD in Communication and Culture at 
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro and Full Researcher in Communication and Health at Oswaldo 
Cruz Foundation, Brazil.
Vanissa Wanick holds an MBA in marketing from the University Federal Fluminense (UFF) and 
a BA in design at PUC-Rio. Currently, she is a PhD researcher at the University of Southampton 
(Winchester School of Art), looking at advergames across cultures. Her research interests are 
cross-cultural HCI and persuasive design, gamification, games for behaviour change and sustain-
ability. PhD researcher at University of Southampton, Winchester School of Art, UK.
I. Sacramento and V. Wanick

71
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017 
H.R. Marston et al. (eds.), Mobile e-Health, Human–Computer Interaction Series, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-60672-9_4
Chapter 4
Can Quantified Self Be a Facilitating 
Technology to Help Older Adults Stay Longer 
in Their Home?
Christel De Maeyer
Abstract  Readers of this chapter are taken through a journey by the author, who 
narrates a real-life story of a lady called Maria who is 75-year old and lives with her 
husband Albert, 81-years. The narration describes the lives of Maria and Albert, 
detailing their enjoyment of physical activity, and their children. Yet, one-day Maria 
is diagnosed with Alzheimer’s and through the narration the author describes the 
experience that Maria and her family experience. Fast forwarding, to the year 2030, 
the author continues her narration describing how technology may fit into Maria’s 
life and that of her family; including the use of wearable devices and sensors inte-
grated into the home where Maria lives, and enabling her family to track in real-time 
Maria’s sleep patterns and overall health. Additionally, this chapter discusses the 
fields of ageing in place, the quantified self (QS), and based on existing work in this 
field, the author explores a taxonomy for the QS, referencing and drawing on the 
work of Deborah Lupton. Further exploration and discussion in the areas of appro-
priation, affordance, rights, and risks of QS are provided with the author exploring 
how digital technologies fit within the healthcare system.
4.1  Introduction
In a society where we are confronted with an aging population, resulting in rising 
healthcare costs as a consequence of chronic health conditions (European 
Commission EGECFIN 2012), the concept of prevention is becoming an important 
area of research and development, for governments and industry. Across public 
health organizations and academia, researchers are exploring solutions in a bid to 
keep older adults at home longer which is a priority in the healthcare discourse 
(UNFPA 2011).
C. De Maeyer (*) 
Department Graphical Digital Media, Artevelde University College Ghent, Ghent, Belgium 
Department of Industrial Design, Eindhoven University of Technology,  
Eindhoven, The Netherlands
e-mail: C.a.a.D.maeyer@tue.nl

72
In 2014, across Europe, the number of adults aged 65+ years was 19%, there is 
an expectation that there will be a rise toward 23.5% in 2030 (Eurostat 2014), and 
the number of adults aged 80+  years will double to 6.4% in 2030 resulting in 
increased frailty. Frailty is described by Fried (2001, p. M146), as a “geriatric con-
dition and is a collection of symptoms where there is a decrease of reserve and 
resistance to stressors.” Additionally, frailty is a commonality across aging cohorts, 
which in turn may result in suffering from (chronic) health conditions and refers to 
different components such as “the mental and physical state of the elderly and the 
social environment. The accumulation of these components, makes the frail elderly 
vulnerable (Van Kan 2008, p. 31).” Previously, frailty was primarily associated with 
biomedical and the physical state. However, more recently, research argues that the 
psychology and social components of the frail elderly are also important elements 
which should be considered (Rolfson 2006). The Tilburg Frailty Indicators identify 
four components which include “cognition, symptoms of depression, anxiety and 
coping,” (Gobbens 2010, p. 345) while the social components comprise of “living 
alone, the social relations of the older adult and social support that is provided 
(Gobbens 2010, p. 345).”
This evolution brings a new way of thinking, coupled with several challenges, 
barriers, and enablers. One of the challenges is to establish a form of affordable 
“dignified aging.” Waiting lists at care centers/residential homes are long, which for 
some older adults, their carer’s, support networks and family to provide the notion 
of staying at home longer resulting in the concept of “aging in place.” Moreover, on 
the one hand, more support in home care and a socialization of care is required and 
needs to be available, while caregivers, family, and friends will need to take a bigger 
responsibility in taking care of their aging relative/friend, to establish “aging in 
place” in a comfortable matter.
To tackle these problems, technology and its attributes have become popular in a 
bid to support the more vulnerable and frail older adults in conjunction with the 
physical environment and are becoming more prevalent (Tacken 2005; Altus 2000). 
Over the last 15 years (2002–2017), multi- and cross-disciplinary research has been 
conducted by scholars in relation to assistive living (smart homes) (Mynatt 2000; 
Klack 2011; Birnholtz 2010; Himmel 2016). Yet, today’s evolution in technology 
proposes more personal, tangible, and cheaper solutions that open new possibilities 
toward the elderly.
A relatively new trend is the Quantified Self (QS) which is based upon the 
recording and measuring of one’s daily activities. This can include walking or other 
sport-related activities, sleep patterns, and/or heart rate, tracked by hardware devices 
such as a Fitbit or Jawbone (n.b. different models measure different elements). 
Wearable technology such as Fitbit, Jawbone, or similar devices with suitable and 
relevant software/applications could be an approach that can facilitate more inde-
pendence for the older adult and offering peace of mind for family members and/or 
friends who culminate in being their support and care network(s).
As one ages, children and grandchildren move away for employment which can 
result in being at home alone, having little contact with friends, family, neighbors, 
and/or community groups (e.g., church, social activities). Living alone can be a 
worry for the children, friends, or extended family members who care for them. 
Unintentional falls resulting from hazards in the home (e.g., rugs) and medication 
C. De Maeyer

73
(Gschwind et al. 2014, 2015) are a worry, as they may occur more frequently due to 
a variety of causes, and may result in severe injuries or death. Prevention and detec-
tion of falls are important, if we want to establish an “aging in place.”
A recent study – the iStoppFalls (2011–2014) – explored the use and deployment of 
technological solutions in conjunction with strength and balance exercises adapted 
from the Otago exercise program (Campbell and Robertson 2003). The iStoppFalls 
project designed and developed purpose-built software, integrating three purpose-built 
exergames incorporating strength and balance exercises from the Otago exercise pro-
gram, in conjunction with adapted fall risk assessments (Gschwind et al. 2014, 2015), 
(Marston 2015), educational material, and a social media platform to motivate partici-
pants to engage and share their experiences of the iStoppFalls platform. The conclusion 
of the iStoppFalls project showed that the ICT exercise program is feasible in a home 
environment of older community-dwelling people without supervision; there were no 
adverse events or falls during the intervention which shows it was safe for older adults. 
An initial instructor support is needed to initiate the exercise program; the program 
overall was perceived as enjoyable and acceptable to use. However, more work is 
needed to be done on the level of adherence of the program to create routines in peo-
ple’s life. Participants who exercised for more than 90 min a week showed a reduced 
physiological fall risk, in comparison with the control group (Gschwind et al. 2015).
While researchers have proposed several fall detection technologies in the form 
of sensor floor systems, which can be integrated into the home environment (Klack 
2011), accelerators monitor gait (Salomon 2010), (Brauner 2014), (Geraedts 2014), 
(Geraerdts 2017) and wearable sensors (Mann 1997; Patel 2012; Jovanov 2011).
In this chapter, we would like to focus on wearable technology, including wear-
able devices and sensor-based technology, which have become more affordable for 
larger populations. These wearable technologies can collect a lot of information 
about the user, such as physical activity, sleep patterns, location, heart rate, and 
calorie burning, to name a few; this gathered data can then be sent to family, support 
networks, and/or health practitioners.
In addition, these wearable technologies are more commoditized today and a 
more robust alternative than early prototypes, such as “Diarist” (Metaxas 2007); a 
“Daily Activities Diarist,” reporting on daily activities through a wireless sensor 
network in the home of the older adult that gathers all the data and presents an 
“Activity-of-Daily-Life journal”; and “Arurama,” (Dadlani 2010) a sensor-based 
system that provides peace of mind and a sense of connection with the supported 
network of the older adult. Arurama collects data about presence in the home, sleep-
ing patterns, and weight through an unobtrusive ambient informative system.
Today, these wearable devices or sensor-based systems are not completely suit-
able for the frail older adult; the software that is accompanied with these devices 
requires users to be digital literate. For many wearable devices, such as the Fitbit or 
similar, when a device is purchased, there is no instruction manual, which for many 
people would be a problem. Setup requires the device to be activated through regis-
tration on the Internet which means the user of the wearable devices/technologies 
needs to either have access or own a computer/laptop. Although for younger people, 
who may have grown up with this type of technology and devices, their digital 
literacy will be higher than older adults. Additionally, the in-built software on 
4  Can Quantified Self Be a Facilitating Technology to Help Older Adults…

74
­wearable devices is not set up to monitor and sends and receives information to 
those who may need it (i.e., family, support networks, and/or health practitioners).
In this chapter, we propose a narrative approach toward design research, based 
on a real story by positioning the current situation toward a future model and what 
the role could be of technology in facilitating and enhancing “aging in place” with 
early signs or symptoms of Alzheimer patients. Symptoms such as lost in time or 
place, memory loss, problems arising from planning daily task, and other related 
problems occur with early-onset Alzheimer’s disease. We explore how can we let 
technology flourish which will mediate the daily lives of frail older adults in an 
“aging in place” future?
Narrative Story: Illustrating Maria’s Path as an Alzheimer Patient
Maria is a 75-year-old woman who lives with her husband (Albert) who is 
81 years old. Throughout their lives, they have been active, cycling, walking, 
swimming, camping with their young family many decades ago, and enjoying 
holidays home and abroad for long periods at a time. Maria enjoys swimming 
three times a week; she socializes with her friends in town, having lunch and 
coffee, and takes daily walks. However, one morning Maria’s daughter (Helena) 
is visiting and Albert updates Helena on her mother’s activities, which include 
her wondering around the house at night. This comes to a climax, where Maria 
tells Helena that she thought she was dead or dying. This is an episode of a 
psychosis and is diagnosed by Maria’s doctor, who is hospitalized for a few 
weeks to undertake an observation. For Helena and Albert, the accumulation of 
these events was the onset of early Alzheimer diagnosis for Maria.
From that moment onward the diagnosis of Maria’s Alzheimer’s disease, 
Albert, Helena, and the rest of family’s lives were going to change. Through 
assistance and communication with health practitioners, a weekly nurse now 
attends Maria and Albert’s home, to place the medication into Maria’s medi-
cation box. Over some years, this home goes well; the medication that Maria 
is prescribed is working well and postpones the severe phase of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Helena has siblings, and among them, they cook up for their parents 
and all seems to be going well.
However, after some years, daily life seemed to change for Maria, she is 
eating less, and there seems to be a general decline in domestic tasks. Maria 
is still vulnerable around the house at night, and her condition seems to have 
decreased. Maria’s episodes of memory loss and/or experiencing memories 
from early age/childhood are becoming more frequent. From Helena’s stand-
point, she is concerned that her mother is becoming frailer and the inevitable 
fall and the complete loss of senses, resulted in Maria being hospitalized. 
Further health issues arise from this, where Maria is losing a lot of weight and 
is dehydrated. For Helena, her siblings, and Albert, Maria is transitioning into 
the last phase of her life, which is spent in a closed institution for Alzheimer 
patients where she has a revival for a few months, but then slowly goes into 
C. De Maeyer

75
her own world and eventually dies 2 years later. During Maria’s stay at the 
retirement home, her daily routines are well planned and organized. Maria 
wakes up in the morning, is given breakfast, and is washed daily. Once or 
twice a week, Maria goes into a relaxation bath, a soft jacuzzi bath, with calm-
ing music, creating a comfort and cozy atmosphere, which she enjoys a lot. 
The staff and other residents are entertained through different activities as 
much as possible and helping with little domestic things in the retirement 
home. In Maria’s bedroom, she has a lot of personal items such as photo-
graphs of children and grandchildren, and a smaller replicate of the home is 
created to experience the feeling of the ancestral home. Additionally, experi-
ments are conducted with “activity aprons” (see Fig. 4.1); activity aprons 
stimulate sensory activity with patients with Alzheimer’s disease. They have 
different assets sowed on the apron, such as little pockets with a zipper, a 
pocket that makes a bit of sound, and little plush animals to play with, all to 
engage the minds and fingers with Alzheimer patients.
The siblings visit as often as possible and take little walks with Maria. 
They take her out to have Maria’s favorite ice cream which is vanilla ice cream 
with hot chocolate sauce. However, in time, it doesn’t become easier, Maria 
has been in the home for 1 year, a lot of patience is needed by those attending 
to Maria during meal times, and over time, Maria declines, slipping into her 
own world and slowly disappears.
Fig. 4.1  Activity apron 
(Permission granted by 
C. De Maeyer)
4  Can Quantified Self Be a Facilitating Technology to Help Older Adults…

76
It’s 2030: How Does Technology Fit in the Life of Maria and Her 
Family?
Maria is living an active life and is living in a connected smart home environ-
ment. With the advancement of technology, her connected home has multiple 
sensors which can wake her up in the morning and provide her with a daily 
weather report and her daily routines. Maria prepares for her day; she showers 
and receives information on her shower time and water usage. Her walk 
keeper application suggests to her that while it is dry outside, she should con-
sider going for a walk, while her grocery delivery will be arriving later that 
afternoon. The grocery list is based on a series of sensors connected to her 
fridge; through her bank details and via her wearable implant, she could pro-
cess and agree to purchasing her latest groceries. Her implant acts as a heart 
rate monitor and blood/glucose monitor; her daily/weekly physical activity 
comprises of walking, swimming, gardening, cycling, and socializing with 
friends over a coffee. Maria is excited because every week she receives new 
recipes; these recipes are good reminders to prepare healthy food on a regular 
basis, considering Maria’s diet. Maria slides through the different recipes that 
have been delivered and she chooses to add some ingredients to her shopping 
list, so she can cook some of the new recipes that she has saved.
Based on the data from her wearable implant and the sensors connected 
throughout her home, Maria can access real-time data based on her sleep and 
overall health monitoring. Maria notices that her sleep patterns have changed 
over the last few weeks; also her light report tells her that she woke up several 
times at night and that she had little walks around the house which she cannot 
remember. Based on this recent information, Maria makes the choice based 
on the information that she has received, her doctor, and her connected home 
to the next level. She chooses to integrate a social companion (robot) to 
accompany her all the time; the companion learns Maria’s daily habits and 
Reflecting on this narrative, and possible scenario of aging adults, one can think 
about how we can integrate digital technologies such as wearable technologies, 
mobile apps, or assisted living technologies to help Maria stay longer at home or 
facilitate “aging in place,” giving support in the daily follow-up of Maria’s physical, 
psychological, and social state of well-being, as a preventive and alert system for 
behavior change that occurs in the process of Alzheimer patients. Furthermore, 
looking at the challenges that bring these digital technologies, mainly in the area of 
ease of use, privacy, and the control or ownership of the data which is collected by 
the respective digital technologies, there needs to be an established informed con-
sent with all interested parties, the support network, the person(s) who are involved 
in following up Maria’s Alzheimer’s disease, and the social acceptance of these 
digital technologies.
C. De Maeyer

77
This scenario is brought forward to think more in depth on how we can use future 
technology within healthcare and to consider what future research is needed to 
secure a broader adoption. We find similar scenarios in a different context in a study 
focusing on ambient intelligence (Ducatel 2001), where a projection is done to the 
year 2010. The proposed four scenarios set in different contexts, but equally impor-
tant, were in the area of mobility – Road Warrior, Digital Me, traffic, sustainability 
and commerce, and social learning. If we compare the scenarios with the one that is 
proposed here toward the year 2030, one will notice that the results showed in the 
study are still very relevant and a continuous topic for research. First, it has to be 
seen as “progress and positive force for society and political development.” Second, 
it has already “open lots of new opportunities for businesses and firms” specialized 
in the respective domains, in our scenario, the healthcare sector. Third, the “socio-
political gains or pains” require more in-depth studies (Ducatel 2001, p.8).
can anticipate incidents or anomalies. Maria’s social companion is called 
Robert.
Maria and Robert relationship grows over time based on the essence that 
Robert is always there, and when time passes, he gets to know Maria better. 
He anticipates her moods, helps Maria with taking her medication on time and 
the correct dosage, reminds and motivates her to do her daily exercises, and 
provides access to cognitive games and stimuli which challenge Maria. Robert 
is Bluetooth enabled and collects all of Maria’s data such as bio state, physical 
state, and mental state. Robert tracks the number of steps Maria has walked, 
her sleep pattern, her daily food intake, and her fuel usage because these items 
are connected to Robert which is the main server and data gathering social 
robot. Robert is connected to the outside world, which includes the caregiver 
who passes by on a regular basis to check in on Maria, her friends and family 
members, and the support networks. Additionally, Robert is connected to the 
hospital where Maria is in treatment for her early Alzheimer symptoms and is 
also connected to the insurance company which manages Maria’s health 
insurance.
On a fresh Spring day, Maria falls and has a severe heart attack. Robert has 
recognized how severe this is and is negotiating with all the data he has, in 
addition to informing the health insurance company and the hospital and pro-
cessing Maria’s will which will (if necessary) be delivered to the necessary 
people and departments (e.g., the solicitor). Will Robert decide to send an 
alert to the necessary institutions for urgent help or let Maria go and let her die 
in the comfort of her smart home considering her wishes to not reanimate her 
and do everything to let her die surrounded by her friends and family and her 
doctor?
4  Can Quantified Self Be a Facilitating Technology to Help Older Adults…

78
4.2  Aging in Place: What Preceded
Previous work has shown that older adults have a positive attitude toward new tech-
nologies (Demiris 2008), this will be more so with the Generation X and the 
Millennial generation who have grown up having technology in their lives, acting as 
more than a device for work-related reasons.
Previously, with technology use and access comes possible barriers and enablers 
that require further analysis and understanding. As our society moves toward a 
socialization of care, there is a shift toward a more collaborative model between the 
older adult, family, friends, caregivers, and extra support networks, which are 
demanding also more responsibility. Furthermore, there is also a need and demand 
of more self-management and the ability of adaptation with the older adult in their 
daily life. One of the central questions that needs to be considered and asked is: who 
does take or will take the responsibility for this provision, and for those individuals 
who agree to be part of this, how involved will they be to undertake and execute this 
new responsibility? According to Coventry (2014), there are three main factors in 
engaging patient self-management. Do patients have the “knowledge and emotional 
and physical capacity” to engage in self-management? Is there enough “motivation” 
with the older adult, and how will the “responsibility” be taken in the supported 
network? Who will be responsible for the several tasks and/or labor within a self-­
management environment? In addition, one needs to consider also the “trust and 
confidence” we give in digital technologies to help us in self-management. A posi-
tive scenario like the narrative of Maria can turn into a negative, dark scenario. 
Possible threats and barriers one needs to consider are the digital divide, trust, pri-
vacy, security and identity (Punie 2005).
Privacy is one of the returning issues, also in “awareness systems” and/or “moni-
toring systems” as known in “smart homes” (Birnholtz 2010; Brittain et al. 2010; 
Markopoulos 2009). Awareness systems enable us to be aware of certain aspects in 
the smart home, because it is “Related to social awareness, such as is the presence 
of someone at a fixed location to the awareness of someone’s daily life activities” 
(Markopoulos 2009, p. 70). Smart homes are homes that are equipped with technol-
ogy in the form of cameras and sensors, to enhance the safety of the patient or older 
adult and to monitor their overall health condition. For example, a smart ­thermostat 
(e.g., Nest) that regulates the heat in the home based on your daily habits and rou-
tines in the home can provide the user with a daily schedule for heating the house, 
also providing the outdoor temperature to regulate your home temperature. 
Additional examples are smart lights (e.g., Hue) that can be remotely controlled and 
adjusted to moods, pressure sensor-based tiles which can sense when a person falls, 
and motion cameras to locate movement in the smart home, a display that provides 
homeowners about all the information from the connected devices and simultane-
ously is used for entertainment purposes.
Further elements that can extend the smart home and provide additional informa-
tion to the homeowners include smart mirrors that can display messages; this could 
C. De Maeyer

79
be useful as a reminder to people who take medication and other daily activities or 
appointments that are scheduled for the forthcoming week(s). A smart bathroom 
can include a water regulating temperature system that controls the temperature of 
the water and a sensor flushing system for the toilet. These systems which incorpo-
rate sensors and cameras are integrated into the home and experienced as an “inva-
sion of privacy” or “a threat at one’s dignity in one’s own home” (Machiko 2010, p. 
146). This is especially the case with video cameras. For example, the installation 
of the video camera in more public spaces like the living room versus the bedroom 
and bathroom will have lower or higher acceptance (Himmel 2016). With older 
adults, “their perceptions of the potential of the technologies is focused on a reactive 
role (detecting emergencies) rather than a proactive one (monitoring a situation to 
detect trends or predict issues or concerns)” (Demiris 2008, p.123).
Even though in house monitoring through smart home technology can provide 
peace of mind and the feeling that a crisis can be controlled quite quickly, which in 
turn enables the possibility of remote follow-up, it seems a positive approach and 
concept. Remote follow-up can be conducted through communication between the 
older adult, caregivers, family, and friends, to reduce the feeling of isolation, loneli-
ness, and solitude with the older adult (Birnholtz 2010). Technology such as Skype 
is one solution, to mediate interaction with family and the older adult (Demiris 
2008). Social media such as Facebook also provides users with several opportuni-
ties to engage with loved ones and possibly reduce isolation through sharing content 
(e.g., photographs), using the chat function, or making a video call like Skype. The 
use of video monitoring technology with older adults can have multiple purposes, 
from monitoring the different rooms within a home or as a communication means to 
communicate with the outside world. The acceptance of this technology will differ 
within different target audiences, for example, older adults with mobility problems 
or older adults with hearing problems, and will have different needs and require-
ments. Other restraints are the positioning of the monitor devices, in rooms, and 
whether there is facial recognition or not (Leonardi 2009; Arning 2015). Research 
shows that Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) technology acceptance is low; in the 
case of monitoring, it gives a feeling of being “watched over” and is experienced as 
an “invasion of privacy” (Himmel 2016).
The proposed digital technologies are not cheap and require adjustments to the 
home of the older adult(s) and its environment where they are installed (Machiko 
2010). Alternatives such as the emergence of wearable technology might become 
new norms toward new lifestyles in general and could also be appropriated for older 
adults in securing aging in place. In some instances, these technologies are used by 
early adopters who are digital literate, by participants in studies (e.g., MK Smart 
project, UK), and by individuals who are searching for more economical solutions 
in monitoring their home in regard to fuel consumption or who are interested in data 
such as those in the quantified self-movement. In the following sections, we will 
take a closer look at the current use and taxonomy of Quantified Self and what role 
it can play in helping the older adult in aging at place.
4  Can Quantified Self Be a Facilitating Technology to Help Older Adults…

80
4.3  Appropriation and Affordance of Quantified Self
Quantified Self is a relatively new domain; it was pinpointed by Gary Wolf and 
Kevin Kelly in 2007, where they stated that Quantified Self is “tracking every facet 
of your life” (Wolf 2009). Indeed, the Quantified Self movement was started in 2008 
whereby people come together to talk about their experiences in quantifying them-
selves through technologies such as the London Quantified Self meet-up (https://
www.meetup.com/LondonQS/). In a sense this is not new, people have always been 
quantifying themselves (e.g., how many movies you see in a year, how many books 
you read, keeping finances in excel, or how many calories are consumed). However, 
with technological advancements, it has enabled individuals to take this a step fur-
ther. Today we collect information about how many steps we take during the day, 
how many hours a day we sleep, how many calories we burn, menstrual cycles, 
spending and purchases, and reproduction/pregnancy recording. Most Quantified 
Self applications are aimed at behavior change and preventive healthcare (Quantified 
Self London Meetup 2014; The Economist 2012).
Exploring the current use of self-tracking and its origins, it is noticeable that 
within the Quantified Self movement today, it is used by people with a specific pro-
file, such as software engineers, startup founders, and data analyzers, measuring 
mainly physical activity, food, weight, sleep, and mood, who are going through 
different phases in their self-tracking activity. Outside the Quantified Self move-
ment, in a recent report published by Pew Internet Research, 69% of adults reported 
to track their health (n = 3014), while 21% of those US individuals identified in 
using some form of technology to track their health and analyze their data (Fox 
2013).
Previously, Quantified Self users experience different phases in their self-­
tracking. Epstein (2015) proposed a model for lived informatics for personal infor-
matics, comprising of three stages, initially starting with the decision to track and 
decide on the selection of tools to track. Choosing or deciding to track oneself could 
be for many reasons and include to improve one’s health, to improve lifestyle, or to 
find a new life experience/activity (Choe 2014). In the selection of tools, there is a 
compare process to select the appropriate tool; one could choose to use mobile apps 
such as Runkeeper (running mobile application) or Human (a physical and calorie 
tracker) or decide to wear a wristband such as Fitbit or Jawbone to name a few 
options.
Stage two relates to the “tracking and acting” process which is “an ongoing pro-
cess of collecting, integrating and reflecting” (Epstein 2015). Choe (2014) notes 
three activities, “collecting, integrating, and reflecting,” which are distinct and 
dependent upon data. Self-trackers learn about their behavior during the process of 
collecting and monitoring the data, “the main importance however, is to get mean-
ingful insights and reflect on data to make positive change” (Choe 2014, p. 10).
Stage three relates to the “lapsing stage,” which is associated with individuals/
users who choose to stop self-tracking for a set amount of time or completely. Based 
upon recent research, the dropout rate is quite high for several reasons, including 
technology failure, lack of interest, curiosity which is gone, or the cost of tracking 
C. De Maeyer

81
in terms of time (Endeavour Partners 2014; Fritz 2014; Karapanos 2015; Shih 2015; 
Epstein 2016). Finally, there is “the resuming phase”; these can be short breaks, 
where self-trackers have gone on holiday and forgotten to take their wearable device 
or they choose to have a longer break. In the latter, the self-tracker might start again 
by reflecting first on the older data and then decides later to start tracking again and 
collecting more data depending on the tracking activity (Epstein 2015). As the self-­
tracking devices aimed at the older adult, they will be transferring information to the 
supported network and not necessarily to the older adult; these stages will have less 
relevance, although they will still be there. The evaluation of the self-tracking activ-
ity has a different aim, mainly following up the daily activities of the older adult, 
and will not have the aim to change behavior in that sense but more steering and 
follow-up of the daily routines and habits of the older adult.
As Quantified Self diffuses in different domains, it has the potential to be inte-
grated into the lives of our current and future aging populations to assist their “aging 
in place.” For example, with the increase of longevity, coupled with chronic health-­
related impairments, and an increase of social isolation, it is possible the use and 
deployment of wearable devices could have a place in the context of “aging in 
place.” In the domain of frail older adults, wearable devices and connected health 
technologies integrated with smart homes have the potential to become a surveil-
lance tool (detecting emergencies) rather than a (health) behavior change tool (pro-
active use to see trends); it will be a tool or solution to “watch over” people’s daily 
lives and detecting anomalies and a follow-up and reminder system as we have seen 
in the narrative of Maria, e.g., reminder for medication, daily walks, eating healthy 
food, getting in touch with family and friends, and follow-up on sleeping patterns, 
eating habits, walks, and daily routines in general. In the following section, we will 
discuss the sociocultural aspect of it and will explore and examine the work of 
Lupton who has undertaken a vast array of research in “self-tracking cultures” fol-
lowed by an overview of the different affordance and appropriation of these digital 
technologies.
4.4  Taxonomy to Categorize Quantified Self
Quantified Self is gaining a lot of interest from the academic communities by 
researchers in computer science, human computer interaction, rehabilitation, and 
health and well-being. This cross- and multidisciplinary work is crucial for the 
adoption, and usability, of these new devices in addition to understanding the health 
benefits (positive and negative) to using this type of technology. The work of Lupton 
(2014) takes a multi- and cross-disciplinary approach; an authority in this domain 
through her research of sociopolitical and culture impact is equally important for 
adoption process to diffuse in other domains, “The practices, meanings, discourses 
and technologies associated with self-tracking are inherently and inevitably the 
product of a broader social, cultural and political process (Lupton 2016, p. 1).”
Given the rapid expansion of technology since the turn of the twenty-first century 
and in particular the wearable technology market, governments and corporate 
4  Can Quantified Self Be a Facilitating Technology to Help Older Adults…

82
­entities alike have become interested in this field. Quantified Self is moving from 
personal or individual use toward other domains such as healthcare, commercial 
profiling (building profiles based on our online behavior together with other data 
that we collect and share in the cloud), and insurance application (certain wrist-
bands get promoted by insurance companies and have the ability to access our data; 
in that sense the insurance will be personalized based on your behavior) (Olson 
2014). Categorizing these different modes in Quantified Self enables us to think 
more clearly about the application in certain self-tracking activities and how they 
are appropriated and in which domain.
Lupton (2014) suggests there are five modes of self-tracking:
	1.	 Private
	2.	 Communal
	3.	 Pushed
	4.	 Imposed
	5.	 Exploited
While these modes can interconnect, or overlap with one another, for this chap-
ter, we have limited our focus primarily to private self-tracking, and pushed self-­
tracking, in addition to exploring the area of communal self-tracking. The limited 
focus of these three modes in this chapter connects to the purpose of self-tracking 
applied to older adults. Depending on the state of the older adult, the private self-­
tracking will or might be a voluntary activity undertaken by the older adult. In fur-
ther states of older adults or frail older adults, the pushed self-tracking might be 
pushed by friends, family, or the supported network. The communal mode of self-­
tracking applies to both modes (private and pushed) as older adults will share their 
data with their supported network to give that sense of peace of mind.
The definition of these five modes has been outlined by Lupton (2014) which are 
as follows:
The first mode “private tracking” is a mode widely practiced with in the move-
ment whereby the users collect data about themselves. These types of users may 
share their data in specific communities or on social media platforms, as suggested 
in the “communal mode” of self-tracking:
Private self-tracking, as espoused in the Quantified Self’s goal of ‘self-knowledge through 
numbers’, is undertaken for purely personal reasons and the data are kept private or shared 
only with limited and selected others (Lupton 2014, p. 6).
With private tracking, this can be associated with older adults who wish to stay 
at home longer but can be reassured that their family can observe their activity lev-
els. In addition, as mentioned, the private self-tracking can be an activity that older 
adults take on themselves, as a sort of self-surveillance on different aspects of their 
daily life or to continue being engaged in several activities they practice or are orga-
nized by the community.
The second mode, “communal,” is based on the notion of sharing data with oth-
ers, be it friends, family, and strangers (e.g., meet-ups). They are not necessarily 
sharing on social media, but they have other means of sharing within a closed 
community.
C. De Maeyer

83
While communal self-tracking, in its very name and focus on the ‘self’ may appear to be an 
individualistic practice, many self-trackers view themselves as part of a community of 
trackers (Boesel 2013a; Lupton 2013a; Nafus and Sherman 2014; Rooksby et al. 2014). 
They use social media, platforms designed for comparing and sharing personal data and 
sites such as the Quantified Self website to engage with and learn from other self-trackers 
(Lupton 2014, p. 8).
The third mode as noted by Lupton (2014) is “pushed self-tracking,” which 
might be related to the stimulus of others, such as peers, who benefit from self-­
tracking and stimulating others to start a self-tracking activity, or other actors stimu-
lating or promoting self-tracking. For example, a dietitian may suggest to patients 
that they should consider tracking their food intake to ascertain the influences of the 
issues in question.
Pushed self-tracking departs from the private self-tracking mode in that the initial incentive 
for engaging in self-tracking comes from another actor or agency. Self-monitoring may be 
taken up voluntarily, but in response to external encouragement or advocating rather than as 
a wholly self-generated and private initiative (Lupton 2014, p. 7).
From an “aging in place” perspective, the “pushed self-tracking” mode could be 
suitable for an older adult or elderly person because they could be “pushed” into this 
mode by a caregiver, family member, or a friend. In the first narrative of Maria, it 
would have been helpful to use Quantified Self tools in the follow-up process when 
Maria got her first psychosis that led toward the diagnosis of early Alzheimer’s dis-
ease. As Maria needed more help to continue her daily routines, habits, and domestic 
tasks, caregivers will only report something when there is something out of the ordi-
nary or unusual behavior which has been observed of the older adult and that might 
only be through the weekly visits during that period of early Alzheimer’s disease.
Taking a reflecting approach on the work by Lupton, further considerations need 
to be considered for future implications. There will be a general trend toward a 
neoliberal model toward “self-care and homo economicus,” from being a “partner 
of exchange” to being an “entrepreneur of himself,” and a proactive prevention soci-
ety, including a reorganization of health insurances and government policies. From 
the standpoint of bracelets or wristbands, the aim is to give a safer feeling, more 
independence, and autonomy to the older adult, to create a peace of mind with the 
children, family members, and friends. There are different aspects to look at from 
an older person’s perspective. The aim of these wristbands is very different; their 
focus is more on surveillance technology than proactive measuring physical activ-
ity, sleep, heart rate, and dietary intake. Therefore, this information is more impor-
tant to the person who is monitoring their loved one.
4.5  Appropriation and Affordance of Quantified Self 
for “Aging in Place”
The model of appropriation for “aging in place” is different in Quantified Self tools 
for the older adults. Aging in place enables the older adult to remain longer in their 
home and live more independent and autonomous as opposed to living in residential 
4  Can Quantified Self Be a Facilitating Technology to Help Older Adults…

84
care institutions (Davey 2004). However, the Quantified Self tools that are specifi-
cally built for older adults have different function, for example, Zembro (http://
www.zembro.eu) is a wristband or watch that monitors the whereabouts of a user 
and has an alarm that warns the support network of the older adult when something 
goes wrong. Other example, the Allen Band (http://theallenband.com/the-allen-
band-idea/), is a wristband device which monitors heart rate, in conjunction with 
movements via a global positioning system (GPS), body temperature, and any sud-
den movements such as falls. It is connected and synchronized to a cloud service 
where the caregiver can consult or receives alerts from the system when emergencies 
occur. The older adult’s physical activity and location are monitored by using wear-
able technologies; the data collection is transferred to the professionals, caregivers, 
family, and friends. The software visualizes trends and anomalies to provide infor-
mation on the health and condition of the individual. In most applications, the older 
adult doesn’t see the data that is collected by them, even though older adults would 
be interested in their data. Older people are commonly assigned to the role of object 
rather than subject in the development of technology (Brittain et al. 2010, p. 273).
Furthermore, the wristband is not discrete and might have a stigmatizing effect 
to the older adult who is wearing it; it also has an impact on their self-esteem or 
self-image. We could compare it to hearing aids, which are more in the closet and 
then behind the ear. This is mostly about vanity but also not publicly admitting one 
may have a hearing problem (Allen 2017). Making the wristbands or bracelets more 
fashionable will help in not stigmatizing the older adult but make them nice to wear.
4.6  The Rights and Risks of Quantified Self Technologies
The attitude of future aging populations may be more positive to use wearable/digi-
tal devices and could be more common and popular than at present. For some 
younger people, they may be more inclined to deploy wearable devices on their 
older parents or relatives who have been diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease to 
maintain their surveillance to ensure their parent(s) are coping. Yet, this surveillance 
may “constrain the choices of older people and undermine their decisions to take 
risks” (Brittain et al. 2010, p. 273; see also Percival 2006). It is argued that (Ballinger 
2002, p. 305) “while service providers are oriented to the management of physical 
risk, older people themselves are more concerned with the risk to their personal and 
social identities. The challenge of the self-image.” The frail older adult is avoiding 
the stigma of being frail and vulnerable. In addition, the supporting technologies 
can intervene in the daily habits and routines of the older adult, in so much as rein-
forcing the emotion of an institutionalized home (Exleya 2007).
Moreover, these wearable devices are designed and developed by private compa-
nies and by default also collect a lot of data about the users. The ownership of the 
data should lie with the user; in the case of Alzheimer patients, this is a responsibil-
ity for the family or trusted guardians/friends to have the ownership and informed 
consent for what reasons the data could be used and how it would be used. One can 
C. De Maeyer

85
think of different insurance models (rising in cost) for Alzheimer patients based on 
the data that is gathered by the Alzheimer patient. The personal private sphere or 
personal freedom might be in danger if this is not regulated well.
4.7  Social Inclusion and Human Contact
As these solutions require engagement and interactions from family members, 
friends, and caregivers who are possibly connected to the mobile application to 
monitor their parent, friend, or service user, further considerations are needed from 
the standpoint of design and its applications. We need to consider whether this solu-
tion will bring more engagement and interaction with those concerned (close family 
members, friends, and caregivers) as we shift responsibility of care to the senior and 
their connected community? Will the older adult in question still have the same 
contact with their close environment?
It has been argued by that in telecare, these technologies cannot replace the 
human contact, as older adults look forward to seeing and communicating face-to-­
face conversation with their caregiver(s) or the more informal contacts with caregiv-
ers, family, and friends. Therefore, it should not replace the face-to-face contact 
(Percival 2006) but decrease social isolation and ensue monitoring is being under-
taken of a loved one. Will the social well-being within the connected group and the 
aging cohorts improve because of the surveillance function toward the older adults/
elderly person? As Quantified Self tools are used as a personal device or application, 
it might facilitate further closeness between the older adult and their family, friends, 
or caregivers. The Quantified Self movement is open to people across the life span, 
and it should be considered that this domain may have a role in fostering intergen-
erational relationships. Enhancing and fostering intergenerational relationships 
through self-­tracking and monitoring of loved ones can be enhanced through discus-
sion of activities and sharing experiences. Yet, it should not be looked at as a main 
surveillance tool but also as a fun experience looking at the activity of the older 
adult and the whole experience that it brings about.
4.8  Living with Simplicity: Design Models for Quantified 
Self Targeted to Older Frail Adults
As these digital technologies are being introduced to lay people who are not neces-
sarily tech savvy or digital literate, technology and wearable devices need to be user 
friendly both in terms of hardware and software. If the technology fails, the dropout 
rate will be high. If we take the behavior model by Fogg (2009), it enables us to 
think more clearly about different behavior design aspects. Initially, we look at the 
ability; does the user have the sufficient ability to use the proposed wearable devices 
and its services that are offered with the devices, are there effective triggers, and is 
4  Can Quantified Self Be a Facilitating Technology to Help Older Adults…

86
there sufficient motivation to use the product or service? A combination of these 
elements needs to be integrated continuously for behavior change to occur. There is 
an ability factor comprising of six factors: time, money, physical effort, brain cycles, 
social deviance, and nonroutine. These factors can influence and play a role in tech-
nology adoption and behavior change. Expanding upon some of these factors, fur-
ther considerations need to be undertaken in regard to restraints for older adults 
which in turn would provide older users the opportunity and ability to use these 
technologies:
•	 Money. To buy all this new technology, is the older adult capable to buy and 
install these new technologies, or will there be funding from the government to 
fund parts of these technologies, connected to health insurance?
•	 Brain cycles. Is the older user’s level of digital literacy appropriate to understand 
the technology and its additional attributes and functionality? For example, regu-
lar updates, privacy, should the need for automation be considered?
•	 Physical effort. We should think about passive tracking as much as possible, in 
so much as the older adult does not need to intervene in the tracking process. 
With active self-tracking, we understand that a user is actively involved in the 
process. For example, with Foursquare/Swarm (https://www.swarmapp.com), a 
mobile application, the user gives in his or her location and is checking in at a 
certain location; this is an example of active tracking. Unlike Human (http://
human.co), for example, it is a mobile application; it will track your activity 
without the user intervening; this is an example of passive tracking. Other exam-
ples are MyFitnessPal (https://www.myfitnesspal.com), where you actively put 
in your food intake.
•	 Social deviance. Will the technology be widely accepted by the community or will 
it stigmatize the older adult and alienate them from the community? For example, 
will it decrease their self-esteem and create an image of weakness, admitting they 
are frail while they are not ready to admit the frailty? (Exleya 2007)
•	 Nonroutine. For many older adults today, using technology is not part of their 
daily activity. However, it is possible as our younger generations grow old, so 
will the routine of accessing respective technologies or social media platforms.
Living in a world where technology plays a big role in everyday life, simplicity 
is a key requirement in the use of all these technologies. Norman (2010) explores 
this notion through product and service design; “people try to simplify the paths 
they take. They try to simplify their lives, preferring short routes to longer ones 
(Norman 2010, pp. 126–127).” This concept is one to consider when considering 
the design and development of new technologies aiming for broader adoption.
The ease of use is very important as previous research has demonstrated, relating 
to the acceptance of technology by older adults (Bickmore 2003; Himmel 2016; 
Smarr 2012). Previously, we have discussed the Quantified Self as means to assist 
the older adult in giving them the ability to stay longer at home – “aging in place.” 
Ensuring that the older adult has independence, choice, and autonomy, this is par-
ticularly important for adults who are living alone and their children and grandchil-
dren live in another part of the country or overseas. Considering these types of 
C. De Maeyer

87
technologies as enablers and facilitators to create a balance between human com-
mitment and the help and assistance of Quantified Self tools may assist ‘aging in 
place’ still human, enabled and facilitated by technology and humans.
Throughout this chapter, we have discussed the different areas which are becom-
ing popular areas of research while considering these new technologies are becom-
ing introduced into the lives of older adults now but also in the future, with the 
notion of “aging in place” successfully. While all areas of society from government 
to community/local/national organizations to families, healthcare and service provi-
sion, education, and policy makers need to explore, identify, and evaluate the con-
sequences that technology has and may have in the future on the healthcare system, 
would it become more sustainable, how would it be funded, and how would adults 
with low digital literacy gain confidence to learn and become skilled in learning new 
ways of information for successful aging in place?
4.9  How Do These Digital Technologies Fit 
into the Healthcare System as a Whole?
4.9.1  Technologies of the Self
As these technologies become more integrated into the lives of society, further 
exploration is needed to look at the social and political impact this may have on the 
daily lives, while we as users become completely responsible for our behavior. How 
does this change the role of the caregiver? How will this impact on the delivery of 
health services on a EU level through health insurance or the national health service 
(NHS) found in the UK, and how will this be measured? What could the possible 
consequences be?
In the sociological literature, Michel Foucault’s describes “Technologies of the 
Self, which permit individuals to effect by their own means or with the help of oth-
ers a certain number of operations on their own bodies and souls, thoughts, conduct, 
and way of being, so as to transform themselves in order to attain a certain state of 
happiness, purity, wisdom, perfection, or immortality” (Foucault 1988, p. 18). In 
further analysis, Foucault discusses three themes which were dominant in former 
times when the problems were similar but solutions and subjects were different. 
One of these subjects is a medical care model:
A medical model was substituted for Plato’s pedagogical model. The care of the self isn’t 
another kind of pedagogy; it has to become permanent medical care. Permanent medical 
care is one of the central features of the care of the self. One must become the doctor of 
oneself. (Foucault 1988, p. 31)
Referring back to the area of Quantified Self, Quantified Self is a practice that 
leads to self-governance, self-management, and self-entrepreneur and fits in a neo-
liberal thought or idea. Citizens are responsible for themselves out of self-interest 
which is also in the interest of the state. Question we need to explore and ask is how 
4  Can Quantified Self Be a Facilitating Technology to Help Older Adults…

88
will this be managed and experienced in this increasingly digital society in which 
e-health in general becomes a commodity and various stakeholders from private and 
profit making enterprises form partnerships to provide a series of services. Citizens 
are handing over control and ownership of their personal data collected by the wear-
able devices and are at the disposal of private companies and the Internet empires 
(Andrejevic 2014). In addition, depending on the social-political climate of the 
country, the personal data might be used as a means of oppression or being exploited 
by marketers; the personal data can be turned back upon the user (Lupton 2016a, b).
4.10  Care and Control: Social Sorting?
Taking into account older adults using different technologies and devices, not only 
do users assess themselves but are also been assessed by their family and friends. 
Possible other agencies looking and “watching over” the users as well are the com-
panies delivering these technologies and possibly the caregiver or the caregiving 
institution(s). However, what needs to be explored is who is benefitting from this 
surveillance and does it or would it create more trust between the user and family?
The dichotomy between forced surveillance and voluntary surveillance today is 
blurring (Harcourt 2015). As argued, “our digital lives begin to converge with a 
form of electronic monitoring that increasingly resembles correctional supervision” 
(Harcourt 2015, p. 20). Harcourt’s comparison with the electronic ankle band and 
the Apple watch illustrates a whole other meaning, as he notes:
Some of us are forced to wear electronic ankle bracelets, others lustfully strap Apple 
watches onto their wrists, but in both cases, all of our daily motions, activities, and where-
abouts become easily accessible to those with rudimentary technology-that is, when we are 
not actively broadcasting our activity, heartbeats (Harcourt 2015, p. 20).
Therefore, do frail adults and especially people with Alzheimer’s disease have 
the agency to avoid or to voluntarily put all the tracking devices off? And if they do, 
who takes that responsibility when something goes wrong during that period that 
they are caught off-guard? If in the future these digital technologies will be con-
nected to our healthcare insurance, will the insurance company still cover and pay 
out for an incident, especially if the older adult is not wearing the digital technolo-
gies or has put them on off as in inactive?
Additionally, through surveillance, there is the social sorting, a classification to 
manage a population or persons, also with the possibility to influencing populations 
and individuals. Today this is easy and possible through all the data that is collected 
in our networked, connected society (Lyon 2009). Social sorting can be conducted 
through different aspects of personal data that has been collected, for example, the 
location, age, gender, behavior, and communication by mail or texting. Thus, a 
whole set of parameters that can then be applied for prediction, intervention, or the 
commercial purpose while also informing policy as local, regional, and national 
levels of government aimed toward new directives, new social settings, relations, 
and power that has been delivered through knowledge collected.
C. De Maeyer

89
Therefore, we need to look at how this will impact on the public and private spheres 
of the individual/the user. Will the individual feel more free or independent and auton-
omous in this case? While exploring this notion of society from a global view, will this 
promote exclusion more than inclusion? Considering that not only there is the per-
sonal tracking through Quantified Self, but the larger body of surveillance means, 
social media platforms, online shopping behavior, and online administrative services, 
all the services we use in daily life can enable detailed profiling of a population.
4.11  Discussion
The goal of this chapter was to illustrate different research projects on smart technol-
ogy, connected homes, and Quantified Self devices/tools. Our main research ques-
tion if the Quantified Self can facilitate “aging in place” is a construct of complex 
and different aspects. Even though older adults have a positive attitude toward new 
technology (Demiris 2008) and see benefits in using new technologies, there are also 
barriers and enablers in using the technology across an older adult population.
The main barriers that were noted by (Pino 2015) were the lack of experience 
and the overall usability factors in new technology. Technology can have a lot of 
benefits for the older adult, but in order to achieve this uptake with our aging popu-
lation, there needs to be greater attention for the design and development of these 
technologies (Patel 2012; Norman 1993; Norman 2010). As every person is unique, 
considerations should be taken for unique or individual customization and modular 
systems toward, and artificial intelligence could be the answer to fit and match user 
needs to the technology.
In our narrative story, Maria would have had a lot of benefits in having a stable 
companion, who is always there; reminds her about her daily routines and habits, in 
taking medication, to do her walks, to drink, and to eat; and even helps her with 
decision-making on a longer term. However, for Maria, living in a fully connected 
home asks for a different mind-set; one has to become used to the embodiment of 
technology in the fabric of one’s everyday lives. In order to use Quantified Self in 
Maria’s narrative, Maria needs to understand how to use these technologies; she has 
to be digital literate and have the capacity to control and shape her life and enhance 
her life with these technologies. The technology has to work flawless and has to be 
accurate, especially in healthcare as we will become more and more dependent on 
it in our lives to stay healthy and, in the case of older adults, to stay longer at home.
Furthermore, if one looks at the feedback loops of Quantified Self tools today, 
the feedbacks we receive from those technologies are very blunt and don’t show any 
empathy at all “In light of feedback loops, people are approached as computer-like 
information processors, or “autocorrelating servomechanisms, a living part of a 
dataistic apparatus that allows the reflection and regulation of specific movements 
and behavior” (Ruckenstein 2015, p.10). They just report facts and figures. They 
will never ask the question “why have you not walked for a week” or even consider 
the context surrounding them.
4  Can Quantified Self Be a Facilitating Technology to Help Older Adults…

90
Interconnectedness between devices and services will need to aggregate all the 
data that is gathered are an important asset in order to see correlations between the 
different data that is collected and for Maria to understand her digital self 
(Markopoulos 2016). As previously discussed, users need to be aware that all these 
devices are in the hands of private companies and that the data they gather is in the 
cloud somewhere, and as users, we need to claim that data and have ownership and 
the ability to decide what we as user can do with it. In the case of Alzheimer patients, 
this is the responsibility of the family, guardians, or trusted friends (Allen 2017; 
Lyon 2009; Harcourt 2015).
4.12  Conclusions
In this chapter, there has been a discussion focusing on the theoretical analysis 
based on existing literature from the fields of sociology and human computer inter-
action. More specifically we brought perspectives on user design aspects from a 
Quantified Self perspective. We look at different design frameworks that need to be 
considered in the design for older frail adults as the appropriation and affordance 
will be different. Future empirical research is needed to connect the theoretical 
models and to understand and learn more about how frail older adults and adults 
with Alzheimer’s disease experience Quantified Self in their daily live in conjunc-
tion with respective support networks and friends.
Finally, this chapter has explored the privacy and surveillance relating to technol-
ogy use, the main concerns that need to be considered as a default setting. The 
future of our aging populations is uncertain, yet, there are many technologies and 
digital devices available on the market and that have been researched; there is still a 
long way to go to make aging in place a smooth transition. Since the turn of the 
twenty-first century, society has seen many phenomenal hardware and software 
developments, yet, what will the next 10, 20, 30, or 50 years bring to the lives of 
people across different age cohorts/span? Will intergenerational relationships 
become stronger through learning new skills and to decrease isolation and social 
connectedness? What will replace communication tools such as Skype and social 
media platforms like Facebook? How will care be delivered in the homes of our 
elderly in the next 50 years? Will robots become part of the furniture like the hoover 
and the television set have become now?
Throughout the twentieth century, society witnessed many advancements 
through many contexts such as war. Yet the twenty-first century is uncertain from 
the perspective of politics and healthcare reform both nationally and internationally. 
What we can be sure of is the future is going to be exciting in the sense of ascertain-
ing the feasibility of suitable technological devices for delivering healthcare and 
increasing physical activity and data tracking which will also inform on one’s health 
and possible health insurance premiums.
C. De Maeyer

91
Acknowledgments  I would like to dedicate this chapter to my mom who died in 2016 with severe 
Alzheimer’s disease. I used BodyMedia technology to monitor how she was sleeping and how 
much physical activity she was undertaking. Unfortunately, the latter was not working well, since 
she was not really making steps but more shuffled on her feet across the floor, and the system 
counted distinctive toe strikes to measure steps.
References
Allen A (2017) Will grandma want a robot seal? Retrieved from Politico: http://www.politico.com/
agenda/story/2017/01/technology-healthcare-advances-for-the-elderly-000268
Altus DM (2000) Evaluating an electronic monitoring system for people who wander. J Alzheimer’s 
Dis Other Dementia’s 15:121–125
Andrejevic M (2014) The big data divide. Int J Commun 8:1673–1689
Arning KZ (2015) Get that camera out of my house!” Conjoint measurement of preferences 
for video-based healthcare monitoring systems in private and public places. ICOST 2015, 
pp 152–164
Ballinger CP (2002) The construction of the risk of falling among and by older people. Ageing 
Soc 22:305–324
Bickmore TW (2003) Relational agents: effecting change through human-computer relationships. 
PhD, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, program in media arts and sciences, School of 
Architecture and Planning, Boston
Birnholtz JM-R (2010) Independence and interaction: understanding seniors’ privacy and aware-
ness needs for aging in place. CHI2010, Atlanta, GA, USA. ACM, Atlanta
Brauner PZ (2014). Exergames for Elderly in Ambient Assisted Living Environments. International 
Conference on Pervasive Games – PERGAMES. Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg
Brittain K, Corner L, Robinson L, Bond J (2010) Ageing in place and technologies of place: 
the lived experience of people with dementia in changing social, physical and techno-
logical environments. Sociology of Health & Illness 32:272–287. https://doi.org/10.111
1/j.1467-9566.2009.01203.
Campbell AJ, Robertson CM (2003) Otago exercise program to prevent falls in older adults. Otago 
Medical School, Otago
Choe EE (2014) Understanding quantified-Selfers’ practices in collecting and exploring personal 
data. CHI 2014. ACM, Toronto
Coventry PA (2014) Capacity, responsibility, and motivation: a critical qualitative evaluation of 
patient and practitioner views about barriers to self-management in people with multimorbid-
ity. BMC Health Services Research
Dadlani PS (2010) Aurama: caregiver awareness for living independently with an augmented pic-
ture frame display. AI & Soc 25(2):235–245
Davey JN (2004) Accommodation options for older people in Aotearoa/New Zealand. Institute for 
Research on Ageing/Business & Economic Research Ltd.
Demiris GH (2008) Senior residents’ perceived need of and preferences for “smart home” sensor 
technologies. Int J Technol Assess Health Care 24(1):120–124
Demiris G, Oliver D (2008) Use of videophones for distant caregiving: an enriching experience for 
families and residents in long-term care. J Gerontol Nurs 34(7):50–55
Ducatel KB-C (2001) Scenarios For Ambient Intelligence In 2010. European Commission, user 
friendly information society. European Commission
Endeavour Partners (2014). Inside wearables. How the science of human behavior change offers 
the secret to long-term engagement. © 2014 Endeavour Partners LLC
Epstein DP (2015) A lived informatics model of personal informatics. UbiComp’15, September 
07–11, 2015, Osaka, Japan. ACM, Osaka
4  Can Quantified Self Be a Facilitating Technology to Help Older Adults…

92
Epstein (2016) Beyond abandonment to next steps: understanding and designing for life  
after personal informatics tool use. CHI’16, May 07–12, 2016, San Jose, CA, USA. ACM, 
San Jose
European Commission (EGECFIN), a. t. (2012). The 2012 ageing report, economic and budgetary 
projections for the 27 EU Member States (2010–2060). European Commission, DG ECFIN & 
AWG. European Commission, Brussels
Eurostat (2014) Eurostat T, EU statistics on regions and cities. Eurostat regional yearbook. In 
Eurstat regional yearbook (doi:10.2785/54659 ed.). Luxembourg: Publications O ce of the 
European Union
Exleya CA (2007) A critical examination of home care: end of life care as an illustrative case. Soc 
Sci Med 65:2317–2327
Fogg B (2009) A behavior model for persuasive design. Persuasive’09. Clairmont: ACM ISBN 
978-1-60558-376-1/09/04
Foucault M (1988) http://foucault.info/documents/foucault.technologiesofself.en.html. Retrieved 
from Foucault.Info: http://foucault.info/documents/foucault.technologiesofself.en.html
Fox SD (2013) Tracking for health. Pew Internet Research, Pew Internet Research
Fried LT (2001) Frailty in older adults: evidence for a phenotype. J Gerontol Ser A Biol Med Sci 
56(3):M146–M156
Fritz TH (2014) Persuasive technology in the real world: a study of long-term use of activity sens-
ing devices for fitness. CHI 2014, One of a CHInd. Toronto
Geraedts HA (2014) Adherence to and effectiveness of an individually tailored home-based exer-
cise program for frail older adults, driven by mobility monitoring: design of a prospective 
cohort study. BMC Public Health 14:570
Geraerdts HA (2017) A home-based exercise program driven by tablet application and mobil-
ity monitoring for frail older adults: feasibility and practical implications. Prev Chronic Dis 
14(160227):E12
Gobbens EA (2010) The Tilburg frailty indicator: psychometric properties. American Medical 
Directors Association
Gschwind YJ et al (2014) ICT-based system to predict and prevent falls (iStoppFalls): study proto-
col for an international multicenter randomized controlled trial. BMC Geriatr 14:91
Gschwind YJ et  al (2015) ICT-based system to predict and prevent falls (iStoppFalls):  
results from an international multicenter randomized controlled trial. Eur Rev Aging Phys 
Act 12:10
Harcourt B (2015) Exposed. Havard University Press, Camebridge, UK
Himmel SZ (2016) Smart home medical technologies: users’ requirements for conditional accep-
tance. i-com 15(1):39–50
Jovanov EM (2011) Body area networks for ubiquitous healthcare applications: opportunities and 
challenges. J Med Syst 35(5):1245–1254
Karapanos E (2015) Sustaining user engagement with behavior – change tools. INTERACTIONS.
ACM.ORG
Klack, L. (2011). Future care floor: a sensitive floor for movement monitoring and fall detection in 
home environments. Wireless mobile communication and healthcare. pp 211–218
Leonardi CE (2009) Knocking on elders’ door: investigating the functional and emotional geog-
raphy of their domestic space. CHI 2009, April 4–9, 2009, Boston, MA, USA. Boston: ACM 
978160558-246-7/09/04
Lupton D (2014) Self-tracking modes: reflexive self-monitoring and data practices. Imminent citi-
zenships: personhood and identity politics in the informatic age
Lupton D (2016a) Digitised health, medicine and risk, health, risk & society. Health Risk Soc 
17(7–8):473–476
Lupton D (2016b) The quantified self. Polity Press, USA
Lyon D (2009) Surveillance, power and everyday life. In: David L (ed) The Oxford handbook of 
information and communication technologies. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Machiko RT (2010) Smart home with healthcare technologies for community-dwelling older 
adults, smart home systems. InTech
Mann S (1997) Smart clothing: the “Wearable Computer” and WearCam. Personal Technol 1(1). 
Retrieved from http://n1nlf-1.eecg.toronto.edu/personaltechnologies/
C. De Maeyer

93
Markopoulos PD (2009) A design framework for awareness systems, awareness systems. Springer 
London, London
Markopoulos P (2016) Reflections and advances in ambient intelligence. J Ambient Intell Smart 
Environ 8(5):491–499
Marston HR (2015) The design of a purpose-built exergame for fall prediction and prevention for 
older people. Eur Rev Aging Phys Act 12:13
Metaxas GM (2007) Daily activities diarist: supporting aging in place with semantically enriched 
narratives. INTERACT 2007. 4663, pp 390–403. Springer
Mynatt EE (2000) Increasing the opportunities for aging in place. CUU’00 Proceedings on the 
2000 conference on Universal Usability. ACM, New York, pp 65–71
Norman (1993) Things that make us smarter. Diversion Books, New York
Norman D (2010) Living with complexity. Cambridge Massachusetts, London, England: MIT 
Press
Olson P (2014) Wearable tech is plugging into health insurance. (Forbes) Retrieved from Forbes:  
http://www.forbes.com/sites/parmyolson/2014/06/19/wearable-tech-health-insurance/ 
#1498788b5ba1
Patel S (2012) A review of wearable sensors and systems with application in rehabilitation. 
J Neuroeng Rehabil 9:21
Percival JJ (2006) Big brother or brave new world? Telecare and its implications for older people’s 
independence and social inclusion. Crit Soc Policy 26:888–909
Pino MB-S (2015) “Are we ready for robots that care for us?” Attitudes and opinions of older 
adults toward socially assistive robots. Front Aging Neurosci 7:141
Punie YD (2005) Dark scenarios in ambient intelligence: highlighting risks and vulnerabilities. 
SWAMI consortium to the European Commission under contract 006507, Information Society 
Technologies
Quantified Self London Meetup (2014) London QS meetup survey. Retrieved from Quantified 
Self: http://quantifiedself.com/2014/03/london-qs-meetup-survey/
Rolfson DM (2006) Validity and reliability of the Edmonton frail scale. Age Ageing 35:526–529
Ruckenstein M (2015) Beyond the quantified self: thematic exploration of a dataistic paradigm. 
New Media Soc 1(18)
Salomon RL (2010) iFall – case studies in unexpected falls. IEEE International Symposium on 
Industrial Electronics (ISIE) (pp 1645–1650). IEEE, Bari
Shih PH (2015) Use and adoption challenges of wearable activity trackers. iConference 2015 
proceedings
Smarr CP (2012, Sep) Older adults’ preferences for and acceptance of robot assitance for everyday 
living tasks. Proc Hum Factors Ergon Soc Annu Meet 56(1):153–157
Tacken MM (2005) Use and acceptance of new technology by older people. Findings of 
the international MOBILATE survey: enhancing mobility in later life. Geront Tech J  
3:126–137
The Economist (2012) Technology quarterly Q1 2012. Retrieved from The Economist: http://
www.economist.com/node/21548493
UNFPA (2011) Aging in the twenty first century, a celebration and a challenge. UNFPA and 
HelpAge International London. New York: United Nations Population Fund
Wolf G (2009) wired.com. Retrieved from https://www.wired.com/2009/06/lbnp-knowthyself/
Christel De Maeyer has over 25 years international experience in the Digital Media domain. 
Christel, holds a Master degree in Communication Science, New Media and Society in Europe, 
VUB – SMIT – Brussels, where she researched wearable devices and behavior change. In 2008 she 
became involved in the Persuasive Technology Lab at Stanford University, working on behavior 
design with the team of Dr. B. J. Fogg in the area of Peace Innovation and wearable tech. Christel 
is a researcher and lecturer at Artevelde University College, Ghent, Belgium; a PhD Candidate in 
User Centred Engineering Group, Department of Industrial Design, Eindhoven University of 
Technology http://be.linkedin.com/in/christeldemaeyer
4  Can Quantified Self Be a Facilitating Technology to Help Older Adults…

Part III
Games for Health

97
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017 
H.R. Marston et al. (eds.), Mobile e-Health, Human–Computer Interaction Series, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-60672-9_5
Chapter 5
Using Technology to Increase Activity, 
Creativity and Engagement for Older Adults 
Through Visual Art
Alexander Paczynski, Laura Diment, David Hobbs, and Karen Reynolds
Abstract  With an ageing population it is critical to develop strategies to assist 
older adults to remain physically and cognitively active and to reduce sedentary 
behaviour. Previous research has shown a positive relationship between art therapy 
and successful ageing, yet traditional art practices may be challenging for older 
adults. Virtual reality systems eliminate mess and the need for fine motor control, 
allowing people of all ages and abilities to access an alternate artistic environment. 
Digital art, created using novel software, has the potential to encourage physical 
activity, creativity and provide a leisurely experience. Splashboard uses the 
Microsoft Kinect camera and enables participation in art through virtual button acti-
vation. Through arm and body movements a multi-coloured digital canvas can be 
created, saved, printed and displayed. The software was trialled with 15 older adults 
within a residential aged care setting. During the art sessions the system tracked 
body position and hand movements. An exercise was integrated into Splashboard to 
assess reaction time, attention, memory and hand-eye coordination. Participant 
feedback on the joys and challenges of using Splashboard was collected via ques-
tionnaires. Results indicated that the software successfully engaged most partici-
pants, encouraged physical activity and cognitive thought, and allowed the residents 
to enjoy the process of creating art.
A. Paczynski • D. Hobbs (*) • K. Reynolds 
Medical Device Research Institute, College of Science and Engineering,  
Flinders University, Adelaide 5042, Australia
e-mail: david.hobbs@flinders.edu.au 
L. Diment 
Medical Device Research Institute, College of Science and Engineering,  
Flinders University, Adelaide 5042, Australia 
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford,  
OX1 3PJ Oxford, UK

98
5.1  Introduction
The global population in most developed countries is ageing, with United Nations 
projections indicating that the number of persons aged 60 or above is expected to 
more than double by 2050 and more than triple by 2100 (United Nations 2015). The 
United Kingdom has approximately 10.4 million older people (people aged 65 years 
and over) (Office for National Statistics 2012), with around 45% having a disability 
(Department for Work and Pensions 2012). Disability is defined as having a physi-
cal or mental impairment that has a substantial and long-term negative effect on a 
persons’ ability to do normal daily activities (Equality Act 2010). As the life expec-
tancy rises and the population ages, the total number of people with disabilities will 
increase. Improved healthcare and increased life expectancy are likely to reduce the 
prevalence of severe disability, but the occurrences of milder chronic diseases may 
rise (World Health Organization 2011).
Disability can discourage an active lifestyle, increasing the risk of developing 
other conditions such as cardiovascular disease or osteoporosis (Conn et al. 2011). 
Consequently, assisting older adults to improve their physical and cognitive well-
being potentially prevents them from leading sedentary lives and increases their 
independence. For this reason, it is critical to develop technologies and strategies to 
assist older adults to become more active, by increasing physical movement and 
creativity for cognitive stimulation.
5.2  The Benefits of Creating Art
Studies have shown the potential benefits of engaging older people in visual arts. 
Fisher and Specht (1999) demonstrated that undertaking creative activities, such as 
painting, was linked to successful ageing by fostering a sense of competence, pur-
pose and growth. Partaking in the creative process enabled older people to open 
themselves up to innovative and flexible thoughts that can be implemented in their 
daily lives. Engaging in art making gave older adults a sense of purpose, satisfac-
tion, a means to escape from their worries and positive feelings about their self-
worth (Fisher and Specht 1999).
LaPorte and colleagues suggested that the physical and cognitive well-being of 
older adults with dementia could be maintained or enhanced through recreational 
therapies such as art (LaPorte et al. 2003). The authors reported that those suffering 
from a cognitive impairment found comfort through undertaking artistic activities 
as they provided structure to their day and a means of communication. Additionally, 
those living with dementia felt a sense of achievement through their art.
Hannemann (2006) stated that “People with physical or mental challenges due to 
stroke, heart attack, dementia, or other serious factors have reported improved mood 
and self-esteem through artwork” (p. 62). An additional study by Cohen et al. (2006) 
showed that an intervention group that participated in art programs had a higher 
A. Paczynski et al.

99
physical health rating, with decreased doctor visits and fewer instances of falls and 
health problems, when compared to the control group that did not participate in the 
artistic activity. The study also reported an increase in morale for the intervention 
group (Cohen et al. 2006).
5.3  Utilising Technology to Make Art Accessible for People 
with Disabilities
As the benefits of art therapy become more widely known, a critical consideration 
is how to make art accessible to older adults who have a disability or who experi-
ence age-related impairments. The hands-on approach of most traditional art prac-
tices excludes many older persons with physical and cognitive impairments who 
may lack the necessary strength, coordination, dexterity and control of their hands 
to grip pencils, pens and paintbrushes.
With the emergence of the technological era, innovative systems and strategies to 
solve existing problems continue to be developed, with both virtual reality (VR) and 
augmented reality (AR) programs becoming more prevalent in art therapy. VR 
allows one to interact in an immersive, virtual, computer-generated environment in 
a physical way, whereas AR integrates virtual information into the real or existing 
environment. A computer with the relevant software and motion-tracking device 
can allow an individual to interact with a virtual environment without the need for 
complex control systems or fine motor control. Such technology has enabled chil-
dren with a disability, and older adults in a residential care setting, to engage with 
and play music simply by moving their limbs (Tam et al. 2007; Raghavendra et al. 
2010; Chau et al. 2012).
A review of interactive technologies that encourage creative engagement in art 
identified 14 interactive free or low-cost art programs that utilise a range of plat-
forms, including the Apple iPad, Microsoft Kinect and desktop PC (Diment and 
Hobbs 2014a). Some open-source programs have been designed for the Kinect that 
create artistic effects in response to user’s movements or voice, but these programs 
prove difficult for a user with an impairment, and the full breadth of user ability was 
rarely considered when they were developed. Many of the available programs have 
not been validated for users with an impairment, and so it is difficult to confirm their 
effectiveness for this population (Diment and Hobbs 2014a).
A pilot study trialling new software coupled with a Microsoft Kinect camera, 
with children with severe physical impairments, identified that despite their limita-
tions, the children were able to create art through the use of a gesture-based virtual 
art program (Diment and Hobbs 2014b). The program was designed to track a par-
ticipant’s limbs, draw art while doing so, and record the amount of motion for each 
limb. As the trial progressed, it was noted that the children engaged with the pro-
gram more, and an analysis of the data showed a trend towards increased limb 
motion (Diment and Hobbs 2014b).
5  Using Technology to Increase Activity, Creativity and Engagement for Older Adults…

100
Studies have investigated the benefits of using an off-the-shelf Nintendo Wii 
(consisting of a Nintendo console, a sensor and a handheld controller) with older 
adults in residential aged-care facilities, given the system’s ability to encourage 
physical activity and stimulate upper body movement. Jung and colleagues found 
that participation in Wii games positively impacted the well-being of older adults 
compared to a control group who played traditional board games (Jung et al. 2009). 
Another study suggested that digital gameplay has the potential to train and uphold 
cognitive and motor abilities in aged care, identifying that a primary benefit was 
allowing seniors to simulate real-life activities that otherwise may be difficult to 
participate in (Marston et al. 2013).
Higgins and colleagues reported that staff in an aged-care environment believed 
that the Nintendo Wii offered an opportunity for older adults and individuals with a 
disability to improve their well-being. However, it was also the belief of staff that 
participation in Nintendo Wii games was not as effective for those individuals who 
were significantly impaired due to a physical or cognitive condition (Higgins et al. 
2010). These observations highlight the need to address issues relating to both the 
physical interface between the user and the technology (termed the “human/tech-
nology interface” by Cook and Polgar (2008, p. 44) and the cognitive demand of the 
activity or game, when developing an accessible system for individuals with an 
impairment.
Keogh and colleagues used the “Nintendo Wii Sports” package with 34 older 
adults in a residential care setting, with the intervention group achieving signifi-
cantly greater increases in bicep curl, muscular endurance, physical activity levels, 
and psychological quality of life, compared to the control group (Keogh et al. 2014). 
The authors noted that after some initial reluctance and anxiousness from the par-
ticipants, the intervention group developed a sense of empowerment and achieve-
ment and commented that the games were fun and provided an avenue for greater 
socialisation (Keogh et al. 2014).
A recent meta-analytic review from 36 studies to examine the physical and cog-
nitive impacts of digital games on older adults identified that playing digital games 
is effective in improving their physical balance and balance confidence, functional 
mobility, executive function and processing speed (Zhang and Kaufman 2015). Key 
findings from the review included that playing digital games improves the balance 
of older adults, both those living in the community and those living in nursing 
homes, and that the participants’ ages or the amount of time spent playing the game 
are related only weakly to affect size, with the direction of the relationship incon-
clusive (Zhang and Kaufman 2015).
The following study demonstrates the feasibility of using digital technologies to 
promote physical activity, stimulate cognitive function and encourage creativity 
through observing how older adults engaged both physically and cognitively with a 
visual art computer program.
A. Paczynski et al.

101
5.4  Harnessing Technology to Enable Older Adults to Create 
Digital Art: A Case Study
With the emergence of new and smarter technologies, the reliance on tangible 
devices as the only means of providing an input to a computer program is decreas-
ing. As described earlier, new technologies now recognise gestures and movements 
as control inputs, paving the way for new “non-touch” interfaces. With the impor-
tance of the user interface in mind, the Microsoft Kinect was identified as a viable 
option for further exploration as it allows the user to interact with the system via 
hand gestures, limb movement and voice control. There is no need to hold a physi-
cal device or activate potentially confusing and inaccessible buttons.
A study examining how older adults respond to and interact with a new computer 
program using a Kinect camera to create digital artwork was performed, as there 
was interest in understanding how these sorts of technologies can facilitate not only 
increased movement but also cognitive stimulation and creativity.
5.5  Overview of the Technology
The Kinect Virtual Art Program (KVAP) was originally developed to integrate with 
a Microsoft Xbox 360 camera, to enable an individual to draw and create art simply 
by moving their limb through space while interacting with a virtual world. KVAP 
was designed by engineers in consultation with therapists, special needs teachers 
and disability professionals to meet the needs of children with severe physical 
impairments. The program encouraged experimentation and exploration, engaging 
participants cognitively through the creation of art as well as physically through 
limb movement (Diment and Hobbs 2014b). KVAP was further developed and 
upgraded to function on the latest Kinect sensor for the Xbox One system, with the 
software being renamed Splashboard. The new design sought to engage a broader 
population, and a subsequent trial of the software focused on its use in a residential 
aged-care setting.
The newest Kinect (Kinect for Windows v2) was released in 2014, along with the 
Xbox One Microsoft console. It utilises a “time-of-flight” camera, which works by 
emitting light and measuring the time taken to return to the sensor. This method 
provides an accurate estimation of depth and enables a precise reconstruction of the 
environment (Meisner 2013).
5  Using Technology to Increase Activity, Creativity and Engagement for Older Adults…

102
5.6  The Splashboard Program
Splashboard uses an off-the-shelf Microsoft Kinect v2 (Microsoft 2015) and its cor-
responding Software Development Kit connected to a computer rather than an Xbox 
unit. In combination with the new camera, Splashboard is faster and more efficient 
than KVAP and incorporates new visual and auditory effects that relate to the move-
ments of the user to encourage movement, creativity and unstructured exploration. 
Splashboard was designed to be simple and intuitive and to accommodate the user 
and their potential lack of motor control, muscle strength or cognition. Being  
gesture-based, Splashboard doesn’t require a physical interface to hold or 
manipulate.
Splashboard tracks the changes in x, y and z coordinates of various body parts 
over time. The tracked limbs are then responsible for painting in the virtual environ-
ment. Given that the program is specifically targeted at people with limited motor 
capabilities, a virtual button activation system is used. Colourful squares and icons 
are used to create a virtual overlay on the video display of the real world. As a body 
part passes through one of the buttons, for example, the blue square, the paint colour 
produced by the motion of that particular body part becomes blue. The same prin-
ciple applies for all other coloured buttons. The screen layout of Splashboard is 
shown in Fig. 5.1.
Fig. 5.1  (a) Menu bar visible along the top of the screen, with a vertical button layout on either 
side of the screen. (b) Menu bar visible along the top of the screen, with a two-line horizontal but-
ton layout. (c) Menu bar hidden with a two-line horizontal square button layout. (d) Sample 
Splashboard painting
A. Paczynski et al.

103
The interactive menu bar (see Fig. 5.2) was designed to be visually simple and 
informative. Moving from left to right, buttons exist for taking a screenshot, altering 
a virtual button positioning, erasing/clearing, painting, toggling special effects, 
tracking the left hand, tracking the right hand, tracking all limbs, zooming, hiding 
the image and exiting the program. The buttons are activated by hovering over the 
desired function.
5.7  Pilot Trial with Older Adults
A pilot trial of Splashboard was conducted in a residential aged-care facility to 
obtain data on how a virtual reality art program can affect the physical and cognitive 
well-being of residents. Fifteen participants were given an opportunity to use 
Splashboard as part of a suite of leisure activities that the aged-care centre typically 
offers. Inclusion criteria for the 6-week trial included being 65 years of age or older, 
being a resident of the aged-care facility, having visual acuity to a distance of two 
metres (with or without a visual aid) and having the ability to independently and 
intentionally move one or more limbs.
Quantitative data in the form of limb movement, range of motion and the length 
of time that Splashboard was used was automatically tracked and stored by the 
program. Heart rate information was measured using an off-the-shelf ‘Fitbit Charge 
HR’ (Fitbit 2015) that participants were asked to wear on their left wrist during each 
session.
Qualitative responses were collected via two questionnaires. The first question-
naire profiled the participant pre-trial (to gain a better understanding of the user and 
their levels of enjoyment), and the second questionnaire was administered at the end 
of the trial (to provide an insight into the user experience, what participants found 
enjoyable and the challenges that were faced). Some participants were unable to 
respond to the questions, so the staff answered on their behalf. Initial background 
responses indicated that participants were affected by one or more medical  
Fig. 5.2  The Splashboard interactive menu bar
Fig. 5.3  The initial on-screen assessment exercise that the participant was required to complete 
prior to using Splashboard
5  Using Technology to Increase Activity, Creativity and Engagement for Older Adults…

104
conditions, with most participants having dementia or depression or recovering 
from a stroke.
Under staff supervision, participants were free to use the program whenever they 
desired. Each participant was allocated a unique identification number that could be 
tracked over the trial period. A short assessment exercise (see Fig. 5.3) provided an 
indication of reaction time, attention, memory, hand-eye coordination and the abil-
ity to follow instructions. The exercise was integrated into the Splashboard system, 
appeared upon start-up and required the participant to follow a series of prompts on 
the screen. The assessments occurred at the beginning of each session to determine 
if Splashboard was having an effect on the participant’s ability to complete the 
exercise over time.
5.8  Results
Fifteen residents (average age 84  ±  8  years, minimum  =  69  years, maxi-
mum = 96 years) trialled the Splashboard system for 6 weeks. The system was set 
up during the day in a spacious room with a widescreen television for residents to 
interact with. The average session length was 11.6 min, and the average number of 
sessions per participant was four. Staff noted that most participants were able to 
engage physically with Splashboard without discomfort.
While Splashboard can track many parts of the body, this pilot study focused on 
tracking the left and right hands and the lower spine only. Movements of the hands 
indicated upper limb function of a “typical user” while movement of the lower spine 
indicated how much the person moved their base of support.
5.9  Individual Case Study
From the overall cohort, a representative participant (participant 4) was selected to 
highlight the effects of using the program. Aged-care staff indicated that this par-
ticipant had suffered a stroke and had elevated blood pressure, depression and 
short-term memory loss. Over the 6-week period, this participant used Splashboard 
nine times for an average of 17 min (min = 7 min, max = 39 min). Movement in all 
three dimensions for the upper body relative to the lower spine is shown in Fig. 5.4a 
and 5.4b.
During each of the nine sessions, this participant moved both their upper limbs 
at least 400 m, with notable exceptions for sessions five and eight, where total limb 
movements approached 2000 m and 1000 m per arm, respectively, in a single ses-
sion. With the exception of session one, most of the arm movement was symmetri-
cal, as indicated in Fig. 5.4a. Over time, the participant gradually increased their 
arm velocity across sessions, and the average velocity per arm was relatively sym-
metrical (see Fig. 5.4b). Heart rate data showed a 43.5% increase between minimum 
A. Paczynski et al.

105
and peak heart rates during Splashboard use. While the participant indicated right 
hand dominance on their pretrial questionnaire, the data does not indicate a signifi-
cant hand preference. This suggests that Splashboard encouraged uniform bilateral 
upper body movement.
Fig. 5.4a  Three-dimensional distance travelled for the left and right hands relative to the lower 
spine
Fig. 5.4b  Average velocity for lower spine, left and right hands
5  Using Technology to Increase Activity, Creativity and Engagement for Older Adults…

106
Figure 5.5 shows a plot of the lower spine movement in the X (left and right 
movement, parallel with screen) and Z planes (forward and backward movement, 
perpendicular to screen) to highlight the range and amount of body movement that 
occurred during session two for this participant. The zero point on the X axis marks 
the position of the Kinect sensor.
The spine trace indicates that the participant showed very little side-to-side (X 
direction) and forward-backward (Z direction) movement, with a preference for 
moving to their left compared to their right in this instance.
Data from the pre-Splashboard assessment exercise shows variable response 
times, making it difficult to conclude if this participant improved their attention and/
or reaction time over 6 weeks. ‘Incomplete’ means that the participant failed to 
complete the assessment in the allocated time, which was 1 min. The data indicates 
that this participant was attentive and able to follow instructions. The time of com-
pletion for each assessment exercise is shown in Table 5.1. Overall, the time required 
–0.8
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0
0.2
0.4
X Direction (Left and Right) (m)
Z Direction (Forwards Backwards) (m)
Participant 04 - Session 2
Fig. 5.5  Session 2 – Movement of the lower spine tracked in X and Z directions. The positive X 
direction represents movement to the right, and negative X direction represents movement to the 
left
Table 5.1  Assessment exercise times for participant 4
Session no.
Length (s)
Session no.
Length (s)
1
Incomplete
6
40.46
2
17.33
7
58.48
3
27.14
8
32.73
4
36.87
9
10.1
5
4.61
A. Paczynski et al.

107
to complete the task varied significantly across and between all participants, with 
some participants being unable to complete the exercise.
Examples of the art that this particular participant created using Splashboard are 
shown in Fig. 5.6. Staff noted that the participant engaged well with Splashboard, 
smiling and whistling while creating art. The participant took particular interest in 
the technology and how the program worked. This insight may indicate a higher 
level of cognitive function. Staff noted that participant 4 would smile, whistle and 
throw their arms around while using Splashboard, saying “that was good fun”, after 
a session.
5.10  Overall Pilot Trial Trends
Table 5.2 shows the heart rate values that were recorded via the Fitbit Charge HR 
for each participant during Splashboard use. The data shows that all participants 
experienced an increase in heart rate compared to their resting heart rate, as would 
be expected when engaging in an upright activity. Participants that used Splashboard 
for longer periods of time experienced greater increases in heart rate.
From the 15 participants, six completed four or more sessions, five finished two 
sessions and the remaining four completed only one session. Out of the six partici-
pants who engaged in four or more sessions, five recorded higher maximum dis-
tances travelled in at least one of their sessions than those who had fewer sessions.
All participants completing more than one session recorded lower distances trav-
elled in their final session than in their first session. From the six people who com-
pleted four or more sessions, four recorded higher distances travelled with their 
arms in a middle session. The remaining seven participants recorded their maximum 
distance travelled during their first session, indicating that the initial engagement 
with Splashboard was high before decreasing.
It is likely that residents were initially excited by the novelty of a new activity 
when Splashboard was first introduced, providing them with extra motivation to 
engage and hence record high levels of movement in their initial session. A key fac-
tor for the amount of distance travelled is the session length. Sessions were unstruc-
tured, and session length was not controlled during the trial as the length of the 
Fig. 5.6  Example artwork that was created by participant 4
5  Using Technology to Increase Activity, Creativity and Engagement for Older Adults…

108
session was used as an indicator of enjoyment and sustained activity. A longer ses-
sion length allows more opportunity for motion and increases the likelihood that a 
greater distance is travelled. Not restricting the participants to a set task meant that 
they could engage with Splashboard to creatively explore the potential of the 
program.
The average velocity was calculated post-session to determine if the rate of limb 
movement increased over the 6-week trial period. From the 11 participants who 
completed more than one session, average velocity increased in one or more tracked 
body parts for seven participants, indicating that while the session times for most 
participants decreased over time, the amount of movement per second increased.
Key indicators for Splashboard enjoyment were session length, the number of 
sessions and qualitative responses provided by participants and staff. Table  5.3 
shows the average session length for all participants and the number of sessions 
completed. Session lengths varied for many reasons with 14 of the 15 participants 
recording an average session length of 5 min or greater.
Qualitative responses indicated that 11 of the 15 participants enjoyed their expe-
rience with Splashboard, with a few of the participants expressing their desire to use 
it again. The bright colours that formed the art on the screen were enjoyed by most 
participants. Across all participants a common response was that Splashboard made 
them tire due to the amount of upper limb activity that was required to create art 
within the program. Staff also noticed this and referred to it as incidental exercise 
and that participants were engaging in exercise without realising it, therefore mak-
ing it a positive experience.
The four participants who did not enjoy using Splashboard could not articulate 
why they did not enjoy the activity; however, one participant said that Splashboard 
made them feel anxious, so they didn’t engage with the program again, and another 
Table 5.2  Heart rate (HR) values per participant during Splashboard use
Participant no.
Minimum HR
Average HR
Peak HR
No. of sessions
01
89
102
132
9
02
84
88
96
6
03
91
101
109
2
04
85
101
122
9
05
87
88
94
5
06
90
95
104
2
07
77
77
93
4
08
86
96
115
15
09
89
102
113
1
10
90
102
116
2
11
65
68
73
1
12
95
103
113
2
13
85
87
107
2
14
95
104
111
1
15
58
58
59
1
A. Paczynski et al.

109
seemed confused and tried to physically touch the TV screen that was displaying the 
virtual art rather than to engage with it like a mirror. One participant found it com-
forting to see themselves on the TV screen, while another found this confronting.
As explained earlier, prior to using Splashboard each participant was presented 
with a cognitive assessment. Ten of the participants completed at least one cognitive 
assessment. The response times were highly variable with no trends identified, pos-
sibly due to the medical history of the participant and because participants were 
unaware that the interactive prompt was an assessment, meaning they didn’t com-
plete or interact with it with a sense of urgency. Some participants had difficulty 
understanding the prompt, so the assessment was marked as incomplete. However, 
participants who used Splashboard more often consistently showed better ability to 
complete the cognitive assessment, indicating a familiarity with the exercise.
5.11  Sub-cohort Trends
Four out of five participants affected by stroke enjoyed using Splashboard, with the 
other participant reporting the experience as ‘overwhelming’. Limb movement data 
indicated that all participants in this sub-cohort were able to produce both above-
average upper body motion and average velocities and four of five participants felt 
that Splashboard was beneficial for their physical and cognitive well-being. Some 
participants had trouble with verbal communication, so Splashboard provided an 
opportunity to creatively express themselves in a way that was previously not pos-
sible for them. One participant could no longer write with either hand after suffering 
a stroke, but the accessibility of Splashboard provided this individual with a chance 
to participate in artistic activities.
For the sub-cohort with dementia/memory impairment, three of the nine partici-
pants completed four or more sessions with Splashboard. Four participants felt that 
Splashboard was beneficial for their cognitive health and five participants believed 
Splashboard was beneficial to their physical well-being.
Table 5.3  Average Splashboard session times (min) and the number of sessions per participant (N)
Participant 
no.
Average session length (min), 
no. of sessions (N)
Participant 
no.
Average session length (min), 
no. of sessions (N)
01
43 min, N = 9
09
7 min, N = 1
02
6 min, N = 6
10
11.5 min, N = 2
03
8.5 min, N = 2
11
6 min, N = 1
04
17 min, N = 9
12
7 min, N = 2
05
7 min, N = 5
13
19.5 min, N = 2
06
3.5 min, N = 2
14
6 min, N = 1
07
10.5 min, N = 4
15
5 min, N = 1
08
16 min, N = 15
5  Using Technology to Increase Activity, Creativity and Engagement for Older Adults…

110
All participants affected by depression completed two or more sessions with 
Splashboard and four out of five completed four or more sessions. Limb movement 
data indicated that all participants were able to produce above-average upper body 
movements. Qualitative responses from this sub-cohort indicated that three partici-
pants felt happier after having used Splashboard. The opportunity to be creative was 
satisfying for this sub-cohort.
5.12  Character Profile Analysis
Participants were asked to respond to a questionnaire following the 6-week trial. 
One question required participants to select words from a list to create a character 
profile, based on a simplified Myers-Briggs-type personality test. It was hypothe-
sised that this character profile would show similar personality traits amongst the 
participants that enjoyed interacting with Splashboard the most and/or similar traits 
amongst those who did not enjoy Splashboard. Of the 15 participants, 12 provided 
responses to the character profile section of the questionnaire.
Figure 5.7 shows the responses selected by the six participants who completed 
four or more sessions with Splashboard in red, while responses in blue are from 
participants who completed less than four Splashboard sessions. The results are not 
significantly different between the two groups. However, on individual questions, 
responses indicate that participants that were sociable, creative and easy-going 
Fig. 5.7  Character profile trends. Red bars represent participants who completed four or more 
Splashboard sessions; blue bars represent participants who completed less than four Splashboard 
sessions
A. Paczynski et al.

111
tended to enjoy Splashboard and the process of creating virtual art. Conversely, 
participants who did not participate in the trial as often (i.e. they completed less than 
four sessions over the trial period) favoured many of the opposite traits, such as 
being reserved and careful.
5.13  Efficacy of Recording Heart Rate Using the FITBIT 
Charge HR
The Fitbit Charge HR appeared to collect more reliable data if the session length 
was longer compared to shorter sessions. Errors from the Fitbit were potentially due 
to incorrect positioning of the Fitbit on the participant’s wrist (which was fitted by 
staff). The Fitbit is required to fit snugly on the wrist as described by the device 
manufacturer in order to function optimally, and this aspect may have been over-
looked when being fitted to participants’ wrists given individual wrist size 
differences.
Since participants were using their arms to paint, noise via movement may have 
been introduced into the signal. To minimise movement-generated noise, the Fitbit 
was placed on the left wrist, with the assumption that the majority of participants 
would favour their right hand when using Splashboard. Analysis of the movement 
data showed that this was not the case, with many participants demonstrating bilat-
eralism or preferentially using their nondominant hand.
5.14  Pilot Trial Overview
The pilot trial results suggest that Splashboard can provide a leisurely and creative 
activity while encouraging physical motion and cognitive thought. The trial demon-
strated that older participants with a significant medical history were able to engage 
in an activity that otherwise may no longer be possible. This study also provided an 
understanding of the groups of people that may benefit from a virtual art program. 
Many participants were disappointed to hear Splashboard was leaving the facility at 
the conclusion of the trial. A reflection from the lifestyle coordinator highlights the 
success of the pilot trial and the impact it had on residents:
The very first day we trialled Splashboard with a participant, many staff were in tears. For 
someone who can no longer verbalise her needs it was very emotional to see her so engaged 
and enthralled by Splashboard. She was totally living in the moment and was able to 
express herself through art. Many of us noticed improvements in her mood and also assisted 
to decrease her behaviours and anxiety.
Families were overjoyed that their loved one was considered to participate in something 
new and exciting and some were able to see first-hand their loved one participating in some-
thing they didn’t realise they could still do. Staff, visitors and customers would sit at the 
back of the room and watch participants with amazement and were blown away by the 
technology.
5  Using Technology to Increase Activity, Creativity and Engagement for Older Adults…

112
5.15  Conclusion
The results from the pilot trial indicate that a virtual art program can encourage both 
creativity and physical activity via upper limb movement and body motion for a 
cohort of older adults. The system provided an opportunity for some residents to 
creatively express themselves where they can’t do so with traditional methods. 
Participants felt that Splashboard was beneficial to their physical and cognitive 
well-being, with a few participants reporting feeling happier after using Splashboard. 
Staff were positive about the program and enjoyed seeing their residents engaging 
with the technology, recognising that it was also contributing towards “incidental 
exercise” as well as cognitive stimulation. Given the positive pilot trial results, there 
is scope for Splashboard to be trialled with a larger cohort to investigate which 
populations can benefit the most from using Splashboard, the effect that ongoing 
use may have on balance in older adults and if ongoing use can improve cognitive 
well-being.
Digital technologies that promote physical and cognitive well-being for older 
persons, especially those with a disability and other comorbidities, have the poten-
tial to increase independence and decrease the risk of people developing further 
health complications that are associated with sedentary behaviour and reduced cog-
nitive activity. Digital art technologies enable older adults who have a disability or 
who experience age-related impairments to benefit from art therapy when tradi-
tional hands-on approaches are inaccessible.
References
Callaham J  (2015) Kinect for Windows v2 sensor sales end, developers can use Xbox One 
version instead. Retrieved 7 December 2015, from: http://www.windowscentral.com/
kinect-windows-v2-sensor-sales-end-developers-can-use-xbox-one-version
Chau T, Memarian N, Leung B, Treherne D, Hobbs DA, Worthington-Eyre B, Lamont A, Pla-
Mobarak M (2012) Home-based computer vision access Technologies for Individuals with 
severe motor impairments. In: Augusto JC, Huch M, Kameas A, Maitland J, McCullagh P, 
Roberts J, Sixsmith A, Wichert R (eds) Handbook of ambient assisted living – Technology for 
Healthcare, rehabilitation and well-being. IOS Press, Amsterdam, pp 581–597
Cohen GD, Perlstein S, Chapline J, Kelly J, Firth KM, Simmens S (2006) The impact of profes-
sionally conducted cultural programs on the physical health, mental health, and social func-
tioning of older adults. The Gerontologist 46(6):726–734
Conn VS, Hafdahl AR, Mehr DR (2011) Interventions to increase physical activity among healthy 
adults: meta-analysis of outcomes. Am J Public Health 101(4):751–758
Cook AM, Polgar JM (2008) Cook & Hussey’s assistive technologies, principles and practice, 3rd 
edn. Mosby Elsevier, St. Louis
Crawford S (2012) How Microsoft Kinect Works. Retrieved 22 January 2016, from: http://elec-
tronics.howstuffworks.com/microsoft-kinect.htm
Department for Work and Pensions (2012) Family Resources Survey. ISBN 978-1-78153-035-1. 
Retrieved 7 December 2015, from: https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/
attachment_data/file/222839/frs_2010_11_report.pdf
A. Paczynski et al.

113
Diment LE, Hobbs DA (2014a) Interactive technologies that engage children with disabilities in 
visual art – a review. In Proceedings of the 2014 Australian Biomedical Engineering Conference 
(ABEC), Canberra, Australia, August 2014
Diment LE, Hobbs DA (2014b) A gesture-based virtual art program for children with severe motor 
impairments  – developments and pilot study. J  Assistive Rehabil Ther Technol 2(23206). 
doi:10.3402/jartt.v2.23206
Fisher BJ, Specht DK (1999) Successful aging and creativity in later life. J  Aging Stud 
13(4):457–472
Fitbit (2015) Charge HR, Retrieved 15 December 2015, from: https://www.fitbit.com/au/chargehr
Gantt C (2013) iFixit opens up the new Xbox One Kinect sensor to see what’s inside. Retrieved 
7 December 2015, from: http://www.tweaktown.com/news/34077/ifixit-opens-up-the-new-
xbox-one-kinect-sensor-to-see-whats-inside/index.html
Hannemann BT (2006) Creativity with dementia patients. Gerontology 52(1):59–65
Higgins HC, Horton JK, Hodgkinson BC, Muggleton SB (2010) Lessons learned: staff percep-
tions of the Nintendo Wii as a health promotion tool within an aged-care and disability service. 
Health Promot J Austr 21(3):189–195
Jung Y, Li KJ, Janissa NS, Gladys WLC, Lee KM (2009) Games for a better life: effects of playing 
Wii games on the well-being of seniors in a long-term care facility. In: Proceedings of the sixth 
Australasian conference on interactive entertainment, USA. doi:10.1145/1746050.1746055
Keogh JWL, Power N, Wooller L, Lucas P, Whatman C (2014) Physical and psychosocial func-
tion in residential aged-care elders: effect of nintendo wii sports games. J Aging Phys Act 
22:235–244
LaPorte KM, Melo L, Stanley S, Zeltzer BN (2003) Arts therapies promote wellness in elders. 
(clinical report). Behav Healthcare Tomorrow 12:7
Marston HR, Greenlay S, van Hoof J  (2013) Understanding the Nintendo Wii and Microsoft 
Kinect consoles in long-term care facilities. Technol Disabil 25(2):77–85
Meisner J  (2013) Collaboration, expertise produce enhanced sensing in Xbox One. 
Retrieved 
7 
December 
2015, 
from: 
http://blogs.microsoft.com/blog/2013/10/02/
collaboration-expertise-produce-enhanced-sensing-in-xbox-one/
Microsoft (2015) Kinect Sensor for Xbox One, Retrieved 15 December 2015, from: http://www.
microsoftstore.com/store/msusa/en_US/pdp/Kinect-for-Xbox-One/productID.307499400
Office for National Statistics (2012) 2011 Census: Population Estimates for the United 
Kingdom, 27 March 2011. Retrieved 7 December 2015, from: http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/
census/2011-census/population-and-household-estimates-for-the-united-kingdom/stb-2011- 
census--population-estimates-for-the-united-kingdom.html
Raghavendra P, Murchland S, Shiosaki P, Hobbs DA (2010) Enabling children with severe physi-
cal disabilities using the virtual music instrument. In: Baxter P, Hart HM (eds) Developmental 
medicine and child neurology. Blackwell Publishing, Oxford. Australasian Association for 
Cerebral Palsy and Developmental Medicine (AusACPDM) Christchurch, New Zealand, p 45
Tam C, Schwellnus H, Eaton C, Hamdani Y, Lamont A, Chau T (2007) Movement-to-music com-
puter technology: a developmental play experience for children with severe physical disabili-
ties. Occup Ther Int 14(2):99–112
United Nations (2015) ‘World Population Prospects: 2015 Revision’. Press release retrieved 1 
August 2016, from: http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/events/pdf/other/10/
World_Population_Projections_Press_Release.pdf
World Health Organization (2011) Global health and aging, NIH Publ no. 117737; 1(4):273–277
Zhang L (2013) Kinect Coordinate Space. Retrieved 21 December 2015, from: http://2.
bp.blogspot.com/q9uwRQSp0zQ/USIKLoqjfII/AAAAAAAAAK8/XXCUHNVjjLk/s1600/
skeleton+space.png
Zhang F, Kaufman D (2015) Physical and cognitive impacts of digital games on older adults: a 
meta-analytic review. J Appl Gerontol 1–22
5  Using Technology to Increase Activity, Creativity and Engagement for Older Adults…

114
Alexander Paczynski is a biomedical engineer working for Medical Equipment Management in 
the Northern Territory, Australia. His primary role is to provide technical expertise, support and 
remedial maintenance of medical equipment in metropolitan areas and remote communities. 
Alexander graduated from Flinders University with first-class honours in biomedical engineering. 
His interests lie in rehabilitative technologies, medical equipment design and improving healthcare 
accessibility.
Laura Diment is a John Monash scholar. She is studying for her doctorate in rehabilitation engi-
neering at the University of Oxford, and she teaches undergraduate engineering courses. Her previ-
ous work for the Medical Device Partnering Program in South Australia supported the development 
of novel medical technologies and developed her interest in personalized rehabilitation devices. 
Her current research focus is on improving the comfort of prosthetic limbs.
David Hobbs is a biomedical and rehabilitation engineer within the Medical Device Research 
Institute at Flinders University. He has extensive industry experience within the rehabilitation 
engineering and assistive technology sector, having worked in the disability sector for 9 years 
before taking up an academic role at Flinders University. David is a Fulbright scholar and a 
Churchill fellow and is completing his PhD in rehabilitation engineering, which is focussing on 
improving upper limb sensation and function for children with an impairment.
Karen Reynolds is Matthew Flinders’ distinguished professor of biomedical engineering at 
Flinders University and a director of the University’s Medical Device Research Institute. Her 
research interests are aimed at developing new technologies for improved healthcare. She devel-
oped and leads the award-winning Medical Device Partnering Program in South Australia, a pro-
gramme that supports the development of cutting-edge health technologies through unique 
collaborations between researchers, industry, end-users and government.
A. Paczynski et al.

115
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017 
H.R. Marston et al. (eds.), Mobile e-Health, Human–Computer Interaction Series, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-60672-9_6
Chapter 6
Can Mobile Digital Games Benefit Older 
Adults’ Health?
Emmanuel Duplàa, David Kaufman, Louise Sauvé, Lise Renaud, 
and Alice Ireland
Abstract  Aging adults face many challenges, including declining physical and 
cognitive abilities, loss of companions and social support, family changes, loss of 
professional identity, changing lifestyles, and increasing likelihood of developing 
chronic and debilitating disease. Evidence suggests that digital games can improve 
older adults’ quality of life through improved physical, cognitive, and social health 
as well as general psychological wellbeing and emotional health. Benefits demon-
strated in research studies have varied with game characteristics, study methodolo-
gies, and outcome measures, so generalising across studies is difficult, but our 
review highlights the potential for mobile digital games to improve older adults’ 
lives as they increasingly appear on common, accessible mobile devices.
6.1  Introduction
The proportion of people aged 60 and older is increasing faster than other age 
groups and is expected to increase to two billion by 2050 (World Health Organization 
2002). In the USA, one million people reach the age of 65 each year, and in 2020, 
almost 30% of the population will be over 65 (Allaire et al. 2013). In Canada in 
2010, almost five million people were 65 years of age or more, and by 2036, there 
will be more than ten million (Human Resources and Skills Development Canada 
E. Duplàa (*) 
Faculty of Education, University of Ottawa,  
145, Jean-Jacques-Lussier, Ottawa, ON, K1N 6N5, Canada
e-mail: eduplaa@uottawa.ca 
D. Kaufman • A. Ireland 
Faculty of Education, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada 
L. Sauvé 
Department of Education, Téléuniversité, Université du Québec, QC, Canada 
L. Renaud 
Faculty of Communication, Université de Québec à Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada

116
2011). Aging older adults face many challenges, including declining physical and 
cognitive abilities, loss of companions and social support, family changes, loss of 
professional identity, changing lifestyles, and increasing likelihood of developing 
chronic and debilitating disease.
Information communication technologies (ICTs) can offer ways to mitigate these 
challenges. Older adults increasingly use ICTs in their daily lives. ICTs, including 
digital games and mobile technologies, can help to improve older adults’ safety at 
home, provide more access to information, increase family and social interaction, 
and increase older adults’ life satisfaction and self-esteem (Fausset et  al. 2013; 
Hwang et al. 2011).
Both digital games and mobile technologies are increasingly popular among 
older adults. In 2007, 27% of Canadian 45–64-year-olds and 36% of those 65 and 
over were playing digital games, positioning games as this population’s third most 
common technology-related activity in that year, after email and online search 
(Statistics Canada 2007). In the USA, 78% of adults aged 65+ owned cell phones in 
2015 and 30% owned smartphones, while the percentage of smartphone owners 
among all adults had increased from 35 to 68% since 2010 (Anderson 2015). In 
2014 in Canada, 61% of seniors owned cell phones and 14% owned smartphones 
(Oliveira 2014). Thirty-two percent of Americans aged 65+ owned tablets in 2015, 
while 45% of all adults did so – an increase from only 4% in 2010 (Anderson 2015).
While their popularity has grown, digital games have become effective ways to 
enhance older adults’ health and quality of life. They can engage players physically, 
mentally, and socially, educate them about health behaviors, support disease man-
agement and rehabilitation, and promote change to healthier activities and lifestyle 
choices (Wattanasoontorn et al. 2013). While research has documented benefits of 
digital gameplay on computers and game consoles, mobile games’ potential in these 
areas is just beginning to be realized and studied.
This chapter reviews the potential benefits of mobile digital games for older 
adults’ health and quality of life. Because research on mobile digital games is rela-
tively new, the review relies on a qualitative meta-analysis (Bland et al. 1995) of 
research on digital games in general, summarizing areas in which evidence has been 
found for health-related benefits for older adults. This is extended to include game 
examples, whether or not rigorously evaluated, specifically for mobile games. The 
overall purpose of this chapter is to summarize key benefits of digital games for 
older adults’ health and quality of life and to point to how these are likely to be real-
ized in the near future.
6.2  Older Adults, mHealth, and Digital Games
Statistics Canada (2014) defines older adults as those aged 65 and older, but some 
reports distinguish a next generation aged from 55 to 64 years (Statistics Canada 
2007). Definitions vary in the literature on digital games, with some studies 
E. Duplàa et al.

117
including adults starting at age 55. No studies have focused on the oldest old – 
adults aged 85 years or more (Marston et al. 2016).
The term “mHealth” has evolved from earlier terms describing applications of 
technology to health. Initially, the definition of “telemedicine” by Perednia and 
Allen (1995) was one of the most cited in the medical and paramedical literature, 
covering the use of communication and information technologies to deliver medical 
services remotely. The term grew to include clinical acts and the doctor-patient 
relationship, mediated by technology (e.g., Serafini 1995; Strode et al. 1999).
More recently, the concept of “eHealth” has appeared, based on the analogy with 
other e-domains such as eBusiness and eLearning. This combines medical comput-
ing with a business development perspective that views patients as clients who are 
actively involved in managing their own health, supported by technology (Alvarez 
2002; Eysenbach 2001). It also extends medical training beyond students and medi-
cal staff to the general public through sites and applications including digital games 
(Raffelini 2005). Today, by extension, “mHealth” is defined as a component of 
eHealth: “mHealth or mobile health is the realization of medical and public health 
supported by mobile devices, such as mobile phones, patient monitoring devices, 
personal digital assistants, and other wireless devices” (Misha 2011, p. 6). mHealth 
extends telehealth in part by linking patients with medical personnel through conve-
nient devices and improving medical data collection and patients’ access to health 
care (Agarwal and Lau 2010). Several recent studies have documented mHealth 
applications for older adults (Baldwin et al. 2015; Kampmeijer et al. 2016; Silva 
et al. 2015). However, games are mentioned rarely in these reviews.
6.3  Older Adults and Quality of Life
Digital games are often cited as tools to improve quality of life for older adults. 
Although it has been difficult to build a consensus on what “quality of life” means 
(Kuyken 1995), the most widely used definition is that of the World Health 
Organization (1993). This provides a context for our review, defining quality of life 
as an individual’s perception of their position in life, in the context of the culture and 
value systems in which they live and in relation to their goals, expectations, stan-
dards, and concerns. It encompasses interrelated dimensions including a person’s 
physical health, psychological state, level of independence, social relationships, 
personal beliefs, and relationships with characteristics of their environment. Chen 
et  al. (2012) similarly define quality of life as a multidimensional concept that 
includes individual subjective perceptions on physical health, psychological state, 
relationships, and interactions with the environment. Four dimensions of health-
related quality of life that have been studied with respect to digital games and older 
adults are physical health, cognitive abilities, social connectedness, and subjectively 
reported psychological well-being.
6  Can Mobile Digital Games Benefit Older Adults’ Health?

118
6.3.1  Physical Health
Aging brings about a decline in physical capacity. Usually from age 75 (although 
this varies with the individual), older people require different levels of daily support 
services to maintain their independence in the face of chronic health issues and/or 
cognitive problems (Daniel 2012). Physically, older adults are at increased risk of 
falls and major health risk factors. These risk factors include impaired muscle 
strength and poorer postural balance (Jorgensen et  al. 2013) as well as fatigue, 
exhaustion, slow gait, and unintentional weight loss (Daniel 2012). For example, in 
2009, 8.3% of men and 9.8% of women aged 65 or older were injured seriously 
enough to limit their usual activities, and 63.7% of these injuries were due to falls 
(Statistics Canada 2015). To overcome this, physical exercise is often recommended 
for the frail elderly as an intervention to restore muscle strength and agility (Daniel 
2012). Many interventions have been proposed, with varying degrees of success, to 
improve balance in older people (Bieryla and Dold 2013).
6.3.2  Cognitive Abilities
A number of dimensions link cognition and aging. According to Brickman and 
Stern (2009), aging increases a person’s chances of developing a neurodegenerative 
disease such as Alzheimer’s disease. Cognitive deficits associated with age have 
been identified in working memory (Bopp and Verhaeghen 2005), reasoning (Schaie 
1996), and episodic memory (Salthouse 1996). Other research highlights dementia, 
which is a severe loss of memory, attention, language, and problem-solving ability 
(Bishop et al. 2010; Salthouse 2009), and identifies less serious deficiencies in the 
operation of attention, problem-solving, information processing speed, spatial ori-
entation, and divided attention (Basak et al. 2008). Cognitive function is an impor-
tant indicator of the ability of older adults to maintain their independence, 
engagement, and health (World Health Organization 2002).
6.3.3  Social Connectedness
Social connectedness and relationships are significant influences on health-related 
behaviors and health outcomes (Christakis and Fowler 2007; Elwert and Christakis 
2008; Stowe and Cooney 2015). For example, Christakis and Fowler (2007) found 
that the influence of social networks extends up to three degrees (i.e., friends, friends 
of friends), and certain health conditions are more influenced by friends than by 
closer relationships, including spouses. Gorin et al. (2008) showed that when one 
partner is enrolled in a weight reduction program, the likelihood of weight loss also 
increases for the non-registered partner. Putnam (2000) found that people who have 
E. Duplàa et al.

119
close social networks experience lower rates of sadness, loneliness, low self-esteem, 
sleeping problems, eating problems, and likelihood of death.
Social isolation is a lack of social connectedness or the objective state of having 
minimal contact with others (Wenger et al. 1996). Social isolation is associated with 
health because isolation can be caused by mental disorders, distress, or poor health 
(Ellis and Hickie 2001) and can lead to loneliness, sadness, and boredom (Grenade 
and Boldy 2008). Loneliness (defined as distress about the quality of one’s social 
relationships) is related to numerous psychosocial risk factors including increased 
blood pressure, depression, impaired mental function, nursing home admission, and 
mortality (Hawkley et al. 2010).
6.3.4  Psychological Well-Being
Overall psychological well-being is linked to physical and cognitive health and 
social connectedness. Depression, poor coping skills, and a weakened sense of self-
efficacy all appear to contribute to older adults’ dependence, development of dis-
ease, and early mortality (World Health Organization 2002). The complex 
phenomenon of well-being for older adults has both objective and subjective aspects 
(Jeste et al. 2010). Psychological health is crucial for older adults’ quality of life, 
and aspects such as optimism, sense of purpose, and positive attitudes are linked to 
longer life spans (Jeste et al. 2010; Maier and Smith 1999). However, it is important 
to note that subjective well-being is not synonymous with objective health but is, 
instead, a reflection of a person’s inner satisfaction with their life situation (Stowe 
and Cooney 2015, citing Havighurst 1963).
6.4  Benefits of Digital Games for Older Adults
Digital games are becoming accepted as tools for improving health, and research is 
providing increasing evidence of their effectiveness, although reviewers have ques-
tioned the quality and consistency of many studies (Bleakley et al. 2015; Primack 
et al. 2012). Primack et al., in a review of the literature up to 2010, found evidence 
from randomized controlled trials for positive outcomes of digital game applica-
tions to physical therapy, psychological therapy, physical activity, health education, 
pain distraction, and disease self-management. Eight of the 38 studies that the 
authors reviewed targeted adults aged 50–80. Bleakley et al. reviewed literature up 
to 2011 for the effects of exergames on adults older than 65 years and found some 
evidence for a range of physical and cognitive benefits.
Although this book focuses on mobile eHealth, our review has not been limited 
to mobile applications because research on these specifically for older adults is new 
and limited and tends to address design issues rather than evidence of effectiveness. 
However, mobile devices, tablets in particular, are often recommended for older 
6  Can Mobile Digital Games Benefit Older Adults’ Health?

120
adults due to their simpler interfaces, and migration to mobile devices of the types 
of applications described here will naturally happen over the next few years. 
Therefore, these examples are good indicators of the future direction of mobile, 
game-based eHealth for older adults.
6.4.1  Physical Benefits
“Exergames,” which are video games that combine play with significant physical 
exercise using physical input devices (e.g., Nintendo Wii, Microsoft Xbox 360 
Kinect), have been suggested as an innovative approach to improve physical activity 
among older adults (Larsen et  al. 2013). Exergames rely on motion tracking to 
translate players’ physical actions into game actions (e.g., bowling, dancing) and 
scores on a screen. Exergames’ popularity has grown rapidly within the older adult 
population (Maillot et al. 2012). The health benefits of exergames have been widely 
researched. Larsen et al. (2013) analyzed four electronic databases on exergames 
and found positive effects of exergaming on older adults’ physical health, although 
they could not easily compare the studies due to methodology variations.
Wiemeyer and Kliem (2012) surveyed the scientific literature on the impact of 
“serious” exergames aimed at disease prevention, injury prevention, and rehabilita-
tion for older adults. They found at least partial support for using these games to 
improve energy expenditure, strength, basic motor control, and various nonphysical 
measures of well-being. The games also increased patients’ motivation to adhere to 
their recommended chronic disease treatments over time.
In a randomized controlled experiment comparing no exercise, seated exercise, 
and Wii Fit gameplay for systematic Progressive Functional Rehabilitation (PFR), 
Daniel (2012) examined the effectiveness of 15-week interventions on indices of 
physical frailty among 19 older adults. Their Wii Fit group showed improved physi-
cal function and strength equivalent to the seated-exercise group, and the Wii Fit 
group showed higher caloric consumption relative to the other groups. Daniel con-
cluded that a physical activity program based on exergames offers advantages over 
seated-exercise programs and is an option for older adults with limited access to 
organized exercise programs. Additionally, she noted that Wii games are varied and 
interactive, providing older adults at home with a wider variety of exercises than the 
standard exercise protocol.
Three other Wii Fit studies add to positive results for exergames. Singh et al. 
(2013) measured improvements for 36 elderly Malaysian women in flexibility, bal-
ance, and functional mobility, comparing six-week-long therapeutic balance exer-
cise group to a digital gaming group using the Nintendo Wii Balance Board. They 
found that the older women who regularly played with the Wii improved on all three 
measures identically to the comparison group. Jorgensen et al. (2013) found that  
biofeedback-basic Nintendo Wii training resulted in significantly higher maximal 
voluntary contraction strength and high motivation, compared to a control group, 
among the 58 participants who completed the trial. Similarly, Bieryla and Dold 
E. Duplàa et al.

121
(2013) conducted an experiment with 12 healthy older adults and found that their 
Wii Fit experimental group significantly increased their BBS measure of balance 
after one month of training, compared to the normal activity control group. However, 
3 other tests showed no significant changes.
Kinect exergames are a key part of a system developed by Gschwind et al. (2015) 
(www.istoppfalls.eu) to deliver an unsupervised exercise program to older adults at 
home. Results from their international multicenter randomized controlled trial, 
which included 153 participants aged 65-plus years, show that use of the application 
led to significant reductions in measures of physiological fall risk and postural sway, 
along with improved stepping reaction time. The authors conclude that more work 
is needed to optimize adherence to the program.
Taken together, these studies confirm that exergame-based training can lead to 
improvements in physical strength and balance, as measured by certain types of 
tests, even if additional research must be conducted to understand how. Strength and 
balance are crucial for maintaining daily function and preventing debilitating falls 
in older adults (World Health Organization 2016). However, the games in these 
studies are far from mobile in that they require a dedicated game machine anchored 
to a single location.
Moving to an exergame only available on mobile device, Kerwin et al. (2012) 
developed the mobile game prototype Dance! Don’t Fall to encourage physical 
activity and monitor gait and fall risk in older adults. Based on a smartphone sensor 
worn against a player’s lower back that communicates with a video display, the 
game teaches a single-person dance routine and gives feedback on a player’s perfor-
mance. Although Kerwin et al. have not done a controlled evaluation, their initial 
user evaluation results for the game were positive, and the project has expanded into 
a larger “Active@Home” fall prevention initiative (Fraunhofer Portugal 2016).
Konstitinidis et al. (2015) point to another form exergaming on mobile devices, 
citing examples of GPS-based mobile apps with city visualizations to encourage 
players to walk, run, or exercise outdoors. The commercial game Pokemon Go 
(http://pokemongolive.com/en/) adds to this approach by augmenting reality to 
include virtual creatures to track and capture. These examples rely on increasingly 
powerful web-based game engines. Although they are not so far aimed at older 
adults, it is not hard to imagine physical games and activities directed by mobile 
devices designed especially for this group to maintain and improve physical health 
and fitness.
6.4.2  Cognitive Benefits
As with physical benefits, the cognitive effects of digital games for older adults have 
been widely studied. A survey by Kaufman et al. (2016b) of 463 older Canadian 
adults found that mental exercise, fun, and several specific cognitive improvements 
(attentional focus, memory, reaction speed, problem-solving, and reasoning) were 
the most frequently self-reported benefits experienced from digital gameplay. 
6  Can Mobile Digital Games Benefit Older Adults’ Health?

122
Several types of games, including some not specifically designed for cognitive 
training, have been shown to enhance cognitive function, although evidence is 
inconsistent due to variations in study methodologies (Zhang and Kaufman 2016b).
Traditional Digital Games  In an early controlled experiment, Goldstein et  al. 
(1997) studied the effects of video games like Tetris on older adults’ reaction time, 
visual/cognitive adaptability, and emotional well-being. After 25 h of gameplay, the 
authors found a significant improvement for the experimental group in reaction time 
as well as a weak increase in emotional well-being; however, no difference was 
found in post-gameplay visual/cognitive adaptability between the two groups. 
Goldstein et al. warned that the relative increase in well-being could have been asso-
ciated with other experimental factors such as the presence of the attendant, weekly 
visits, or voluntary participation in the study.
Belchior et al. (2013) examined the comparative effect of four types of training 
on useful field of view (UFOV) performance (processing speed, divided attention, 
and selective attention) for 58 older adults. Experimental groups played Medal of 
Honor or Tetris or had clinically validated UFOV training over 2–3 weeks. The 
three experimental groups all increased their visual performance significantly over 
the control group. The Tetris group also increased selective visual attention among 
the older adults, which was not the case for the same experiment with young adults 
(Green and Bavelier 2003). The authors interpreted this result to suggest that the 
Tetris game challenged their cognitive, perceptual, and motor skills more than it 
would have for young adults who are already familiar with digital games.
Using a game that required visualizing movement in three dimensions, Whitlock 
et al. (2012) studied improvements in 39 older adults’ of multitasking, reasoning, 
and spatial memory during 2 weeks of 1-h play sessions with World of Warcraft, in 
which they completed specific challenges. They found improvements in attention 
control, orientation and mental rotation, recognition memory, and reasoning, and 
those with weaker computer skills benefited most from the game.
The games Tetris and Medal of Honor are available in mobile versions, suggest-
ing that the cognitive benefits identified in these experiments could also be achieved 
on smartphones or tablets once usability issues are addressed that might deter older 
adults from playing on these devices.
Brain-Training Games  Various games have been widely marketed and tested as 
tools for maintaining cognitive capacities such as memory, focus, and processing 
speed, with mixed results. In a significant study, Wolinsky et al. (2013) found that 
healthy adults over age 50 improved their concentration, speed, and agility in task 
switching after training for an average of 9.2 h with the game Road Tour, as com-
pared to solving crossword puzzles. In Japan, Nouchi et al. (2012) examined the 
positive effects of the use of brain-training games on 32 older adults in Japan who 
played Brain Age or Tetris at home on a Nintendo DSi game console for 15 min per 
day, 5 days per week for 4 weeks. Effects of playing Brain Age were higher than 
those for Tetris for all measures of executive function and for two measures of pro-
cessing speed.
E. Duplàa et al.

123
Using an electrophysical test after 20 1-h training sessions with the commercial 
brain-training game Lumosity, Mayas et al. (2014) found significantly reduced dis-
traction and increased alertness in their experimental group of healthy older adults 
with no previous video game experience, compared to their control group.
However, some results have been less conclusive. Miller et al. (2013) found only 
a gain in delayed memory function, but not in immediate memory or language, in 
133 dementia-free older participants that used a computerized brain-training pro-
gram for 20 min per day, 5 days per week for 2–6 months. Ballesteros et al. (2015) 
found that after playing brain-training games (Speed Mach, Memory Matrix, and 
others) for 3 months, there were significant improvements in their experimental 
group’s attention, processing speed, memory, and subjective well-being, but the 
cognitive improvements disappeared after 3  months without play. Finally, Boot 
et al. (2013) found no significant improvements in cognitive abilities for groups 
playing Brain Age 2 or Mario Kart DS2 for 1  h per day, 5  days per week for 
12 weeks, compared to their control group.
In a comprehensive study, Simons et al. (2016) reviewed all available research 
and company evidence about brain-training applications that use cognitive training 
or games to enhance performance on other tasks. They concluded that many studies 
have shown benefits of training on closely related tasks, but few studies have pro-
vided evidence for transfer from one cognitive domain to another. None of the stud-
ies in this review provided compelling evidence consistent with broad-based, 
real-world cognitive benefits from brain-training interventions. The reviewers 
judged this difference between hypothesized benefits and results to be due to meth-
odological weaknesses, since few of the studies conformed to best practices for the 
design and reporting of intervention research.
Mobile brain-training games (apps) are widely available; for example, see 
Dredge (2016). Dredge points out that evidence about their effectiveness is indeed 
questionable and that at least one company has been fined for unproven advertising 
claims. He does note, however, that these games can be entertaining and appealing 
to older adults.
Experimental Games  In addition to commercial brain-training games, some 
researchers have developed their own games to measure specific effects on older 
adults’ health. ELDERGAMES (Gamberini et al. 2006, 2009) and HERMES (Buiza 
et  al. 2009) have used custom-built games for older adults’ cognitive training, 
although they have not provided evidence of their effectiveness. The SAVIE group 
at Téléuniversité, Université du Québec, has a long history of developing “frame 
games” for playfully delivering learning content; several of their games have been 
redesigned to meet older adults’ usability needs and are now being converted to 
tablet format (Kaufman et al. 2016b; Sauvé et al. 2015; Seah 2015).
Zviel-Girshin et  al. (2011) built a gaming platform specifically designed for 
older adults, the Play System for Elderly Therapy (PSET), containing several games 
and diagnostic tests. The system could diagnose and treat cognitive problems by 
allowing the patient or the therapist to select a specific game, a program of tests, or 
treatments. Evaluation results showed that patients who used the system had fun 
6  Can Mobile Digital Games Benefit Older Adults’ Health?

124
supplementing their therapy sessions. Therapists, for their part, appreciated the 
opportunity to work with several patients simultaneously. Although no specific 
results were reported in terms of cognition, the project enhanced work on the thera-
peutic process.
To support a set of studies, Anguera et al. (2013) developed the three-dimensional 
game NeuroRacer, with challenge levels customized to individual players’ abilities. 
It was used to test whether older adults’ multitasking performance could be improved 
through training. First, using the game with a sample of 20–79-year-olds, they found 
that multitasking performance declines linearly with age. Second, they tested the 
impact of the game on adults aged 60–85. After playing for 1 h, three times per week 
for a month, tests showed that the multitasking group had significant reduction in 
multitasking costs compared to the single-task and control groups. In addition, elec-
troencephalography tests showed that they had returned their key neural indicators 
of cognitive control to levels normally seen in 20-year-olds, and these gains per-
sisted for 6 months after training. The authors concluded that these results provide 
evidence that a custom-designed video game can be used to assess and improve 
cognitive ability and its underlying neural mechanisms throughout life.
In a project aimed at cognitive diagnosis and monitoring, a team from two 
Canadian universities has produced a tablet-based Whack-a-Mole game to remotely 
monitor inhibition and processing speed for patients with moderate dementia 
(Guana 2016). This combines mobile monitoring technology with a game that is 
simple and familiar to older adults.
Physical Games  Exergames have been shown to produce cognitive, as well as 
physical, benefits for older adults. Maillot et al. (2012) found that a 12-week Wii-
based physical training program for sedentary older adults, using a variety of games 
that challenged different physical and cognitive abilities, significantly improved 
game performance, physical function, executive control, and processing speed com-
pared to the control group. The players did not, however, improve their visuospatial 
functions.
Avoiding cognitive decline allows older adults to continue to function effectively 
in everyday life and to safely carry on activities that they enjoy. There is at least 
some evidence that conventional digital games, brain-training games, experimental 
digital games, and exergames can all enhance older adults’ cognitive function, and 
many of these are now or will be available on mobile devices, contributing to the 
health of the aging population.
6.4.3  Social Benefits
Digital games can also offer older adults benefits in terms of social contact and sup-
port. Because it is more difficult to carry out controlled experiments to confirm 
these benefits, researchers have tended to rely on qualitative research and observa-
tion. For example, McLaughlin et al. (2012), using focus groups and qualitative 
E. Duplàa et al.

125
analysis of players’ comments while playing an exergame, found that these games 
are increasingly social activities for older adults. In an experiment using exergames 
with older women, Wollersheim et al. (2010) studied both the physical and psycho-
social aspects of gameplay for 11 older women who played Wii Sports games twice 
per week for 6 weeks.
Interviews highlighted that the participants were forced out of their comfort 
zones by the game. The game also challenged their perceptions of themselves; 
before playing, they saw themselves as old and disconnected from the world, but 
after the experiment they felt younger and less disconnected. They also self-reported 
improved physical and social well-being and deeper social connections and shared 
experiences with younger family members. The authors concluded that the digital 
game helped to break players’ isolation and decreased their feelings of loneliness. 
However, they cautioned that their gameplay environment, with regular technical 
support from researchers and constant verbal encouragement for the players, could 
not be generalized to independent home gameplay.
Theng et al. (2012) studied the use of Wii-based exergames for enhancing atti-
tudes of younger and older generations toward each other. For this study, 14 teams 
of older adults paired with 17- or 18-year-olds participated in 6 recorded game ses-
sions, with data gathered through pre- and post-surveys and post-gameplay indi-
vidual interviews. Their results showed that the gameplay had positive results for 
participants’ social activity, intergenerational social ties, and attitudes toward other 
generations, although design issues limited the games that the older adults could 
comfortably play.
In a controlled experiment, Chen et al. (2012) examined the benefits from the use 
of Xbox 360 Kinect SVG exergames on the physical and mental health of institu-
tionalized older adults with disabilities. Sixty-one participants were divided into an 
experimental group, who played for three 30-min sessions per week for 4 weeks, 
and a control group that continued regular activities. Study results found that social 
functioning showed a significant increase after the experiment. However, there were 
no significant differences between groups in vitality, general mental health, or role 
limitations due to emotional problems.
In another study, Mubin et  al. (2008) developed an interactive mobile social 
game, Walk 2 Win, incorporating older adult feedback gathered throughout the 
game’s design, construction, and testing. Walk 2 Win is a memory game that can be 
played individually or in teams using smartphones. Evaluation results for both types 
of play, by eight older adults in 2-h sessions, showed that older people are eager to 
play simple games with simple rules but are not confident in their skills for playing 
fast games. On the social level, the study participants expressed a strong preference 
for more social team play, especially with their grandchildren.
Al Mahmud et al. (2010), testing their tabletop card-guessing game with older 
adults at a community center, concluded that the rules of the game greatly influ-
enced social interaction among players. They recommended that game rules encour-
age cooperation among team members and social interaction with members of other 
teams. They also found that the older adults in their study appreciated opportunities 
to play with younger family members.
6  Can Mobile Digital Games Benefit Older Adults’ Health?

126
Schell et al. (2016) found that for 73 players, levels of social connectedness 
increased significantly, and loneliness decreased significantly, after playing in a 
team-based Wii Bowling tournament for eight weeks. Qualitative evidence from this 
study described how players built new friendships and continued new social interac-
tions after the tournament. Schell et al. concluded that digital games are an enjoy-
able leisure activity that can help older adults to maintain and enhance their social 
contacts, offsetting possible increased isolation as they grow older.
Combining social interaction and health-related learning, Seah (2015) found that 
social interaction while playing an online Bingo game significantly improved 50 
older adults’ self-reported social connectedness. In this game, older adults were also 
able to learn about healthy living and nutrition through questions and answers built 
into the game. The combination of social interaction and learning was highly valued 
by subject participants.
Games played online or on social networks link players to enable socializing 
along with gameplay (Kirman et al. 2011). In one example, Cornejo et al. (2012) 
found that an older adult and her relatives who tested a Facebook-based social digi-
tal game for 5 weeks were enthusiastic about its potential to reduce loneliness and 
increased social interaction with their family networks during and after the research 
project.
Massively multiplayer online role-playing games (MMORPGs) such as World of 
Warcraft (WoW) offer immersive worlds that are based on social interaction with 
other players in persistent, online virtual environments. In a questionnaire-based 
study of older adult WoW players, Zhang and Kaufman (2015) found a link between 
enjoyment of relationships within the game and the development of online bridging 
and bonding social capital that built and sustained their social networks. Zhang and 
Kaufman (2016c) reported that playing MMORPGs offered older adults ways to 
nurture off-line relationships with family and real-life friends and to construct new 
meaningful and supportive relationships with friends in the game. Zhang and 
Kaufman (2016a) highlighted the importance of intergenerational digital gameplay 
for forming stronger relationships and more favorable opinions across younger and 
older generations.
These studies illustrate the social benefits of digital games usually played on 
computers or game consoles. Some of these are now, or will soon be, available on 
mobile devices; for example, the Bingo game cited above is being rewritten as a 
tablet application to make it more easily accessible to older adults, and Facebook 
games are readily available online through smartphones and tablets. By supporting 
social interaction and social networks for older adults, these digital games promise 
to help to increase their enjoyment of leisure time, sustain relationships that mean 
so much for their quality of life, and so contribute to their health and well-being.
E. Duplàa et al.

127
6.4.4  Benefits for Psychological Well-Being
Psychological well-being encompasses mental and emotional health and subjec-
tively perceived well-being. Several types of games have been shown to contribute 
to these.
Exergames  Wiemeyer and Kliem (2012) reviewed exergames for health using 
Mueller et al.’s (2011) framework, which emphasized positive effects on psycho-
logical, behavioral, and social health in addition to physical condition. Wiemeyer 
and Kliem’s conclusions highlighted exergames’ positive effects on intrinsic moti-
vation, attitude, self-control, and self-efficacy.
In another study of exergames, Rosenberg et al. (2010) assessed the feasibility, 
acceptability, and short-term effects of Nintendo Wii Sports exergames practiced by 
19 American older adults with subsyndromal depression. Their results after 
12 weeks of play showed significant improvements in depressive symptoms, mental 
health, and cognitive functioning, as well as the absence of major side effects, 
although there were no significant changes in physical health or anxiety. They con-
cluded that these games are likely to be a new way to improve symptoms of older 
adults with subsyndromal depression.
Participants in the Wollersheim et al. (2010) study reported that, in addition to 
improved physical and social well-being, they experienced a sense of empowerment 
and improved psychological well-being as they learned to play the games despite 
physical frailty and shared new social experiences and connections.
Advergames  Digital “advergames”  – a “persuasive technology” designed to 
change attitudes or behaviors (Fogg 2003, p. 1) – are widely used in health promo-
tion. The literature is sparse to date on advergames aimed specifically at older 
adults, but there is evidence that they are effective across a range of age groups 
(DeSmet et al. 2014). Lieberman’s (2001) experiments with advergames for chil-
dren found that they positively affected self-esteem, self-efficacy, knowledge and 
competence, communication, and social media; although this study was not directed 
at older adults, it confirms Wiemeyer and Kliem’s argument that games are likely to 
have a role to play in maintaining and enhancing older adults’ motivation and emo-
tional health.
Brown-Johnson et al. (2015) demonstrated the power of an iPad-based learning 
game, mHealth TLC, to improve patient-physician communication using virtual 
clinical visits. Although they were concerned about its emotionally charged content, 
eight users rated the game engaging, believable, clinically appropriate, and helpful 
for supporting lung cancer patients, its target audience. While this game was not 
aimed at older adults, the study suggests that learning through mobile games may 
have the potential to positively affect older adults’ medical communication and 
care.
Other Games  Beyond advergames, various studies have analyzed the impact of 
games on emotional health when they are primarily intended for other purposes. 
Boot et al. (2013) and Chen et al. (2012) found no significant impact on emotional 
6  Can Mobile Digital Games Benefit Older Adults’ Health?

128
well-being, although both studies measured this outcome. However, Goldstein et al. 
(1997) noted that their participants experienced greater emotional well-being than 
the control group after the study, either as a result of playing Tetris or of being part 
of a game experiment. In their experiment with brain-training games, Ballesteros 
et al. (2015) found significant improvements in the affection and assertiveness com-
ponents of self-reported well-being that remained after three months without play.
In a study focused on socio-emotional functioning, Allaire et al. (2013) surveyed 
overall wellness, positive emotion, negative emotion, and depression among 140 
older adults divided into three groups: non-players (40%), casual gamers (25%), 
and regular players (35%). They found that casual and regular gamers reported sig-
nificantly greater well-being than non-gamers as well as lower levels of negative 
emotions and, to some degree, lower levels of depression. The three groups did not 
show any difference in their level of positive emotions, social functioning, or self-
rated health. The researchers suggest that their results might indicate that digital 
games serve as a source of entertainment, similar to other leisure activities, which 
can increase older adults’ well-being and reduce depression.
The game types studied here are all moving to mobile devices, as noted earlier in 
this chapter. This section has shown that psychological well-being promises to be an 
important benefit (or side effect) of these mobile games, enhancing older adults’ 
health and quality of life.
6.5  Health Benefits by Type of Game
Digital games in several categories, some now available on mobile devices, have 
been shown to benefit older adults’ physical, cognitive, and social health as well as 
their general psychological well-being and emotional health. The benefits that have 
been demonstrated in research studies have varied with game characteristics, study 
methodologies, and outcome measures; it is difficult to generalize across studies 
even when they use randomized, controlled research design (Bleakley et al. 2015). 
Tables 6.1, 6.2, and 6.3 summarize by type of game the studies and benefits covered 
in this review.
Exergames (Table 6.1) have been widely studied and have produced benefits in 
all categories: physical, cognitive, social, and psychological. Documented results 
sometimes depend on the test used (e.g., for physical balance), the health profile 
(e.g., depression for non-symptomatic people), or rules that encourage particular 
types of interaction (e.g., for social games). Some exergames are available on 
mobile devices, while others are not. With many potential benefits, these games can 
reduce treatment costs while minimizing the risk for older adults of physical acci-
dents and can support maintenance of all aspects of health discussed here. Finally, 
these types of games can support mobility in the present and future; for example, 
Daniel (2012) argues that older adults should invest in personal game consoles to 
support their own exergame regimes. This brings us to a view of exergames as 
evolving mobile tools for physical and cognitive support as well as for social con-
nectedness (Crompton 2013).
E. Duplàa et al.

129
Table 6.1  Summary of studies and outcomes: exergames
Reference
Study method
Games/articles/topics 
studied
Sample/study duration
Outcomes/conclusions
Limitations and notes
Physical health
Larsen et al. 
(2013)
Electronic database 
review
Seven studies
311 older adult (OA) 
participants
Positive impact on physical 
health in six of seven 
studies
Methodological 
differences made 
comparing studies 
difficult
Wiemeyer and 
Kliem (2012)
Literature review
Serious games (SGs) for 
health and rehabilitation
80 references
Partial support for using 
SGs to improve energy 
expenditure, strength, basic 
motor control, and some 
nonphysical measures of 
well-being Increased 
patient motivation for 
treatment adherence
Found few good-quality 
studies with OAs. Need 
work on how to achieve 
long-term motivation 
and engagement
Daniel (2012)
Randomized 
controlled trial (RCT)
Wii Fit
19 OAs: 15 weeks, 3x/
week for 45 min
Physical function and 
strength improvements; 
higher caloric consumption 
than control group
Variety of Wii games 
makes them attractive 
to older adults
Singh et al. (2013)
RCT
Wii Balance Board
36 older women: 
6 weeks, 2x/week for 
40 min
Improved flexibility, 
balance, functional 
mobility equivalent to 
control group
Jorgensen et al. 
(2013)
RCT
Wii Fit
58 OAs: 10 weeks, 2x/
week for 35 min
Higher maximal voluntary 
contraction strength, high 
motivation
Bieryla and Dold 
(2013)
RCT
Wii Fit
12 OAs: 3 weeks, 3x/
week for 30 min
Improved BBS balance 
measure
No significant change 
in three other balance 
measures
(continued)
6  Can Mobile Digital Games Benefit Older Adults’ Health?

130
Table 6.1  (continued)
Reference
Study method
Games/articles/topics 
studied
Sample/study duration
Outcomes/conclusions
Limitations and notes
Gschwind et al. 
(2015)
RCT
Kinect custom balance- 
and strength-training 
games
153 OAs: 16 weeks, 
180 min/week
Significantly improved 
physiological fall risk, 
postural sway, stepping 
reaction time
Improvements were 
associated with better 
adherence to the 
training program
Kerwin et al. 
(2012)
User testing
Dance! Don’t Fall mobile 
game
10 OAs completing 5 
tasks
Positive user response with 
feedback on suggested 
improvements
Needs more variety and 
higher levels to engage 
users over time
Konstitinidis et al. 
(2015)
Review/position paper
GPS-based mobile games
Reviews newer 
technologies for mobile 
exergames
Wollersheim et al. 
(2010)
Experimental study 
(ES)
Wii Sports games
11 older women, 6 
weeks baseline period 
+6-week intervention 
period, 2x/week for 
mean time of 51 min
Participants perceived 
improved physical 
well-being
Support and 
encouragement from 
other players and 
researchers maintained 
player engagement
Cognitive health
Maillot et al. 
(2012)
RCT
Cognitive effects of Wii 
training with Balance 
Board
32 OAs: 24 1-h 
training sessions
Significant improvements 
in executive function and 
processing speed tasks
Exergames found to be 
more engaging, which 
may partly explain 
improvements 
compared to other 
exercise
E. Duplàa et al.

131
Reference
Study method
Games/articles/topics 
studied
Sample/study duration
Outcomes/conclusions
Limitations and notes
Social health
McLaughlin et al. 
(2012)
Observation and focus 
group study
Boom Blox (Wii 
exergame)
13 OAs
Identification of OAs’ costs 
and benefits associated 
with playing a digital 
game. Social interaction is 
an important benefit
Usability issues and 
cognitive challenges 
from poor game design 
can discourage play and 
negate potential benefits
Wollersheim et al. 
(2010)
See above
See above
See above
Deeper social connections, 
shared experiences with 
younger family members, 
decreased loneliness, 
improved sense of social 
well-being
Theng et al. 
(2012)
ES
Wii games
14 teams of OAs and 
teens, playing for 6 
sessions
Positive results for social 
activity, intergenerational 
social ties, attitudes toward 
other generations
Older adults’ play was 
limited by playability 
issues
Chen et al. (2012)
ES with control group 
(CG)
Xbox Kinect games
61 institutionalized 
OAs with disabilities: 
4 weeks, 3x/week for 
30 min
Significant increase in 
social functioning
No difference in 
vitality, general mental 
health, or role 
limitations
Schell et al. 
(2016)
Mixed-methods study
Wii bowling
73 OAs in teams in an 
8-week tournament
Significantly increased 
social connectedness, 
decreased loneliness, new 
friendships, continuing new 
social interactions
(continued)
6  Can Mobile Digital Games Benefit Older Adults’ Health?

132
Table 6.1  (continued)
Reference
Study method
Games/articles/topics 
studied
Sample/study duration
Outcomes/conclusions
Limitations and notes
Psychological well-being
McLaughlin et al. 
(2012)
See above
See above
See above
Self-esteem, fun, positive 
emotions, learning 
observed as benefits
See above
Wiemeyer and 
Kliem (2012)
Literature review
Serious games for health 
and rehabilitation
80 references
Found positive effects on 
intrinsic motivation, 
attitude, self-control, and 
self-efficacy
Rosenberg et al. 
(2010)
ES
Wii Sports games
19 OAs with 
subsyndromal 
depression: 12 weeks, 
3x/week for 35 min
Significant improvements 
in depressive symptoms, 
mental health, cognitive 
functioning
No major side effects. 
No significant changes 
in physical health or 
anxiety
Wollersheim et al. 
(2010)
See above
See above
See above
Improved sense of 
empowerment, 
psychological well-being
E. Duplàa et al.

133
Table 6.2  Summary of studies and outcomes: brain-training games
Reference
Study method
Games/articles/topics 
studied
Sample/study 
duration
Outcomes/conclusions
Limitations and notes
Cognitive health
Wolinsky et al. 
(2013)
RCT with training 
groups on site or at 
home
Road Tour game
207 adults aged 65+, 
413 aged 50–64: 
9–13 h play
Improved concentration, 
speed, task-switching agility 
that held or increased at 
1-year follow-up
Comparable effects for 
both age groups
Nouchi et al. 
(2012)
RCT
Brain Age, Tetris
32 OAs: 4 weeks, 5x/
week for 15 min
Improved executive function, 
processing speed for Brain 
Age players compared to 
Tetris players
Mayas et al. 
(2014)
RCT
Lumosity
27 OAs: 
10–12 weeks, 
20 × 60 min
Reduced distraction, 
increased alertness
Miller et al. 
(2013)
ES
Brain Fitness
Convenience sample 
of 69 OAs: 5x/week, 
20–25 min. 
Evaluated at 2 and 
6 months
Improved delayed memory 
function. No improvements 
in immediate memory or 
language
Those who played at least 
40 sessions over 6 months 
improved in all 3 domains
Ballesteros et al. 
(2015)
RCT
Speed Mach, Memory 
Matrix, others
30 OAs: 
10–12 weeks, 
20 × 1 h play 
sessions
Improved attention, 
processing speed, memory
Cognitive improvements 
disappeared after 3 months 
without play
Boot et al. (2013)
RCT
Brain Age 2, Mario Kart 
DS2
62 OAs: 12 weeks, 
5x/week for 1 h
No improvements in 
cognitive abilities
Action game viewed as 
less enjoyable
(continued)
6  Can Mobile Digital Games Benefit Older Adults’ Health?

134
Table 6.2  (continued)
Reference
Study method
Games/articles/topics 
studied
Sample/study 
duration
Outcomes/conclusions
Limitations and notes
Simons et al. 
(2016)
Literature and 
company 
information review
Brain-training tasks and 
games
Info on games and 
training programs for 
cognitive 
improvement
Found extensive evidence of 
improvements in train task 
performance. Less or no 
evidence that improvements 
transfer to related or 
non-related tasks
Found significant 
deficiencies in study 
design and 
implementation. 
Recommends best 
practices for evaluating 
brain-training claims
Psychological well-being
Ballesteros et al. 
(2015)
See above
See above
See above
Increases in the affection and 
assertiveness component 
subjective well-being that 
persisted after 3 months 
without play
E. Duplàa et al.

135
Table 6.3  Summary of studies and outcomes: traditional digital games
Reference
Study method
Games/articles/topics 
studied
Sample/study 
duration
Outcomes/conclusions
Limitations and notes
Cognitive health
Kaufman et al. 
(2016b)
Survey
Perceived benefits from 
digital gameplay in general
463 OAs
Mental exercise, perceived 
improvements in attentional 
focus, memory, reaction 
speed, problem-solving, 
reasoning
Zhang and 
Kaufman 
(2016b)
Systematic 
literature review
Cognitive impacts of digital 
gameplay in general, 
including exergames
26 studies on OAs
Some evidence that games 
can mitigate cognitive 
decline
Few rigorous studies found; 
inconsistent evidence due to 
methodology variations
Goldstein et al. 
(1997)
RCT
Super Tetris
22 OAs: 5 weeks 
for 5 + h/week
Significant improvement in 
reaction time
No significant improvement in 
cognitive/perceptual agility as 
measured by the Stroop Color 
and Word Test
Belchior et al. 
(2013)
RCT
Medal of Honor, Tetris
58 OAs: 
2–3 weeks, 
6 × 90 min
Improved visual performance 
(unified field of view), 
selective visual attention
Whitlock et al. 
(2012)
ES
World of Warcraft
39 OAs: 2 weeks, 
14 h
Improved attention control, 
orientation and mental 
rotation, recognition 
memory, reasoning
Greater benefit for those with 
weaker computer skills
Psychological well-being
Goldstein et al. 
(1997)
See above
See above
See above
Greater emotional 
well-being
This outcome might be the 
result of study participation 
rather than from the game
Allaire et al. 
(2013)
Survey
140 OAs
Casual and regular gamers 
reported significantly greater 
well-being and lower 
negative emotions and 
depression
No differences in levels of 
positive emotions, social 
functioning, or self-rated health
6  Can Mobile Digital Games Benefit Older Adults’ Health?

136
Brain-training games (Table 6.2), which address cognitive health, have also been 
widely researched and are widely available on mobile devices. However, many 
study outcomes have been limited to capabilities targeted in the gameplay, and there 
is only limited evidence for transfer from brain-training interventions to real-world 
outcomes. This stands in stark contrast to the marketing claims of many companies 
(Simons et al. 2016). Time spent training seems to be important (e.g., at least 10 h, 
as Seçer and Satyen (2014) suggest), and it is important to assess cognitive benefits 
in the long term (e.g., some seem to fade after three months, as found by Ballesteros 
et al. 2015). Simons et al. (2016) point out that in order to measure the utility of a 
brain-training game, you must consider not only the relative benefits of different 
interventions but also their opportunity costs; training with a game yielding 10% 
better performance that takes twice as long to complete might not be worthwhile. 
Finally, it is important to consider that these games could also have benefits in terms 
of entertainment and enjoyment that outweigh their opportunity costs, even if they 
provide no cognitive benefits.
Table 6.3 summarizes studies on traditional digital games. There is evidence that 
traditional non-immersive games can improve emotional well-being along with 
some aspects of cognitive health, and there are indications that games with immer-
sive environments, such as Medal of Honor and World of Warcraft, provide benefits 
related to cognitive and visual processing. However, today, immersive environments 
remain more difficult to use on mobile devices because of their size and power 
limitations.
Various digital games built as research projects (Table 6.4) have been shown to 
be effective in improving aspects of cognitive and social health. It is particularly 
interesting that two mobile experimental games, Whack-A-Mole (WOW) and the 
exergame Dance! Don’t Fall, have incorporated monitoring of physical or cognitive 
functions, blurring the line between games and the growing group of mobile appli-
cations designed to collect data and provide health feedback to individuals and their 
physicians. The Play System for Elderly Therapy (PSET) game continues this 
approach by providing a playful system for facilitating the therapeutic 
relationship.
As online digital games (Table 6.4) increasingly become venues for socializing, 
either through group play or through online communities, evidence is mounting for 
their contributions to older adults’ social health, although randomized controlled 
trials are limited in this area. Specific benefits, usually self-reported, include 
increased social interaction, reduced loneliness, feelings of social connection, gen-
eral psychological well-being, and others including motivation for learning when a 
game includes learning content. Intergenerational exchange is often cited as a ben-
efit for these types of games.
In addition, there is some evidence for psychological benefits arising from adver-
games (Table 6.4), when they improve health-related knowledge, attitudes, and/or 
behaviors. Researchers have also suggested that digital games in general might 
enhance older adults’ feelings of well-being by providing new entertainment and 
leisure activity choices (De Schutter and Brown 2016).
E. Duplàa et al.

137
Table 6.4  Summary of studies and outcomes: experimental games, online social games, and advergames
Reference
Study method
Games/articles/topics 
studied
Sample/study duration
Outcomes/conclusions
Limitations and 
notes
EXPERIMENTAL GAMES
Cognitive health
Gamberini et al. 
(2006, 2009)
Prototype 
development, user 
testing
ELDERGAMES project
107 OAs: 12 weeks of 
testing
Prototype measures cognitive 
function accurately compared 
to accepted scales. No 
cognitive improvement 
evaluation
Buiza et al. 
(2009)
Prototype 
development, user 
testing
HERMES project
Usability testing
Usability evaluation only
Sauvé et al. 
(2015); Seah 
(2015)
Game descriptions 
and user evaluations
SAVIE learning games (Live 
Well, Live Healthy!, Bingo, 
others)
Various user 
evaluations of PC and 
table-based prototypes
Ergonomic evaluations; 
positive user feedback about 
learning experiences
Zviel-Girshin 
et al. (2011)
System description
Play System for Elderly 
Therapy (PSET)
Patient and therapist 
evaluations
Patients enjoyed 
supplementing therapy 
sessions. Allowed therapists 
to work more effectively with 
multiple patients
Anguera et al. 
(2013)
RCT
NeuroRacer
174 participants aged 
20–79 OAs trained for 
1 h 3x/week for 
1 month
Multitasking group had 
significant reduction in 
multitasking costs compared 
to the single-task and control 
groups. Key neural indicators 
returned to 20-year-old levels 
and remained after 6 months
(continued)
6  Can Mobile Digital Games Benefit Older Adults’ Health?

138
Reference
Study method
Games/articles/topics 
studied
Sample/study duration
Outcomes/conclusions
Limitations and 
notes
Guana (2016)
Game prototype
Mobile Whack-A-Mole 
dementia-monitoring game
Prototype 
demonstration
Designed to facilitate 
monitoring progress of 
cognitive functions
Social health
Mubin et al. 
(2008)
Game prototype
Walk 2 Win mobile social 
memory game
Eight OAs playing in 
2-hour sessions either 
alone or in teams
Participants had strong 
preference for team play, 
especially with grandchildren
Players preferred 
simple games and 
were not confident 
about their abilities 
for fast-paced play
Al Mahmud et al. 
(2010)
Game prototype
Tabletop card-guessing 
game
User testing
Rules of game influenced 
cooperation and social 
interaction; OAs appreciated 
play with younger family 
members
ONLINE SOCIAL GAMES
Social health
Cornejo et al. 
(2012)
User test
GuessMyCaption
One OA, 12 relatives 
for 5-week test
Increased social interaction 
within family. Participants 
were positive about the 
game’s potential to increase 
social connections online and 
off-line
Table 6.4  (continued)
E. Duplàa et al.

139
Reference
Study method
Games/articles/topics 
studied
Sample/study duration
Outcomes/conclusions
Limitations and 
notes
Zhang and 
Kaufman (2015)
Online survey
World of Warcraft
222 OAs
Enjoyment of online 
relationships was associated 
with greater bridging and 
bonding social capital for 
stronger social networks
Zhang and 
Kaufman (2016c)
Online survey
World of Warcraft
176 OAs
Playing offered older adults 
ways to nurture off-line 
relationships with family and 
real-life friends and to 
construct new meaningful and 
supportive relationships with 
friends in the game
Zhang and 
Kaufman (2016a)
Literature review
Digital games, 
intergenerational play
19 studies
Intergenerational digital 
gameplay facilitates forming 
stronger relationships and 
more favorable opinions 
across younger and older 
generations
ADVERGAMES
Social health
Seah (2015)
Mixed-method study
Multiplayer Bingo learning 
game about nutrition and 
health
50 older adults playing 
for 30–45 min twice 
per week for 4 weeks
Significantly increased 
self-reported social 
connectedness; new learning 
about nutrition and about 
computers
Psychological well-being
Brown-Johnson 
et al. (2015)
User test
mHealth TLC iPad health 
game prototype
Eight health 
professionals (not older 
adults)
The game was rated as 
engaging, believable, 
clinically appropriate, and 
helpful for supporting lung 
cancer patients
mhealth game 
example; did not 
involve older adults
6  Can Mobile Digital Games Benefit Older Adults’ Health?

140
In terms of mHealth, mobile digital games provide a huge opportunity to increase 
digital health management. This chapter has noted some early mobile games that 
link older adult play with diagnostic data collection to detect or monitor health con-
ditions. Older adults continue to enjoy, and find benefits from, playing commercial 
digital games alone and with family and friends. Finally, the development of spe-
cific mHealth games for older adults continues. All of these point to a future in 
which older adults can enjoy mobile games while managing and monitoring physi-
cal abilities and cognitive skills, supporting and developing their social networks, 
and maintaining their general well-being and quality of life.
6.6  Limitations and Conclusions
There are several limitations to the work presented here. First, it is difficult to untan-
gle the heterogeneity of protocols used in digital game research. For example, sev-
eral variables that may be important, such as age or differences in the types of 
digital games, were not fully considered in the reviewed studies. Limitations also lie 
in the isolation of variables: in fact, in the experiments the researchers clearly sepa-
rate types of digital games, sometimes comparing them. They often separate the 
effects in the psychological tradition, e.g., cognition, emotion, and socialization. 
Several studies dissociate variables when they are often linked, for example, 
Wollersheim et al. (2010), who mention the social support of the game experience 
or the novelty of the game as confounding the results. As has been pointed out by 
other reviewers, therefore, differences in experimental protocols make it impossible 
to rigorously summarize and compare experimental results.
We suggest several areas for further research. The most important one relates to 
the theme of this article, i.e., the gameplay process and outcomes of mobile digital 
games. Also, studies on the duration of any benefits found would be useful. Many 
authors mention the need for work concerning the adaptation of successful digital 
games to the needs and capabilities of older adults. Whitlock et al. (2012) showed 
that the participants’ backgrounds and gameplay expertise have major impacts on 
realized benefits; therefore, more research should be conducted on individual differ-
ences in older adult players. Miller et al. (2013) also mention that for cognitive 
outcomes, slight individual deficiencies can vary the results. All these results show 
the complexity and tremendous diversity inherent in older adults in any digital game 
context and research protocol. It is important for researchers to work closely with 
participants in the design and implementation of research studies and to employ a 
situational epistemology that promotes health and successful aging.
Acknowledgments  This research was supported by AGE-WELL NCE Inc., a member of 
Canada’s Networks of Centres of Excellence program.
E. Duplàa et al.

141
References
Agarwal S, Lau CT (2010) Remote health monitoring using mobile phones and web services. 
Telemed e-Health 16(5):603–607
Al Mahmud A, Mubin O, Shahid S, Martens J-B (2010) Designing social games for children and 
older adults: two related case studies. Entertainment Comput 1(3–4):147–156. doi:10.1016/j.
entcom.2010.09.001
Allaire JC, McLaughlin AC, Trujillo A, Whitlock LA, Laporte L, Gandy M (2013) Successful 
aging through digital games: Socioemotional differences between older adult gamers and non-
gamers. Comput Hum Behav 29(4):1302–1306. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2013.01.014
Alvarez RC (2002) The promise of e-health – a Canadian perspective. eHealth Int 1(1):4
Anderson M (2015) Technology device ownership: 2015. Pew Research Center, 
Washington, 
DC. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/10/29/
the-demographics-of-device-ownership/
Anguera JA, Boccanfuso J, Rintoul JL, Al-Hashimi O, Faraji F, Janowich J et al (2013) Video game 
training enhances cognitive control in older adults. Nature 501(7465):97–101. doi:10.1038/
nature12486
Baldwin S, Hsu Y-C, Ching Y-H (2015) Mobile apps for older adults: health, learning, and liv-
ing. In Proceedings, E-learn 2015: world conference on E-learning in corporate, government, 
healthcare, and higher education 2015. ACM, New York, pp 1402–1407
Ballesteros S, Mayas J, Prieto A, Toril P, Pita C, Ponce de Leon L et al (2015) A randomized con-
trolled trial of brain training with non-action video games in older adults: results of the 3-month 
follow-up. Front Aging Neurosci 7:45. doi:10.3389/fnagi.2015.00045
Basak C, Boot WR, Voss MW, Kramer AF (2008) Can training in a real-time strategy video 
game attenuate cognitive decline in older adults? Psychol Aging 23(4):765–777. doi:10.1037/
a0013494
Belchior P, Marsiske M, Sisco SM, Yam A, Bavelier D, Ball K, Mann P (2013) Video game train-
ing to improve selective visual attention in older adults. Comput Hum Behav 29(4):1318–1324. 
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2013.01.034
Bieryla KA, Dold NM (2013) Feasibility of Wii fit training to improve clinical measures of balance 
in older adults. Clin Interv Aging 8:775–781. doi:10.2147/CIA.S46164
Bishop NA, Lu T, Yankner BA (2010) Neural mechanisms of ageing and cognitive decline. Nature 
464:529–535. doi:10.1038/nature08983
Bland CJ, Meurer LN, Maldonado GA (1995) A systematic approach to conducting a non-statisti-
cal meta-analysis of research literature. Acad Med 70(7):642–653
Bleakley CM, Charles D, Porter-Armstrong A, McNeill MDJ, McDonough S, McCormack 
B (2015) Gaming for health: a systematic review of the physical and cognitive effects 
of interactive computer games in older adults. J  Appl Gerontol 34(3):NP166–NP189. 
doi:10.1177/0733464812470747
Boot WR, Champion M, Blakely DP, Wright T, Souders DJ, Charness N (2013) Video games as a 
means to reduce age-related cognitive decline: attitudes, compliance, and effectiveness. Front 
Psychol 4:31. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00031
Bopp KL, Verhaeghen P (2005) Aging and verbal memory spans: a meta-analysis. J Gerontol B 
Psychol Sci Soc Sci 60(5):223–233. doi:10.1093/geronb/60.5.P223
Brickman AM, Stern Y (2009) Aging and memory in humans. Encycl Neurosci 1:175–180. 
Retrieved from http://www.cumc.columbia.edu/dept/sergievsky/pdfs/agingandmemoryinhu-
mans.pdf
Brown-Johnson C, Berrean B, Cataldo JK (2015) Development and usability evaluation of the 
mHealth tool for lung cancer (mHealth TLC): a virtual world health game for lung cancer 
patients. Patient Educ Couns 98(4):506–511. doi:10.1016/j.pec.2014.12.006
Buiza C, Soldatos J, Petsatodis T, Geven A, Etxaniz A, Tscheligi M (2009) HERMES: perva-
sive computing and cognitive training for ageing well. In: Omatu S et al (eds) Distributed 
6  Can Mobile Digital Games Benefit Older Adults’ Health?

142
computing, artificial intelligence, bioinformatics, soft computing, and ambient assisted living. 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp 756–763
Chen S-T, Huang Y-GL, Chiang I-T (2012) Using somatosensory video games to promote qual-
ity of life for the elderly with disabilities. In: DIGITEL’12: Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE 
fourth international conference on digital game and intelligent toy enhanced learning. ; IEEE 
Computer Society, Washington, DC, pp 258–262. doi:10.1109/DIGITEL.2012.68
Christakis NA, Fowler JH (2007) The spread of obesity in a large social network over 32 years. N 
Engl J Med 357:370–379. doi:10.1056/NEJMsa066082
Cornejo R, Hernandez D, Favela J, Tentori M, Ochoa S (2012) Persuading older adults to social-
ize and exercise through ambient games. In: Proceedings, 2012 6th international conference 
on pervasive computing Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth) and workshops. IEEE, 
New York, pp 215–218
Crompton H (2013) A historical overview of mobile learning: toward learner-centered educa-
tion. In: Berge ZL, Muilenberg LY (eds) Handbook of mobile learning. Routledge, New York, 
pp 3–14
Daniel K (2012) Wii-hab for pre-frail older adults. Rehabil Nurs 37(4):195–201. doi:10.1002/
rnj.25
De Schutter B, Brown JA (2016) Digital games as a source of enjoyment in later life. Games 
Culture 11(1–2):28–52. doi:10.1177/1555412015594273
DeSmet A, Van Ryckeghem D, Compernolle S, Baranowski T, Thompson D, Crombez G et al 
(2014) A meta-analysis of serious games for health lifestyle promotion. Prev Med 69:95–107. 
doi:10.1016/j.ypmed.2014.08.026
Dredge S (2016 March 23) Five of the best brain-training apps. The Guardian, London. Retrieved from 
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/23/brain-training-apps-five-of-the-best
Ellis P, Hickie I (2001) What causes mental illness? In: Bloch S, Singh B (eds) Foundations of 
clinical psychiatry. Melbourne University Press, Melbourne, pp 43–62
Elwert F, Christakis NA (2008) Variation in the effect of widowhood on mortality by the causes of 
death of both spouses. Am J Public Health 98(11):2092–2098
Eysenbach G (2001) What is e-health? J Med Internet Res 3(2):e20. doi:10.2196/jmir.3.2.e20
Fausset CB, Harley L, Farmer S, Fain B (2013) Older adults’ perceptions and use of technology: a 
novel approach. In: Stephanidis C, Atona M (eds) Universal access in human-computer interac-
tion: user and context diversity. Springer International Publishing AG, Cham, pp 51–58
Fogg BJ (2003) Persuasive technology: using computers to change what we think and do. Morgan 
Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco
Fraunhofer Portugal (2016) Active@home launched to prevent falls using traditional dances and 
tai chi training. Associação Fraunhofer Portugal Research, Porto. Retrieved from http://www.
fraunhofer.pt/en/fraunhofer_portugal/news/news_archive/active-home-launched-to-prevent-
falls-using-traditional-dances-a.html
Gamberini L, Alcaniz M, Barresi G, Fabregat M, Ibanez F, Prontu L (2006) Cognition, tech-
nology and games for the elderly: an introduction to the ELDERGAMES project. Psychnol 
J 4(3):285–308
Gamberini L, Martino F, Seraglia B, Spagnolli A, Fabregat M, Ibanez F et al (2009) Eldergames 
project: an innovative mixed-reality table-top solution to preserve cognitive functions in elderly 
people. In: HSI’09: proceeding of the 2nd conference on human system interactions. ACM, 
New York, pp 161–166
Goldstein J, Cajko L, Oosterbroek M, Michielsen M, Van Houten O, Salverda F (1997) Video 
games and the elderly. Soc Behav Personality 25(4):345–352
Gorin AA, Wing RR, Fava JL, Jakicic JM, Jeffery R, West DS et al (2008) Weight loss treatment 
influences untreated spouses and the home environment: evidence of a ripple effect. Int J Obes 
32:1678–1684. doi:10.1038/ijo.2008.150
Green CS, Bavelier D (2003) Action video game modifies visual selective attention. Nature 
423:534–537
E. Duplàa et al.

143
Grenade L, Boldy D (2008) Social isolation and loneliness among older people: issues and future 
challenges in community and residential settings. Australia Health Rev 32(3):468–478
Gschwind YS, Eichberg S, Ejupi A, de Rosario H, Kroll M, Marston HR et al (2015) ICT-based sys-
tem to predict and prevent falls (iStoppFalls): results from an international multicenter random-
ized controlled trial. Eur Rev Aging Phys Act 12(10):1–11. doi:10.1186/s11556-015-0155-6
Guana A (2016) Western Ottawa Whack-a-Mole (WOW) computer game. Demo presented at the 
AGE-WELL 2016 Annual conference, Montreal
Havighurst RJ (1963) Successful aging. In: Williams RH, Tibbitts C, Donahue W (eds) Processes 
of aging. Atherton Press, New York, pp 299–320
Hawkley LC, Thisted RA, Masi CM, Cacioppo JT (2010) Loneliness predicts increased blood 
pressure: 5-year cross-lagged analyses in middle-aged and older adults. Psychol Aging 
25(1):132–141. doi:10.1037/a0017805
Human Resources and Skills Development Canada (2011) Canadians in context – Aging popu-
lation. Human Resources and Skills Development Canada, Ottawa. Retrieved from: http://
www4.hrsdc.gc.ca/.3ndic.1t.4r@-eng.jsp?iid=33
Hwang MY, Hong JC, Hao YW, Jong JT (2011) Elders usability, dependability, and flow 
experiences on embodied interactive video games. Educ Gerontol 37(8):715–731. 
doi:10.1080/03601271003723636
Jeste DV, Depp CA, Vahia IV (2010) Successful cognitive and emotional aging. World Psychiatry 
9(2):78–84
Jorgensen MG, Laessoe U, Hendriksen C, Nielsen OBF, Aagaard P (2013) Efficacy of Nintendo 
Wii training on mechanical leg muscle function and postural balance in community-dwelling 
older adults: a randomized controlled trial. J Gerontol Ser A Biol Med Sci 68(7):845–852. 
doi:10.1093/gerona/gls222
Kampmeijer R, Pavlova M, Tambor M, Golinowska S, Groot W (2016) The use of e-health and 
m-health tools in health promotion and primary prevention among older adults: a systematic lit-
erature review. BMC Health Serv Res 16(Suppl 5):467–479. doi:10.1186/s12913-016-1522-3
Kaufman D, Munteanu C, Moffatt K. (2016a) WP4-TECH-APPS: technology for active participa-
tion in society. In: Research summary presented at the AGE-WELL 2016 Annual conference, 
Montreal
Kaufman D, Sauvé L, Renaud L, Sixsmith A, Mortenson B (2016b) Digital gameplay 
by older adults: patterns, benefits, and challenges. Simul Gaming 47(4):475–489. 
doi:10.1177/1046878116645736
Kerwin M, Nunes F, Silva PA (2012) Dance! don’t fall – preventing falls and promoting exercise at 
home. Stud Health Technol Inform 177:254–259. doi:10.3233/978-1-61499-069-7-254
Kirman B, Björk S, Deterding S, Paavilainen J, Rao V (2011) Social game studies at CHI 2011. 
In: Proceedings of CHI’11: extended abstracts on human factors in computing systems. ACM, 
New York, pp 17–20. doi:10.1145/1979742.1979590
Konstitinidis EI, Bamparopoulos G, Bamidis PD (2015) Transfering full body exergames from 
desktop applications to mobile devices: the role of the internet of things. In: Proceedings of 
IMCL2015–2015 international conference on interactive mobile communication technologies 
and learning. IEEE, New York, pp 254–258. doi:10.1109/IMCTL.2015.7359598
Kuyken W (1995) The World Health Organization quality of life assessment (WHOQOL): 
position paper from the World Health Organization. Soc Sci Med 41(10):1403–1409. 
doi:10.1016/0277-9536(95)00112-K
Larsen LH, Schou L, Lund HH, Langberg H (2013) The physical effect of exergames in healthy 
elderly – a systematic review. Games Health J 2(4):205–212. doi:10.1089/g4h.2013.0036
Lieberman DA (2001) Management of chronic pediatric diseases with interactive health games: 
theory and research findings. J Ambul Care Manag 24(1):26–38
Maier H, Smith J (1999) Psychological predictors of mortality in old age. J Gerontol: Psychol Sci 
54:44–54
6  Can Mobile Digital Games Benefit Older Adults’ Health?

144
Maillot P, Perrot A, Hartley A (2012) Effects of interactive physical-activity video-game training 
on physical and cognitive function in older adults. Psychol Aging 27(3):589–600. doi:10.1037/
a0026268
Marston HR, Freeman S, Bishop KA, Beech CL (2016) A scoping review of digital gaming 
research involving older adults aged 85 and older. Games Health J 5(3):157–174. doi:10.1089/
g4h.2015.0087
Mayas J, Parmentier FBR, Andrés P, Ballesteros S (2014) Plasticity of attentional functions in 
older adults after non-action video game training: a randomized controlled trial. PLoS One 
9(3):e92269. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0092269
McLaughlin A, Gandy M, Allaire J, Whitlock L (2012) Putting fun into video games for older 
adults. Ergonomics Des Q Human Factors Appl 20(2):13–22. doi:10.1177/1064804611435654
Miller KJ, Dye RV, Kim J, Jennings JL, O’Toole E, Wong J, Siddarth P (2013) Effect of a com-
puterized brain exercise program on cognitive performance in older adults. Am J  Geriatr 
Psychiatry 21(7):655–663. doi:10.1016/j.jagp.2013.01.077
Misha K (2011) mHealth: new horizons for health through mobile technologies. Word Health 
Organization, Geneval. Retrieved from http://www.who.int/goe/publications/goe_mhealth_
web.pdf
Mubin O, Shahid S, Al Mahmud A (2008) Walk 2 win: towards designing a mobile game for 
elderly’s social engagement. In: BCS-HCI’08: proceedings of the 22nd British HCI group 
annual conference on people and computers: culture, creativity, interaction – volume 2. British 
Computer Society, Swinton, pp 11–14
Mueller F, Edge D, Vetere F, Gibbs MR, Agamanolis St, Bongers B, Sheridan JG (2011) Designing 
sports: a framework for exertion games. In: CHI’11: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on 
human factors in computing systems, Vancouver, Canada
Nouchi R, Taki Y, Takeuchi H, Hashizume H, Akitsuki Y, Shigemune Y et al (2012) Brain training 
game improves executive functions and processing speed in the elderly: a randomized con-
trolled trial. PLoS One 7(1):1–9. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0029676
Oliveira M (2014) Most Canadian seniors have mobile phones, but not “smart” 
ones: poll. CTV News, Toronto. Retrieved from http://www.ctvnews.ca/sci-tech/
most-canadian-seniors-have-mobile-phones-but-not-smart-ones-poll-1.1648473
Perednia DA, Allen A (1995) Telemedicine technology and clinical applications. JAMA 
273(6):483–488
Primack BA, Carroll MV, McNamara M, Klem ML, King B, Rich M et al (2012) Role of video 
games in improving health-related outcomes: a systematic review. Am J Prev Med 42(6):630–
638. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2012.02.023
Putnam RD (2000) Bowling alone: the collapse and revival of American community. Simon & 
Schuster, New York
Raffelini C (2005) La télémédecine entre lorganisation et la technologie [Telemedicine between 
the organization and technology]. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Université du Québec à 
Montréal
Rosenberg D, Depp CA, Vahia IV, Reichstadt J, Palmer BW, Kerr J et al (2010) Exergames for 
subsyndromal depression in older adults: a pilot study of a novel intervention. Am J Geriatr 
Psychiatry 18(3):221–226. doi:10.1097/JGP.0b013e3181c534b5
Salthouse TA (1996) The processing-speed theory of adult age differences in cognition. Psychol 
Rev 103(3):403–428. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.103.3.403
Salthouse TA (2009) When does age-related cognitive decline begin? Neurobiol Aging 30(4):507–
514. doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2008.09.023
Sauvé L, Renaud L, Kaufman D, Duplàa E (2015) Validation of the educational games for seniors: 
live well, live healthy! Procedia Soc Behav Sci 176:674–682. doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2015.01.526
Schaie KW (1996) Intellectual development in adulthood: the Seattle longitudinal study. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Schell R, Hausknecht S, Zhang F, Kaufman D (2016) Social benefits of playing Wii bowling for 
older adults. Games Cult 11(1–2):81–103. doi:10.1177/1555412015607313
E. Duplàa et al.

145
Seah ET-W (2015) Understanding the learning and social gameplay experience of older adults 
playing a Bingo digital game. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Simon Fraser University, 
Burnaby, BC, Canada. Retrieved from http://summit.sfu.ca/item/16066
Seçer I, Satyen L (2014) Video game training and reaction time skills among older adults. Act 
Adapt Aging 38(3):220–236. doi:10.1080/01924788.2014.935908
Serafini M (1995) High-tech housecalls. Natl J 57:258–264
Silva BMC, Rodrigues JJPC, de la Diez T, López-Coronado M, Saleem K (2015) Mobile-health: 
a review of current state in 2015. J Biomed Inform 56:265–272. doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2015.06.003
Simons DJ, Boot WR, Charness N, Gathercole SE, Chabris CF, Hambrick DZ, Stine-Morrow 
EAL (2016) Do “brain-training” programs work? Psychol Sci Public Interest 17(3):103–186. 
doi:10.1177/1529100616661983
Singh DKA, Rajaratnam BS, Palaniswamy V, Raman VP, Bong PS, Pearson H (2013) Effects of 
balance-focused interactive games compared to therapeutic balance classes for older women. 
Climacteric 16(1):141–146. doi:10.3109/13697137.2012.664832
Statistics Canada (2007) Enquête canadienne sur lutilisation dinternet [Canadian investigation on 
the use of the internet]. Statistics Canada, Ottawa. Retrieved from: http://www.statcan.gc.ca/
daily-quotidien/080612/dq080612b-fra.htm
Statistics Canada (2014) Rates of internet use, by age group, selected years. Statistics Canada, 
Ottawa
Statistics Canada (2015) Activity-limiting injuries, 2009. Statistics Canada, Ottawa. Retrieved 
from http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/82-625-x/2010002/article/11272-eng.htm
Stowe JD, Cooney TM (2015) Examining Rowe and Kahn’s concept of successful aging: impor-
tance of taking a life course perspective. The Gerontologist 55(1):43–50. doi:10.1093/geront/
gnu055
Strode SW, Gustke S, Allen A (1999) Technical and clinical progress in telemedicine. J Am Med 
Assoc 281(12):1066–1068
Theng Y-L, Chua PH, Pham TP (2012) Wii as entertainment and socialisation aids for mental and 
social health of the elderly. In: CHI EA ‘12: CHI’12 extended abstracts on human factors in 
computing systems. ACM, New York, pp 691–702. doi:10.1145/2212776.2212840
Wattanasoontorn V, Boada I, García R, Sbert M (2013) Serious games for health. Entertain Comput 
4:231–247. doi:10.1016/j.entcom.2013.09.002
Wenger C, Davies R, Shahtahmasebi S, Scott A (1996) Social isolation and loneliness in old age: 
review and model refinement. Ageing Soc 16(3):333–358
Whitlock LA, McLaughlin AC, Allaire JC (2012) Individual differences in response to cogni-
tive training: using a multi-modal, attentionally demanding game-based intervention for older 
adults. Comput Hum Behav 28(4):1091–1096. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2012.01.012
Wiemeyer J, Kliem A (2012) Serious games in prevention and rehabilitation – a new panacea for 
elderly people? Eur Rev Aging Phys Act 9(1):41–50. doi:10.1007/s11556-011-0093-x
Wolinsky FD, Vander Weg MW, Howren MB, Jones MP, Dotson MM (2013) A randomized con-
trolled trial of cognitive training using a visual speed of processing intervention in middle aged 
and older adults. PLoS One 8(5):e61624. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0061624
Wollersheim D, Merkes M, Shiels N, Liamputtong P, Wallis L, Reynolds F, Koh L (2010) Physical 
and psychosocial effects of Wii video game usage among older women. Int J Emerg Technol 
Soc 8(2):85–98
World Health Organization (1993) Study protocol for the World Health Organization project to 
develop a quality of life assessment instrument (WHOQOL). Qual Life Res 2(2):153–159
World Health Organization (2002) Active ageing: a policy framework. World Health Organization, 
Geneva. Retrieved from http://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/67215
World Health Organization (2016) Falls prevention in older age. World Health Organization, 
Geneva. Retrieved from http://www.who.int/ageing/projects/falls_prevention_older_age/en/
Zhang F, Kaufman D (2015) The impacts of social interactions in MMORPGs on older adults’ 
social capital. Comput Hum Behav 51:495–503. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2015.05.034
6  Can Mobile Digital Games Benefit Older Adults’ Health?

146
Zhang F, Kaufman D (2016a) A review of intergenerational play for facilitating interactions and 
learning. Gerontechnology 14(3):127–138. doi:10.4017/gt.2016.14.3.002.00
Zhang F, Kaufman D (2016b) Cognitive benefits of older adults digital gameplay: a critical review. 
Gerontechnology 15(1):3–16. doi:10.4017/gt.2016.15.1.002.00
Zhang F, Kaufman D (2016c) Older adults’ social interactions in MMORPGs. Games Culture 
11(1–2):150–169. doi:10.1177/1555412015601757
Zviel-Girshin R, Reichman A, Abraham I, Hammer L, Shema A, Kimhi A (2011) Play system for 
therapy for the elderly. In: Proceedings, 2011 IEEE international conference on microwaves, 
communications, antennas and electronics systems (COMCAS). IEEE, New York, pp 1–5. 
doi:10.1109/COMCAS.2011.6105934
Emmanuel Duplàa is a professor in the Faculty of Education at the University of Ottawa, 
­specializing in information and communication technologies (ICT) for learning. He has partici-
pated in projects on design ergonomics and planning, distance education and training in eHealth. 
He is currently conducting research on educational video games, digital literacy, and e-learning 
design processes.
David Kaufman is a professor in the Faculty of Education at Simon Fraser University, Canada. He 
has published extensively with more than 120 published articles and 3 books to his credit; serves 
as a reviewer for many journals, granting agencies and professional associations; and has received 
more than $3 million in funding. His current research focuses on digital technologies to support 
ageing well.
Louise Sauvé is a professor of Educational Technology at TÉLUQ University in Quebec City, 
Canada. She has worked for many years as a distance education specialist, has developed many 
digital games and has published extensively on games and simulations for learning.
Lise Renaud is a professor at the University of Quebec at Montreal and director of ComSanté, a 
research centre on communication and health. She has more than 20 years of experience doing 
research and conducting interventions in public health in Montreal. She has 6 books and many 
articles to her credit.
Alice Ireland is an educational consultant in Vancouver, BC. She was formerly an executive direc-
tor of Simon Fraser University’s Simulation and Advanced Gaming Technologies (SAGE) for 
Learning Project and an associate professor of Management Information Systems at the Dalhousie 
University School of Business. She is currently a work package coordinator for AGE-WELL NCE 
Inc.
E. Duplàa et al.

Part IV
Ageing Perspectives to the Barriers and 
Enablers of Technology Use

149
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017 
H.R. Marston et al. (eds.), Mobile e-Health, Human–Computer Interaction Series, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-60672-9_7
Chapter 7
Digital Game Technology and Older Adults
Hannah R. Marston, Michael Kroll, Dennis Fink, Rakel Poveda, 
and Yves J. Gschwind
Abstract  This chapter provides readers with an overview of digital gaming trends 
across Europe and Australia, using current and up-to-date statistics detailing gam-
ing preferences, demographics and digital device usage and ownership. Providing a 
contemporary overview of the literature in the field of digital gaming and ageing the 
authors aim to demonstrate the work that has been covered by international academ-
ics. These domains include a series of reviews which have focused on health reha-
bilitation and gaming, eHealth, digital gaming, fall prevention and active ageing. 
Further discussion focuses on the use and deployment of mobile health apps and 
digital gaming and how they are used within the field of ageing, in regard to gami-
fication, chronic health conditions and the nature of interaction and engagement by 
users. Results are presented from the iStoppFalls project, whereby an ICT survey 
was deployed to ascertain participants ICT usage, ownership and behaviours. The 
results in this chapter focus primarily on digital games, how participants learnt to 
play games, their preferred game genres and online gaming habits. Common chal-
lenges are explored and discussed by the authors in regards to gaming research with 
H.R. Marston (*) 
Health & Wellbeing Priority Research Area, School of Health, Wellbeing  
& Social Care, Faculty of Wellbeing, Education & Language Studies,  
The Open University, Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire, UK 
Institute of Movement and Sport Gerontology, German Sport University Cologne,  
Cologne, Germany 
Centre for Research in Computing, Open University, Milton Keynes, UK
e-mail: Hannah.Marston@open.ac.uk; marstonhannah@hotmail.com 
M. Kroll • D. Fink 
Institute of Movement and Sport Gerontology, German Sport University Cologne,  
Cologne, Germany 
R. Poveda 
Instituto de Biomecánica de Valencia, Universidad Politécnica de Valencia, Valencia, Spain 
Biomedical Research Networking Centre in Bioengineering, Biomaterials and Nanomedicine 
(CIBER-BBN), Healthcare Technology Group, Valencia, Spain 
Y.J. Gschwind 
Neuroscience Research Australia, University of New South Wales,  
Barker Street, Randwick, Sydney 2031, Australia

150
recommendations proposed for future use and engagement of digital gaming, 
mobile health apps and wearables.
7.1  Introduction
Global ageing is a concern for researchers, governments, stakeholders and interna-
tional organizations such as the World Health Organization (WHO). In 2013, the 
WHO reported the increase of issues associated with our ageing populations via 
international conferences. In the respective published report, the WHO states that 
ageing is an international occurrence resulting from decreased mortality and fertil-
ity. Statistics show that the overall global population aged 60+ years increased from 
9.2% in 1990 to 11.7% in 2013 and will continue to grow reaching 21.1% by 2050 
(WHO 2013). Thus, globally, this proportion will more than double from 841 mil-
lion people in 2013 to two billion in 2050 (WHO 2013). Moreover, the rise of the 
oldest old (persons aged 80+ years) is expected to grow from 14% in 2013 to 19% 
in 2050, and the WHO noted that if this prediction is reached, it will result in 392 
million people aged 80+ years by 2050.
The notion of innovative technological approaches has been undertaken by 
researchers in the fields of gerontology, health, digital game studies, computer sci-
ence and human computer interaction (HCI) to explore how digital games, mobile 
health (mHealth) apps and respective software can assist our ageing populations to 
lead a healthy and active life. Technology can be a powerful medium to integrate into 
the lives and homes of our ageing populations. This chapter explores suitable solu-
tions through various technologies which are crucial for maintaining independence, 
health, wellbeing and quality of life while aiming to understand the needs and require-
ments of older adults in relation to technological solutions such as digital games.
7.2  Ageing and Technology
The notion of ageing in place has been defined by the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention as “the ability to live in one’s own home and community safely, 
independently, and comfortably, regardless of age, income, or ability level” (2013, 
https://www.cdc.gov/healthyplaces/terminology.htm). Ageing in place refers to 
older adults aged 65+ years preferring to stay in their own home as they age (Kochera 
et al. 2005; Peek et al. 2015; Satariano et al. 2014; Peek et al. 2014). Therefore, 
technology supporting individual’s ageing in place can enable opportunities for 
communication and engagement through devices including: Internet searching for 
specific information, communicating with friends and family via email and Skype/
social media outlets such as Facebook. Further, digital games can also aid ageing in 
place and enhance intergenerational relationships. Previous work undertaken by 
Voida and Greenberg (2009) and Voida et al. (2010) has shown intergenerational 
gaming to be a positive step forward in terms of building intergenerational 
H.R. Marston et al.

151
relationships through digital games. Moreover, technology used to promote safety 
and security of persons to age in place may include webcams, fall detectors, home 
monitoring and inactivity monitors.
Since 2000, there has been interest from the academic and industry communities 
into exploring how digital games and accompanying software could be made attrac-
tive to and used by older adults. These efforts have resulted in annual statistics, 
research and development as well as marketing strategies by companies which aim 
to broaden their gaming audiences by presenting digital gaming to older adults as 
well as children and young adults.
7.2.1  Digital Gaming Perspectives from America, Europe 
and Australia
The Entertainment Software Association (ESA 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 
2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016) and the Interactive Software 
Federation of Europe (ISFE 2012) in the USA and Europe have published national 
statistics describing digital gaming habits across different age cohorts. The average 
age of gamers has fluctuated per the annual statistics published by the Entertainment 
Software Association (ESA). To date, the average age of a gamer is 35 years (ESA 
2016). It should be noted that statistics published by the ESA, ISFE (Interactive 
Software Federation of Europe) and IGEA (Interactive Games & Entertainment 
Association) have not included data relating to adults 65+ years and over. For exam-
ple, the ESA has published data relating to adults aged 50+ years and above since 
2004 without further differentiating age groups.
7.2.2  Europe
Digital gaming statistics published by the ISFE focus on the type of games played, 
purchasing habits, gender, and age, and the reasons why games are played by 
European citizens from the perspective of individual European member states and 
as an overall perspective. For the purpose of this chapter, Germany and Spain are 
discussed because they were member states in the European Union (EU) involved 
in an EU-funded project (2011–2014) called iStoppFalls project. The iStoppFalls 
project included a randomized controlled trial (RCT) comprised of six EU partners 
and one Australian partner (i.e. three intervention sites: German Sport University 
Cologne, Instituto Biomecanica Valencia, Neuroscience Research Australia).
Gender of European games survey (ISFE 2012) showed that 54% of gamers are 
male with adults aged 55–64  years representing 11% of respondents. European 
respondents reported online game playing to be the most popular medium (81%) 
while 35% of the respondents had bought a game in the past 12 months (19% new 
games, 8% online games, 7% second-hand games and 7% game apps).
7  Digital Game Technology and Older Adults

152
7.2.2.1  Germany
Digital gamers (n  =  5189 online and offline respondents) surveyed in Germany 
(ISFE, Germany 2012) showed similar results as the rest of Europe. Specific data 
for Germany displays online gaming to be the most popular/preferred gaming for-
mat in Germany with 79% of adults playing, 54% play with friends who they know 
from the real world, 34% with family/relatives, 27% with online strangers and 26% 
with online friends who they have not met in real life. The type of devices used to 
play games were a personal computer (PC, 25%), laptop/netbook (20%), smart-
phone (17%), Nintendo Wii (11%) and Nintendo DS (8%).
7.2.2.2  Spain
Digital gamers (n = 3035 online and offline respondents) surveyed in Spain (ISFE, 
Spain 2012) showed that 83% of respondents played online. Fifty-six percent 
played with friends who they knew from the real world, whereas 41% of respon-
dents played online games with strangers. Additionally, 29% played with friend/
relatives, and a further 29% played online games with friends they have not met in 
the real world. The proportion of online gaming, the weekly rate of online gaming, 
and the interest in technology among gamers and non-gamers were similar to 
German gamers. Games were played on a multitude of devices: smartphone (24%), 
laptop/netbook (22%), PC (21%), Nintendo DS handheld console (12%) and 
Nintendo Wii (15%).
7.2.3  Australia
Similarly, to the ESA and the ISFE publications of respective gamers in those mem-
ber states, the IGEA (IGEA 2014) in Australia also have limited reporting of older 
gamers. The IGEA (2014) reported that the average age of an Australian gamer is 
32 years, while 47% of respondents were female gamers and 53% of respondent’s 
male gamers. It is unclear from the respective publication why this data has not been 
reported, unless there were no adults aged 60 years or over who completed the 
survey.
Reasons for game playing varied and included: 32% played console or PC games 
to have fun, 17% played to relieve boredom and pass the time away, 16% played 
games to relax or to relieve stress, while 12% played to keep their mind active and 
6% enjoyed experiencing a challenge when gaming. Reasons to play games on a 
mobile or tablet device included: 32% played to relieve boredom or pass the time, 
20% wanted to have fun, 15% played games on these mobile devices to relax or 
relieve stress, 11% played to keep their mind active, and 6% wanted games to be 
H.R. Marston et al.

153
challenging during their gaming experience (IGEA 2014). Playing digital games 
during the day or week varied, and 91% reported primarily gaming on a weekend, 
87% played during the holidays, 86% played during the evening, 67% played after 
school or work, 45% played during their lunch break, 37% played while travelling 
on public transport, and 35% played before work or school (IGEA 2014). Preferred 
devices to play games by adults aged 51+ years were PC (91%), console (49%), 
tablet (40%), mobile phone (35%) and handheld device (7%) (IGEA 2014).
Drawing upon the overview of this section, it is notable that older adults world-
wide seem to play digital games. Unfortunately, it is difficult to ascertain the exact 
number of older adults (aged 65+ years) playing games from the respective publica-
tions. For example, the ESA commonly chooses to publish data across three age 
cohorts (<18 years, 18–49 years and 50+ years), but nevertheless the authors believe 
that analysing the data of the latter age group in more detail would provide inter-
ested parties with a bigger picture of the current situation in the older population. In 
this context, it is noteworthy that the ESA provides an annual publication of digital 
gaming trends which is not the case for the ISFE or other associations. Therefore, 
the authors suggest that more frequent publications from different sources would 
give interested parties a better opportunity to keep up to date with technology use 
and digital gaming habits. Overall, the figures across the three continents show a 
positive attitude towards digital gaming and peripheral devices, including digital 
game preferences, purchasing habits, online gaming and reasons for game playing.
7.2.4  Digital Gaming in the Domains of Health 
and Rehabilitation
The field of ‘Games for Health’ has gained popular interest in a bid to explore and 
ascertain digital gaming solutions for chronic health conditions (Marston et  al. 
2016a, b, c; Miller et al. 2013; Bleakley et al. 2013; Hall et al. 2012), while previous 
work focused predominantly on physical and cognitive effects of digital games 
(Bleakley et al. 2013). Future research is needed to tailor interventions to the older 
population.
Hall et al. (2012) undertook a review to ascertain the health outcomes associated 
with game play by adults aged 65+ years. Results highlighted 13 articles including 
mental, physical and social health factors, type of game platform, study design and 
assessments/measurements, and a series of themed summaries. The results showed 
that there were significant mental health themes arising from the literature, followed 
by physical and social health outcomes. The respective authors concluded that 
across the studies in their review, positive effects of health outcomes were displayed, 
while proposing similar recommendations to that of Miller et al. 2013 in so much as 
‘robust and rigorous research designs are needed to increase validity and reliability 
of results’ (pp. 194). Finally, the review undertaken by Marston et al. (2016a, b, c) 
focuses on elderly adults categorized as the oldest old and their  
7  Digital Game Technology and Older Adults

154
participation in digital game studies across the fields of gerontology and computer 
science. Marston and colleagues identified 46 articles, while 60% of these articles 
had been published in gerontology journals, and 8.7% were published in computer 
science. What is interesting from this review was that no single article primarily 
focused on the oldest old as their target sample, and few studies had recruited more 
than 100 participants.
Further analysis of the reviews ascertained 7 primary themes (physiological and 
psychological health, environment (i.e. nursing home), technology hardware and 
software, assessment and game technology (i.e. tools, usability issues)), and 34 sec-
ondary themes were identified. The most common themes identified from the 
reviews were hardware technology and assessment. The respective authors of this 
review proposed several recommendations, initially highlighting the paucity of old-
est old engagement in digital game studies, and with this, future studies should 
recruit oldest old, increase sample size and explicitly report the exact numbers of 
participants aged 85+ years. While following suit of earlier reviews undertaken by 
Hall et al. (2012) and Miller et al. (2013) who both proposed rigorous and robust 
methods in future studies, it needs to be addressed and integrated in conjunction 
with the inclusion of theoretical perspectives which is an element that Marston and 
colleagues found limiting.
Across the fields of gerontology, digital game studies and health, researchers 
have explored the use of digital games and its peripheral hardware (e.g. Wii Balance 
Board) to investigate and understand whether this type of technology can produce 
beneficial outcomes for improving the health, wellbeing and lives of older adults, 
living within their own home or long-term care facility.
Understanding digital games from different domains such as design, motivation, 
enjoyment and meaning in conjunction with their attributes has been conducted by 
scholars (De Schutter and Brown 2016; Marston et al. 2014, 2016a, b, c; De Schutter 
et al. 2014; Marston 2012, 2013a, b; De Schutter and Vanden Abeele 2008; De 
Schutter 2010; IJsselsteijn et al. 2007; Vanden Abeele et al. 2007); in a bid to com-
prehend how digital games can play a part in the lives of older adults from different 
theoretical positons, life course and flow to enhance motivation, gamification and 
rewards have been studied by these respective scholars. Results from these studies 
showed several facets associated with engaging older adults with digital games 
which include needing a purpose, choice, flexibility, and challenge, fostering and 
facilitating social connectedness, contributing to society, perceiving benefits and 
incorporating rewarding experiences to encourage and motivate digital game inter-
action by ageing populations. Moreover, the respective studies have noted usability 
and accessibility as issues experienced by older adults more so than younger adults, 
reducing cognitive overload through interface design, and providing adaptability to 
counterbalance 
functional 
limitations 
(e.g. 
sensory, 
memory, 
executive 
functioning).
Purpose-built games have been deployed in studies focusing on neurological 
conditions such as Parkinson’s disease (PD) using commercial hardware such as 
the Microsoft Kinect (Galna et al. 2014). Results showed digital game rehabilita-
tion using commercial hardware was feasible and safe for people with PD. Yet 
H.R. Marston et al.

155
further interventions should assess the safety, feasibility and efficacy of this tech-
nology within the home. Moreover, digital games have been used to assess cogni-
tion, and executive control functions within older adults (Goldstein et al. 1997; 
Basak et al. 2008). The results in these respective studies showed positive trends to 
deploying digital games in a bid to maintain cognitive functioning as one ages. 
However, this area of digital games has received a lot of attention over the last 
10 years from commercial companies such as Posit Science, Lumos, Nintendo and 
Cogmed.
7.2.5  eHealth, Digital Gaming, Fall Prevention and Active 
Ageing
Within the field of fall prevention and fall risk assessment, several studies using 
purpose-built and commercial technologies and software have been executed 
(Gschwind et al. 2015a, b; Uzor and Baillie 2014; Reed-Jones et al. 2013; Schoene 
et al. 2011; Young et al. 2011). With regard to stroke rehabilitation, digital games 
have been deployed across several studies (Yavuzer et al. 2008; Hijmans et al. 2011; 
Holden et al. 2007). Many studies in the areas of fall prevention and stroke rehabili-
tation showed a positive trend and potential benefit of using purpose-built technolo-
gies and software and/or commercial software in the daily lives of older adults.
Marston and Smith (2012) in their review focused on studies aimed at fall pre-
vention and stroke rehabilitation and identified 38 articles varying in participants’ 
sample size, commercial software/purpose-built technologies and/or hardware 
(peripherals) and assessments. A series of recommendations were proposed, and a 
selection is provided below including: the notion of digital game technology should 
be available in both clinical and home environments, instructions for using digital 
game soft/hardware are not always clear, and thus, it should be written in a language 
that is easily understood (Lange et al. 2009). Patients and users of digital game 
technology for rehabilitation should receive positive feedback during their therapy 
sessions. Providing this type of feedback will indicate to the user/patient their level 
of progress, and in turn, increase self-confidence (Lange et al. 2009). Time is an 
important issue for patients, support networks and the health practitioners. Setting 
up the equipment and calibrating individual settings can be time consuming.
Therefore, it was proposed by Marston and Smith (2012) that sessions should be 
recorded, to provide a full and accurate response to therapists/health practitioners, 
enabling meaningful results, and a progress review (over a period of time) should be 
considered. While data storage would also need to be considered, this option was to 
be implemented. Additionally, digital game activities and having a purpose for 
game playing are perceived to be important aspects that should be considered dur-
ing the design phase of software, taking into account the needs and requirements 
from a clinical/health point of view. Therefore, the proposed recommendations 
included the need to have several elements integrated into the assessment tools, and 
7  Digital Game Technology and Older Adults

156
providing the patient/user with a staggered progression. Furthermore, integrating or 
offering different challenges throughout the game will enable users/patients to 
maintain their motivation, and by accomplishing a challenge, it is likely one’s self-
confidence will be increased.
7.3  Mobile Health (mHealth) Apps and Ageing
eHealth is a growing field of study which can benefit and impact upon the lives of 
many people across different societal pathways. The iStoppFalls study is one exam-
ple of how eHealth can facilitate positive benefits, relating to our ageing popula-
tions. Yet, as a multidisciplinary field and domain, there is still a lack of discussion 
regarding technology use and behaviour, in so much as understanding the barriers 
and enablers to taking up technology, the reasons why older adults use technology 
and understanding their needs and requirements. This chapter explores the use of 
technology through the eyes of the iStoppFalls project focusing upon the use of 
digital game technology for use within the field of eHealth and future studies.
Mobile health (mHealth) apps and wearable devices are a technological medium 
that is gaining greater interest across the fields of health, computer science and 
human computer interaction. Marston and Hall (2015) discussed game-based 
approaches such as gamification in relation to mobile (mHealth) apps and how gam-
ification can provide health promotion, prevention and self-management of chronic 
health conditions. Throughout the respective chapter, Marston and Hall (2015) 
aimed to define gamification within a healthcare context and the associated compo-
nents of gamification, identify and ascertain current work within this field and the 
strategies undertaken. A series of recommendations were proposed for taking this 
work forward and enhancing game-based approaches such as gamification across 
the fields of health promotion, prevention and self-management.
Furthermore, a table shows an overview of differing healthcare apps by develop-
ers, functionality and motivation, while another table displays the number of 
mHealth apps that have been developed for chronic health conditions (Marston and 
Hall 2015, pp. 90). There were several recommendations proposed across research 
and practice; taking a research perspective, Marston and Hall (2015) proposed 
future studies should utilize a mixed-method approach relating to data collection of 
the functionality of gamification and mHealth apps, while also taking a qualitative 
approach through one-to-one interviews and participatory design workshops with 
target audiences and stakeholders.
Undertaking pre-/post-assessment of health behaviour components in the initial 
stages of design that would also fill the paucity of evidence, be it from a small or 
large RCT, would be fruitful for furthering and enhancing the work in this area. 
From a practical standpoint and based upon the work by Aitken and Gauntlett 
(2013) who previously presented six points to the barriers and obstacles of using 
mHealth apps which also need addressing. Additional suggestions included the 
need of the design/research teams to consider the appropriation of gamification 
H.R. Marston et al.

157
components which would be identified through participatory design workshops and 
access to statistical data from mHealth apps that are being used. Accessing back-end 
data could be fruitful to understand whether mHealth apps and wearable technolo-
gies are beneficial for self-management and prevention of chronic health 
conditions.
There is a multitude of interactive content available across many digital devices 
(mobile phones, computers, digital games/consoles and televisions), but this content 
may not be consumable for older adults, taking into consideration chronic health 
conditions and age-related impairments such as poor vision, hearing loss and/or 
impaired cognition. Interacting with digital technologies can vary and include 
touch, voice, motion and gesture, as well as different in/output devices (mouse/
keyboard). At old age, diseases (e.g. arthritis) can play a part in limiting one’s inter-
action with technology, especially playing games through traditional methods such 
as a gamepad as used by gamers/players engaging on the PlayStation or Xbox con-
soles (Fig. 7.1). With more innovative approaches found on the Nintendo Wii con-
sole via the Wiimote (Figs. 7.2 and 7.3) and in Fig. 7.4, which displays an older 
adult interacting with the Hills ‘n’ Skills game developed for the iStoppFalls proj-
ect, accessed and deployed on the Microsoft Kinect console (e.g. gesture and speech 
control), interaction may be easier for some, yet remain difficult for others. Digital 
game interaction may have made strides over the decades from the traditional game-
pads to motion, gesture and speech recognition, yet some people who are very 
unstable on their feet may experience difficulties with limited upper extremity sup-
port, and those with impaired cognition due to health and age-related conditions 
and/or dexterity problems engaging with the Nintendo Wii, and/or the Microsoft 
Kinect consoles may also have a limited gaming experience.
Fig. 7.1  Displays how a gamer/user would hold a traditional gamepad. Permission given by  
Dr. H.R. Marston
7  Digital Game Technology and Older Adults

158
Moreover, one should consider the approach taken to interacting and engaging 
with mHealth apps via smartphones and tablet devices. Whereby, the general 
approach is to tap and swipe on the screen and select the necessary information. 
Conversely, if one has been familiar with pressing a series of buttons on a phone and 
then is introduced to a new updated model such as Android (Samsung) or iOS 
Figs. 7.2 and 7.3  Displays how a gamer/user would hold a Wii Mote to play the Wii Sports 
(Boxing and Golf). Permission given by Dr H. R. Marston
Fig. 7.4  Displays a user playing the Hills ‘n’ Skills exergame developed for the iStoppFalls proj-
ect. Permission given by Dr. R. Wieching, lead coordinator on the iStoppFalls project
H.R. Marston et al.

159
(Apple) smartphone, then the individual will be required to recalibrate their mental 
models to fit in with their new device. For some younger cohorts, this may not be so 
difficult, unless they are switching models let us say from an iPhone to a Google 
Pixel, then a younger person may also face challenges when using their new phone. 
This would be similar to an older person moving from a phone where buttons are 
required to be pressed to one which is used by swiping. This is something that 
requires further exploration in relation to younger cohorts, yet, interaction and 
engagement affects everyone across the life course, some more than others, espe-
cially those who have age-related health issues.
7.4  The iStoppFalls Project and the Digital Device Survey
The eHealth project – iStoppFalls, funded under the EU Framework Programme 
(FP) 7 stream  – was an international project comprising of seven partners, six 
European and one from Australia. The RCT phase was conducted across three sites 
(Sydney, Valencia and Cologne), in 2014, and a total of 153 participants aged 
65 years and older were recruited.
Participants were randomized into either the intervention group which asked par-
ticipants to engage with a purpose-built exercise program for 16 weeks, (Gschwind 
et al. 2014) or the control group who received an educational booklet on general 
health. The digital device survey, completed by iStoppFalls participants, included 
computer use, access and ownership; digital game use, access and ownership; 
length/frequency of computer usage and game playing; type of game genres played 
or which they would like to play; online gaming habits; social media use; digital 
device ownership; purchasing habits of digital games; learning how to play games; 
and hobbies and interests (see supplementary data for a copy of the survey). In this 
chapter, data relating primarily to digital game use, access and ownership, type of 
genres played or what the participants would like to play will be presented. Results 
from the other survey domains can be found in Marston et al. (2016a, b, c).
7.4.1  iStoppFalls Participants and Their Technology 
Experience and Engagement
Of the 71 participants assigned to the intervention group in the iStoppFalls project, 
61 participants completed the survey and only four participants (3 female and 1 
male) reported to currently playing games. With 15 participants (9 female and 6 
male) reported to have previously played games, two participants did not respond 
and 42 participants (23 female, 19 male) reported to not ever have played games. 
Playing games is an activity that can be undertaken on a variety of entertainment 
7  Digital Game Technology and Older Adults

160
platforms such as PC (desktop), console and digital device (e.g. tablet, smartphone, 
mobile phone) or via a social media platform.
7.4.2  Ownership of Digital Game Hardware
Two iStoppFalls participants (one female and one male) reported positively to 
owing a console, with one female participant owning a Nintendo Wii and one male 
owning a PlayStation 2. Although participants may or may not own a game console, 
they may have access through friends, children, family members or grandchildren. 
Two female and five male participants reported to have access to a game console by 
being able to borrowing one.
Having access to a variety of technologies such as a desktop computer, smart-
phone, tablet or console allows greater access to digital game engagement, across 
different game genres and platforms/formats, be it a subscription game such as 
World of Warcraft, Solitaire, Minecraft or Mystery of Family Cur on Facebook. Of 
the participants assigned to the intervention a total of 40 participants (21 female and 
19 male) reported to having access to a computer to play games.
7.4.3  Preferred Game Genres
Respondents were asked to consider what type of game genres they would like to 
play. The most popular game genre were sport (37.9%), followed by strategy 
(31.0%), puzzle (24.1%), role playing and others (n = 5), adventure (6.9%) and 
simulation (5.2%). In addition, games in the real-time strategy (1.7%), massively 
multiplayer online role playing (1.7%), action (1.7%), exergame (1.7%) and plat-
form (1.7%) were each preferred by one respondent. Moreover, 8.6% of respon-
dents reported the ‘other’ genre that they would consider playing, which suggests 
that respondents would be willing to play games which maybe more attuned to their 
hobbies and interests or tailored made. None of the respondents considered playing 
games from the shooter genre.
7.4.4  Online Game Playing
Today online games can be accessed via several hardware technologies. Three par-
ticipants of the iStoppFalls trial reported to play games online. Participants were 
asked what type of online games they played. These included games accessed via 
platforms on social media such as Facebook, via a subscription such as World of 
Warcraft, or massively multiplayer online games such as Neverwinter Nights, 
Ultima Online, EverQuest or Final Fantasy. None of the participants reported to 
H.R. Marston et al.

161
engage with games via these formats/platforms, yet two participants did respond to 
‘other’. With this in mind, further exploration is needed in so much as why older 
adults do or do not engage with online games and, for those that do, why they play 
online games and what type of platforms/formats they play on.
7.4.5  Approaches to Learning How to Play Digital Games
Learning to play games can be undertaken in a variety of different approaches from 
watching friends, children or grandchildren to engaging with a virtual environment 
on its own. Participants in the iStoppFalls project reported primarily learning how 
to play games through a family member and having been self-taught. Additionally, 
participants reported that their friends and children were also helping them learn 
how to engage with digital games. Playing games can be difficult, and depending on 
the game technology, playing games may be easier such as the Nintendo Wii or the 
Microsoft Kinect which employs more gesture and speech recognition to assist with 
game play rather than the Sony PlayStation or Microsoft Xbox which employs a 
gamepad with buttons. Players are expected to execute multiple buttons pressing on 
the latter two consoles which for some people, in particular older adults, this maybe 
cumbersome and more difficult due to age-related impairments. Fourteen partici-
pants answered positively to the question of ‘would you be willing to learn how to 
play a game?’ while 18 participants answered ‘unsure’ and 24 answered ‘no’. These 
responses indicate that the respective participants are willing to learn how to play 
digital games, and their preferred methods are via a friend or through self-learning, 
followed by a family member or a child.
7.4.6  Purchasing Habits of Digital Games and the iStoppFalls 
Participants
Digital games can be purchased from a variety of outlets including online (e.g. 
Amazon), supermarkets/grocery stores, or specialist digital game/electrical stores 
and for multiple occasions (i.e. as a birthday or Christmas present). Very few par-
ticipants had bought games for themselves. Respondents reported primarily pur-
chasing digital games online (3.4%) for their grandchild (6.9%), as a birthday 
present (5.2%), as a Christmas present (5.2%) or as a treat (3.4%).
7  Digital Game Technology and Older Adults

162
7.5  Lesson’s Learned from the iStoppFalls Technology 
Survey Results?
7.5.1  Older Adults and Gaming
There have been several reviews published, detailing a variety of studies which have 
utilized technology for health and rehabilitation (Miller et al. 2013; Bleakley et al. 
2013; Hall et al. 2012; Marston and Smith 2012). Yet, literature is scarce regarding 
what type of technology is used by older adults, their purpose for using technology, 
purchasing habits and social media use. Most of the studies that utilized digital 
games to facilitate physical activity to improve health and rehabilitation have not 
reported data associated with technology use, social media, ownership and access of 
technology, digital game hardware, the type of games played/preferred and 
approaches to learning how to play games. Further, data regarding whether partici-
pants would be willing to learn how to play, online gaming habits, including the 
type of games played online, the type of platform the game is played on, who they 
played with and the length and frequency of online gaming habits is scarcely 
reported.
With the exception of Marston (2012, 2013a, b), there is little information pub-
lished based on the type of games older adults would want to play and whether they 
would want games designed and developed based on their hobbies, interests and/or 
dreams. Yet the authors believe collecting this type of data is important to under-
stand the needs and requirements of technology use of our current ageing popula-
tions but also as a means of preparing for the future. However, the needs and 
requirements for future ageing populations could differ due to younger populations 
being more experienced with technology and digital gaming.
The results of the completed iStoppFalls surveys showed that digital games are 
played by adults aged 65 years and older, that games were played on digital devices 
across all age groups and that there were no significant results for the type of game 
genres played or preferred, except exergames. Exergames have become a popular 
subgenre of the sports genre (Marston and McClenaghan 2013; Fencott et al. 2012). 
Over the last decade, there has been a growing body of academic work which 
focuses on the utilization of exergames for different purposes, such as rehabilita-
tion, health and wellbeing (Marston et al. 2016a, b, c; Miller et al. 2013; Bleakley 
et al. 2013; Hall et al. 2012; Marston and Smith 2012) and the experience of enjoy-
ment (Marston 2013a, b). Based on previous literature (Marston 2012, 2013a, b; 
Bianchi-Berthouze 2007; Harley et al. 2010; Nap et al. 2009; Khoo and Cheok 
2006; Voida et al. 2010; Voida and Greenberg 2009), the notion of playing exer-
games has been executed through the ease of interaction and primarily through the 
release of the Nintendo Wii. The approaches to engaging with the digital game 
environment through motion-based technologies and more recently through gesture 
control (Gschwind et al. 2014, 2015a, b; Marston et al. 2016a, b, c) have afforded 
audiences who would not necessarily engage with digital games the opportunity to 
play for fun, rehabilitation or intergenerational gaming.
H.R. Marston et al.

163
7.6  Common Challenges in Gaming Research
The results from the international, multicentered RCT – iStoppFalls – showed the 
exercise program did reduce the physiological fall risk in the study sample. While 
analyses of subgroups displayed that the participants assigned to the intervention 
who had greater adherence also improved their postural sway, stepping reaction and 
executive function (Gschwind et al. 2015a, b). Moreover, analyses of results explor-
ing the usability and acceptability of the iStoppFalls system showed positive usabil-
ity, user experience and acceptance, based upon the RCT and living lab approaches 
(Vaziri et al. 2016). However, to the knowledge of the authors, the iStoppFalls proj-
ect was the first kind of project which entailed an international, multicentered RCT 
and living lab approach, comprising of three different study sites, using a variety of 
technologies and digital devices. Future studies should consider exploring the moti-
vation, gender and age in addition to factoring what previous experiences partici-
pants have in using technology, the purpose for using technology and exploring 
overall perceptions and behaviour.
Research projects, be they large or small, may encounter issues which can affect 
the initial study design, for example, low adherence to an exercise program resulting 
in less engagement with the digital games, high drop-out rate due to technical dif-
ficulties or gamers’/players’ lack of understanding/knowledge on how to engage 
with the technology and/or digital games. Implementing too much technology (e.g. 
tablet, digital games, menu selection, social media and/or app) could overload par-
ticipants, especially those who have little or no previous experience of technology 
use. This could also reduce the confidence of the participants and may cause them 
to become demotivated and drop out. The number of measures/instruments can vary 
across different research projects, and in some cases large governmental-funded 
projects may have access to a wider range of research tools. This in turn may result 
in participants being overloaded with assessments and, for example, fail to complete 
surveys with the required amount of attention, because they were already too tired 
and/or stressed from the other assessments.
The data presented in this book chapter provide an overview concerning impor-
tant aspects associated with gaming and how older populations relate to the underly-
ing technology and its associated behaviours. While annual statistics are published 
by the ESA, there is little annual reporting from the United Kingdom or European 
game industries; albeit the ISFE are attempting to make some headway in this area 
by publishing a quarterly ‘GameTrack Digest’ which has been published since the 
end of 2011 (GameTrack 2016). The content reports the current gaming trends for 
Germany, Spain and the UK and covers a variety of areas including the percentage 
of gamers from age 6 to 64 years, weekly hours of gaming, type of games played 
(i.e. online, apps), types of devices played (i.e. console, handheld, computer, smart-
phone, tablets) and the profile of gamers across these age groups (i.e. gender).
7  Digital Game Technology and Older Adults

164
7.6.1  Gaming, mHealth Apps and Wearables: 
Recommendations and Outlook
When looking at gaming research in general, future studies may consider undertak-
ing an in-depth qualitative approach such as focus groups, observations and one-to-
one interviews to provide an opportunity to dig deeper into the data and to identify 
common themes and relationships. Future work in this area may also explore the 
needs, requirements and preferences of older adults, in so much as the type of games 
suitable for use in a health and rehabilitation setting.
For instance, researchers need to consider the duration of the intervention period 
when selecting the appropriate study design. Undertaking a mixed-method approach 
in future studies may support scientists to examine the data to ascertain patterns of 
usage, preferences, motivations and perceptions of the respective technology used. 
While future studies should also take into consideration how to enhance and moti-
vate users from an intergenerational standpoint; examining how intergenerational 
engagement can influence not only fun and entertainment but also enabling the posi-
tive benefits of health prevention and self-management. Longitudinal studies are 
important for understanding the beneficial and positive impacts on health-related 
rehabilitation, in association to games, yet to date many published studies are con-
ducted over short periods of time.
Since 2010, wearable technologies and mHealth apps have become a popular 
area of study (Jakicic et al. 2016; Marston and Hall 2015). Yet, Jakicic and col-
leagues noted in their respective RCT that there was less weight loss over a 2-year 
period between the intervention and control groups, concluding that such wearable 
devices which provide feedback associated with one’s physical activity may not be 
so beneficial over the standard weight loss approaches and methods.
Understanding how wearable technologies in conjunction with digital games and 
mHealth apps is required to address the assessment of quality of life which has 
previously been measured through gold standard instruments such as the World 
Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule (WHODAS) 2.0; the Patient 
Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9); a nine-item questionnaire used for screening, diag-
nosing, monitoring and measuring the severity of depression; the European Quality 
of Life – 5 Dimensions (EQ-5D); the Short Form-36; and 8-item questionnaires 
(SF-36, SF-8) which can measure one’s level of depression, physical and mental 
health, and activities of daily living.
Several apps have been developed from paper-based instruments such as the physi-
ological profile approach (PPA) to falls risk assessment and prevention, the (Falls 
Efficacy Scale-International FES-I) assessment (Yardley et al. 2005), the Iconographical 
Falls Efficacy Scale (icon-FES), (Delbaere et al. 2011) and the Incidental and Planned 
Activity Questionnaire (IPEQ), (Delbaere et al. 2010) by scientists at the Neuroscience 
Research Australia (NeuRA), in the field of fall prevention/fall risk, and are available 
from the App Store, Google Play and BlackBerry App World.
These apps include the icon-FES app (Delbaere et al. 2011) which assesses the 
fear of falling, the IPEQ app (Delbaere et al. 2010) which assesses the incidental 
H.R. Marston et al.

165
and planned exercise levels, the PPA Sway Path app (Sturnieks et al. 2011; Lord 
et al. 2003) which measures the postural sway of a person, the PPA reaction Time 
Test (Lord et al. 2003; NeuRA, https://www.neura.edu.au/apps/) which measures 
the reaction time of a person, the Costab app (Lord et al. 1996) which measures the 
coordinated stability of a person, the Trail Making Test app (Delbaere and Lord 
2015) which assesses the visual attention and task switching abilities and the Low 
Contrast Sensitivity Test app (NeuRA, https://www.neura.edu.au/apps/) which 
assesses the visual contrast sensitivity of a person. All of these apps have the ability 
to be deployed across different technology devices for use in a clinical assessment. 
Although the apps outlined above have been adapted for assessment in specific 
areas, Marston et al. (2015) have previously discussed technology and the deploy-
ment of technology within the twenty-first century as a means of assessing quality 
of life.
Through the quantified self (QS)/self-tracking domain, many people track their 
activities, nutritional intake and body fluids/minerals. For some, self-tracking is via 
the process of several apps on their smartphone to monitor their food intake, sleep 
patterns, sugar intake, menstrual cycle, calories, blood pressure, heart rate and/or 
physical activity (Singer 2011; Wolf 2010). The QS movement and self-tracking is 
still a growing field of study, and it is common to see individuals wearing a piece of 
wearable technology, which they maybe tracking how many steps they walk per 
day.
However, it is more than that, through electronic components which are easily 
attached to the skin, it may be possible in the future to measure, assess and monitor 
a person’s heart rate, blood pressure and temperature. Chaotic Moon (https://www.
fjordnet.com/offices/austin/) uses electro-conducive paint to ascertain the vital 
signs. Using this type of paint enables materials to be connected such as the micro-
controller with several sensors. Similarly, other research institutes are also follow-
ing suit in this area of bio-wearables/technologies including the Ulsan National 
Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Korea Advanced Institute of Science 
and Technology (KAIST) and the University of California San Diego, while 
Motorola filed a patent on May 3, 2012, titled ‘Coupling an electronic skin tattoo to 
a mobile communication device’.
What is interesting about this work is the essence of taking self-tracking to a dif-
ferent level, enabling items to be attached to the skin, and with more accuracy. Not 
only could this method of self-tracking impact on the field of QS but also on the 
medical profession, for example, if such an approach had been tested and validated, 
the use of bio-wearables could have a massive impact on the lives of pregnant 
women both in the developed world and in developing countries. Additionally, from 
the standpoint of our ageing populations, bio-wearables could remotely monitor 
vital statistics of older adults who may also require assistance or support from health 
practitioners and support networks.
This chapter has provided an overview of the technology studies associated with 
digital games and related aspects to ageing and ageing in place. Additionally, the 
proposal of new technological ideas which the author and colleagues believe are 
crucial for moving forward in the twenty-first century have also been outlined and 
7  Digital Game Technology and Older Adults

166
for the forthcoming decades it is certainly going to be interesting in the fields of 
health, ageing and technology. Being prepared for the future is important while 
understanding the differences across the life course and ascertaining the importance 
of sound study design.
Acknowledgements  The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the 
research, authorship and/or publication of this article: This project has received funding from the 
European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme for research, technological development and 
demonstration under grant agreement no. 287361. The Australian arm is funded by an Australian 
National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) EU collaboration grant (#1038210). 
The content of the manuscript does not represent the opinion of the European Community or 
NHMRC. The funding sources have no role in any aspects of this study. Yves J. Gschwind has been 
financially supported by a research grant from the Margarete and Walter Lichtenstein Foundation, 
Basel, Switzerland. All other authors are supported by the iStoppFalls project, European 
Community Grant Agreement 287361. On behalf of the iStoppFalls consortium, we would like to 
thank all the participants who took part in the study. Trial registration: Australian New Zealand 
Clinical Trials Registry Trial ID: ACTRN12614000096651. International Standard Randomized 
Controlled Trial Number: ISRCTN15932647.
References
Aitken M, Gauntlett C (2013) Patient apps for improved healthcare, From Novelty to Mainstream. 
IMS Institute for healthcare informatics
Basak C, Boot WR, Voss MW, Kramer AF (2008) Can training in a real-time strategy video game 
attenuate cognitive decline in older adults? Psychol Aging 23/4:765–777
Bianchi-Berthouze N, Kim WW, Patel DI (2007) Does body movement engage you more in digital 
game play? And why? In: Paiva A, Prada R, Picard RW (eds) Affective computing and intelli-
gent interaction second international conference (ACII 2007). Springer, New York, pp 102–113
Bleakley CM, Charles D, Porter-Armstrong A, McNeill MDJ, McDonough SM, McCormack B 
(2013) Gaming for health: a systematic review of the physical and cognitive effects of interac-
tive computer games in older adults. J Appl Gerontol. doi:10.1177/0733464812470747
Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (2013) Healthy places terminology. Retrieve from 
https://www.cdc.gov/healthyplaces/terminology.htm. Accessed Dec 2016
De Schutter B (2010) Never too old to play: the appeal of digital games to an older audience. 
Games Cult 6/2:155–170. https://doi.org/10.1177/1555412010364978
De Schutter B, Brown JA (2016) Digital games as a source of enjoyment in later life. Games and 
Culture 11(1–2):28–52. doi:10.1177/1555412015594273
De Schutter B, Vanden Abeele V (2008) Meaningful play in elderly life. Presented at the annual 
meeting of the international communication association, Montreal
De Schutter B, Brown J, Vanden Abeele V (2014) The domestication of digital games in the lives 
of older adults. New Media & Society. doi:10.1177/1461444814522945
Delbaere K, Lord SR (2015) Validation of a trail-making test developed for iPad. Retrieved from 
https://www.neura.edu.au/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/Trails-iPad_validation.pdf. Accessed 
Dec 2016
Delbaere K, Hauer K, Lord SR (2010) Evaluation of the incidental and planned activity ques-
tionnaire (IPEQ) for older people. Br J  Sports Med 44(14):1029–1034. doi:10.1136/
bjsm.2009.060350
Delbaere K, Smith ST, Lord SR (2011) Development and initial validation of the Iconographical 
falls efficacy scale. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 66(6):674–680. doi:10.1093/gerona/glr.019
H.R. Marston et al.

167
Entertainment Software Association. (2004). Essential facts about the computer and video game 
industry 2004. Retrieved from http://www.theesa.com/files/EFrochure.pdf. Accessed Feb 2005
Entertainment Software Association (2005) Essential facts about the computer and video game 
industry 2005. Retrieved from http://www.tntg.org/documents/gamefacts.pdf. Accessed 27 
July 2016
Entertainment Software Association (2006) Essential facts about the computer and video game 
industry 2006. Retrieved from https://library.princeton.edu/sites/default/files/2006.pdf. 
Accessed 27 July 2016
Entertainment Software Association (2007) Essential facts about the computer and video game 
industry 2007. Retrieved from http://www.org.id.tue.nl/IFIP-TC14/documents/ESA-Essential-
Facts-2007.pdf. Accessed 27 July 2016
Entertainment Software Association (2008) Essential facts about the computer and video game 
industry 2008. Retrieved from http://www.org.id.tue.nl/IFIP-TC14/documents/ESA-Essential-
Facts-2008.pdf. Accessed 27 July 2016
Entertainment Software Association (2009) Essential facts about the computer and video game 
industry 2009. Retrieved from http://www.org.id.tue.nl/IFIP-TC14/documents/ESA-Essential-
Facts-2009.pdf. Accessed 27 July 2016
Entertainment Software Association (2010) Essential facts about the computer and video game 
industry 2010. Retrieved from http://isfe.eu/sites/isfe.eu/files/attachments/esa_ef_2010.pdf. 
Accessed 27 July 2016
Entertainment Software Association (2011) Essential facts about the computer and video game 
industry 2011. Retrieved from http://www.isfe.eu/sites/isfe.eu/files/attachments/esa_ef_2011.
pdf. Accessed 27 July 2016
Entertainment Software Association (2012) Essential facts about the computer and video game 
industry 2012. Retrieved from http://www.isfe.eu/sites/isfe.eu/files/attachments/esa_ef_2012.
pdf. Accessed 27 July 2016
Entertainment Software Association (2013) Essential facts about the computer and video game 
industry 2013. Retrieved from http://www.isfe.eu/sites/isfe.eu/files/attachments/esa_ef_2013.
pdf. Accessed 27 July 2016
Entertainment Software Association (2014) Essential facts about the computer and video game 
industry 2014. Retrieved from http://www.theesa.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/ESA_
EF_2014.pdf. Accessed 27 July 2016
Entertainment Software Association (2015) Essential facts about the computer and video game 
industry 2015. Retrieved from http://www.theesa.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/ESA-
Essential-Facts-2015.pdf. Accessed 27 July 2016
Entertainment Software Association (2016) Essential facts about the computer and video game 
industry 2016. Retrieved from http://essentialfacts.theesa.com/Essential-Facts-2016.pdf. 
Accessed 27 July 2016
Fencott C, Lockyer M, Clay J, Massey P (2012) Game invaders, the theory and understanding of 
computer games. Wiley, Hoboken. doi:10.1002/9781118347584
Galna B, Jackson D, Schofield G, McNaney R, Webster M, Barry G et al (2014) Retraining func-
tion in people with Parkinson’s disease using the Microsoft Kinect: game design and pilot 
testing. J Neuroeng Rehabil 11(60). doi:10.1186/1743-0003-11-60
GameTrack (2016) GameTrack digest: Quarter 1, 2016. Retrieved from http://www.isfe.eu/sites/
isfe.eu/files/attachments/gametrack_european_summary_data_2016_q1.pdf. Accessed 4 Aug 
2016
Goldstein J, Cajko L, Oosterbroek M, Michielsen M, van Houten O, Salverda F (1997) Videogames 
and the elderly. Social Behavior and Personality 25(4):345–352
Gschwind YJ, Eichberg S, Marston HR, de Rosario H, Aal K, Ejupi A, Kroll M, Drobics M, 
Annegam J, Wieching R, Lord SR, Delbaere K (2014) ICT-based system to predict and prevent 
falls (iStoppFalls): study protocol for an international multicenter randomized controlled trial. 
BMC Geriatrics
7  Digital Game Technology and Older Adults

168
Gschwind Y, Eichberg S, Ejupi A, de Rosario H, Kroll M, Marston H, Drobics M, Annegarn J, 
Wieching R, Lord SR, Aal K, Vaziri D, Woodbury A, Fink D, Delbaere K (2015a) ICT-based 
system to predict and prevent falls (iStoppFalls): results from an international multicenter ran-
domized controlled trial. Eur Rev Aging Phys Activ (EURAPA) 12(10)
Gschwind YJ, Schoene D, Lord SR, Ejupi A, Valensuela T, Aal K, Woodbury A, Delbaere K 
(2015b) The effect of sensor-based exercise at home on functional performance associated 
with fall risk in older people – a comparison of two exergames interventions. Eur Rev Aging 
Phys Act 12:11. doi:10.1186/s11556-015-0156-5
Hall AK, Chavarria E, Maneeratana V, Chaney BH, Bernhardt JM (2012) Health benefits of digital 
videogames for older adults: a systematic review of the literature. Games for Health Journal 
1(6):402–410. doi:10.1089/g4h.2012.0046
Harley D, Fitzpatrick G, Axelrod L, White G, McAllister G (2010) Making the Wii at home: game 
play by older people in sheltered housing. Lect Notes Comput Sci 6389:156–176. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-642-16607-5_10
Hijmans JM, Hale LA, Satherley JA, McMillan NJ, King MJ (2011) Bilateral upper-limb rehabilita-
tion after stroke using a movement-based game controller. J Rehabil Res Dev 48(8):1005–1013
Holden MK, Dyar TA, Dayan-Cimadoro L (2007) Telerehabilitation using a virtual environment 
improves upper extremity function in patients with stroke. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil 
Eng 15(1):36–42
IJsselsteijn W, Nap HH, de Kort Y, Poels K (2007) Digital game design for elderly users. In: 
Proceedings of the 2007 conference on future play, Toronto, pp 17–22. ACM, New York. Doi: 
10.1145/1328202.1328206
Interactive Games & Entertainment Association (IGEA) (2014) Digital Australia 14. Retrieved 
from 
http://igea.wpengine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/Digital-Australia-2014-DA14.
pdf. Accessed 27 July 2016
Interactive Software Federation of Europe (ISFE) (2012) Videogames in Europe: 2012 consumer 
study. Retrieved from http://www.isfe.eu/industry-facts/statistics. Accessed June 2013
Interactive Software Federation of Europe (ISFE) Germany (2012) Videogames in Europe: 2012 
consumer study. Retrieved from http://www.isfe.eu/sites/isfe.eu/files/attachments/germany_ 
-_isfe_consumer_tracker.pdf. Accessed 8 Aug 2016
Interactive Software Federation of Europe (ISFE) Spain (2012) Videogames in Europe: 2012 con-
sumer study. Retrieved from http://www.isfe.eu/sites/isfe.eu/files/attachments/spain_-_isfe_
consumer_study.pdf. Accessed 8 Aug 2016
Jakicic JM, Davis KK, Rogers RJ, King WC, Marcus MD, Helsel D, Rickman AD, Wahed AS, 
Belle SH (2016) Effect of wearable technology combined with a lifestyle intervention on long-
term weight loss the IDEA randomized clinical trial. JAMA 316(11):1161–1171. doi:10.1001/
jama.2016.12858
Khoo ET, Cheok AD (2006) Age invaders: social and physical inter-generational mixed reality 
family entertainment. Int J Virtual Reality 5(2):45–50
Kochera A, Straight A, Guterbock T (2005) Beyond 50: a report to the nation on liveable communi-
ties – creating environments for successful aging. AARP Public Policy Institute, Washington, 
DC
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) (2014) Tattoo biobatteries pro-
duce power from sweat. ACS Chemistry for Life. Retrieved from https://www.acs.org/content/
acs/en/pressroom/newsreleases/2014/august/tattoo-biobatteries-produce-power-from-sweat-
video.html. Accessed Dec 2016
Lange B, Flynn SM, Rizzo AA (2009) Game-based telerehabilitaiton. Eur J Phys Rehabil Med 
45(1):143–151
Lord SR, Ward JA, Williams P, Zivanovic E (1996) The effects of a community exercise program 
on fracture risk factors in older women. Osteoporos Int 6(5):361–367
Lord SR, Menz HB, Tiedemann A (2003) A physiological profile approach to falls risk assessment 
and prevention. Phys Ther 83(3):237–252
Marston HR (2012) Older adults as 21st century game designers. The computer games journal. 
Whitsun 1(1):90–102
H.R. Marston et al.

169
Marston HR (2013a) Digital Gaming Perspectives of Older Adults: Content vs Interaction: 
Educational Gerontology 39(3):14–208. doi:10.1080/03601277.2012.700817
Marston HR (2013b) Design recommendations for digital game design within an ageing society. 
Journal of Educational Gerontology 39(2):103–118
Marston HR, Hall AK (2015) Gamification: application for health and health information technol-
ogy engagement. In: Novak D, Tulu B, Brendryen H (eds) Handbook of research on holistic 
perspectives in Gamification for clinical practice. Medical Information Science Reference, 
Hershey, pp 78–104. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-9522-1.ch005
Marston HR, McClenaghan PA (2013) Play yourself fit: exercise + videogames = Exergames. In: 
Bredl K, Bösche W (eds) Serious games and multi-user virtual environments in professional 
development and healthcare. IGI. http://www.igiglobal.com/chapter/play-yourself-fit/75818
Marston HR, Smith ST (2012) Interactive videogame technologies to support independence in the 
elderly: a narrative review. Games for health Journal 1(2):139–152. doi:10.1089/g4h.2011.0008
Marston HR, Kroll M, Fink D, Eichberg S (2014). Digital game aesthetics of the iStoppFalls exer-
game. In B. Schouten et al. (Eds). pp. 89–100. Games for Health, 2014. Springer Fachmedien 
Wiesbaden. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-658-07141_12. http://link.springer.com/chapte
r/10.1007%2F978-3-658-07141-7_12
Marston HR, Freeman S, Musselwhite CBA (2015) Where does quality of life (QoL) fit in the 
future of technology in the 21st century. Generations Review, British Society of Gerontology 
Organisation 25(3):8–14
Marston HR, Freeman S, Bishop AK, Beech CL (2016a) Utilization of digital games for older 
adults aged 85+ years: a scoping review. Games for Health Journal 5(3):157–174. doi:10.1089/
g4h.2015.0087
Marston HR, Kroll M, Fink D, de Rosario H, Gschwind YJ (2016b) Technology use, adop-
tion and behaviour in older adults: results from the iStoppFalls project. Educ Gerontol. doi: 
10.1080/03601277.2015.1125178
Marston HR, Kroll M, Fink D, Gschwind YJ (2016c) Flow experience of older adults using the 
iStoppFalls exergames. Special edition. Digital Gaming Ageing Games Cult J 11(1–2):201–
222. doi:10.1177/1555412015605219
Miller KJ, Adair BS, Pearce AJ, Said CM, Ozanne E, Morris MM (2013) Effectiveness and feasibil-
ity of virtual reality and gaming system use at home by older adults for enabling physical activ-
ity to improve health related domains: a systematic review. Age Ageing 0:1–8. doi:10.1093/
ageing/aft194
Nap HH, de Kort YAW, Ijsselsteijn WA (2009) Senior gamers: preferences, motivations and needs. 
Geron 8(4):247–262
Peek ST, Wouters EJ, van Hoof J, Luijkx KG, Boeije HR, Vrijhoef HJ (2014) Factors influencing 
acceptance of technology for aging in place: a systematic review. Int J Med Inform 83(4):235–
248. doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2014.01.004
Peek STM, Aarts S, Wouters EJM (2015) Can smart home technology deliver on the promise 
of independent living? A critical reflection based on the perspectives of older adults. In: van 
Hoof J, Demiris G, Wouters EJM (eds) Handbook of smart homes. Springer, Health Care and 
WellBeing. Cham, pp 1–10
Reed-Jones RJ, Dorgo S, Hitchings MK, Bader JO (2013) WiiFit plus balance test scores for the 
assessment of balance and mobility in older adults. Gait Posture 36(3):430–433. doi:10.1016/j.
gaitpost.2012.03.027
Satariano WA, Scharlack AE, Lindeman D (2014) Aging, place, and technology: toward 
improving access and wellness in older populations. J Aging and Health 26(8):1373–1389. 
doi:10.1177/0898264314543470
Schoene D, Lord SR, Verhoef P, Smith ST (2011) A novel video game-based device for measur-
ing stepping performance and fall risk in older adults. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 92(6):947–953. 
doi:10.1016/j.apmr.2011.01.012
Singer E (2011) The measured life. MIT Technology Review, June 21, 2011. Retrieved from 
https://www.technologyreview.com/s/424390/the-measured-life/. Accessed Dec 2016
Sturnieks DL, Arnold R, Lord SR (2011) Validity and reliability of the Swaymeter device for mea-
suring postural say. BMC Geriatr 11:63. doi:10.1186/1471-2318*11-63
7  Digital Game Technology and Older Adults

170
University of California San Diego (2016) Coupling an electronic skin tattoo to a mobile com-
munication device. US Patent & Trademark Office. Retrieved from http://appft.uspto.gov/
netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsea
rch-adv.html&r=6&p=1&f=G&l=50&d=PG01&S1=%2820131107.PD.+AND+Motorola.
AS.%29&OS=PD/20131107+AND+AN/Motorola&RS=%28PD/20131107+AND+AN/
Motorola%29. Accessed Dec 2016
Uzor S, Baillie L (2014) Investigating the long-term use of Exergames in the home with 
elderly fallers. In: SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems (CHI’14). 
doi:10.1145/2556288.2557160, April 26–1st May, 2014
Vanden Abeele V, Husson J, Vandeurzen L, Desmet S (2007) A software approach to computer sci-
ence: designing & developing games for and with senior citizens. Int J Game Dev 2
Vaziri DD, Aal K, Ogonowski C, Von Rekowski T, Kroll M, Marston HR, De Rosario H, Poveda 
R, Gschwind Y, Delbaere K, Wieching R, Wulf V (2016) Exploring user experience and tech-
nology acceptance for a fall prevention system: Results from a randomized clinical trial and 
a living lab. European Review of Aging and Physical Activity (EURAPA) 13:6. doi:10.1186/
s11556-016-0165-z
Voida A, Greenberg S (2009) Wii all play: the console game as a computational meeting place. In: 
Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems (CHI 
2009), Boston, April 4–9. ACM Press, New York, pp 1559–1568. doi: 10.1145/1518701.1518940
Voida A, Carpendale S, Greenberg S (2010) The individual and the group in console gam-
ing. In: Proceedings of the ACM conference on computer-supported cooperative work 
(CSCW 2010), Savannah, GA, February 6–10. ACM Press, New  York, pp  371–380 
doi:10.1145/1718918.1718983
Wolf G (2010) The data-driven life. The New York Times Magazine, 28 April 2010. Retrieved 
from http://www.Nytimes.Com/2010/05/02/magazine/02self-measurement-t.Html. Accessed 
Dec 2016
World Health Organization (2013) World population ageing report. Retrieved from http://www.un.org/
en/development/desa/population/publications/pdf/ageing/WorldPopulationAgeing2013.pdf. 
Accessed Feb 2017
Yardley L, Beyer N, Hauer K, Kempen G, Piot-Ziegler C, Todd C (2005) Development and initial 
validation of the falls efficacy scale international (FES-I). Age Ageing 34(6):614–619
Yavuzer G, Senel A, Atay MB, Stam HJ (2008) “Playstation eyetoy games” improve upper  
extremity-related motor functioning in subacute stroke: a randomized controlled clinical trial. 
Eur J Phys Rehabil Med 44(3):237–244
Young W, Ferguson S, Brault S, Craig C (2011) Assessing and training standing balance in older 
adults: a novel approach using the ‘Nintendo Wii’ balance board. Gait Posture 33(2):303–305
Hannah R. Marston  is a research fellow, in the Health and Wellbeing Priority Research Area 
(http://healthwellbeing.kmi.open.ac.uk/) in the School of Health, Wellbeing and Social Care, at 
The Open University, UK. In March 2017, Dr. Marston organized the first digital health and well-
being symposium as lead of the Digital Health and Wellbeing Special Interest Group in the Health 
and Wellbeing Priority Research Area. The event was attended by external academics from across 
the UK and comprised of several external speakers and a panel discussion. She is currently orga-
nizing the 2nd Digital Health and Wellbeing conference to be held between 1–3 May, 2018, at The 
Open University campus. Hannah has published over 20 journal papers and 5 book chapters and 
currently serves on two editorial boards. Previously, Dr. Marston has worked internationally under-
taking fixed-term positions in Germany as a research scientist on the iStoppFalls EU project at the 
Institute of Movement and Sport Gerontology at the German Sport University Cologne and in 
Canada as post-doctoral fellow at the University of Waterloo. Hannah interests are multi-cross 
disciplinary and include digital games, gender, ageing, lifespan, gamification, technology use and 
health.
H.R. Marston et al.

171
Michael Kroll is now working in the International Office at the German Sport University Cologne.
Dennis Fink leads the Sport Youth section of the DJK Sports Association, based in Langenfeld, 
NRW, Germany. https://www.djk.de/
Rakel Poveda-Puente holds a Master in Social Welfare, a degree in Social Work and Postgraduate 
Social Gerontology (Universitatde València). Since 1993, Rakel has worked as a Senior Researcher, 
at the Institute of Biomechanics of Valencia (IBV). Since 2015, Rakel has held the position of 
Assistant Professor at the Social Work Department of the Universitat de València. She has 
­participated and conducted R&D projects in several national and European calls (AAL, CIP-ICT, 
Avanza, Plan Nacional). She has published several articles and books in national and international 
publications. She works in the area of ageing and people with disabilities with a special focus on: 
characterization of the technologies users and their problematic, as well as the development of 
methodologies for user friendly design and accessibility.
Yves J. Gschwind studied sport, exercise and health sciences at the University of Basel, 
Switzerland, and the University of Sydney, Australia. His Ph.D. took place at the University 
Hospital in Basel where he predominantly worked with older people suffering from cognitive 
decline. He continued his research focusing on new technologies (ICT) with a postdoc position as 
a research officer at Neuroscience Research Australia, and then moved on to manage various clini-
cal pharmaceutical trials (phase I–IV).
7  Digital Game Technology and Older Adults

173
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017 
H.R. Marston et al. (eds.), Mobile e-Health, Human–Computer Interaction Series, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-60672-9_8
Chapter 8
The Evolution of Telehealth
Melinda Martin-Khan, Shannon Freeman, Kevin Adam, and Georgia Betkus
Abstract  The evolution of telehealth is defined as the change of telehealth over 
time, and how it is developing into a system of health care delivery and exchange of 
information for participants over distance. The term ‘separated’ is becoming less of 
a key element in the current definition of telehealth as we seek to transition tele-
health into an integrated mainstream health care system that is useful for people 
everywhere and not just for people in rural and remote locations. An integrated 
telehealth service enables economies of scale that ensure an affordable and efficient 
system which is available in a timely way, for anyone with access challenges. This 
ensures that the needs of people in rural and remote areas are more likely to be met 
but it also creates a more affordable and efficient system. We are now beginning to 
see that telehealth is not just a second best option if you cannot be there in person, 
but in some instances, telehealth is the best choice, no matter where you live.
The evolution of telehealth encompasses the time when health care was delivered 
exclusively in-person, through to the introduction of technology supported health 
consultations for people who had access challenges, to opportunities that are now 
available for delivering health care and exchanging health information remotely as 
part of a multi-faceted health care system which is delivered either in-person or 
online for people everywhere. Different models of telehealth have evolved to incor-
porate technologies into the health care system to keep pace with this change in 
implementation.
M. Martin-Khan 
Centre of Research Excellence in Telehealth, Centre for Online Health, Centre for Research 
in Geriatric Medicine, School of Medicine, The University of Queensland,  
Level 2, Building 33, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Ipswich Road, Woolloongabba, Brisbane, 
QLD 4102, Australia 
S. Freeman (*) 
School of Nursing, University of Northern British Columbia,  
3333 University Way, Prince George, BC, Canada
e-mail: shannon.freeman@unbc.ca 
K. Adam 
School of Health Sciences, University of Northern British Columbia,  
3333 University Way, Prince George, BC, Canada
G. Betkus 
School of Interdisciplinary Studies, University of Northern British Columbia,  
3333 University Way, Prince George, BC, Canada

174
8.1  Introduction
Telehealth is the delivery of healthcare or the exchange of healthcare information 
using telecommunication technologies when participants are separated by distance 
(World Health Organization 2016). The terms telehealth, telemedicine, and telecare 
are often used interchangeably, and sometimes they have a slightly more nuanced 
meaning. In some literature, telemedicine is used specifically to refer to clinical 
service delivery at a distance. Telehealth has been defined to include the broader 
topic of public health and programs of risk reduction and wellness in relation to 
population health strategies. Telecare has been used to refer specifically to programs 
focused on nursing and community support (Richard Wootton et  al. 2006). 
Healthcare crossing all domains of care will be touched on throughout this chapter 
as we consider the evolution of telehealth. For the purposes of this chapter, we will 
use the term telehealth in its generic form to encompass all these different approaches 
to healthcare and the exchange of healthcare information at a distance (Fatehi and 
Wootton 2012; Wootton et al. 2006).
In this chapter, we will discuss the evolution of telehealth from the time when 
healthcare was delivered exclusively in person through to the opportunities avail-
able because of new technologies for delivering healthcare and exchanging health 
information remotely. We will consider the approaches to telehealth that have been 
adopted to incorporate those technologies into the healthcare system and how this 
has evolved over time.
Telehealth has had a slow uptake in implementation and suffered significant bar-
riers and setbacks. For many early adopters, the opportunities for improving access 
to equitable healthcare were tangible but have proven difficult to actualize. These 
barriers included slow internet connections, expensive equipment, difficult equip-
ment to operationalize, no change management process implementation, and lim-
ited support for the economic case (Oakley et al. 2001). Telehealth was seen as a 
boutique solution for technical enthusiasts that was relevant where healthcare solu-
tions were required in situations of necessity that eliminated the need to be practical 
(such as the Arctic, rural Australia, outer space, and the deep blue sea).
The evolution of telehealth has a parallel journey with the development of the 
technology and research associated with history of telehealth. The way we think 
about telehealth has evolved with the technology and with expanding evidence-
based practice. Technology has changed in recent years to the extent that many of 
the initial barriers have been broken down; in that internet speeds have increased, 
equipment is not as expensive, and the equipment is not as difficult to operate. Many 
of these changes have had a significant impact on the way telehealth has been prac-
ticed in our health services. Telehealth research has moved from a focus on the dif-
ference between visual quality of internet speeds, bandwidth data and data 
compression (Damore et al. 1999; Frankewitsch et al. 2005; Wootton et al. 1997); to 
reliability of diagnosis (Loane et al. 1998; Martin-Khan et al. 2012; Queyroux et al. 
2017); on to patient outcomes, health service implementation and change manage-
ment. The evolution of telehealth parallels these developments. That is not to say we 
have stopped doing studies using these initial designs, but we have expanded the 
M. Martin-Khan et al.

175
methodological research designs and focused on a broader range of telehealth appli-
cations from a research perspective.
In this chapter, evolution of telehealth is defined as the change of telehealth over 
time and how it is developing into a system of healthcare delivery and exchange of 
information for participants over distance and that the term “separated” is becoming 
less of a key element in the current definition of telehealth as we seek to transition 
telehealth into an integrated mainstream healthcare system.
Consequently, the scope of telehealth has expanded beyond the focus of rural 
patients. It has moved to include older frail patients in long-term care, older able 
people living alone at home, active busy people who do not have time to attend doc-
tor’s appointments in person, and now all patients.
The broadening of the customer base is enabled by a different approach to the 
technology solution. The evolving solution moves from one technology option for 
rural patients in one specialty provided by the healthcare service to a solution that is 
multifaceted – different technologies depending on the complexity of the health 
condition, and in some instances, the technology may be provided by the patient. 
This has enabled a broader customer base from a focus on rural patients to patients 
in regional and urban areas. Telehealth is at the forefront of supporting the move to 
including patients as stakeholders in shared care (Richardson et al. 2001; Wootton 
et al. 2006).
Telehealth is at a crucial point in its evolution. We have moved beyond the initial 
stages of discovery and justification. We are now moving into a period where we are 
beginning to understand how to appropriately integrate telehealth as a part of main-
stream healthcare without losing what makes telehealth innovative and vital. At the 
heart of telehealth has been the desire to ensure that people without access receive 
high-quality healthcare, in a timely manner. As we look at telehealth evolving, there 
will always be opportunities for communities in need to receive telehealth as a 
bridge to equitable healthcare.
8.2  Evolution as a Nonlinear Construct
We often think of evolution in a linear fashion. This is usually the case for develop-
ments related to technology. Information storage technology has evolved rapidly 
over the last several decades. For example, the history of computing has seen a 
progression of changes over time which has enabled smaller devices to be used to 
store larger quantities of data (Fig. 8.1). There have been great advances from the 
initial development of portable floppy disks in the early 1970s to the much more 
compact disks in the early 1980s and DVDs in the mid-1990s which allowed much 
greater storage capacity than their floppy disk counterparts. Then following was the 
development of USBs and SD cards which, along with greatly augmented storage 
capacity allowed for unprecedented mobility and ease of use to the development of 
the cloud, allows providers to access vast amounts of information from anywhere 
with an internet connection.
8  The Evolution of Telehealth

176
Evolution in telehealth as described in this chapter is not a linear progression 
with everyone moving in the same direction following individual discoveries or the 
removal of barriers within one sector or specialty resulting in immediate impacts in 
adjacent specialties. Telehealth is a complex, multidimensional translational health 
system, and as such, it is increasingly recognized as a complex intervention to 
implement within the healthcare system.
8.2.1  Barriers to Implementation
Barriers to widespread telehealth implementation are both simultaneously universal 
and unique. There has been recognition that implementation of telehealth initiatives 
without suitable engagement of relevant participants to ensure that all stakeholders 
understand or perceive potential benefits of the new systems has been a significant 
barrier to implementation success (Mair et al. 2012). An assumption that individuals 
or clinical service units will enthusiastically embrace change after identifying the 
clinical benefits of a telehealth service can lead to poor uptake. There are many 
significant factors which contribute to successful implementation beyond recogni-
tion of clinical benefits or future improved workflow. In relation to the wider stake-
holder group, the factors which impact successful implementation include:
•	 Release from current work commitments to establish protocols for the implementa-
tion of new work procedures incorporating telehealth. Training to ensure confi-
dence in the new system
•	 Time to transition without pressure to perform and meet specific performance 
outcomes (like budget deadlines or new quality outcomes – i.e., has the system 
been introduced as a result of an internally enforced measure?)
Fig. 8.1  Evolution of data storage for computing
M. Martin-Khan et al.

177
•	 Qualified staff supporting trial implementations which show flexibility in rec-
ognizing the growing expertise required to adapt the system to that clinical 
service unit to ensure it fits within the workflow (Bradford et al. 2016; Mair 
et al. 2012)
Individual clinician acceptance is a significant contributing factor. It can be a 
barrier to the introduction of a telehealth element to a service if there is no initial 
support. Even if a clinician is initially supportive, but that support disappears, lack 
of clinician acceptance of telehealth can become a subtle barrier to telehealth. Lack 
of acceptance or misunderstanding by clinicians in relation to each aspect of change 
(workflow, resourcing, technology problems, consultation format variation) impacts 
uptake, expansion, and sustainability (Wade et al. 2014). Botsis and Hartvigsen 
(2008) specifically outlined three key factors which allow for success in the imple-
mentation of telehomecare for the elderly and otherwise physically or cognitively 
impaired. They identified that the system must be simple to use, operate without 
interruptions, and provide computer security and data confidentiality (Fig. 8.2). It is 
important that all stakeholders within a clinical health service feel ownership of a 
telehealth implementation as the barriers to successful implementation are signifi-
cant and complex (Bradford et al. 2016). This has been identified as particularly 
important in rural and remote areas when successful implementation involves all 
stakeholders working together. Relying on one enthusiastic champion to maintain 
the system will not embed telehealth into the service and help to overcome the 
­barriers to sustainability (Bradford et al. 2016).
It is also important for patient stakeholders to accept telehealth as an effective 
and innovative way to receive care at home or in their home community. If patients 
Fig. 8.2  Three key factors for delivering telehomecare to the elderly
8  The Evolution of Telehealth

178
are not willing to access these services, then the services are not providing value to 
the patient, community, or healthcare system. One of the barriers to acceptance, and 
ultimately successful implementation of telehealth, is that many people are not 
comfortable using technology. Richter et al. revealed that almost half of the partici-
pants in their study were not comfortable using computers and one third of the 
participants did not even have internet access. Richter et al. also found that partici-
pants did not trust technology to keep their information safe and secure. Due to 
these concerns, only 57.8% of participants in Richter’s study were interested in 
receiving telehealth in their homes.
Seniors and underserved populations may have the most to gain from these new 
health services, but they may also be the most skeptical. These populations did not 
grow up with these technologies and are not used to their presence. The promise that 
these technologies will allow them to receive care in their home or community is not 
enough to compel these populations to accept telehealth. In particular, seniors with 
dementia are uncomfortable with the technology in their home as they feel like they 
are being watched or they forget why the technology is in their home (Milligan et al. 
2011). It has been found that telehealth that improves daily lives by enabling seniors 
to perform household tasks is more widely accepted than telehealth that monitors 
and tracks seniors in their own home (Milligan et al. 2011). Although the technical 
barriers to implementing telehealth have largely been overcome, patient acceptance 
is clearly still an issue.
While these common barriers are universal to all telehealth implementations, 
there are also unique barriers that are recognized due to the issues germane to indi-
vidual situations. We will discuss three here by way of description (low- to middle 
income countries; rural telehealth; and home telehealth). 
Examples of barriers identified in low- to middle-income countries have included 
a lack of training and poor infrastructure. The lack of importance given to data for 
decision-making creates an issue for health information exchange which is impor-
tant when carrying out telehealth, as electronic health records are often an important 
enabler for reliable consultations at a distance (Akhlaq et al. 2016). Akhlaq et al. 
identified examples in Brazil, Kenya, and South Africa where programs incorpo-
rated clinical services and health information exchange which worked together to 
break down the barriers to ensure effective telehealth service delivery in rural areas.
Telehealth as an opportunity for increasing equity for access to healthcare ser-
vice in rural and remote areas has been a long-term goal (House and Roberts 1977; 
Martin-Khan et al. 2015b). Many of these reviews (and studies) focus on avoiding 
travel (Vieira Esteves and Pacheco de Oliveira 2015; Wootton et  al. 2011) and 
increasing the timeliness of access to care. Barriers to this include a lack of vision, 
no ownership of the service, not being able to adapt the service to meet the needs of 
the rural area, having equipment that doesn’t meet the local needs or can’t function 
on the Internet or data transfer speeds available, and not being economically viable 
(Bradford et al. 2016).
Increasingly, we are recognizing that travel is not the only issue that telehealth 
overcomes. Home telehealth is becoming a significant service area of interest. 
M. Martin-Khan et al.

179
Barriers specific to this area include the challenges associated with measuring 
patient-specific outcomes and obtaining measureable outcomes that are linked to 
telehealth service delivery, in project timeframes to show the tangible benefits of 
telehealth in the home. Communication between professionals and patient-clinician 
communication have been identified as a barrier with home telehealth particularly 
as the home is not designed to be a “clinic” setting and issues in relation to access 
to technology and financial implications (who will provide the equipment, delivery 
or patient owned, and how this impacts service sustainability) (Radhakrishnan et al. 
2016).
The need to overcome these barriers has meant that the evolution of telehealth 
does not occur in a liner fashion. Each telehealth implementation is an exploratory 
exercise which begins with knowledge gained from others but also must be tailored 
to the individual situation based on the clinical specialty, the geographic location 
and connectivity opportunities, and the healthcare/workplace gap that is trying to be 
resolved. For this reason, to date, there have been advances in telehealth technology, 
advances in telehealth theoretical understandings, advances in telehealth specialty 
research, and advances in telehealth change management. But this has not meant a 
shared move forward in telehealth across the field collectively, as each of these 
advances has been arrived at in different ways at different times and applied differ-
ently (Fig. 8.3).
Fig. 8.3  Individual 
telehealth growth cycle 
within specialties; growth 
occurring at different rates 
across specialties
8  The Evolution of Telehealth

180
Before moving on to discuss in detail the key elements of the evolution of tele-
health, it is important to reference the two factors in overcoming barriers to imple-
mentation of telehealth: steps to successful transition and a framework for research 
of telehealth implementation.
8.2.2  Successful Transition to Implementation
To ensure that the benefits of telehealth are maximized, Wootton et al. (2006) rec-
ommended a strategy that encompassed the following elements (Fig. 8.4):
•	 Encourage and provide funding for telemedicine research.
•	 Develop a plan for implementation (once clinical effectiveness and cost- 
effectiveness have been demonstrated).
•	 Assess the major structural changes required within organizations to incorporate 
this method of delivering healthcare.
•	 Develop a process for training, formulation of practice guidelines, quality con-
trol, and continuing audit.
•	 Consider ethics and medicolegal concerns, human and cultural factors, resis-
tance to change, lack of infrastructure, linguistic differences and illiteracy, and 
technical and organizational factors (Wootton et al. 2006).
Support with implementation is key to success. We have identified that many 
publications on service implementation have reported very little implementation on 
the planning stages of the process (which is not to say that it has not occurred, but it 
is concerning) (AlDossary et al. 2017b). Applying a planning framework at the ini-
tial stages of implementation to identify if a telehealth application is applicable is 
crucial (AlDossary et al. 2017a), and then using a focused implementation plan 
(such as this telehealth knowledge translation framework (Theodoros et al. 2016)) 
is a key element in the initial stages.
Finally, ongoing evaluation of implementation to ensure that referral protocols 
and safety procedures are being followed and that engagement by all staff within the 
clinical service unit is occurring (Wade et al. 2014) is required to ensure sustain-
ability from a feasibility and financial perspective (Mair et al. 2012).
Galvanize 
Interest 
Implement 
Assess
Develop
Reflect
Fig. 8.4  Schematic overview of the successful implementation of telehealth services
M. Martin-Khan et al.

181
8.2.3  Research Support for Implementation
Historically, each specialty has considered the opportunities and challenges in tele-
health from within that area of expertise and applied a body of research develop-
ment work to understand the potential for clinical application with regard to 
feasibility, reliability, patient safety, and cost. Where possible, potential for general-
izability has been taken, but in many instances, the need to consider specialty- 
specific issues was important for gaining clinical confidence before telehealth 
implementation could become embedded in the clinical service.
Fatehi et  al. (2016) described the stages that are important when planning a 
research strategy for developing a telehealth intervention for evidence-based prac-
tice. These five stages include the following:
	A.	 Concept development
•	 Need analysis
•	 Proof of concept
•	 Technical evaluation
Research teams determine a medical or public health issue, determine a conceiv-
able telehealth service, and attempt to develop an intervention or prototype of the 
proposed solution. They will also seek to demonstrate that it works and is techni-
cally feasible.
	B.	 Service design
•	 Feasibility
•	 Validity
•	 Accessibility
•	 Cost estimation
A change in the conventional model of care enables the accommodation of the 
new intervention. Feasibility and accessibility of the telehealth service are evaluated. 
Information regarding the healthcare needs of patients and their capacity to access 
care services is crucial for deciding if work should continue. Fatehi et al. define five 
dimensions of accessibility to consider including cost (affordability), approachabil-
ity, acceptability, availability and accommodation, and appropriateness.
	C.	 Pre-implementation
•	 Efficacy
•	 Usability
•	 Willingness to pay
•	 Cost analysis
Health service implementation is complex. Therefore, piloting the intervention 
to test if the process achieves the expected patient outcomes in a controlled environ-
ment of the busy healthcare system (efficacy) is important prior to full implementa-
tion. Consideration of the relevance of the telehealth service to all stakeholders 
8  The Evolution of Telehealth

182
(clinicians, patients, health administrators) needs to be taken into account, along 
with a detailed cost analysis in order to understand the value for implementing the 
intervention into practice.
	D.	 Implementation
•	 Effectiveness
•	 Adoption
•	 Scalability
•	 Generalizability
•	 Satisfaction
•	 Cost-effectiveness
The intervention must now be incorporated into telehealth real-world conditions 
and evaluated for its ability to achieve the desired results. These results should be 
similar to the results from studies leading up to this point and will be related to 
patient clinical outcomes. Historically, randomized control trials have been required 
to determine the effectiveness of a health service intervention, but it is increasingly 
being recognized that there are other methodologies more feasible for measuring 
impact in implementation science research. Given the “real-world” implementation, 
economic analysis should be conducted in partnership with outcome studies.
	E.	 Post implementation
•	 Utilization
•	 Quality improvement
•	 Sustainability
•	 Social impact
•	 Cost benefit analysis (23)
Sustainability refers to both the level of usage and the depletion of resources. It 
is important to consider the long-term viability of telehealth services after the initial 
implementation period has passed. Two elements that need to be considered are 
patient and clinician system utilization and, by extension, long-term health out-
comes associated with use. Secondly, the economic cost associated with the system 
and how it may support or deplete associated resources need also to be considered. 
Information from these two perspectives, when considered together, provides 
important feedback to managers and policy makers in relation to whether the tele-
health service is worth further investment (23).
8.3  The Evolution of Telehealth in Four Stages
While we understand that telehealth has not evolved across the specialties in a linear 
fashion, we can describe the theoretical concept of telehealth and its evolution in 
four stages (Fig. 8.5).
M. Martin-Khan et al.

183
8.3.1  Healthcare Delivery in Person
For centuries, medicine in all of its many traditions has been delivered in person. 
From the ancient Babylonians and Egyptians to the Greeks who through Hippocrates 
contributed the Hippocratic oath which is still taken by doctors today, all treatment 
modalities developed relied almost exclusively on the healer being in close proxim-
ity to the patient. To support people who live at a distance from major healthcare 
centers, different approaches to care delivery have been developed:
•	 In some instances, policy decisions have been made to support clinicians to 
travel and reside in locations that are some distance from tertiary centers. For 
example, graduating clinicians (such as primary care doctors) may be encour-
aged to take a rural post prior to accepting a metropolitan position.
•	 A specialist may establish a clinic at a rural or regional hospital and fly to that 
location on a regular basis (bimonthly) and see patients that have accumulated 
through a booking system over the course of the period between visits.
•	 People needing to see a specialist who is not available may travel (with govern-
ment-assisted travel funding) to the nearest hospital, often 20 h away, via plane 
or car to see a specialist.
•	 A medical airplane service flies in and retrieves people with medical acute emer-
gencies and takes them to tertiary hospital centers for the clinical care they need.
•	 People “make do” and go without if the medical care cannot be sourced in time 
for what they need or they are too weak or frail to travel to receive it.
In all these examples, there is a delay in receiving the care that people need. This 
was and is also true for people living in major cities, though it is less obvious. Traffic 
issues, lack of transport, and frailty could cause difficulties in accessing treatment 
even if the treatment center is nearby geographically. During this period, there were 
no other viable alternatives given the lack of developed communication technology, 
but as these communication systems developed, opportunities to support  
people grew, and we became more creative and flexible in establishing systems that 
provided healthcare to those in need.
1) Health care Delivery in Person
2) Telehealth Enabled by the Technology Revolution
3) Telehealth Defined as a Service
4) Healthcare with Telehealth Capabilities 
Fig. 8.5  Four nonlinear stages in telehealth evolution
8  The Evolution of Telehealth

184
8.3.2  Telehealth Enabled by the Technology Revolution
While it has been argued that telehealth as a means of communication from a dis-
tance is centuries old, as we are avoiding an in-depth discussion of the history of 
telemedicine (handled well in other texts), we will focus on the recent history of 
telehealth and the technological advances of the last 150 years.
The advent of the postal service could be regarded as the first use of “store and 
forward” though minimal technology may be involved. In any case, in the mid-
nineteenth century, national postal systems were the norm, and clinicians would 
send inquiries with case reports to one another and receive feedback. This enabled 
the diagnosis and care plans to be written for people at much larger distances than 
before, but the most significant advances came with the advent of telegraphy (1) 
(Wootton 2006).
The first technology that broke the distance barrier was telegraphy, which even-
tually morphed into the telephone and the mobile phone as we know it today. In the 
beginning, being able to speak in “real time” enabled a new level of clinical service, 
and despite many innovations since, the telephone has been the foundation for tele-
health for a long time. It has not been until more recent technological innovations 
have reached the ease of use and widespread adoption, and widespread adoption of 
the telephone, that we have seen telehealth become more accepted into mainstream 
healthcare. For example, imaging is well accepted (X-rays are electronically sent). 
Issues around privacy are challenging the electronic medical heath record, but the 
urgency for a solution is pushing this forward. The ease of videoconferencing is 
seeing this mode of consultation occurring with increasing volume (Skype, Zoom, 
FaceTime, there are so many options at the click of a button), but the levels of stake-
holder acceptability have not broken down yet in the health sector (online clinic 
medical certificates are not accepted at most universities for students).
As technology capabilities continue to expand, the scope of equipment and ser-
vices available across healthcare sectors has also grown and with it the potential 
benefits to healthcare in terms of connectivity and information processing. During 
this period, telemedicine has been seen as something that is new and must be 
approached with care before allowing it to be practiced and reimbursed within 
mainstream healthcare (Krupinski 2009). For this reason, many technologies have 
been tested within research projects at university hospitals or in silo specialties and 
have not progressed quickly or directly to mainstream utilization. Initial prototypes 
are often expensive and clunky which prohibit widespread utilization, and research 
is slow to keep up with fast technology adaptations (the research which is being 
implemented to test whether a technology is reliable continues long after the tech-
nology has been updated with a newer, more advanced model).
During this period, research often focused on specific equipment qualities (could 
the patient hear and see the doctor?) and then on equipment factors within special-
ties (could you make a particular diagnosis within a specialty using that equipment). 
This meant that often similar studies may be repeated as clinicians were concerned 
about drawing generalizations in unfamiliar clinical territory (if you could diagnose 
M. Martin-Khan et al.

185
a rash using telemedicine, could you then diagnose a wound, or did you need another 
study to show reliability for wound care rather than just the rash study reliability as 
generalizable to wound care?). As this is patient care, there is a desire to be cautious 
so telehealth has many small studies of a similar but different nature; but the general 
opinion is that the evidence is still “emerging” for many of the specialties as larger-
scale studies have not been carried out (Grigsby et al. 2005).
To follow is a description of some of the different telehealth technologies and 
how they have developed in healthcare and impacted telehealth.
8.3.2.1  Telephone
Telephones have long been the staple of the delivery of healthcare at a distance, 
utilized for telehealth purposes virtually since its inception (Wooten et al. 2006). 
This type of telehealth can be defined as the information and support provided via 
landline telephone (Barlow et al. 2007). Everyone with access to a telephone can 
participate in this type of telehealth; however, the use of telephones for telehealth 
has evolved over time.
Originally, family physicians would use landline telephones for consultations 
with specialist physicians. However, this form of telehealth did not directly include 
the patient and was proven as an indirect way for patients to receive care (i.e., they 
would not receive the benefit of the advice until their next visit with their doctor 
(Hersh et al. 2001). For this reason, telephone use has evolved to include patient-to-
healthcare provider interaction (phone conference within a consultation or special-
ist to patient consultation). Patients can speak directly to a healthcare provider over 
the phone to ask for advice, relay information, or receive support (McLean et al. 
2011). This type of telephone telehealth has proven to support better patient out-
comes and reduce unnecessary visits to see the healthcare provider (McLean et al. 
2011).
Unfortunately, this form of telehealth does not support users who are deaf and 
hard of hearing or have visual impairments; if users cannot see the numbers to dial 
or hear the healthcare provider on the other end of the line, then this service is not 
providing value. Since vision and hearing are senses that are known to decline as a 
person ages, it is reasonable to believe that the telephone is not the ideal telehealth 
solution for the elderly.
The telephone continues to be a useful tool in clinical care, often as a triage for 
additional telehealth services. The telephone (a landline in this instance) has tradi-
tionally been a common community resource (either for every household or shared 
among neighbors). Using the telephone, clinical staff can assess the urgency for 
medical care or do follow-up after discharge from hospital. For specialists discuss-
ing important matters with older people where their cognitive function is a factor, 
some cognitive testing by phone may be important. Significant work has been done 
in relation to testing the reliability of cognitive assessment via telephone to ensure 
that discussions with older people regarding their medications and personal circum-
stances are accurate, following the use of reliable cognitive assessments (Martin-
8  The Evolution of Telehealth

186
Khan et  al. 2010). To support medication adherence for patients with multiple 
sclerosis, a trial project was carried out which involved home telehealth monitoring 
(a unit that was connected to the home telephone line and sent customized text mes-
sages) and telephone counseling (Turner et al. 2014). The telephone was found to be 
feasible and acceptable for this form of intervention as a way of encouraging health 
promotion activities.
Telephone continues to play a crucial role in telemedicine. The introduction of 
the mobile phone, discussed in detail later, has further cemented the role of tele-
phony in telemedicine. More often than not, telephone is currently excluded from 
telemedicine literature searches as it is now embedded in the healthcare system as a 
meaningful part of healthcare delivery.
8.3.2.2  Photos/X-rays: Imaging
The transmission of photos and X-rays is most commonly associated with the field 
of teleradiology and telepathology. Teleradiology can be defined as the process 
where X-rays are being administered at one location and the resulting image is 
being sent to physicians at another site (Omachonu and Einspruch 2010). 
Telepathology can be defined as the capture of microscopic images which are then 
forwarded to a pathologist for diagnosis (Dervan and Wootton 1998). These sys-
tems, much like store and forward, also do not typically involve direct patient pro-
vider interactions.
The World Health Organization (2016) found teleradiology to be the most mature 
form of telehealth in use, with approximately 60% of all surveyed WHO member 
countries having an established teleradiology system in country. In fact, teleradiol-
ogy is so ubiquitous that it is now considered a part of a regular radiology practice. 
Two thirds of European radiologists surveyed incorporated teleradiology into their 
clinical practice. Telepathology is a close second to teleradiology, though not as 
firmly established in the WHO countries surveyed, with just under 40% of countries 
having an established telepathology service. In addition, 20% of the WHO countries 
surveyed reported having established pilot telepathology programs (World Health 
Organization 2016).
8.3.2.3  Videoconference
Videoconference telehealth can be defined as synchronous video consultation 
between a patient and provider, a provider and provider, or a provider, patient, and 
specialist (Whited 2006). Videoconferencing systems have been widely imple-
mented across the healthcare setting and are rising in popularity as interactive 
video-enabled equipment becomes more accessible.
This platform offers many opportunities to enhance care for the elderly. For 
example, studies have shown that implementation of telehomecare program utiliz-
ing videoconferencing components for elderly patients resulted in improved health, 
M. Martin-Khan et al.

187
decreased numbers of required clinic visits, lowered health risks, and increased 
quality of life (Botsis and Hartvigsen 2008). Research has shown that implementa-
tion of videoconferencing telehomecare for the elderly can be safely implemented 
and delivered at lower costs (Finkelstein et al. 2006). Considering the elderly popu-
lation comprises an ever-increasing proportion of individuals utilizing healthcare 
systems, it is important to utilize healthcare resources as efficiently as possible; 
videoconferencing telehealth systems offer yet another avenue to achieve that 
efficiency.
Despite this, some barriers still exist in utilizing videoconferencing telehealth to 
the elderly. One of the primary barriers to implementing telehomecare using video-
conferencing was user lack of familiarity with the technology. It is frequently 
reported in the literature that elderly patients often fail to respond when videocon-
ferencing has been initiated and face challenges transmitting additional data to the 
healthcare team. This indicates that a lack of familiarity and inadequate orientation 
to the equipment pose an obstacle to their participation. These findings are common 
but not ubiquitous (Botsis and Hartvigsen 2008). This is unsurprising given the 
heterogeneity within the platforms being utilized and within the elderly population 
itself, as the elderly have a higher prevalence of comorbidities such as physical and 
cognitive impairments which limit their ability to utilize videoconferencing in tele-
health (van den Berg et al. 2012).
8.3.2.4  Store and Forward
Store-and-forward healthcare services are defined as the collection of medical infor-
mation followed by its transmission to then be reviewed by subsequent medical 
personal. The technology allows for the capture, storage, and transfer of digital still 
and motion images, as well as text and audio information (Hersh et  al. 2006). 
Utilization of this telehealth does not typically involve direct contact between the 
patient and provider as they are often separated by both time and space where infor-
mation may not be interpreted for hours or even days after the information is ini-
tially collected (Whited 2006).
Store-and-forward technology is affordable, assessable, and easily implemented 
into a practice or telehealth programs. Store-and-forward technology has vast poten-
tial to reduce barriers and inequities for health services. In comparison to synchro-
nous communication technologies, store-and-forward medical consultations require 
a relatively low degree of sophistication and are therefore less costly than other 
telehealth technologies (Whited 2006). Store and forward also has the addition ben-
efit of avoiding the logistical challenge of setting up of implementing a videocon-
ferencing system (Eedy and Wootton 2001).
Store-and-forward technology has been widely adopted by the dermatologists. 
Their specialty lends itself particularly well to the implementation of the technol-
ogy. These services typically utilize readily available digital cameras and have eas-
ily accessible secure forwarding platforms in which to forward images (Hersh et al. 
2006). Studies have shown that store and forward in teledermatology is a reliable 
8  The Evolution of Telehealth

188
form of teleconsultation and telediagnosis (Whited 2006). Store-and-forward tech-
nology has also been incorporated into other clinical specialties including ophthal-
mology, wound care, cardiology, gynecology, and gastroenterology.
8.3.2.5  Mobile Phones
Mobile health is defined as the use of mobile computing and communication tech-
nologies in healthcare and public health (Free et al. 2010). Smartphones, defined as 
“mobile phones with computer features that may enable them to, with computerized 
systems, send e-mails, and access the web”(Fiordelli et al. 2013), have seen a surge 
forward in the usability of handheld/portable technology for healthcare. It has also 
increased the opportunity for user owned equipment access opportunities.
Mobile phones are owned by a significant proportion of the population and as 
such have been touted as an opportunity cut down barriers to health inequity. Despite 
this, there is still a gap in the poorest areas where the cost of a mobile phone (both 
purchase and ongoing costs) has an impact on the overall family budget and access 
to ongoing calls and texts. For example, a study in 2012 found that 75% of partici-
pants who were South African and living below the poverty line had a mobile phone, 
but there was no information about what type of phone (James 2015).
For those people with a mobile phone, it has been identified that different fea-
tures of the mobile phone can provide health and wellness support, for example, 
smoking cessation, diabetes management, hypertension, weight loss, diet and phys-
ical activity, treatment adherence, and disease management. The mobile phone is 
useful for activities such as reminder, short text messages (SMS), and alerts which 
result in health benefits for patients (Fiordelli et al. 2013; Guy et al. 2012).
An interesting element to mobile health applications is that patients are in control 
of the device. The fact that it is personal, intelligent, connected, and with the indi-
vidual all the time is a very powerful tool. Secondly, the individual finances the 
device and often purchases health apps personally. Interestingly, minimal research 
has been done on industry-available apps or products that are available within the 
phone systems (“native applications” Klasnja and Pratt 2012) and the health bene-
fits attributed to individuals.
8.3.2.6  Robots or Knowbots
Utilizing computing power in a mobile unit with decision-making capacity to pro-
vide assistance is a challenging but increasingly feasible healthcare option. This 
would be commonly known as a robot. A robot is a machine that is capable of car-
rying out complex tasks, it is generally programed by a computer, and the tasks are 
automated. Robots have become more useful as they have become more complex 
with the tasks becoming more intricate and elements of decision-making complex-
ity included in the programing. Artificial intelligence-based applications have led to 
the creation of new devices being referred to as knowledge robots or “knowbots” 
M. Martin-Khan et al.

189
(Ferrante 2005). This can also be referred to as an intelligent agent. An intelligent 
agent is “any program that can be considered by the user to be acting as an assistant 
or helper, rather than as a tool in the manner of a conventional direct manipulation 
interface. An agent should also display some, but perhaps not all, of the characteris-
tics that are associated with human intelligence including: learning, inference, 
adaptability, independence, creativity, etc.”(Lieberman 1997). In thinking about the 
use of this technology, we need to understand the difference between an agent and 
a tool as defined by Lieberman. In the early stages, a robot may just be a tool, com-
pleting tasks that were specifically assigned and detailed to be carried out, but with 
more sophisticated computing, the element of agency is introduced, and the “know-
bot” is now expected to have a certain level of decision-making within specified 
boundaries and be acting in support of the people they are working with and not just 
“completing tasks by rote”; to this end, there is an element of autonomy in their 
function and decision-making. Siri is an example of an intelligent agent designed to 
work in support of the person who possesses an iPhone or iPad. There is a certain 
level of programming and a degree of autonomy. In addition, Siri has some learning 
capacity and “gets to know” its user.
Knowbots are useful in the care of people with cognitive impairment, and they 
are starting to be implemented as a support for people who are disabled and for frail, 
older people. An example is the Paro which is a robot seal used for animal therapy 
for people with cognitive impairment in residential care. The robot seal responds 
autonomously to touch and speech of the people around it, and it learns to recognize 
the people it is with most often (Moyle et al. 2013). Robots are being used to sort 
and dispense medicines to reduce human error and to count, sort, deliver, and steril-
ize surgical tools. The RoboCourier made by Swisslog Healthcare Solutions is an 
autonomous mobile robot that carries information or products in a secure carrier 
throughout a building (up elevators or through automatic doors) (Lee 2013).
There is concern about how the introduction of robots will impact the workforce. 
A survey of current attitudes toward robots (knowbots or intelligent agents)  
identified different attitudes depending on the roles adopted. There tended to be a 
more negative response to robots involved in a direct caring role, but more accepting 
toward service or monitoring tasks (Göransson et al. 2008). Lee et al. identified two 
“opportunities” for robots to impact healthcare: firstly, in replacing positions previ-
ously held by employees such as packaging drugs or delivering lab results and sec-
ondly in creating telehealth solutions where we weren’t aware there was a problem, 
for example, connection clinicians and patients in meaningful ways that hadn’t pre-
viously been imagined (Lee 2013). There is also an opportunity for robots to sup-
port existing roles where there are current shortages but extra support would improve 
safety and quality controls without removing existing jobs. Currently, robots, as 
with all new technologies, are very expensive and as such are outside the reach of 
most small- to medium-sized hospitals. Therefore, they are mostly used by larger 
organizations, academic hospitals, or research-funded projects. As with most tech-
nology, when the price drops, scalability will improve.
8  The Evolution of Telehealth

190
8.3.3  Telehealth Defined as a Service
Telehealth falls under the domain of healthcare innovation which can be defined as 
the synthesis of a novel concept, idea, service, or product, with the express intent of 
improving and augmenting care, improving safety, and providing outreach modali-
ties, prevention, and research, with the overarching goal of improving health service 
quality and patient and provider safety, improving outcomes, increasing efficiency, 
and improving costs (Omachonu and Einspruch 2010). As technology has evolved, 
so has telehealth as a service. As previously mentioned, telehealth was originally 
designed to provide needed healthcare services to residents in rural and remote 
communities. Overtime, this mission has expanded to include provision of care to 
residents of urban centers, frail elderly, and busy professionals.
8.3.4  Healthcare with Telehealth Capabilities
The final phase of the telehealth evolution is a healthcare system with telehealth 
capabilities. Once it is recognized that telehealth has potential to meet a need for 
almost any demographic, there is a justification for seeking to embed the system 
within the wider healthcare network. This requires an understanding of how the 
healthcare system works, the potential of the technology, and a willingness to reen-
gineer healthcare. We know that now technology is becoming less expensive and 
available to more people, we can tailor opportunities to interact with the healthcare 
system in a new way. This also requires an awareness that there will be people who 
still can’t afford some of those technologies and that policy decisions will need to 
ensure that people aren’t disadvantaged.
When evolving to an embedded healthcare system, the goal is that each new 
“telehealth” technology would eventually cease to be a telehealth technology and 
would become a routine part of the healthcare system. Current examples would 
include the telephone. There are several papers of telephone telehealth projects 
(from 20 years ago), but people often exclude it now as “not telehealth.” More fre-
quently, electronic medical records are being considered a standard part of the 
healthcare system and no longer a “telehealth” specialty, but an issue for the wider 
healthcare community. Sending X-rays electronically used to be a telehealth topic, 
but now it is routine care both across town and within hospitals. Finally, email 
(including photos) is sometimes included as telehealth and sometimes excluded as 
it is very close to being considered “standard.” Photos are likely to be included in 
telehealth longer (wound care, dermatology) as taking a good photo is challenging 
and impacts diagnosis, so this may not disappear from the telehealth arena in the 
short term.
There is recognition that for telehealth to be successful, it cannot be a boutique 
service, it has to be generalizable, there have to be economies of scale, and it has to 
be something everyone does. It must also be a solution that is matched to the need. 
M. Martin-Khan et al.

191
This has only become possible when we truly recognized that telehealth was not just 
for rural patients or older frail patients, but with a reengineering of the healthcare 
system, it is for everyone. A silo service that is offered for rural patients, or older 
patients in residential care, is not necessarily the best service approach available. 
Until we embed that service within the healthcare system and ensure that all the 
resources of the healthcare organisation are facilitating those services, then rural 
and remote patients or older people in residential care won’t be receiving the best 
service possible.
An example is an online appointment and consultation service for primary care 
and specialist consultation (general practice and outpatients). In the “old days,” a 
person living in rural or remote area would drive or be flown in from your nearest 
town to see the specialist in the city for your 10-min appointment. After the intro-
duction of videoconferencing, you would go to the local healthcare center and have 
a video consultation with the specialist organized by her receptionist talking to you 
and your general practitioner (GP) and posting out a confirmation letter. In this fully 
evolved model, your GP would tell you that you need to see the specialist (it now 
doesn’t matter whether the hospital is 10 min away and parking is $30 an hour, or 
30 h away); and you would go online and request an appointment and upload your 
referral letter (that had been emailed to you by your GP). You would choose an 
appointment date that suited you and confirm that video consultation in your office 
was your preferred option. Following a check of your referral letter, you would 
receive an email with a link for the video consultation, and on the day of your 
appointment, you would click on the link and wait in a “consultation room” for the 
specialist to appear (during your lunch hour – no sick leave required).
At this point, we move away from focusing on individual technology solutions, 
or individual specialties, and start to consider healthcare systems as a complete unit. 
Solutions begin to be implemented on a larger scale, for example, telehealth centers 
within a hospital that provide services to multiple specialties within the center and 
also support clinicians to run telehealth services from their own units within the 
hospital (Martin-Khan et al. 2015a).
To come to this point, we need to start thinking about which healthcare design 
solution is best for a situation and which combination of resources will be most 
resource efficient, to meet all stakeholder needs and that support quality clinical 
outcomes. The resultant model may be a combination of “telehealth experiences” 
and traditional health approaches. We need to be sure to consider that some of the 
technology may not be owned by the organization but that healthcare can be 
accessed on resources owned by patients and that some healthcare may be preven-
tion or risk reduction activities and not just acute or chronic care. Equipment that 
may be used includes mobile phones, iPad, and personal computers. Interactions 
may include social media, messaging, appointments, and lifestyle support.
Ubiquitous computing refers to unobtrusive computer systems because they 
enable the use of computers daily without the user being aware of the technology 
interaction. Ubiquitous computing may refer to voice recognition on telephones, 
motion detectors, or sensors that measure weight (Ferrante 2005). Ubiquitous com-
puting is particularly important in this phase of telehealth evolution as the line 
8  The Evolution of Telehealth

192
between telehealth and healthcare is being blurred. The use of intelligent agents 
within the healthcare system to improve the automation of systems and yet indi-
vidualize them has potential; this is particularly useful for medications, meal plans, 
music choices, and leisure activities.
As technology becomes more sophisticated, users will become more comfort-
able with using it within the healthcare system, and the barriers to daily use will be 
less challenging. At present, this remains a significant difficulty; telehealth is still 
struggling to gain wide acceptance (Krupinski 2009). While we must continue to 
carry out research relating to efficacy, there is a need to focus on change manage-
ment and an understanding of barriers to implementation. It is important to under-
stand what the real barriers to acceptance are and to support increased knowledge in 
this area.
8.4  Evolution at Different Rates
There have been significant developments and change in healthcare in the last 
decade with cost of equipment decreasing and the complexity and capacity of tech-
nology increasing. In addition, the ownership of technology has moved from indus-
try to individuals which will lead to an increase in the opportunities for healthcare 
partnerships in the future of telehealth. The impact of these changes will be felt in 
different healthcare institutions and in different specialties at different rates, but it is 
hoped that everyone is evolving toward the same end. For example, 80% of WHO 
countries surveyed in 2015 reported having a teleradiology program, while 40% of 
WHO countries reported having a telepsychiatry program (World Health 
Organization 2016). This further exemplifies the differential rates of change with 
respect to different specialties incorporating telemedicine within its scope of 
practice.
Opportunities for telehealth to be ubiquitous in the healthcare system are largely 
dependent on context, timing, and transformation (Krupinski 2009). In some 
instances, opportunities will come in one specialty that enable a significant leap 
forward, supported by policy change and funding, which takes the telehealth ele-
ments into the mainstream healthcare infrastructure and embeds it within the system 
seamlessly. In this way, patients and clinicians don’t think of it as “telehealth” any-
more but as “healthcare.” For another specialty, more layers of research may be 
required, before policy change or clinician acceptance occur which create the con-
text for transformation.
M. Martin-Khan et al.

193
8.4.1  Research Supporting Evolution
The quality of telehealth published research has improved over time, but telehealth 
is still not widely implemented, and there remain many barriers to universal accep-
tance including a paucity of evidence around clinical effectiveness (Grigsby et al. 
2005). There have been a number of studies (included in systematic reviews) which 
have examined clinical outcomes (Estai et al. 2016; Hamine et al. 2015; Hui et al. 
2017; Thomas et  al. 2014), patient satisfaction (Jenkins-Guarnieri et  al. 2015; 
Liptrott et al. 2017; Mair and Whitten 2000; Williams et al. 2001), other stakehold-
ers (Leibowitz et al. 2003; Shulman et al. 2010), and cost (Kairy et al. 2009; Mistry 
2012; Rojas and Gagnon 2008). A significant challenge in research is the rate of 
technological development and adaption and the comparably slower pace of 
research. There are instances of telemedicine activity and implementation in some 
clinical specialties, where research has not been able to be done on efficacy, prior to 
that implementation (Hersh et  al. 2001). The reasons implementation has gone 
ahead are complex and not always unjustified.
Research methodologies that align well with implementation science and that 
will enable the study of effectiveness during clinical care are required as many of 
these technologies (medical records, mobile phones, apps) are being implemented 
during or before long clinical trials can be implemented. Control groups (as part of 
randomized control trials or clinical trials) are not feasible in many instances, and 
yet evidence to support widespread uptake is still required for funding or policy 
innovation. Building the body of evidence has been difficult because of the chal-
lenges around establishing appropriate research models. Increasingly, it is becom-
ing clear that there are challenges for telehealth in terms of the traditional scientific 
model of randomized control trials (Grigsby et al. 2005; Joseph 2013; Krupinski 
2009). Other options that may be more suitable include multi-institutionalized trials 
or quasi-experimental studies.
8.5  Conclusion
The way we have utilized technology in healthcare has evolved over time. Initially, 
we were primarily a human-based workforce with limited opportunity to minimize 
the barriers of distance and time. As technological breakthroughs in infrastructure 
and computing began, the implications for healthcare were realized. Initially, atten-
tion was focused on testing the safety and reliability of individual equipment and 
infrastructure installations. This advanced to utilizing equipment within specialties 
for disease-specific support. As telehealth evolved, technology solutions were iden-
tified with flagship services for individual health services such as teledermatology 
or telehomecare. These were stand-alone solutions, often embedded within a larger 
health service, to provide a telehealth silo service alongside a partner health service. 
We then moved to focus on increasing the range of stakeholders, from only 
8  The Evolution of Telehealth

194
providing telehealth to rural patients; we realized that telehealth had relevance to 
frail older people in large urban areas. Soon we began to understand that telehealth 
had applicability to everyone, including young, busy professionals who were just 
too busy to leave the office. It was at this point that telehealth became relevant to all 
and evolved to the point where there was potential for it to be embedded within the 
healthcare system.
As Grover identifies, we are still living in the “mainframe era of healthcare, and 
what we need is the healthcare equivalent of the low cost PC” (Schlender 2003). We 
are seeking to evolve into the era where telehealth services are all embedded within 
the mainstream health service, in a way that people no longer notice that they are 
even using “telehealth” in the same way that they no longer consider the telephone 
“telehealth.” We need to configure healthcare differently to ensure that we can pro-
vide it more economically by taking advantage of the unique technologies we now 
have available to us. We need to be interacting with patients as equal partners in 
healthcare and be receiving some data/connectivity from them for health interac-
tions. We need to be transitioning some elements of our healthcare activity to intel-
ligent agents to support quality assurance and safety and to provide interactive 
support for people in need. When we are fully maximizing technology in the health 
sector, without separating telehealth into a silo for experimental or service purposes, 
we will know that we have evolved to the next phase of quality healthcare.
References
Akhlaq A, McKinstry B, Muhammad KB, Sheikh A (2016) Barriers and facilitators to health 
information exchange in low- and middle-income country settings: a systematic review. Health 
Policy Plan 31(9):1310–1325. doi:10.1093/heapol/czw056
AlDossary S, Martin-Khan MG, Bradford NK, Armfield NR, Smith AC (2017a) The development 
of a telemedicine planning framework based on needs assessment. J Med Syst 41(5):74
AlDossary S, Martin-Khan MG, Bradford NK, Smith AC (2017b) A systematic review of the 
methodologies used to evaluate telemedicine service initiatives in hospital facilities. Int J Med 
Inform 97:171–194
Barlow J, Singh D, Bayer S, Curry R (2007) A systematic review of the benefits of home telecare 
for frail elderly people and those with long-term conditions. J Telemed Telecare 13(4):172–179
Botsis T, Hartvigsen G (2008) Current status and future perspectives in telecare for elderly people 
suffering from chronic diseases. J Telemed Telecare 14(4):195–203
Bradford NK, Caffery LJ, Smith AC (2016) Telehealth services in rural and remote Australia: a 
systematic review of models of care and factors influencing success and sustainability. Rural 
Remote Health 16(4):1–23
Damore LJ 2nd, Johnson JA, Dixon RS, Iverson MA, Ellison EC, Melvin WS (1999) Transmission 
of live laparoscopic surgery over the Internet2. Am J Surg 178(5):415–417
Dervan PA, Wootton R (1998) Diagnostic telepathology. Histopathology 32(3):195–198
Eedy DJ, Wootton R (2001) Teledermatology: a review. Br J Dermatol 144(4):696–707
Estai M, Bunt S, Kanagasingam Y, Kruger E, Tennant M (2016) Diagnostic accuracy of teleden-
tistry in the detection of dental caries: a systematic review. J Evid Based Dent Pract 16(3):161–
172. doi:10.1016/j.jebdp.2016.08.003
M. Martin-Khan et al.

195
Fatehi F, Wootton R (2012) Telemedicine, telehealth or e-health? A bibliometric analysis of the 
trends in the use of these terms. J Telemed Telecare 18(8):460–464
Fatehi F, Smith AC, Maeder A, Wade V, Gray LC (2016) How to formulate research questions and 
design studies for telehealth assessment and evaluation. J Telemed Telecare:1–5
Ferrante FE (2005) Evolving telemedicine/ehealth technology. Telemed J E-Health 11(3):370–
383. doi:10.1089
Finkelstein SM, Speedie SM, Potthoff S (2006) Home telehealth improves clinical outcomes at 
lower cost for home healthcare. Telemed J E-Health 12(2):128–136
Fiordelli M, Diviani N, Schulz PJ (2013) Mapping mHealth research: a decade of evolution. J Med 
Internet Res 15(5):e95–e95. doi:10.2196/jmir.2430
Frankewitsch T, Söhnlein S, Müller M, Prokosch H-U (2005) Computed quality assessment of 
MPEG4-compressed DICOM video data. Stud Health Technol Inform 116:447–452
Free C, Phillips G, Felix L, Galli L, Patel V, Edwards P (2010) The effectiveness of M-health 
technologies for improving health and health services: a systematic review protocol. BMC Res 
Notes 3(1):250
Göransson O, Pettersson K, Larsson PA, Lennernäs B (2008) Personals attitudes towards robot 
assisted health care – a pilot study in 111 respondents. Stud Health Technol Inform 137:56–60
Grigsby J, Brega AG, Devore PA (2005) The evaluation of telemedicine and health services 
research. Telemed J E-Health 11(3):317–328
Guy R, Hocking J, Wand H, Stott S, Ali H, Kaldor J (2012) How effective are short message ser-
vice reminders at increasing clinic attendance? A meta-analysis and systematic review. Health 
Serv Res 47(2):614–632
Hamine S, Gerth-Guyette E, Faulx D, Green BB, Ginsburg AS (2015) Impact of mHealth chronic 
disease management on treatment adherence and patient outcomes: a systematic review. J Med 
Internet Res 17(2):e52–e52. doi:10.2196/jmir.3951
Hersh W, Helfand M, Wallace J, Kraemer D, Patterson P, Shapiro S et al (2001) Telemedicine for 
the Medicare population. Evidence report/technology assessment no. 24. AHRQ publication 
no. 01-E012. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Rockville
Hersh WR, Hickam DH, Severance SM, Dana TL, Krages KP, Helfand M (2006) Diagnosis, access 
and outcomes: update of a systematic review of telemedicine services. J Telemed Telecare 
12(2_suppl):3–31
House A, Roberts J (1977) Telemedicine in Canada. Can Med Assoc J 117(4):386
Hui CY, Walton R, McKinstry B, Jackson T, Parker R, Pinnock H (2017) The use of mobile appli-
cations to support self-management for people with asthma: a systematic review of controlled 
studies to identify features associated with clinical effectiveness and adherence. J Am Med Inf 
Assoc 24(3):619–632. doi:10.1093/jamia/ocw143
James J (2015) The impact of mobile phones on poverty and inequality in developing countries. 
Springer, Cham
Jenkins-Guarnieri MA, Pruitt LD, Luxton DD, Johnson K (2015) Patient perceptions of Telemental 
health: systematic review of direct comparisons to in-person psychotherapeutic treatments. 
Telemed J E-Health: Off J Am Telemed Assoc 21(8):652–660. doi:10.1089/tmj.2014.0165
Joseph VV (2013) The effects of telehealth on patients with long-term conditions in routine health-
care use and lessons from practical application. In: Telehealth networks for hospital services: 
new methodologies. IGI Global, pp 103–120
Kairy D, Lehoux P, Vincent C, Visintin M (2009) A systematic review of clinical outcomes, clini-
cal process, healthcare utilization and costs associated with telerehabilitation. Disabil Rehabil 
31(6):427–447. doi:10.1080/09638280802062553
Klasnja P, Pratt W (2012) Healthcare in the pocket: mapping the space of mobile-phone health 
interventions. J Biomed Inform 45(1):184–198
Krupinski EA (2009) History of telemedicine: evolution, context, and transformation. Telemed 
E-Health 15(8):804–805
Lee J (2013) Robots get to work. More hospitals are using automated machines, but jury’s still out 
on success. Mod Healthc 43(21):20–23
8  The Evolution of Telehealth

196
Leibowitz R, Day S, Dunt D (2003) A systematic review of the effect of different models of after-
hours primary medical care services on clinical outcome, medical workload, and patient and 
GP satisfaction. Fam Pract 20(3):311–317
Lieberman H (1997) Autonomous interface agents. Paper presented at the proceedings of the ACM 
SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems
Liptrott S, Bee P, Lovell K (2017) Acceptability of telephone support as perceived by patients with 
cancer: a systematic review. Eur J Cancer Care. doi:10.1111/ecc.12643
Loane M, Corbett R, Bloomer S, Eedy D, Gore H, Mathews C et al (1998) Diagnostic accuracy 
and clinical management by realtime teledermatology. Results from the Northern Ireland arms 
of the UK multicentre Teledermatology trial. J Telemed Telecare 4(2):95–100
Mair F, Whitten P (2000) Systematic review of studies of patient satisfaction with telemedicine. 
BMJ (Clinical Research Ed) 320(7248):1517–1520
Mair FS, May C, O’Donnell C, Finch T, Sullivan F, Murray E (2012) Factors that promote or 
inhibit the implementation of e-health systems: an explanatory systematic review. Bull World 
Health Organ 90(5):357–364. doi:10.2471/BLT.11.099424
Martin-Khan M, Wootton R, Gray L (2010) A systematic review of the reliability of screening for 
cognitive impairment in older adults by use of standardised assessment tools administered via 
the telephone. J Telemed Telecare 16(8):422–428
Martin-Khan M, Flicker L, Wootton R, Loh P-K, Edwards H, Varghese P et al (2012) The diagnos-
tic accuracy of Telegeriatrics for the diagnosis of dementia via video conferencing. J Am Med 
Dir Assoc 13(5). doi:10.1016/j.jamda.2012.03.004
Martin-Khan M, Fatehi F, Kezilas M, Lucas K, Gray LC, Smith AC (2015a) Establishing a central-
ised telehealth service increases telehealth activity at a tertiary hospital BMC Health Serv Res 
15. doi:10.1186/s12913-015-1180-x
Martin-Khan M, Salih S, Rowland J, Wootton R, Gray L (2015b) General practitioners, patients, 
and care givers support the use of a Telegeriatric memory disorder consultation for older adults. 
Adv Alzheimer’s Dis 4:1–9. doi:10.4236/aad.2015.41001
McLean S, Protti D, Sheikh A (2011) Telehealthcare for long term conditions. BMJ 342:d120
Milligan C, Roberts C, Mort M (2011) Telecare and older people: who cares where? Soc Sci Med 
72(3):347–354
Mistry H (2012) Systematic review of studies of the cost-effectiveness of telemedicine and telec-
are. Changes in the economic evidence over twenty years. J  Telemed Telecare 18(1):1–6. 
doi:10.1258/jtt.2011.110505
Moyle W, Cooke M, Beattie E, Jones C, Klein B, Cook G, Gray C (2013) Exploring the effect of 
companion robots on emotional expression in older adults with dementia: a pilot randomized 
controlled trial. J Gerontol Nurs 39(5):46–53. doi:10.3928/00989134-20130313-03
Oakley A, Rademaker M, Duffill M (2001) Teledermatology in the Waikato region of New Zealand. 
J Telemed Telecare 7(Suppl 2):59–61
Omachonu VK, Einspruch NG (2010) Innovation in healthcare delivery systems: a conceptual 
framework. Innov J Public Sector Innov J 15(1):1–20
Queyroux A, Saricassapian B, Herzog D, Müller K, Herafa I, Ducoux D et al (2017) Accuracy 
of Teledentistry for diagnosing dental pathology using direct examination as a gold standard: 
results of the Tel-e-dent study of older adults living in nursing homes. J Am Med Dir Assoc 
18(6):528–532. doi:10.1016/j.jamda.2016.12.082
Radhakrishnan K, Bo X, Jacelon CS (2016) Unsustainable Home Telehealth: a Texas qualitative 
study. Gerontologist 56(5):830–840. doi:10.1093/geront/gnv050
Richardson WC, Berwick DM, Bisgard J, Bristow L, Buck C, Cassel C (2001) Crossing the qual-
ity chasm: a new health system for the 21st century. Institute of Medicine, National Academy 
Press, Washington
Rojas SV, Gagnon M-P (2008) A systematic review of the key indicators for assessing tele-
homecare cost-effectiveness. Telemed J E-Health: Off J Am Telemed Assoc 14(9):896–904. 
doi:10.1089/tmj.2008.0009
Schlender B (2003) Intel’s Andy grove: the next battles in tech. Fortune 12:80–81
M. Martin-Khan et al.

197
Shulman RM, O’Gorman CS, Palmert MR (2010) The impact of telemedicine interventions involv-
ing routine transmission of blood glucose data with clinician feedback on metabolic control in 
youth with type 1 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Pediatr Endocrinol 
2010:1–9. doi:10.1155/2010/536957
Theodoros D, Hill A, Hartley N, Martin-Khan M, Bird D, Russell T et al (2016) Innovation to 
implementation for Telehealth: a practical guide to knowledge translation in Telehealth. CRE 
in Telehealth, The University of Queensland, Australia
Thomas SM, Jeyaraman MM, Hodge WG, Hutnik C, Costella J, Malvankar-Mehta MS (2014) The 
effectiveness of teleglaucoma versus in-patient examination for glaucoma screening: a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One 9(12):e113779–e113779. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0113779
Turner AP, Sloan AP, Kivlahan DR, Haselkorn JK (2014) Telephone counseling and home tele-
health monitoring to improve medication adherence: results of a pilot trial among individuals 
with multiple sclerosis. Rehabil Psychol 59(2):136
van den Berg N, Schumann M, Kraft K, Hoffmann W (2012) Telemedicine and telecare for older 
patients—a systematic review. Maturitas 73(2):94–114
Vieira Esteves T, Pacheco de Oliveira S (2015) Telehealth in Brazil: contemporary tool for access 
to health. Stud Health Technol Inform 216:995–995
Wade VA, Eliott JA, Hiller JE (2014) Clinician acceptance is the key factor for sustainable tele-
health services. Qual Health Res 24(5):682–694. doi:10.1177/1049732314528809
Whited JD (2006) Teledermatology research review. Int J Dermatol 45(3):220–229
Williams TL, May CR, Esmail A (2001) Limitations of patient satisfaction studies in telehealth-
care: a systematic review of the literature. Telemed J  E-Health: Off J  Am Telemed Assoc 
7(4):293–316
Wootton R, Dornan J, Fisk NM, Harper A, Barry-Kinsella C, Kyle P et al (1997) The effect of 
transmission bandwidth on diagnostic accuracy in remote fetal ultrasound scanning. J Telemed 
Telecare 3(4):209–214
Wootton R, Craig J, Patterson V (2006) Introduction to telemedicine, vol 206. Royal Society of 
Medicine Press, London
Wootton R, Bahaadinbeigy K, Hailey D (2011) Estimating travel reduction associated with the use 
of telemedicine by patients and healthcare professionals: proposal for quantitative synthesis in 
a systematic review. BMC Health Serv Res 11:185–195. doi:10.1186/1472-6963-11-185
World Health Organisation (2016) Global diffusion of eHealth: making universal health coverage 
achievable. Retrieved from: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/252529/1/9789241511780-
eng.pdf?ua=1
Melinda Martin-Khan is a health scientist with a joint appointment in the Centre for Online 
Health and the Centre for Research in Geriatric Medicine, in the Faculty of Medicine at the 
University of Queensland, Australia. Her gerontology focus is across the fields of telehealth, qual-
ity indicator development and dementia with international collaborators. She has worked on proj-
ects in long-term care, acute care and the emergency department and has received more than $11M 
in project funding.
Shannon Freeman is an assistant professor in the School of Nursing at the University of Northern 
British Columbia, co-president of the British Columbia Psychogeriatric Association, current vice 
president of the International Association on Geriatrics and Gerontology Coalition of Student 
Organizations and an interRAI Canada researcher. Dr. Freeman’s research interests focus on the 
health and wellbeing of vulnerable populations with current research projects in the areas of geron-
technology, mental health and wellbeing of older adults and First Nations Elders and long-term 
care. She is a director of the Prince George Hospice Society and also takes an active role in research 
examining hospice palliative and end-of-life care.
8  The Evolution of Telehealth

198
Kevin Adam is a student in the School of Health Sciences pursuing a degree in Biomedical 
Sciences at the University of Northern British Colombia. He is a Regional Stakeholder with 
Canadian Blood Services and has an avid interest in health systems, gerontology, gero-technology, 
and emergency care. He has participated in policy development within the Canadian blood system, 
aboriginal intergenerational research, and several literature reviews.
Georgia Betkus is a master’s student in Interdisciplinary Studies at the University of Northern 
British Columbia. She is a research assistant for the Northern Health Authority and holds an under-
graduate degree in Health Science from the University of Northern British Columbia. She has 
contributed to numerous health research initiatives and is currently a project manager for a tele-
health initiative in northern British Columbia, Canada.
M. Martin-Khan et al.

Part V
Ethics, Theory & Service Provision

201
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017 
H.R. Marston et al. (eds.), Mobile e-Health, Human–Computer Interaction Series, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-60672-9_9
Chapter 9
On the Need for Developmental Perspectives 
in Research on the Potential Positive 
and Negative Health Effects of Digital Games
Adrienne Holz Ivory and James D. Ivory
Abstract  As digital games become increasingly ubiquitous via mobile applications 
and other widely-used media platforms, game-based health applications and mobile 
health monitoring technologies are promising tools for eHealth and mHealth. Given 
the importance of older people as an audience for eHealth and mHealth applica-
tions, it is problematic that much research on users and effects of digital games 
largely neglects developmental approaches and variables. This chapter reviews 
research on effects of digital games, particularly the health effects of digital games 
on older people, and suggests how more focus on developmental approaches could 
guide research on health applications of digital games and game-based eHealth and 
mHealth tools for older populations.
Digital games represent a promising eHealth tool and mHealth tool, particularly 
with the growth of mobile game-based health applications and mobile health moni-
toring technologies. After reviewing the general state of research on positive and 
negative effects of digital games, this chapter addresses how much of the prominent 
research on digital games research largely neglects developmental approaches and 
variables. The chapter summarizes research dealing specifically with the health 
effects of digital games on older people. Next, the chapter suggests how develop-
mental approaches could be effective in guiding research on the potential health 
effects of digital games for older populations, then finally calls for more reliance on 
development as a key aspect in research of digital games’ effects, as well as in 
design of game-based eHealth and mHealth applications.
A.H. Ivory (*) • J.D. Ivory 
Department of Communication, Virginia Tech, 108 Shanks Hall (Mail Code: 0311),  
181 Turner Street NW, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA
e-mail: holz@vt.edu; jivory@vt.edu

202
9.1  Research on Effects of Digital Games: Positive 
and Negative Potential
The booming commercial and cultural impact of digital games has been accompa-
nied by similarly grand speculation and claims about the health impacts of the 
medium on its users. Over the past few decades, the most prominent academic dis-
cussions about digital games and their possible health effects have dealt with poten-
tial negative outcomes, particularly the potential negative social consequences of 
violent content in digital games (Anderson et al. 2010; Ferguson 2007a, b) and the 
medium’s potential for problematic overuse (“addiction”) (Griffiths, 1997, 2008). 
There has, however, also been ample discussion about the potential positive effects 
of digital games. Such potential positive outcomes have ranged from improvements 
in coordination and perception (Green and Bavelier 2006; Kuhlman and Beitel 
1991) to developments of advanced social skills (Yee 2006) and to protection 
against cognitive decline from aging (Basak et al. 2008; Maillot et al. 2012). Granic 
et al. (2014) describe several potential benefits of gaming, including cognitive, emo-
tional, and social benefits. Game playing may stimulate cognitive skills such as 
problem-solving skills, spatial skills, and increasing creativity, and may also pro-
mote motivation levels among players. There are also emotional benefits of gaming, 
such as improved mood among players, and social benefits of gaming, such as pro-
social skills.
Generally speaking, many of the boldest claims about the existence of powerful 
positive and negative effects of digital games are likely overstated (Boot et al. 2011; 
Elson et al. 2014; Ferguson 2010). That said, there is preliminary, if disputed, evi-
dence for a wide range of possible effects of at least some digital games. Digital 
games are widely and often heavily used by large and diverse audiences, and their 
engaging and enjoyable features make the medium a likely candidate to serve as an 
effective vehicle for delivering messages and encouraging rehearsal of behaviors 
and habits—healthy or otherwise. Therefore, scholars, game designers, and a vari-
ety of health advocates are likely to continue to explore the potential effects of 
games with sustained, or even growing, enthusiasm. Digital games are increasingly 
seen as a potentially powerful tool for eHealth, the application of technology to 
provide or enhance health-related services and information (Eysenbach 2001). 
Increasing ubiquity of mobile devices and mobile health monitoring technology has 
also made game-based mobile applications a promising tool for mHealth—mobile 
health—across diverse developmental and socioeconomic populations (Klasnja and 
Pratt 2012; Lowe and ÓLaighin 2014; Marston and Hall 2016; Miller et al. 2014b).
While digital games have long been stereotypically associated with children, 
older people have received particular attention as an audience for potential health 
benefits of digital games. Research has observed that older people express a prefer-
ence for games as a method for learning (Diaz-Orueta et al. 2012; LeRouge et al. 
2013). Given that challenging problem-solving tasks and tests of coordination and 
visual acuity are two common elements of digital games, researchers have explored 
the possibility that digital games might be a useful tool for stemming declines in 
A.H. Ivory and J.D. Ivory

203
cognitive, perceptual, and motor skills among older players, as well as promoting 
mental health and preventing accidents such as falls (Basak et al. 2008; Hall et al. 
2012; Maillot et al. 2012). Companies have even marketed some games as benefi-
cial “training” for the brain, though such claims are limited in their empirical sup-
port. As with other areas of research on the positive and negative effects of digital 
games, study findings related to their potential for maintaining the health of older 
people’s bodies and minds is tentative and mixed at best (Boot et al. 2011; Simons 
et  al. 2016). Considering the public health challenges associated with a global 
increase in the proportion of older people and, consequently, the increase in health 
concerns associated with older people, the potential health benefits of digital games 
will likely continue to merit exploration from researchers in search of more conclu-
sive findings about potential positive effects. As research attempts to generate more 
consistent and conclusive findings regarding the possible positive and negative 
effects of digital games, with studied outcomes ranging from deviant behavior 
among children to cognitive skills among older people, one shortcoming of much of 
this research across its many specific focus areas is limited consideration of devel-
opmental approaches, theories, and models as guides for research designs and inter-
pretation of findings.
While much of the research on the effects of digital games is focused very closely 
on potential effects for age-specific audiences, such as young people potentially 
made more aggressive by the games’ violence or older people potentially aided in 
thwarting cognitive decline by game tasks, neither the conceptual models nor the 
empirical designs of much of this research account for the specific developmental 
characteristics of the populations of interest. In many cases, such research may not 
even involve participants from appropriate age groups. For example, much research 
discussing potential negative effects of digital games on children has relied heavily 
on college student samples (Ferguson 2007a; Sherry 2006).
The tendency for the research on the health effects of digital games to largely 
ignore the role of developmental stages of life in possible effects mechanisms is a 
grave oversight. Incorporating developmental perspectives to understand the unique 
ways that minds and bodies at different stages of life may respond to digital games 
may be a key to unpacking the currently conflicted and inconclusive bodies of 
research on various potential effects of digital games. If some possible health effects 
of digital games are nuanced and conditional, which seems likely given the conflict-
ing findings of much research on the effects of digital games, then developmental 
approaches may be useful in identifying moderators that show what potential posi-
tive and negative effects may be likely among individuals, depending on develop-
mental characteristics such as age. Research on potential benefits of digital games 
for older people is an area where developmental approaches may be particularly 
insightful, given that many health concerns that digital games may address among 
older people are closely associated with specific developmental processes associ-
ated with aging.
9  On the Need for Developmental Perspectives in Research on the Potential Positive…

204
9.2  The Generally Limited Role of Developmental 
Approaches in Research on the Effects of Digital Games
The most prominent research dealing with the potential effects of digital games has 
explored whether digital games influence negative health outcomes in young peo-
ple, such as aggression and other antisocial behavior (Anderson et al. 2010). The 
outcomes of this research are mixed, hotly debated, and closely scrutinized (Hall 
et al. 2011). Several concerns have been raised with the practice and interpretation 
of the literature on potential negative effects of digital games. One is the presence 
of flexibility in many studies’ measurement of outcomes, which inflates the appear-
ance of significant effects by allowing researchers to sift through multiple versions 
of an outcome measure to choose a significant version of that measure (Elson et al. 
2014). Another issue is a tendency for studies that observe significant effects to be 
published more than studies that do not (Ferguson and Heene 2012), which inflates 
the presence of studies observing significant effects in the published literature; this 
issue has been dubbed “the file drawer problem” (Rosenberg 2005; Rosenthal 1979) 
in reference to the tendency for studies observing null findings to be relegated to file 
drawers rather than publication venues. A third issue is the methodological chal-
lenge involved in isolating effects of factors such as violent content relative to other 
factors such as competition (Adachi and Willoughby 2011), which clouds our abil-
ity to observe unique effects of violent content. Opinions about the potential nega-
tive effects of digital games vary among scholars, and their disagreements are 
sometimes acrimonious (e.g., Bushman et al. 2015a, b; Griffiths et al. 2016; Hall 
et al. 2011; Ivory et al. 2015; Markey et al. 2015; Petry et al. 2014; Quandt et al. 
2015; Strasburger et al. 2014).
Along with these other issues, however, the research on potential negative effects 
exemplifies the lack of attention to developmental approaches in the literature on the 
effects of digital games more broadly, because it has tended to neglect incorporating 
the role of key biological and psychological changes in adolescence that are closely 
associated with such negative behaviors (Kirsh 2003). Much of the research on the 
potential negative effects of digital games is guided by general theories of learned 
behavior and effects of stimuli on cognitive structures, such as social cognitive the-
ory (Bandura 2001) and the general aggression model (Bushman and Anderson 
2002), which acknowledge the existence of individual traits as moderators of effects 
but do not tend to assign substantial roles to specific developmental factors. As a 
result, even research targeting implications of the effects of digital games for spe-
cific developmental groups, such as children and adolescents, too often fails to 
include development in its theory or method.
Further, laboratory research on such negative effects of digital games has often 
used adult college students as participants as a matter of logistical convenience 
(Ferguson 2007a; Sherry 2006), eschewing the younger digital game players of pri-
mary interest to the social questions guiding the research. This has led to a situation 
where, in many cases, research dealing with participants at one developmental stage 
of life is generalized to youthful participants at another stage of life with very 
A.H. Ivory and J.D. Ivory

205
different biological and psychological characteristics that are relevant to the nega-
tive behaviors of interest. Survey studies have more often directly targeted the 
youthful populations of interest to much research on digital games’ health effects 
(e.g., Gentile 2009).
These studies however, tend to neglect incorporating developmental approaches 
in their conceptual explanations and predictions or including variables specifically 
related to development as potential factors in analyses of health outcomes. The net 
result is that much of the research on the effects of digital games either studies one 
age group to make claims about another, or studies an age group presumed to be 
particularly prone to the effects of digital games without exploring why the group 
might be developmentally prone to effects, or what members of that group might 
possess developmental traits particularly conducive to effects (Kirsh 2003).
Much of the literature on potential positive effects of digital games similarly 
lacks grounding in developmental approaches. Like research on the potential nega-
tive effects, the research on potential positive effects of digital games is conflicting 
and disputed (Boot et al. 2011; Simons et al. 2016). The research on potential posi-
tive effects of digital games also too often tends to incorporate the same general 
theories of learning, imitation, and cognitive effects of stimuli as research on poten-
tial negative effects, with little more than a passing nod to developmental approaches 
and factors (e.g., Gentile and Gentile 2008). Research on potential positive out-
comes related to cognition and education has also relied in large part on findings 
from studies using adult participants, despite being touted as having implications 
for children and adolescents (Blumberg et  al. 2013). Thus, while much of the 
research exploring both optimism about potential benefits of digital games and con-
cerns about potential harms has focused on implications for audiences at specific 
developmental stages, such as children, too much of that research has failed to 
incorporate such developmental factors appropriately in both conceptualizations 
and methodology.
9.3  Existing Research on the Health Effects of Digital Games 
for Older People
While much of the research dealing with the effects of digital games, particularly on 
younger people, has been somewhat negligent of developmental issues with those 
younger people of interest (Kirsh 2003), research investigating potential health 
effects of digital games on older users has at least more frequently focused on par-
ticipants from the age group of interest. In fact, research exploring the effects of 
digital games on older people has tended to include and even compare findings for 
samples of older people across a range of ages. For example, a meta-analysis of 
research on the effects of video games on cognitive function among older adults 
(Toril et al. 2014) found that while there were a limited number of studies on the 
topic, the available research was conducted with older adults over a range of ages, 
9  On the Need for Developmental Perspectives in Research on the Potential Positive…

206
and age appeared to moderate some effects on older people. For instance, one study 
exploring multitasking performance (Anguera et  al. 2013) includes participants 
varying in age from 20 to 79 years. Meanwhile, some populations, such as older 
people 85 years of age and older, have not been thoroughly examined in social 
research involving digital games (Marston et al. 2016a).
Reviews of research on effects of game-based health applications for older peo-
ple have observed a limited number of studies guided by theory (Hall et al. 2012; 
Hall and Marston 2014). Reliance on conceptual approaches to development and 
aging has been limited in many cases, and research on varied outcomes of digital 
game use for older people is not unified under a model incorporating these different 
outcomes in a broad understanding of health and aging. Efforts exist to provide 
theoretical frameworks uniquely tailored to game-based health applications (e.g., 
AlMarshedi et al. 2016), but they are not widely employed. For instance, lifetime 
digital game playing is associated with bilateral entorhinal cortex, hippocampal, 
and occipital gray matter volume (Kuhn and Gallinat 2014).
Among older adults (60–85 years old), custom-designed digital games may ben-
efit cognitive control abilities (Anguera et  al. 2013). Meta-analyses (Toril et  al. 
2014) and systematic reviews (Bleakley et al. 2015; Hall et al. 2012) show positive 
effects of digital game training on cognitive functions such as attention, memory, 
reaction time, and global cognition, as well as motor functions, physical outcomes, 
and prevention of injury from falls. Basak et al. (2008), for example, found gain in 
executive control functions among older adults trained in a real-time strategy digital 
game. Similarly, Maillot et al. (2012) found that active digital game training pro-
grams for older people improved outcomes such as physical function and cognitive 
measures of processing speed and executive control.
That said, much of the research on the effects of digital games on perceptual and 
cognitive skills has been identified as possibly plagued by methodological flaws that 
limit conclusive interpretation of that research (Boot et  al. 2011). A review of 
research on cognitive training games conducted by Simons et al. (2016) found that 
while such applications tended to improve performance on the specific tasks 
involved, there was less evidence for similar improvements in other tasks or general 
cognitive performance. Similarly, systematic reviews by Molina et al. (2014) and 
Miller et al. (2014a) found mixed evidence for the effectiveness of digital games as 
a tool for physical rehabilitation of older people.
Therefore, much of this research is not only lacking conceptual synthesis in 
terms of understanding the role of the effects of digital games in a comprehensive 
model of the aging process, but stronger conceptual guidance is needed to produce 
individual findings that can be conclusively interpreted. Further, researchers have 
found that age may moderate many effects of digital games on older players (Toril 
et al. 2014), indicating the importance of a nuanced conceptual and methodological 
approach to developmental factors in effects of games on older people rather than 
treating older people as a single homogenous developmental stage group.
A.H. Ivory and J.D. Ivory

207
9.4  Relevant Developmental Approaches to Aging and Their 
Potential Application to the Health Effects of Digital 
Games
Definitions of successful aging have evolved over the years. Initially, literature cen-
tered on the biomedical model, which focused on freedom from illness as well as 
the deficit model of aging, which centers on age-related decline (Tam 2013). More 
recent approaches account for individual perceptions of aging, such as the model of 
selective optimization with compensation (see Baltes and Baltes 1990), which aims 
to understand developmental change across the life span, whereby people select 
domains to focus their resources, optimize their gains and acquire new skills, and 
compensate for limitations. While past approaches on aging were one dimensional, 
newer approaches are more multidimensional and account for the broader dimen-
sions which encompass the aging process, such as social, psychological, and physi-
cal aspects.
Young et al. (2009) describe aging as an individual process where each individ-
ual ages differently and that successful aging can be achieved when compensations 
are made for physiological limitations which occur via psychological and social 
means. They propose successful aging can be measured through a multidimensional 
model integrating physiological, psychological, and social domains of health. 
Somewhat similarly, Bronfenbrenner (1993) proposes an ecological model of 
human development, which stresses that a person’s development across the life span 
needs to be understood in the context of the entire surrounding system. The ecologi-
cal model proposes five subsystems comprising this ecological system, from the 
microsystem made up of the person’s proximal social environment to the macrosys-
tem made up of broader influences, such as social customs and economic factors.
While these developmental approaches, and others, exhibit some differences in 
their levels of focus and conceptual mechanisms, each provides a framework of key 
concepts to be taken into consideration when proposing theoretical and practical 
applications of digital games to healthier aging. For example, a multidimensional 
approach to the health benefits of digital games for aging audiences can be rooted in 
psychological, physiological, and social dimensions of aging, when considering 
possible outcomes of digital game interventions, possible individual moderators of 
the effects of games, and possible constraints to use that need to be accounted for in 
designing games for an older audience. Moreover, research that explores the multi-
dimensional aspects of conceptualizations of aging in concert will be well-suited to 
synthesize existing research programs on varied dimensions of the effects of games, 
while also modeling key moderating variables that might define conditional effects. 
It is also important that digital games meant to educate the elderly and elicit behav-
ior change take into account health behavior models and theories. For instance, 
Kececi and Bulduk (2012) note that the four health behavior models used most often 
with the elderly in education, health, and behavioral science articles published dur-
ing the 2000s include the Theory of Reasoned Action/Planned Behavior, the Health 
Belief Model, Social Cognitive Theory, and the Transtheoretical Model. 
9  On the Need for Developmental Perspectives in Research on the Potential Positive…

208
Incorporating such health education-related models in research on game effects for 
older users would leverage their demonstrated applicability to health education.
Along with accounting for the role of developmental and health concepts in the 
effects of digital games, researchers also need to account for developmental factors 
in motivations for playing digital games, in order to better understand why people 
may choose to engage with games at different points in their life span and what 
needs and gratifications they use the games to address (Sherry 2013). As Granic and 
colleagues (2014) state, “We also need information on whether different types of 
games are not only beneficial but also appropriate to play at specific developmental 
stages and whether there are specific benefits that are obtained during specific 
developmental windows and not others” (p.  75). Similarly, elements of game 
mechanics and challenges most conducive to effective health outcomes must also be 
modeled. An important learning principle of effective video games is appropriate 
difficulty level (Eichenbaum et al. 2014). This is a particularly important consider-
ation of video game effects on older players, akin to Vygotsky’s (1978) “zone of 
proximal development” which describes “the distance between the actual develop-
mental level as determined by independent problem solving and the level of poten-
tial development as determined through problem solving under adult guidance or in 
collaboration with more capable peers” (Vygotsky 1978, p. 33).
That is, good games should allow an equilibrium between appropriate levels of 
difficulty and resultant aggravation and achievement and subsequent satisfaction. 
Relevant to this equilibrium is the concept of flow (Csikszentmihalyi 1975), which 
can be understood as a focused and enjoyable state where a user’s skill and a task’s 
challenges, including physical exertion (Mueller et al. 2011), are well matched. 
Flow experiences have been explored in multiple studies examining health applica-
tions of games for older people. Robinson et al. (2015) found that self-report mea-
sures for some flow experiences were higher among older people using an exercise 
game-based balance training intervention than among others taking part in tradi-
tional balance training. Marston et al. (2016b) measured flow experiences of partici-
pants 65 years of age and older, using an established flow measure for older adults 
(Payne et al. 2011), in their research on a digital exercise game designed to prevent 
falls.
Marston (2013) similarly measured flow experiences among older people using 
commercial games on the Nintendo Wii and Sony PlayStation PS2 consoles, finding 
that flow experiences varied across consoles as well as specific games played. 
Further, Whitlock et al. (2014) conducted a study that found individual differences 
and social setting also influenced flow experiences along with game content and 
challenges. While these studies’ findings indicate the importance of flow experi-
ences to older people’s responses to digital games and applications, more research 
is needed to identify optimal challenge and game experience dimensions for older 
users. Further study examining content of games targeted to older adults may facili-
tate motivation levels and appropriate levels of difficulty. Examining related experi-
ence dimensions such as positive and negative affect using established measures 
(e.g., Watson et al. 1988) may also provide further insights as to the ideal experience 
dimensions for game-based digital eHealth and mHealth applications.
A.H. Ivory and J.D. Ivory

209
Additionally, future research on the effects of digital games at different points in 
the life span will need to more carefully incorporate developmentally appropriate 
assessment strategies in operationalization of outcome measures. Measures assess-
ing outcomes such as motor and cognitive function should be designed and applied 
with circumstances that vary across developmental stages, such as memory and 
dementia. Much behavioral research with digital games relies on self-report ques-
tionnaires, which may not be appropriate to measure some outcomes at all develop-
mental stages.
Validity and feasibility of outcome measures has been a concern in reviews of 
research related to game-based health applications for older people. (Granic et al. 
2014; Miller et al. 2014a; Molina et al. 2014; Wiloth et al. 2016). For some older 
populations, development of unique measurement instruments may ensure more 
valid assessment of outcomes from digital games. For example, Wiloth et al. (2016) 
note problems with the validation of some game-based training outcomes in previ-
ous research, particularly for individuals with dementia, and present validation evi-
dence for assessment of motor and cognitive training outcomes using an original 
“Physiomat” game-based training device for individuals with dementia. Similarly, 
health outcome measures in research on digital games’ effects across the develop-
mental life span should be carefully validated in terms of dimensions such as con-
struct validity, test-retest reliability, and responsiveness to change for developmental 
groups of interest, as is best practice with clinical and psychometric instruments 
(Beaton et al. 2001; Portney and Watkins 2015; Wiloth et al. 2016).
Research and theory related to health and development also need to be more con-
sistently integrated into the design of game-based health applications for older peo-
ple. For instance, Payne et al. (2015) conducted a content analysis of application of 
health behavior theories in physical activity and exercise mobile game applications. 
They found that many of the applications included limited application of health 
behavior theories. As a result, they recommend more collaboration between behav-
ioral health experts and mobile health game application designers. Kececi and Bulduk 
(2012) describe several potential barriers to the education of the elderly, which 
include sensory losses (i.e., hearing, touch, and vision deficits), mental illnesses, and 
chronic diseases. Game designers should take such barriers into consideration, and 
in-game feedback for players as well as assessment strategies by practitioners and 
academics should consider these barriers when making learning assessments.
9.5  Conclusion
While the extant literature on the effects of digital games is often problematic in its 
relative neglect of developmental approaches, there is a strong base of research on 
the effects of digital games on older players that has employed appropriately aged 
samples and identified the importance of developmental moderators of such poten-
tial effects, even within the broader older population. There is, however, room for 
more thorough incorporation of multidimensional approaches to psychological, 
9  On the Need for Developmental Perspectives in Research on the Potential Positive…

210
social, and physical processes of development and aging in the conceptualization, 
methodology, and interpretation of research exploring how games may affect indi-
viduals throughout their life spans. Given the wealth of developmental theory and 
research that is available, we urge scholars exploring the potential effects of digital 
games on users of all ages to incorporate developmental approaches and variables 
more thoroughly in future research, and we urge game designers to integrate devel-
opmental and health behavior theory and research findings in game-based eHealth 
and mHealth applications. More attention to important conditional developmental 
factors may shed some light on the currently cloudy picture of the potential societal 
effects of digital games—both positive and negative. Developmental approaches are 
critical to understanding not only how individuals respond to games throughout the 
life span, but also why they choose games at different points in their lives and what 
role game experiences play over the course of their developmental stages.
References
Adachi PJC, Willoughby T (2011) The effect of violent video games on aggression: is it more than 
just the violence? Aggress Violent Behav 16:55–62. doi:10.1016/j.avb.2010.12.002
AlMarshedi A, Wills G, Ranchhod A (2016) Gamifying self-management of chronic illnesses: a 
mixed-method study. JMIR Serious Games 4(2):e14. doi:10.2196/games.5943
Anderson CA, Shibuya A, Ihori N, Bushman BJ, Sakamoto A, Rothstein HR, Saleem M (2010) 
Violent video game effects on aggression, empathy, and prosocial behavior in eastern and west-
ern countries: a meta-analytic review. Psychol Bull 136:151–173. doi:10.1037/a0018251
Anguera JA, Boccanfuso J, Rintoul JL, Al-Hashimi O, Faraji F, Janowich J, Kong E, Larraburo 
Y, Rolle C, Johnston E, Gazzaley A (2013) Video game training enhances cognitive control in 
older adults. Nature 5104:97–103. doi:10.1038/nature12486
Baltes PB, Baltes MM (1990) Psychological perspectives on successful aging: the model of selec-
tive optimization with compensation. In: Baltes PB, Baltes MM (eds) Successful aging: per-
spectives from the behavioral sciences. Cambridge University Press, New York, pp 1–34
Bandura A (2001) Social cognitive theory: an agentic perspective. Annu Rev Psychol 52:1–26. 
doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.52.1.1
Basak C, Boot WR, Voss MW, Kramer AF (2008) Can training in a real-time strategy video game 
attenuate cognitive decline in older adults? Psychol Aging 23:765–777. doi:10.1037/a0013494
Beaton DE, Bombardier C, Katz JN, Wright JG (2001) A taxonomy for responsiveness. J Clin 
Epidemiol 54:1204–1217. doi:10.1016/S0895-4356(01)00407-3
Bleakley CM, Charles D, Porter-Armstrong A, McNeill MDJ, McDonough SM, McCormack B 
(2015) Gaming for health: a systematic review of the physical and cognitive effects of interac-
tive computer games in older adults. J Appl Gerontol 34:NP166–NP189
Blumberg FC, Altschuler EA, Almonte DE, Mileaf MI (2013) The impact of recreational video 
game play on children’s and adolescents’ cognition. In F. C. Blumberg & S. M. Fisch (Eds.), 
Digital Games: A Context for Cognitive Development. New Dir Child Adolesc Dev 139:41–50. 
doi:10.1002/cad.20030
Boot WR, Blakely DP, Simons DJ (2011) Do action games improve perception and cognition? 
Front Psychol 2:226. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00226
Bronfenbrenner U (1993) Ecological models of human development. In: Gauvain M, Cole M (eds) 
Readings on the development of children, 2nd edn. Freeman, New York, pp 37–43
Bushman BA, Anderson CA (2002) Violent video games and hostile expectations: a test of the general 
aggression model. Personal Soc Psychol Bull 28:1679–1686. doi:10.1177/014616702237649
A.H. Ivory and J.D. Ivory

211
Bushman BJ, Gollwitzer M, Cruz C (2015a) There is broad consensus: media researchers agree 
that violent media increase aggression in children. Psychology of Popular Media Culture 
4:200–214. doi:10.1037/ppm0000046
Bushman BJ, Romer D, Jamieson PE (2015b) Distinguishing hypotheses from hyperbole in stud-
ies of media violence: a comment on Markey et al. (2015). Hum Commun Res 41:174–183. 
doi:10.1111/hcre.12058
Csikszentmihalyi M (1975) Beyond boredom and anxiety. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco
Diaz-Orueta U, Facal D, Nap HH, Ranga MM (2012) What is the key for older people to show 
interest in playing digital learning games? Initial qualitative findings from the LEAGE proj-
ect on a multicultural European sample. Games for Health Journal 1:115–123. doi:10.1089/
g4h.2011.0024
Eichenbaum A, Bavelier D, Green CS (2014) Video games: play that can do serious good. 
American Journal of Play 7:50–72
Elson M, Mohseni MR, Breuer J, Scharkow M, Quandt T (2014) Press CRTT to measure aggres-
sive behavior; the unstandardized use of the competitive reaction time task in aggression 
research. Psychol Assess 26:419–432. doi:10.1037/a0035569
Eysenbach G (2001) What is e-health? J Med Internet Res 3(2):e20. doi:10.2196/jmir.3.2.e20
Ferguson CJ (2007a) Evidence for publication bias in video game violence effects literature: a 
meta-analytic review. Aggress Violent Behav 12:470–482. doi:10.1016/j.avb.2007.01.001
Ferguson CJ (2007b) The good, the bad, and ugly? A meta-analytic review of positive and nega-
tive effects of violent video games. Psychiatry Q 78:309–316. doi:10.1007/s11126-007-9056-9
Ferguson CJ (2010) Blazing angels or resident evil? Can violent video games be a force for good? 
Rev Gen Psychol 14(2):68–81. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0018941
Ferguson CJ, Heene M (2012) A vast graveyard of undead theories: publication bias 
and psychological science’s aversion to the null. Perspect Psychol Sci 7:555–561. 
doi:10.1177/1745691612459059
Gentile D (2009) Pathological video-game use among youth ages 8 to 18: a national study. Psychol 
Sci 20:594–602. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2009.02340.x
Gentile DA, Gentile JR (2008) Violent video games as exemplary teachers: a conceptual analysis. 
J Youth Adolesc 37:127–141. doi:10.1007/s10964-007-9206-2
Granic I, Lobel A, Engels RCME (2014) The benefits of playing video games. Am Psychol 69:66–
78. doi:10.1037/a0034857
Green CS, Bavelier D (2006) Effect of action games on the spatial distribution of visuospatial atten-
tion. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 32:1465–1478. doi:10.1037/0096-1523.32.6.1465
Griffiths MD (1997) Computer game playing in early adolescence. Youth and Society 29:223–227. 
doi:10.1177/0044118X97029002004
Griffiths MD (2008) Videogame addiction: further thoughts and observations. Int J Ment Heal 
Addict 6:182–185. doi:10.1007/s11469-007-9128-y
Griffiths MD, van Rooij AJ, Kardefelt-Winther D, Starcevic V, Király O, Pallesen S, Müller K, 
Dreier M, Carras M, Prause N, King DL, Aboujaoude E, Kuss DJ, Pontes HM, Fernandez OL, 
Nagygyorgy K, Achab S, Billieux J, Quandt T, Carbonell X, Ferguson CJ, Hoff RA, Derevensky 
J, Haagsma MC, Delfabbro P, Coulson M, Hussain Z, Demetrovics Z (2016) Working towards 
an international consensus on criteria for assessing internet gaming disorder: a critical com-
mentary on Petry et al. (2014). Addiction 111:167–175. doi:10.1111/add.13057
Hall AK, Marston HR (2014) Gaming and older adults in the digital age of healthcare. In: van 
Hoof J, Demiris G, Wouters EJM (eds) Gaming and older adults in the digital age of healthcare. 
Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 1–9. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-01904-8_55-1
Hall R, Day T, Hall RCW (2011) A plea for caution: violent video games, the supreme court, and 
the role of science. Mayo Clin Proc 86:315–321. doi:10.4065/mcp.2010.0762
Hall AK, Chavarria E, Maneeratana V, Chaney BH, Bernhardt JM (2012) Health benefits of digital 
videogames for older adults: a systematic review of the literature. Games for Health Journal 
1:402–410. doi:10.1089/g4h.2012.0046
9  On the Need for Developmental Perspectives in Research on the Potential Positive…

212
Ivory JD, Markey PM, Elson M, Colwell J, Ferguson CJ, Griffiths MD, Savage J, Williams 
KD (2015) Manufacturing consensus in a diverse field of scholarly opinions: a comment on 
bushman, Gollwitzer, and Cruz (2015). Psychology of Popular Media Culture 4:222–229. 
doi:10.1037/ppm0000056
Kececi A, Bulduk S (2012) Health education for the elderly. In: Atwood CS (ed) Geriatrics. InTech 
Open Science, Rijeka, pp 153–176. doi:10.5772/1893
Kirsh SJ (2003) The effects of violent video games on adolescents: the overlooked issue of devel-
opment. Aggress Violent Behav 8:377–389. doi:10.1016/S1359-1789(02)00056-3
Klasnja P, Pratt W (2012) Healthcare in the pocket: mapping the space of mobile-phone health 
interventions. J Biomed Inform 45:184–198. doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2011.08.017
Kuhlman JS, Beitel PA (1991) Videogame experience: a possible explanation for differences in 
anticipation of coincidence. Percept Mot Skills 72:483–488. doi:10.2466/pms.1991.72.2.483
Kuhn S, Gallinat J (2014) Amount of lifetime video gaming is positively associated with entorhi-
nal, hippocampal and occipital volume. Mol Psychiatry 19:842–847. doi:10.1038/mp.2013.100
LeRouge C, Ma J, Sneha S, Tolle K (2013) User profiles and personas in the design and develop-
ment of consumer health technologies. International Journal of Medical Infomatics 82:e251–
e268. doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2011.03.006
Lowe SA, ÓLaighin G (2014) Monitoring human health behavior in one’s living environment: a 
technological review. Med Eng Phys 36:147–168. doi:10.1016/j.medengphy.2013.11.010
Maillot P, Perrot A, Hartley A (2012) Effects of interactive physical-activity video-game training 
on physical and cognitive function in older adults. Psychol Aging 27:589–600. doi:10.1037/
a0026268
Markey PM, Males MA, French JE, Markey CN (2015) Lessons from Markey et al (2015) and 
Bushman et al (2015): Sensationalism and integrity in media research. Hum Commun Res 
41:184–203. doi:10.1111/hcre.12057
Marston HR (2013) Digital gaming perspectives of older adults: content vs. interaction. Educ 
Gerontol 39:194–208. doi:10.1080/03601277.2012.700817
Marston HR, Hall AK (2016) Gamification: applications for health promotion and health informa-
tion technology engagement. In: Novák D, Tulu B, Brendryen H (eds) Handbook of research 
on holistic perspectives in gamification for clinical practice. IGI Global, Hershey, pp 78–104
Marston HR, Freeman S, Bishop KA, Beech CL (2016a) A scoping review of digital gaming 
research involving older adults aged 85 and older. Games for Health Journal 5:157–174. 
doi:10.1089/g4h.2015.0087
Marston HR, Kroll M, Fink D, Gschwind YJ (2016b) Flow experience of older adults using the 
iStoppFalls exergame. Games and Culture 11:201–222. doi:10.1177/1555412015605219
Miller KJ, Adair BS, Pearce AJ, Said CM, Ozanne E, Morris MM (2014a) Effectiveness and fea-
sibility of virtual reality and gaming system use by older adults for enabling physical activity 
to improve health-related domains: a systematic review. Age Ageing 43:188–195. doi:10.1093/
ageing/aft194
Miller AS, Cafazzo JA, Seto E (2014b) A game plan: gamification design principles in mHealth 
applications for chronic disease management. Health Infomatics Journal 22:184–193. 
doi:10.1177/1460458214537511
Molina KI, Ricci NA, de Moraes SA, Perracini MR (2014) Virtual reality using games for improv-
ing physical functioning in older adults: a systematic review. J Neuroeng Rehabil 11:156–175. 
doi:10.1186/1743-0003-11-156
Mueller F, Edge D, Vetere F, Gibbs MR, Agamanolis S, Bongers B, Sheridan JG (2011) Designing 
sports: a framework for exertion games. In: Chi ’11: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2651–2660. doi:10.1145/1978942.1979330
Payne BR, Jackson JJ, Noh SR, Stine-Morrow EAL (2011) In the zone: flow state and cognition in 
older adults. Psychol Aging 26:738–743. doi:10.1037/a0022359
Payne HE, Moxley V, MacDonald E (2015) Health behavior theory in physical activity game apps: 
a content analysis. JMIR Serious Games 3(2):e4. doi:10.2196/games.4187
A.H. Ivory and J.D. Ivory

213
Petry NM, Rehbein F, Gentile DA, Lemmens JS, Rumpf H-J, Mößle T, Bischof G, Tao R, Fung 
DSS, Borges G, Auriacombe M, Ibáñez AG, Tam P, O’Brien CP (2014) An international  
consensus for assessing internet gaming disorder using the new DSM-5 approach. Addiction 
109:1399–1406. doi:10.1111/add.12457
Portney LG, Watkins MP (2015) Foundations of clinical research: applications to practice, 3rd edn, 
revised. Pearson/Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River
Quandt T, Van Looy J, Vogelgesang J, Elson M, Ivory JD, Consalvo M, Mäyrä F (2015) Digital 
games research: a survey study on an emerging field and its prevalent debates. J Commun 
65:975–996. doi:10.1111/jcom.12182
Robinson J, Dixon J, Macsween A, van Schaik P, Martin D (2015) The effects of exergaming on bal-
ance, gait, technology acceptance and flow experience in people with multiple sclerosis: a ran-
domized controlled trial. BMC Sports Sci Med Rehabil 7(8). doi:10.1186/s13102-015-0001-1
Rosenberg MS (2005) The file-drawer problem revisited: a general weighted method for calculat-
ing fail-safe numbers in meta-analysis. Evolution 59:464–468. doi:10.1554/04-602
Rosenthal R (1979) The file drawer problem and tolerance for null results. Psychol Bull 86:638–
641. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.86.3.638
Sherry JL (2006) Would the great and mighty Oz play doom? A look behind the curtain of violent 
video game research. In: Messaris P, Humphreys L (eds) Digital media: transformations in 
human communication. Peter Lang, New York, pp 225–236
Sherry JL (2013) The challenge of audience reception: a developmental model for educational 
game engagement. In F. C. Blumberg & S. M. Fisch (Eds.), Digital Games: A Context for 
Cognitive Development. New Dir Child Adolesc Dev 139:11–20. doi:10.1002/cad.20027
Simons DJ, Boot WR, Charness N, Gathercole SE, Chabris CF, Hambrick DZ, Stine-Morrow 
EAL (2016) Do “brain training” programs work? Psychol Sci Public Interest 17:103–186. 
doi:10.1177/1529100616661983
Strasburger VC, Donnerstein E, Bushman BJ (2014) Why is it so hard to believe that media influ-
ence children and adolescents? Pediatrics 133:571–573. doi:10.1542/peds.2013-2334
Tam M (2013) Perceptions of successful ageing and implications for late-life learning. Stud Contin 
Educ 35:281–298. doi:10.1080/0158037X.2012.746228
Toril P, Reales JM, Ballesteros S (2014) Video game training enhances cognition of older adults: a 
meta-analytic study. Psychol Aging 29:706–716. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0037507
Vygotsky L (1978) Interaction between learning and development. In: Cole M, John-Steiner V, 
Scribner S, Souberman E (eds) Mind in society: the development of higher psychological pro-
cesses. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, pp 79–91
Watson D, Clark LA, Tellegen A (1988) Development and validation of brief measures 
of positive and negative affect: the PANAS scales. J  Pers Soc Psychol 54:1063–1070. 
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.54.6.1063
Whitlock LA, McLaughlin AC, Leidheiser W, Gandy M, Allaire JC (2014) Know before you go: 
feelings of flow for older players depends on game and player characteristics. CHI PLAY ‘14, 
277–286. doi:10.1145/2658537.2658703
Wiloth S, Lemke N, Werner C, Hauer K (2016) Validation of a computerized, game-based assess-
ment strategy to measure training effects on motor-cognitive functions in people with demen-
tia. JMIR Serious Games 4(2):e12. doi:10.2196/games.5696
Yee N (2006) The demographics, motivations, and derived experiences of users of massively 
multi-user online graphical environments. Presence Teleop Virt 15:309–329. doi:10.1162/
pres.15.3.309
Young Y, Frick KD, Phelan EA (2009) Can successful aging and chronic illness coexist in the same 
individual? A multidimensional concept of successful aging. J Am Med Dir Assoc 10:87–92. 
doi:10.1016/j.jamda.2008.11.003
9  On the Need for Developmental Perspectives in Research on the Potential Positive…

214
Adrienne Holz Ivory is an assistant professor in the Department of Communication at Virginia 
Tech. Her research focuses on media effects, health communication and media portrayals of gen-
der, race and sexuality.
James D. Ivory is an associate professor in the Department of Communication at Virginia Tech. 
His research interests include the content, users and social impact of video games, simulations and 
virtual environments.
A.H. Ivory and J.D. Ivory

215
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017 
H.R. Marston et al. (eds.), Mobile e-Health, Human–Computer Interaction Series, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-60672-9_10
Chapter 10
Open Issues in Designing Home Care 
Technologies
Angela Di Fiore and Francesco Ceschel
Abstract  Home care concerns the management of disparate physical impairments 
at home of the patients. Nowadays, it is being increasingly applied as it improves 
both the quality of life of the patient and the quality of care. This chapter aims to 
provide an overview concerning the recurring issues found while identifying 
requirements and user’s needs for home care technologies. We present a series of 
reflections from the literature to clarify the main factors that may support or hinder 
the design of effective solutions for this domain. Indeed, the design of technologies 
for home care often faces several complexities, such as social, communicational and 
organizational challenges. The goal of this chapter is to underline the relevance of 
the definition of appropriate social requirements and to address the right key points 
of attention, in order to best manage the complexity of home care.
10.1  Introduction
The population of Europe is ageing rapidly, and according to the literature, in 
20  years most of the citizens will be part of the over 65 cohort (World Health 
Organization 2002; Gesano et al. 2009; Fernández-Ballesteros et al. 2013). Since 
ageing may lead to physical impairments and since the ageing population is increas-
ing, there is a rising demand for home care services (European Commission 2015; 
Delloitte 2016).
This phenomenon is pushing the healthcare sector to enhance home services to 
allow care at home (Christensen and Grönvall 2011). Home care is an umbrella 
concept that refers to “the care provided by professionals to a person in her/his own 
A. Di Fiore (*) 
InterAction Lab, Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science,  
University of Trento, Trento, Italy
e-mail: angela.difiore@unitn.it
F. Ceschel 
Life Participation Group, Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, 
University of Trento, Trento, Italy
e-mail: francesco.ceschel@unitn.it

216
home with the ultimate goal being not only to contribute to patients’ life quality (…) 
but also to replace hospital care with care in the home” (Thomé et al. 2003, p. 871).
Home care concerns the management of physical impairments, such as chronic 
and degenerative diseases (Postema et al. 2012). Several studies recognized that 
home care has the potential to increase patients’ quality of life, to decrease costs of 
healthcare, and to leave patients in places where they are emotionally attached to 
(Bodenheimer 2008; Koch 2006; Postema et al. 2012, Delloitte 2016). Home care is 
a complex phenomenon, being characterized by a dynamic context that concerns a 
network of stakeholders with heterogeneous and conflicting needs (Christensen and 
Grönvall 2011; Wagner et al. 1996; Wagner 2000; WHO 2008). Indeed, home care 
engages several stakeholders in multisited care activities, involving both care pro-
fessionals (such as nurses, family doctors, specialists) and family caregivers. Due to 
the intertwinement of actors, care activities, agendas and knowledge, the coordina-
tion of the care activities, the information exchange and the management of the care 
plans have a central role in home care.
In this scenario, technology is perceived as a relevant asset, having a great poten-
tial in supporting the complexity of providing care at home (Delloitte 2016). In 
particular, home care technologies have to deal with interrelations between places, 
healthcare providers, individuals’ needs, sensibilities, data and information 
exchange (McGee-Lennon 2008). According to the literature, there is an emerging 
need of technologies that can support assisted living through home care services 
since “the existing systems are poorly aligned with the care that older populations 
require” (Delloitte 2016, p. 5). Due to the human and organizational complexity that 
characterizes home care, there is a peculiar demand in solutions that can support 
home care practices, backing coordination and communication (Abowd et al. 2006). 
The potential of technology can become a call for actions for designers and research-
ers, in particular in relation to mobile technologies (Beer and Takayama 2011; 
Delaney 2015).
Recent trends in design conceive reality and human practices as dynamic and 
constantly changing; they focus on the ontological problem of the attempt of for-
malizing the reality through the definition of the requirements of a technology 
(Dourish and Bellotti 1992; Ehn 2008; Akama 2015; Moran and Anderson 1990). If 
this problem is relevant in every design process, it is even more central in designing 
for a domain like home care. Home care contexts are generally known for being 
characterized by unpredictable events and extreme micro-social variability (Strauss 
1984; Corbin and Strauss 1984).
In light of the issues described above, this chapter is an introduction to designing 
information technologies for home care contexts. This work addresses some key 
points of attention in the definition of users’ needs in the domain of home care. In 
particular, the identification of these key points of attention has the goal to provide 
a shortlist of conceptual instruments that can guide designers while facing the com-
plexity of the home care domain.
A. Di Fiore and F. Ceschel

217
In the first section, we highlight the positive contribution of three computer sci-
ence approaches in the definition of the requirements of a technology. Requirements 
are the criteria that define the technical and social features of a future technology 
(Van Lamsweerde 2009). In this chapter, we focus specifically on social require-
ments. We discuss computer science approaches that are related to the definition of 
the requirements, with particular attention to their contribution about dealing with 
dynamic human contexts and, specifically, home care contexts.
In the second section, we discuss the features that characterize home care set-
tings, and we highlight some of the open issues that can be useful to consider when 
working in such contexts.
In the discussion, after we synthesize the arguments presented in the preceding 
section, we draw attention to a shortlist of key points we believe fundamental to 
consider when designing technologies for home care.
10.2  Approaches in Defining Social Requirements
In this section, we discuss the approaches in computer science that, in our best 
knowledge, can inform the definition of requirements in dynamics and situated con-
texts, such as home care. We address specifically the concept of social requirement, 
which refers to requirements that focus on the reconciliation of the society and 
individuals’ needs and not on technical  – hardware and software  – aspects 
(Whitworth 2009). This concept “is centred around knowing which (and how) social 
arrangements need to be satisfied” by a technology (Ackerman 2000, p. 195). We 
propose the concept of social requirements as an intellectual tool that can guide the 
design processes for home care technologies, informing the investigation of the 
users’ needs. It is an interesting resource in a design process, because it can be a 
bridge between different approaches in computer science that provide positive con-
tribution in understanding, formalizing and reflecting on users’ needs and technol-
ogy constraints.
In this section we address three computer science approaches that deal with 
social requirements and user’s needs: Computer-Supported Cooperative Work 
(CSCW), Participatory Design (PD) and Requirement Engineering (RE).
Social requirement is a concept proposed by CSCW. In our opinion it can be a 
nexus between approaches that focus on the variability of human reality (such as 
Participatory Design) and the ones that are more on the formalizations that are 
needed to develop a technology (such as Requirement Engineering). In this section 
we analyse the positive contribution of these approaches in defining social require-
ments and users’ needs in dynamic contexts, in order to assemble the potential of 
this fascinating intellectual tool.
10  Open Issues in Designing Home Care Technologies

218
10.2.1  Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW)
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work is an approach that investigates the role of 
technology in fostering interaction and collaboration among individuals within their 
working environment (Dourish and Bellotti 1992). Computer-Supported Cooperative 
Work is a transformative and design-oriented approach, which focuses on how to 
best design a technology to support collaboration among humans, and, hence, it 
attributes much attention to the social requirements a technology should embody. 
Indeed, it is engaged in a more epistemological conception of requirements, focus-
ing on the so-called social requirements that refer more to the process of under-
standing of users’ needs and their work practices in order to develop better 
technologies (Bannon et al. 1988; Schmidt and Bannon 1992). In the light of this 
peculiar attention, CSCW broadly focuses also on healthcare contexts (Fitzpatrick 
and Ellingsen 2013).
One of the most relevant epistemological problems in CSCW concerns the defi-
nition of requirements and is known as the so-called sociotechnical gap. 
Sociotechnical gap is a concept that refers to “the great divide between what we 
know we must support socially and what we can support technically” (Ackerman 
2000, p. 180). This gap represents the main challenge of the approach we are dis-
cussing here and highlights the complexity of the social dimension in relation to the 
intrinsic and ontological limits of technology. Computer-Supported Cooperative 
Work stresses the importance of the social requirements, because they allow to eval-
uate which are the boundaries within which technical solutions can fully address 
social needs. For this reason, this approach attributes considerable importance to the 
experience of professionals who work within a working environment; they can iden-
tify the limits of a technology and, consequently, the sociotechnical gap (Bannon 
et al. 1988; Schmidt and Bannon 1992; Ackerman 2000).
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work considers both the social and techno-
logical side, concerning a working environment as matters in co-evolution. 
Therefore, it ascribes much attention to the work practices and how these practices 
are shaped by the setting of the technologies in place (Ackerman 2000; Bannon 
et al. 1988).
Studies on CSCW (Bannon et al. 1988; Schmidt and Bannon 1992) highlight 
how technology, in a few cases, lacks to support and satisfy the social complexity 
that characterizes the interactions among workers. According to Bannon and 
Schmidt (1989, p. 360) “Computer Supported Cooperative Work should be con-
ceived as an endeavour to understand the nature and requirements of cooperative 
work with the objective of designing computer based technologies for cooperative 
work arrangements”.
As we mentioned above, the literature stresses the importance of understanding 
the users’ needs, their work practices and how their work is articulated and intercon-
nected among individuals. In particular, there are various contributions that address 
healthcare contexts and provide a clear picture about the complexity of the work 
A. Di Fiore and F. Ceschel

219
practices and the use of technologies within it (Fitzpatrick and Ellingsen 2013). 
With regard to the healthcare in particular, CSCW stresses to investigate on the 
influence of the technology on three levels, in order to better identify the sociotech-
nical gap: (1) technologies do not provide enough “complexity” to support a wider 
“social use”; (2) technologies are not socially flexible and are anchored to fixed 
roles, without considering the diversity of professional roles and work tasks; (3) 
technologies do not allow sufficient ambiguity and mostly aim to create quantifiable 
and measurable, tasks and processes (Ackerman 2000).
Overall, CSCW appears the appropriate approach to support the comprehension 
of social requirements. Therefore, it seems to provide the lens to better comprehend 
complex sociotechnical environments, such as healthcare contexts.
10.2.2  Participatory Design
Participatory Design is a democratic approach to design that aims to involve and 
commit users into the decision-making processes, as it will lead to the development 
of a new technology conceived to support the class of users involved in the design 
process itself (Simonsen and Robertson 2012). Participatory Design is a design-
oriented approach that aims to empower users through different techniques that 
support participation and involvement. Participatory Design  – which is strongly 
linked to CSCW – primarily focuses on social requirements; it emphasizes that 
“human activities are carried out in cooperation with others and so new technolo-
gies need to be designed to support cooperation” (Simonsen and Robertson 2012, 
p. 8). For this reason, Participatory Design stresses the need to comprehend how to 
enhance commitment and foster cooperation and mutual support among future 
users. In other words, Participatory Design calls for a deep understanding of the 
needs of the user(s). In this, the design process is paramount, because it is conceived 
as way to structure the future relations among humans and between humans and 
technology (Light and Akama 2014). Moreover, in this process of participation, a 
technology is conceived as a ‘future thing’ that will, eventually, derive from a fur-
ther negotiation among the future users, which will adopt and adapt the technology 
itself (Ehn 2008). That is why, through Participatory Design, designers aim to 
develop technologies in accordance with the user’s perspective, in order to improve 
their working and daily practices (Simonsen and Robertson 2012).
Across the literature on Participatory Design, participants are deemed the main 
actors of the process, as they will assume the role of future users once the design is 
completed. Conversely, the role of researchers and designers is limited to facilitat-
ing, validating, adjusting and monitoring the design path (Simonsen and Robertson 
2012).
The strongest contribution of Participatory Design is the enhancement of human 
relations through participation and mutual understanding, and conceiving a design 
10  Open Issues in Designing Home Care Technologies

220
process (Akama 2015). Indeed, the process primarily focuses on understanding the 
individuals involved (target user group), the relations they established within the 
group and in which context these relations take place. This helps to display the 
design and the subsequent development of technologies, as the co-evolution of ser-
vices and human practices (Suchman and Trigg 1995). This is the reason why the 
Participatory Design community focuses on an approach centred on the human per-
spective, rather than drawing the attention on mere technical requirements.
The Participatory Design literature offers a wide variety of studies on the episte-
mological problem of empowering people, both with the technology and with the 
Participatory Design process itself (Halskov and Hansen 2015). Yet, the literature is 
also rich with empirical papers that illustrate the process and the most effective 
techniques used to engage users in order to grasp their needs (Halskov and Hansen 
2015). These studies present an extensive empirical knowledge on narrative tech-
niques, qualitative methods and concepts, which support the understanding of situ-
ated contexts where new technology may be adopted. On the one hand, the peculiar 
attention of Participatory Design for situated contexts makes it particularly appro-
priate for healthcare contexts. On the other hand, this led to the avoidance of holistic 
models to guide the design processes. In Participatory Design there is no reference 
explicitly made to the concept of social requirements; however, its attention to the 
micro-social level provides several methodological and ethical reflections on par-
ticipation but limits the understanding of the macro level.
10.2.3  Requirement Engineering
Requirement Engineering is a discipline originally established in the 1970s, with 
the aim to investigate which requirements should lead the development of a soft-
ware (Zave and Jackson 1997). Differently from Software Engineering, which aims 
to design ‘things right’, the purpose of Requirement Engineering is to design the 
‘right thing’ by identifying and documenting specific requirements (Boehm 1981). 
Requirement Engineering provides models and taxonomies that use diagrams, 
mathematical analysis and unified modeling language (UML) notation to support 
the formalization of technical and social requirements (Van Lamsweerde 2009). 
This approach investigates the reality from a macro perspective, focusing on the 
standardization and generalization of how a technology should be designed.
Requirement Engineering has a transformative rationale, and it encompasses 
four main phases: (1) requirement elicitation, which refers to the gathering of 
requirements working with prospective users; (2) requirement specification, in 
which the requirements are classified and defined; and (3) requirement validation, 
which is the phase in which the requirements are organized and tested (Sommerville 
2010).
As we stated above, this section focuses on the best practices to comprehend 
social requirements and user’s needs to design better home care technology. Hence, 
to better frame how Requirement Engineering contributes to our goal, in this section 
A. Di Fiore and F. Ceschel

221
we draw particular attention on the contribution that Requirement Engineering 
delivers on the phase of requirement elicitation. This phase aims to define the social 
requirements by understanding the context of use of a hypothetic technology and 
the consequent needs and constraints of potential users, in order to acquire the 
knowledge that will shape the technology (Van Lamsweerde 2009). In other words, 
it focuses on acquiring knowledge about the current state of a system. An inade-
quate development of requirement elicitation may lead to several problems, such as 
delays in the project, resulting in failed expectations that may lead to a poor design 
of a software (Azadegan et al. 2013; Duarte et al. 2012; Geisser and Hildenbrand 
2006; Van Lamsweerde 2009).
The elicitation phase is an iterative activity that encompasses various sources of 
data. This phase includes several research techniques, which are mainly qualitative, 
including interviews, focus groups, brainstorming and ethnography (Van 
Lamsweerde 2009; Geisser and Hildenbrand 2006; Nuseibeh and Easterbrook 
2000). These techniques are aimed to collect information from three different 
domains: (a) information about the organizational context – such as stakeholder 
mapping, roles and conflicts – where the system will be implemented; (b) informa-
tion about the general domain, in terms of organization structure and logistics 
aspects; and (c) information about the system as is – if any – that the stakeholders 
implemented to cope with the lack of available technologies to support their prac-
tices (Van Lamsweerde 2009).
The requirement elicitation can also be divided into two subcategories: (1) mod-
els focused on methodologies and techniques and (2) models focused on a high-
level conception of elicitation. The former prescribe steps and techniques to adopt 
during the elicitation phase, whereas the latter are focused on assumptions on the 
domains to take into account during the elicitation (Hickey and Davis 2004).
The literature provides a few general examples. For instance, the CoRea (Geisser 
and Hildenbrand 2006) suggests to use meetings, brainstorming sessions or contex-
tual inquiry (Van Lamsweerde 2009), which combines interviews and ethnographic 
observation to focus on the work activities of the users. Overall, these models are 
holistic, and they provide general guidelines, for elicitation and techniques, without 
targeting specific domains. Specifically, they do not target healthcare contexts 
(McGee-Lennon 2008). These models tend to address activities without an in-depth 
understanding of the professionals who perform them; this results in the risk of a 
poor comprehension of the context and, consequently, a poor definition of the social 
requirements.
The contextual knowledge of the professionals is essential during the elicitation 
of the social requirements, especially in a healthcare context. In this sense, require-
ment elicitation focuses on the role of the business analysts, which masters the 
techniques and enacts the requirements (Hickey and Davis 2004). However, to our 
best knowledge, the literature on Requirement Engineering does not completely 
valorise the role of the analyst and of the future users, which is paramount in the 
understanding of complex contexts, such as home care (Hickey and Davis 2004).
To summarize, we may claim that Requirement Engineering furnishes a struc-
tured approach that supports the software development and should allow a general-
10  Open Issues in Designing Home Care Technologies

222
ization of the outcome. Nonetheless, it fails to address the specificity of situated 
contexts – which require a deeper understanding of the practices in place – and does 
not fully consider the involvement of the analysts and the prospective users in the 
investigation.
10.3  Open Issues in Home Healthcare
Home care is a discipline that seeks the best practices to carry the care path of indi-
viduals/patients in their house. This discipline aims to let individuals/patients live in 
their home as long as possible, a place to which they are emotionally attached to 
(Bossen et al. 2013). Studies (Thomé et al. 2003; Bossen et al. 2013; Abowd et al. 
2006; Mynatt et  al. 2001; Christensen and Grönvall 2011) suggest that patients 
would gain additional benefits from being ‘treated’ within a familiar environment. 
The literature lists several benefits that home care may entail, fostering individuals/
patients’ compliance to care plans, improving individuals/patients’ awareness about 
the care treatments, reducing hospitalizations, reducing costs of care and improving 
individuals/patients’ quality of life (Rojas and Gagnon 2008).
Yet, to better understand this perspective, we need to introduce a new concept. 
Home care is strongly linked to the concept of ‘continuity of care’. Continuity of 
care is an approach that proposes a change of paradigm by shifting from an overall 
primary care system – focused on an acute care organization – to a long-term home 
care system, which puts a regular and longitudinal path of care in the middle 
(Berwick 2009; Fatehi and Wootton 2012). This transition is perceived as a funda-
mental challenge that is changing the paradigm of the healthcare service organiza-
tions towards the engagement of a dense network of actors (Berwick 2009; 
Bodenheimer 2008).
Continuity of care was developed by focusing on the management of chronic 
conditions (Wagner et al. 1996). It deals with high organizational complexity, since 
home care involves a large number of care providers, and encompasses very diverse 
care medical locations (Wagner 2000). These issues lead to a greater demand of 
home care services in the developed countries, to allow families to deal with the 
care path within a “protected environment” (Bodenheimer 2008; Koch 2006; 
Postema et al. 2012). Continuity of care aims to establish a solid network of all the 
caregivers involved in the care path of an individual/patient, by also ensuring the 
coordination among the caregivers (Gröne and Garcia-Barbero 2001). The literature 
(Haggerty et al. 2003; Schoen et al. 2005) suggests that continuity of care enhances 
coordination among medical locations, such as central hospitals, local hospitals, 
specialist centres, clinics and individuals/patients’ homes. Moreover, it provides a 
continuum of care, reshaping the care system by focusing on the needs of the indi-
viduals/patients.
Within this framework, Haggerty et al. (2003) proposed the concept of using 
three dimensions: (1) information continuity, which refers to the patients’ sense of 
predictability, which is instilled by a coherent information sharing; (2) management 
A. Di Fiore and F. Ceschel

223
continuity, which refers to the patients’ sense of safety that derives from responsive 
protocols and clear interactions between providers; and (3) relational continuity, 
which refers to the sense of predictability and coherence among relationships with 
the professionals.
Home care technologies can be an important resource towards reducing the risk 
of care fragmentation in home care services (Kripalani et al. 2007; Montenegro 
et al. 2011, Schoen et al. 2005). Care fragmentation is a phenomenon that leads to a 
fragmented understanding of a care reality, and it may derive from underestimating 
the illness of a patient (Stange 2009). This may lead individuals/patients and care 
professionals to an inconsistent understanding of the healthcare situation, and, sub-
sequently, it would bring inefficiency, ineffectiveness, inequality, commoditization 
of health, de-professionalization and depersonalization (Stange 2009).
Studies (Wagner 2000; Gröne and Garcia-Barbero 2001; Stange 2009) suggest 
that technologies can hinder the care fragmentation by supporting the care manage-
ment on three levels: (a) at the micro level, it can enhance information sharing and 
collaboration between patients and caregivers; (b) at the meso-level, it can foster 
mutual awareness and collaboration among heterogeneous caregivers; (c) at the 
macro level, it backs the supervising of an overall care service.
As an example, to better frame the home care domain, we can identify a macro 
area within which technology intervenes: “ageing in place” (Mynatt, Rogers 2001; 
Demiris et al. 2004; Beer and Takayama 2011). This area should support the inde-
pendence of older adults, in order to leave them the possibility to cope with their 
health issues in their home. This area of research investigates on how to create a safe 
environment for older adults, while allowing family and professional caregivers to 
keep a hidden control of the older adults (Van Hoff et al. 2011). In this sense, the 
design of a suitable technology could ease the independence, but, in the same way, 
it could grant the possibility for the users to easily interact with the professional and 
family caregivers when needed or to allow the caregivers to coordinate and inter-
vene when necessary (Van Hoff et al. 2011).
10.3.1  Home Care and the Technology: An Opaque Topic
Technology has an important role in supporting home care works and the manage-
ment of home-based disease care programmes (Celler et al. 2003). However, there 
is an open issue on how the relation between technology and healthcare should be 
theoretically framed (Fatehi and Wootton 2012). Therefore, this domain seems 
opaque because of a proliferation of different technical definitions, which may 
appear unclear. To tackle this issue, we focus on how to better frame this domain by 
clarifying the different definitions and their corresponding perspectives.
The literature (Berwick 2009; Eysenbach 2000; Fatehi and Wootton 2012; Koch 
2006; Silverman 2005) provides several examples of the terms that are generally 
used to describe technology-healthcare: telemedicine, E-health, telehealth, tele-
homecare, home-telecare, home-telehealth and telecare.
10  Open Issues in Designing Home Care Technologies

224
‘Telemedicine’, the oldest definition, was first used in 1972. It refers to systems 
used to remotely monitor patients. Basically, telemedicine exploits services of tele-
communication to transmit medical information (Fatehi and Wootton 2012; Koch 
2006; Silverman 2005). The other terms previously mentioned generally refer to 
systems to exchange medical data. Specifically, “E-health” concerns the manage-
ment of information within health services, with particular attention to the role of 
the Internet (Eysenbach 2000). ‘Telehealth’ is conceived as a way to promote health, 
in terms of medical education, to raise awareness among patients (Celler et al. 2003, 
Koch 2006). ‘Tele-homecare’ and ‘home-telecare’ are used as synonyms. These 
terms refer to monitoring systems used to remotely control patients’ vital signs, 
using interactive communication and biological assessments (Celler et al. 2003; 
Koch, 2006). ‘Home-telehealth’ encompasses a general use of telecommunication 
systems – with remote assistance – to exchange information about general health 
topics, including health education and care information (Koch 2006). ‘Telecare’ 
takes into account the importance of information sharing and its relative assess-
ment, as well as the role of technology in managing a home care network built on 
human relations (Celler et al. 2003). Specifically, telecare is an interdisciplinary 
research field that focuses on collaborative technologies; it is related to “the ability 
to connect healthcare services across space and time, and provide treatments usually 
performed by physicians and nurses within hospitals or health care centers to citi-
zens in their homes” (Bossen et al. 2013, p. 190). To our best knowledge, the litera-
ture seems to suggest that systems built on the principle of telecare may deliver 
several benefits to the users: a lower readmission rates, a more efficient collabora-
tion among care providers and a higher collaboration of patients. From this perspec-
tive, telecare appears the term that is more comprehensive of the social complexity 
of home care. In this sense, it is recognized that there are needed technologies that 
are multi-user, multi-stakeholder, distributed, multimodal and dynamic, since this 
domain needs ad hoc technologies to manage the interrelation between places, 
healthcare providers, individuals, needs, sensibilities, data and information (McGee-
Lennon 2008).
Nonetheless, from the literature we collected, we could identify two major fea-
tures that characterize technological solutions for health contexts: (1) the medical 
data exchange and (2) the support of relations and care activities within the network 
of care (Milligan 2012).
Indeed, there seems to be a greater availability of papers concerning technical 
studies based on biological measurements and virtual visits (Fatehi and Wootton 
2012; Silverman 2005; Koch 2006) and cost reduction (Delloitte 2016; Rojas and 
Gagnon 2008), compared to the availability of research on the role the technology 
may have in managing the human relations within home care contexts (such as 
Mynatt et al. 2001; Consolvo et al. 2004). Hence, the literature appears to focus 
more on data exchange and on the lack of universal data protocols to allow tech-
nologies to communicate by the same standard (Berwick 2009; Eysenbach 2000; 
Fatehi and Wootton 2012; Silverman 2005), whereas the literature on telecare sys-
A. Di Fiore and F. Ceschel

225
tems to support collaboration in complex networks of healthcare seems to receive 
less attention (Fatehi and Wootton 2012; Silverman 2005; Koch 2006; Rojas and 
Gagnon 2008; Delloitte 2016). Hence, telemedicine calls for a greater multidisci-
plinary effort to accurately define social requirements (Celler et al. 2003; Fatehi and 
Wootton 2012; Silverman 2005), and we believe that this literature deserves greater 
attention in order to better comprehend how to define the social requirements 
(Bossen et al. 2013).
In particular, Koch (2006) identifies three common barriers related to home care 
services, which are the lack of standards and protocols, the lack of a shared frame-
work of analysis and the lack of guidelines for the development of ad hoc solutions. 
In agreement with Koch (2006), a lack of guidelines and frameworks to support the 
definition of social requirements for home care is affecting the quality of the exist-
ing home care technologies. In relation to the design of home care technologies, 
more work needs to be done, both with the requirement approaches and with the 
knowledge about the healthcare’s complexity.
10.3.2  Home Care from a Social Perspective
As we anticipated in the preceding section, a greater focus on technical factors, 
rather than on social needs and human’ factors, would not allow for a precise com-
prehension of the social requirements. Indeed, there are issues that may limit the 
effectiveness of the design of technologies, for healthcare contexts, which deserve 
more attention. We identified three areas that summarize the recurring social issues 
in home care and that can hinder the design of effective technologies: (1) the coor-
dination of caregivers involved in home care delivery, (2) the communication issues 
within stakeholders and (3) the complexity of the organizational setting of the 
healthcare sector.
10.3.2.1  Coordination Among Caregivers
The unpredictability of a medical condition does affect the physiological state of a 
patient, as well as care providers while assisting the patient itself.
Bodenheimer (2008, p. 1064) suggests that “given this level of complexity, the 
coordination of care among multiple independent providers becomes an enormous 
challenge”. Several studies (Strauss 1984; Corbin and Strauss 1984; Bruni et al. 
2007; Kripalani et al. 2007; Rojas and Gagnon 2008), carried with a peculiar atten-
tion to organizational issues, suggest that home care contexts encompass a large 
variety of care providers, each one with different expertise and skills, which could 
lead to several communication problems. Generally, there are many and very diverse 
formal caregivers involved in the care of a single patient. For instance, 47% of 
10  Open Issues in Designing Home Care Technologies

226
patients in severe conditions are attended to by an average of four doctors and as 
many nurses (Schoen et al. 2005).
Within this framework, Weinberg et al. (2007, 2008) conceptualized care provid-
ers, distinguishing between formal and informal caregivers (or providers), but both 
perceived as co-producers of the care. The former are defined as experts, precisely 
healthcare professionals, whereas the latter are relatives who become ‘experts’ 
through a learn by doing approach, while assisting their loved ones. Formal and 
informal providers can also be distinguished by the tasks they perform, respectively, 
assistance during medical crisis and medical routine. Both can occur, unpredictably, 
due to the contingencies of the medical condition (Strauss 1984). Indeed, Corbin 
and Strauss (1984) stated “even the most routine and everyday tasks can vary in the 
manner in which, the time at which, and the person by whom they are performed, 
according to the tasks to be done and the contingencies that arise” (p. 228).
Often, the unpredictability of a medical condition can influence the care in two 
ways: (a) it can hinder the scheduling of medical examinations and, subsequently, 
the coordination among nurses, primary care physicians and secondary care physi-
cians (Bodenheimer 2008); (b) it can affect the personal life of informal caregivers, 
who may face situations they are not formally prepared to (Corbin and Strauss 1984; 
Strauss 1984). In fact, “each change in illness conditions not only brings about 
changes in trajectory management but also affects the management of everyday 
life” (Corbin and Strauss 1984, p. 229).
10.3.2.2  Communication Issues
The second area concerns communication issues, which can be grouped into five 
main domains. Firstly, formal and informal caregivers have roles and expertise that 
do not facilitate the information exchange. On the one hand, informal caregivers 
manage the information on the medical situation (in terms of tests, exams, etc.) of a 
patient, and they need to share the information with the formal caregivers to coordi-
nate the care. Patients and their families do not always have the right expertise to 
deal with medical issues which would require the assistance of professionals 
(Bodenheimer 2008; Kripalani et al. 2007; Schoen et al. 2005). Secondly, primary 
and secondary physicians struggle to coordinate because of the absence of commu-
nication protocols. The discharge letters historically refer to acute care protocols, 
and currently there is still a lack of communication protocols between physicians 
that are able to embrace the complexity of a long-term care plan for disease 
(Kripalani et al. 2007). Thirdly, there is a poor mutual involvement of primary and 
secondary physicians on the care plan and the discharge plan. Fourthly, the unpre-
dictability of a medical situation often hinders the possibility to follow a strict 
schedule of treatments and medical appointments (Corbin and Strauss 1984). 
Finally, there is a the lack of universal data protocols to support information systems 
in communicating using the same standards.
A. Di Fiore and F. Ceschel

227
Several studies (Kripalani et  al. 2007; Silverman 2005; Fatehi and Wootton 
2012) highlight the importance of these domains. In particular, poor communica-
tions and, consequently, a limited information flow lower the quality of home care 
services. As a consequence, this leads to discontinuity in the services and high rates 
of readmissions and relapses, creating the suspension of home care.
10.3.2.3  Organizational Complexity
The organizational complexity of the healthcare contexts is normally related to the 
variability of social dynamics, which are characterized by a strong individual know-
how of the professionals.
Healthcare contexts do not generally have a fully formalized structure. In par-
ticular, there are soft and hard aspects that need to be considered (Kelman and Hong 
2012). The former refers to the tangible aspects of an organization, such as the 
structure, the functions of each organizational level and the control protocols (Bruni 
et al. 2007), whereas the latter refers to the intangible dimensions of an organiza-
tion, such as the culture, the common “language” and “symbols” and the shared 
values (Kelman and Hong 2012). These aspects are constantly renegotiated and 
readopted by the member of an organization (Weick 1969). Within these contexts, 
the individual skills and the organizational routines are conceived as the “building 
blocks of the organizational capability” (Dosi et al. 2008, p. 5). Accordingly, in 
healthcare contexts, individual skills and work practices are strongly related to soft 
aspects that are, by definition, difficult to handle (Kelman and Hong 2012; Bruni 
et al. 2007).
10.4  Discussion
The healthcare contexts and, specifically, home care contexts display many pecu-
liarities that open the discussion on how to better address the requirements that 
should support the design of proper technologies. These contexts encompass a large 
variety of stakeholders, each one with different roles, tasks, expertise, experiences, 
expectations and needs. Therefore, as the literature suggests (Ackerman 2000; 
Whitworth 2009), social requirements are the nexus of the design of a technology, 
and, hence, inaccurate analysis of users’ needs and contexts may affect the overall 
design process and the efficacy of a technology.
For this reason, we explained the importance of understanding the needs of the 
potential users, and we stressed the significance of the key points of attention that 
would deliver the terrain from which to build a consistent design process. Therefore, 
we presented a series of approaches that support the design of new technologies – 
CSCW, Participatory Design and Requirement Engineering – and we highlighted 
their strengths and weaknesses (summarized in Table 10.1).
10  Open Issues in Designing Home Care Technologies

228
From this analysis, we can now affirm the importance of all of the approaches. 
However, each one delivers a contribution that can be enriched from one another, in 
order to create a novel approach able to better address and understand the social 
requirement a technology should be built on.
In particular, the great contribution of Requirement Engineering is to provide a 
groundwork for the definition of requirements useful for the development of a soft-
ware. Requirement Engineering focuses, first, on how to employ the information 
that emerge during the requirement elicitation to later deliver them the following 
phases of the requirement definition, which are more on technical requirements. 
This approach is particularly useful to create generalizable models and knowledge. 
Yet, it lacks specific models for the requirement elicitation. The few existing models 
are considered holistic and inappropriate to valorise the specificity of the care con-
texts and the essential intuitions of business analysts (Hickey and Davis 2004).
CSCW and Participatory Design mainly focus on social requirements by under-
standing the needs of the future users. In this sense, they intend to comprehend the 
relations that users establish, the practices that users carry out and the contexts that 
users experience. These two approaches draw attention to epistemological prob-
lems, ethical dilemmas and empirical case studies, in order to address the main 
challenges in designing with and for users. For this reason, they do not deal with 
generic models on how to elicit requirements, but they are mainly engaged in flex-
ible and situated design processes with the users. Computer-Supported Cooperative 
Work and Participatory Design rely on qualitative and narrative techniques and are 
less structured than Requirement Engineering. The effort of CSCW focuses more 
on collaborative technologies for working environments, and it draws particular 
attention to the care contexts, whereas Participatory Design focuses more on design 
challenges and on the engagement of users through a participative approach.
Table 10.1  Summary of the approaches to the design of technologies for healthcare
Approach
Characteristics
CSCW
Focus on healthcare
Focus on work practices
Wide empirical contribution
Flexible and situated
Attention to social requirements
Participatory Design
Flexible and situated
Attention to work dynamics and engagement
Wide knowledge on techniques and empirical work
Focus on epistemological issues of participation
Requirement Engineering
Macro approach that tend to formalization
Offers macromodels
Contribution focused on technical requirements
A. Di Fiore and F. Ceschel

229
In summary, on the one hand, Requirement Engineering provides a structured 
model, which allows for a formalized way to grasp the social requirements. On the 
other hand, CSCW and Participatory Design furnish the right instruments and tech-
niques to comprehend the situated needs of the people that will be the users of home 
care technologies.
To better understand the complexity of healthcare contexts, the literature we 
addressed in the previous paragraph highlights three types of issues that character-
ized the design of collaborative technologies for home care: (1) the lack of patient 
data and the lack of communication protocols among professionals, (2) the presence 
of coordination and organizational issues among the actors involved in the process 
of care and (3) the fluctuating and erratic nature of the healthcare. As we observed 
in the previous paragraphs, the literature on technologies and home care shows a 
lack of attention to the social concerns that may emerge within these three levels of 
issue. Conversely, studies appear to focus more on medical information, such as 
biological data and vital sign parameters. This seems to have brought a contribution 
to the field of telemedicine, rather than a contribution to support the organizational 
issues that lie behind the home care contexts.
Stange (2009) suggests that the continuities of care and home care are an open 
challenge that “requires a deeper than surface understanding of the problem” 
(p. 100). In fact, the network of home care is a mosaic where the caregivers co-
produce together the care (Weinberg et al. 2007), and for this reason, it requires a 
major effort to raise awareness and collaboration among the professional and family 
caregivers. This is fundamental in order to create systems to allow for a transversal 
and continuous care (Haggerty et al. 2003).
Hence, we can affirm that the home care domain faces a series of challenges; it 
addresses issues on collaboration, heterogeneous actors, variability of the working 
practices and communication. These challenges limit the understanding of the social 
requirements. Therefore, the home care domain needs ad hoc guidelines and frame-
works of analysis that can support the understanding of the social requirements, in 
order to address the interrelations among places, healthcare providers, individuals’ 
needs and expectations, as well as data and information delivery, which characterize 
home care.
10.5  Conclusion
In this chapter, we introduced the key points of attention we believe are important 
to sustain how technologies for home care could be better addressed and designed. 
We tackled this issue by reviewing the main approaches that, nowadays, provide the 
tools to design information technologies, and we furthered the exploration of these 
approaches, in order to grasp the concepts that better served our scope. In addition, 
we proposed to merge the main features of these approaches to better understand the 
10  Open Issues in Designing Home Care Technologies

230
key points that would lead to the understanding of the social requirements a technol-
ogy should be built on. Finally, this whole introduction aimed to further the discus-
sion on how to better address the challenges of designing technology for home care. 
We are aware about the vastness and complexity of this domain. Yet, we hope this 
discussion could open up the debate to other experts and professionals of the 
research fields we have taken into account, in order to bring together individuals 
with different backgrounds and thus to further the interdisciplinary discussion.
References
Abowd G et al (2006) Challenges and opportunities for collaboration technologies for chronic care 
management. The Human-Computer Interaction Consortium (HCIC 2006)
Ackerman MS (2000) The intellectual challenge of CSCW: the gap between social requirements 
and technical feasibility. Hum Comput Interact 15(2):179–203
Akama Y (2015) Being awake to ma: designing in between-ness as a way of becoming with. 
CoDesign 11(3–4):262–274
Azadegan A et al (2013) Collaborative requirements elicitation in facilitated collaboration: report 
from a case study. In: HICSS, 2013 46th Hawaii international conference on IEEE. pp 569–578
Bannon LJ, Schmidt K (1989) CSCW-four characters in search of a context. DAIMI Rep Ser 
18(289)
Bannon L, Bjørn-Andersen N, Due-Thomsen B (1988) Computer support for cooperative work: an 
appraisal and critique. Eur Secur 88:297–303
Beer JM, Takayama L (2011) Mobile remote presence systems for older adults: acceptance, ben-
efits, and concerns. In: Proceedings of the 6th international conference on Human-robot inter-
action. ACM, pp 19–26
Berwick DM (2009) What “patient-centered” should mean: confessions of an extremist. Health 
Aff 28(4):w555–w565
Bodenheimer T (2008, January 1) Coordinating care a perilous journey through the health care 
system. N Engl J Med 358(10):1064–1071
Boehm BW (1981) Software engineering economics, vol 197. Prentice-hall, Englewood Cliffs
Bossen C et al (2013) CareCoor: augmenting the coordination of cooperative home care work. Int 
J Med Inform 82(5):e189–e199
Bruni A, Fasol R, Gherardi S (2007) L’accesso ai servizi sanitari. Carocci, Roma
Celler BG, Lovell NH, Basilakis J (2003) Using information technology to improve the manage-
ment of chronic disease. Med J Aust 179(5):242–246
Christensen LR, Grönvall E (2011) Challenges and opportunities for collaborative technologies 
for home care work. In: ECSCW 2011: Proceedings of the 12th ECSCW, Aarhus Denmark. 
Springer London, pp 61–80
Consolvo S, Roessler P, Shelton BE, LaMarca A, Schilit B, Bly S (2004) Technology for care 
networks of elders. IEEE Pervasive Comput 3(2):22–29
Corbin J, Strauss A (1984) Collaboration: couples working together to manage chronic illness. 
Image J Nurs Sch 16:109–115
Delaney KJ (2015) A freak accident this summer changed this top tech executive’s approach to 
his business. Quarz. Retrieved August 2016 at: http://qz.com/548625/a-freak-accident-this-
summer-changed-this-top-tech-executives-approach-to-his-business/
A. Di Fiore and F. Ceschel

231
Delloitte (2016) 2016 Global Healthcare outlook. Battling costs while improving care. Retrieved 
December 2016 at: https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/global/Documents/Life-
Sciences-Health-Care/gx-lshc-2016-health-care-outlook.pdf
Demiris G, Rantz MJ, Aud MA, Marek KD, Tyrer HW, Skubic M, Hussam AA (2004) Older 
adults’ attitudes towards and perceptions of ‘smart home’technologies: a pilot study. Med 
Inform Internet Med 29(2):87–94
Dosi G, Faillo M, Marengo L (2008) Organizational capabilities, patterns of knowledge 
accumulation and governance structures in business firms: an introduction. Organ Stud 
29(8–9):1165–1185
Dourish P, Bellotti V (1992) Awareness and coordination in shared workspaces. In: Proceedings 
of the 1992 ACM conference on computer-supported cooperative work. ACM, pp 107–114
Duarte D, Farinha C, da Silva MM, da Silva AR (2012) Collaborative requirements elicitation 
with visualization techniques. In: Enabling Technologies: Infrastructure for Collaborative 
Enterprises (WETICE), 2012 IEEE 21st International Workshop on IEEE, pp 343–348
Ehn, P. (2008) Participation in design things. In: Proceedings of the tenth anniversary conference 
on participatory design 2008. Indiana University, pp 92–101
European Commission (2015) The ageing report: Economic and budgetary projections for the 
28 eu member states (2013–2060). Retrieved from http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/
publications/european_economy/ageing_report/index_en.htm
Eysenbach G (2000) Towards ethical guidelines for e-health. J Med Internet Res 2(1):e7
Fatehi F, Wootton R (2012) Telemedicine, telehealth or e-health? A bibliometric analysis of the 
trends in the use of these terms. J Telemed Telecare 18(8):460–464
Fernández-Ballesteros, R., Robine, J. M., Walker, A., & Kalache, A. (2013). Active aging: a global 
goal. Current gerontology and geriatrics research
Fitzpatrick G, Ellingsen G (2013) A review of 25 years of CSCW research in healthcare: contribu-
tions, challenges and future agendas. Comput Supported Coop Work (CSCW) 22(4–6):609–665
Geisser M, Hildenbrand T (2006) A method for collaborative requirements elicitation and decision-
supported requirements analysis. Advanced Software Engineering: Expanding the Frontiers of 
Software Technology, pp 108–122
Gesano G, Heins F, Naldini A (2009) Regional Challenges in the perspective of 2020, Regional 
disparities and future challenges. ISMERI Europa
Gröne O, Garcia-Barbero M (2001) Integrated care. Int J Integr Care 1(2)
Haggerty JL, Reid RJ, Freeman GK, Starfield BH, Adair CE, McKendry R (2003) Continuity of 
care: a multidisciplinary review. BMJ 327(7425):1219–1221
Halskov K, Hansen NB (2015) The diversity of participatory design research practice at PDC 
2002–2012. Int J Hum Comput Stud 74:81–92
Hickey AM, Davis AM (2004) A unified model of requirements elicitation. J Manag Inf Syst 
20(4):65–84
Kelman S, Hong S (2012) “hard,” “soft,” or “tough love”: what kinds of organizational culture 
promote successful performance in cross-organizational collaborations? Harvard Univ., John 
F. Kennedy School of Government, Cambridge, MA
Koch S (2006) Home telehealth—current state and future trends. Int J Med Inform 75(8):565–576
Kripalani S et al (2007) Deficits in communication and information transfer between hospital-
based and primary care physicians: implications for patient safety and continuity of care. 
JAMA 297(8):831–841
Light A, Akama Y (2014) Structuring future social relations: the politics of care in participatory 
practice. In: Proceedings of the 13th PDC: Research Papers-Volume 1. ACM, pp 151–160
McGee-Lennon MR (2008) Requirements engineering for home care technology. In: Proceedings 
of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems. ACM, pp 1439–1442
Milligan C (2012) There’s no place like home: place and care in an ageing society. Ashgate 
Publishing, Ltd, Farnham
10  Open Issues in Designing Home Care Technologies

232
Montenegro H et al (2011) Combating health care fragmentation through integrated health service 
delivery networks in the Americas:lessons learned. J Integr Care 19(5):5–16
Moran TP, Anderson RJ (1990, September) The workaday world as a paradigm for CSCW design. 
In: Proceedings of the 1990 ACM conference on computer-supported cooperative work. ACM, 
pp 381–393
Mynatt ED, Rogers WA (2001) Developing technology to support the functional independence of 
older adults. Ageing Int 27(1):24–41
Mynatt E et al (2001) Digital family portraits: supporting peace of mind for extended family mem-
bers. In: Proceedings of SIGCHI conference on H-factors in computing systems 333–340 ACM
Nuseibeh B, Easterbrook S (2000) Requirements engineering: a roadmap. In: Proceedings of the 
conference on the future of software engineering 35–46. ACM
Postema TR et al (2012) Key factors influencing the implementation success of a home telecare 
application. Int J Med Inform 81(6):415–423
Rojas SV, Gagnon M-P (2008, November 01) A systematic review of the key indicators for assess-
ing Telehomecare cost-effectiveness. Telemed E-Health 14:9,896–9,904
Schmidt K, Bannon L (1992) Taking CSCW seriously. Comput Supported Coop Work (CSCW) 
1(1–2):7–40
Schoen C, Osborn R, Huynh PT, Doty M, Zapert K, Peugh J, Davis K (2005) Taking the pulse of 
health care systems: experiences of patients with health problems in six countries. HEALTH 
AFFAIRS-MILLWOOD VA THEN BETHESDA MA 24:W5
Silverman BG (2005) Intelligent paradigms for healthcare enterprises: systems thinking, vol 184. 
Springer Science & Business Media, Berlin
Simonsen J, Robertson T (eds) (2012) Routledge international handbook of participatory design. 
Routledge, London
Sommerville I (2010) Software engineering. Addison-Wesley, Harlow
Stange K (2009) The problem of fragmentation and the need for integrative solutions. Ann Fam 
Med 7(2):100–103
Strauss AL (1984) Chronic illness and the quality of life. Mosby, Saint Louis
Suchman LA, Trigg RH (1995, June) Understanding practice: video as a medium for reflection 
and design (excerpt). In: Human-computer interaction. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc, San 
Mateo, pp 233–240
Thomé B, Dykes A-K, Hallberg IR (2003) Home care with regard to definition, care recipients, 
content and outcome: systematic literature review. J Clin Nurs 12(6):860–872
Van Hoof J et al (2011) Ageing-in-place with the use of ambient intelligence technology: perspec-
tives of older users. Int J Med Inform 80(5):310–331
Van Lamsweerde A (2009) Requirements engineering: from system goals to UML models to soft-
ware specifications. Wiley Publishing, Chichester
W.H.O (2008) The world report 2008: primary health care now more that ever
Wagner EH (2000) The role of patient care teams in chronic disease management. Br Med 
J 320(7234):569
Wagner EH et al (1996) Organizing care for patients with chronic illness. Milbank Q:511–544
Weick KEKE (1969) The social psychology of organizing (No. 04; HM131, W3.)
Weinberg DB et al (2007) Coordination between formal providers and informal caregivers. Health 
Care Manag Rev 32(2):140–149
Weinberg DB et al (2008) Impact of relational coordination on job satisfaction and quality out-
comes: a study of nursing homes. Hum Resour Manag J 18(2):154–170
Whitworth B (2009) The social requirements of technical systems. Handbook of research on socio-
technical design and social networking systems 3
World Health Organization, and others (2002) Active ageing: a policy framework. Retrieved form 
http://www.who.int/ageing/publications/active_ageing/en/
Zave P, Jackson M (1997) Four dark corners of requirements engineering. ACM Trans Softw Eng 
Methodol (TOSEM) 6(1):1–30
A. Di Fiore and F. Ceschel

233
Angela Di Fiore holds a degree in Sociology of Work, Organization and Information Systems and 
is currently a Ph.D. candidate in Information and Communication Technology at the Department 
of Computer Science and Information Engineering at the University of Trento. She is a member of 
InterAction Lab (http://interaction.disi.unitn.it/), a research group engaged in Interaction and 
Participatory Design bringing into dialogue different disciplinary perspectives, including the 
Computer Science, Psychology, Sociology, Anthropology, Design and the Arts. She works on 
Participatory Design and CSCW fields applied to Healthcare topics, having a specific focus on 
participants engagement, social requirements and phenomena of technology appropriation.
Francesco Ceschel holds a degree in Sociology of Work, Organization and Information Systems 
and is currently a Ph.D. candidate in Information and Communication Technology at the 
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering at the University of Trento. He is 
a member of the LifeParticipation research group (http://lifeparticipation.org/). He works within 
the fields of Participatory Design and CSCW for de design of technology applied within the frame-
works of active ageing and healthcare. He is also involved into the Rise-DREAM European project 
(https://sites.google.com/a/unitn.it/rise-dream/), for which he has been collaborating with the 
Universidad Costa Rica and the Universidad Católica Nuestra Señora de la Asunción.
10  Open Issues in Designing Home Care Technologies

Part VI
Privacy & Legal Requirements

237
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017 
H.R. Marston et al. (eds.), Mobile e-Health, Human–Computer Interaction Series, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-60672-9_11
Chapter 11
mHealth, Trust and the Security of Personal 
Data
Jennifer K. Lynch and Malcolm Fisk
Abstract  The decentralisation of healthcare now extends, through the use of 
mobile technologies, beyond the home to people (patients) themselves. This heralds 
a revolution in the way people think about and use health and wellbeing services. 
This chapter explores the position in this changing landscape of mHealth, with par-
ticular reference to the use of apps. It gives specific attention to matters of trust, 
regulation and the security of personal data. These issues are highlighted as of espe-
cial importance considering the vulnerability of a high proportion of users of 
mHealth services.
Noted is both the rapid growth in the number of health apps publically available 
and the varied attention given by their creators to safeguarding personal data that 
may be stored or shared through their use. Trust, in relation to such matters, is sug-
gested as being potentially increased through the use of standards that would address 
quality concerns. Nevertheless, there remains a responsibility for health profession-
als to understand and respond to the changes that are taking place – albeit in the 
context that they do not have ‘mastery’ over the mHealth technologies concerned. 
Finally, a framework is called for within which essential safeguards must be estab-
lished in relation to trust in mHealth services and the security of personal data.
11.1  Introduction
Cristensen et al. (2009) noted that technologies in healthcare can be recognised as 
both enablers and disrupters. They are enablers because, amongst other things, they 
have helped in the development of precision medicine that is characterised by the 
better targeting of treatments and therapies. They are disrupters, because their 
increasing pervasiveness and lower cost open up part of the world of medicine to a 
J.K. Lynch (*) 
University of Hertfordshire, Hatfield, UK
e-mail: j.lynch5@herts.ac.uk 
M. Fisk 
De Montfort University, Leicester, UK
e-mail: malcolm.fisk@dmu.ac.uk

238
wider public – this, in turn, undermining the long-held hegemony of the clinicians 
who saw themselves as having mastery over technologies in healthcare.
An element of the ‘opening up’ (p. 191) of medicine was pointed to by Cristensen 
et al. (2009) as a consequence of the advent of telemedicine, where the connectivity 
of devices enabled clinicians to share images and health data in a way that assists 
diagnoses and treatments. This same connectivity they saw as enabling a ‘virtual 
decentralisation’ (p. 101) of services. They failed, however, to extend the logic of 
their argument to points of care that were beyond the local clinic or to consider the 
way that mobile technologies would transform the way that people could (and 
would wish to) access health services.
In order to better consider the changes that are occurring, therefore, it must be 
recognised that the decentralisation pointed to by Cristensen et al. (2009) reaches 
not only the local clinic but also people’s homes; and because of the availability of 
mobile devices (and subject to the availability of suitable communications net-
works), that decentralisation also reaches people (or patients) themselves – wher-
ever they are located. What can be described as a ‘technological turn’ in health is 
not, therefore, just one that is instrumental in bringing greater efficiencies in health 
care; it is one that underpins a revolution in the way people think about and use 
health services. It means, furthermore, that it is necessary to think not narrowly in 
terms of ‘telemedicine’ (where health is seen more in medical terms) but rather in 
terms of ‘telehealth’ (where health can be seen equally in terms of lifestyles, pre-
vention and well-being). Health, it is suggested, can no longer be seen as the pre-
serve of the clinicians, rather it is more a matter for people themselves – whether or 
not they choose to carry the label of ‘patient’. Telemedicine, with its clinical orien-
tation, can be recognised, as affirmed by Darkins and Cary (2000), as a subset of 
telehealth and rightly seen in relation to people’s broader well-being.
In this context, the technological turn might now be usefully considered as a 
‘technological twist’ where, although greater health efficiencies through the use of 
technologies are being achieved, the more important disruption is concerned with 
changes to the whole ethos and manner of health service provision. This will be 
reflected in further moves away from top-down forms of ‘delivery’ (a word that 
conveys, it is suggested, a somewhat one-way process) to a more inclusive manner 
of health service ‘provision’ (that allows for people to access health information and 
health services in new ways). The latter is facilitated through what is people’s 
clearly greater access to technologies that help them in relation to their health and 
lifestyles – including through mHealth, the focus of this chapter.
The European Commission recognises telehealth and mHealth as part of digital 
health. The importance they attach to digital health is clear from both the eHealth 
Action Plan (European Commission 2012) and the extent of the European 
Commission’s investment in relevant research projects (Emmanouilidou 2016). The 
pursuit of that digital health market is, therefore, reflected in the activities of technol-
ogy developers and service providers within different European countries. In 
England, for instance, telehealth (including mHealth and also telecare – more ori-
ented to social care) has been supported by special funds (Bennett and Humphries 
2014). The National Health Service (NHS) has been responsible for the development 
J.K. Lynch and M. Fisk

239
and promotion of an mHealth app, known as ‘Flo’ (or Florence, after Florence 
Nightingale), that is now widely used to help people to manage certain long-term 
conditions through text prompts and the exchange of information (Chambers et al. 
2016). More broadly the NHS Mandate for 2013–20151 cites the objective of increas-
ing technology use within the NHS as a priority – stating that in a digital age, the 
NHS should be at the forefront of new technologies that can help people manage 
their health and care (Department of Health 2013).
The World Health Organization (WHO 2011, p. 6) defines mHealth as ‘medical 
and public health practice supported by mobile devices’ and points to voice and 
text messaging, global positioning and ‘more complex functionalities’ (p. 1) that 
can be provided (ITU 2015). Crucially, the WHO has noted that, internationally, 
mHealth has begun to demonstrate an appeal beyond institutionally managed 
health provision. Hence, whilst the focus of many health-related apps (i.e. down-
loaded software for use on mobile devices) relates to the needs of chronically ill 
people, much else is targeted at a market embracing aspirational lifestyles and 
fitness (Research2Guidance 2015). Therefore, the WHO concludes that mHealth 
has relevance to people of all ages with varying health and well-being require-
ments. This understanding helps to legitimise the claims that mHealth ‘is expected 
to effectively tackle the challenges healthcare systems are confronted with, thus 
leading to sustainable healthcare systems’ (Emmanouilidou 2016, p. 4) and also 
has the potential to transform the healthcare industry ‘into one that is personalized, 
participatory, preventive, and less expensive’ (Malvey and Slovensky 2014, p. 1). 
This illustrates the potential for the extent of disruption as going much beyond that 
initially envisaged by Cristensen et al. (2009).
This is the backdrop to the way in which mHealth is emerging, resulting in 
opportunities – especially from the point of view of people wanting to take more 
responsibility for their health and to be able to access health services in new 
ways. But it also creates challenges for the structures, operational procedures and 
ethos of traditional health services. Impacting on these are privacy, safety, regula-
tory and ethico-legal questions considered in this chapter. We put forward recom-
mendations regarding how some of the concerns about such matters might be 
addressed.
11.2  mHealth in Context
The growth of mHealth is rapid. It is manifested in the increased range of commer-
cial products that are directly provided in or marketed to providers and consumers 
of health and social care. Included are products that can be considered under that 
broadest of umbrellas, the Internet of things (IoT) – linking to a futuristic phenom-
enon loosely defined by the UK government as one where ‘everyday objects are 
1 Accessed at https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/2564 
97/13-15_mandate.pdf
11  mHealth, Trust and the Security of Personal Data

240
connected to a network so that data can be shared’ p. 6 – and seen as having the 
potential to deliver health benefits (Government Office for Science 2014). Indeed, 
Greenough (2015) noted that the growth of IoT is set to change the way govern-
ments, businesses and consumers interact with the physical world, including how 
healthcare, partly by means of mHealth, is provided.
This potential market growth is notable in a number of countries. Within Europe 
the mHealth research organisation  – Research2Guidance  – points to Denmark, 
Finland, the Netherlands, Sweden and in particular the UK as having the highest 
market readiness and most mature market conditions to enable mHealth companies’ 
success (Research2Guidance 2016).2 This was considered primarily to be due to the 
openness of clinicians to incorporate technology into their practice. Research by 
Xiaohui et al. (2014) points to mHealth transforming healthcare in the world’s two 
largest economies – China and the USA. The WHO, meanwhile, supports initiatives 
in both developed and less developed countries through its ‘Be He@lthy, Be Mobile’ 
initiative. The programme, the WHO affirms, ‘harnesses the power and reach of 
mobile phones to address the NCD [Non-communicable disease] risk factors by 
educating people to make healthier lifestyle choices’ (World Health Organisation 
and ITU 2015, p. 3).
By the end of 2015, eight countries, extending from Costa Rica and Zambia to 
the UK, had funded initiatives under the programme, relating to smoking cessation, 
diabetes prevention and management and the setting up of public and preventative 
health monitoring platforms. The market in less developed countries has also been 
highlighted (ITU 2015) albeit, as noted by Clarke and Mars (2015), there are often 
difficulties because of shortcomings in the communications infrastructure. Having 
said this, Arie (2015) asserts that mHealth ‘will be the future of healthcare in Africa’ 
(p. 1), pointing to the thousands of mHealth pilot projects in low- and middle-
income countries, concerned with needs as diverse as supporting pregnant women 
and reminding patients to take medication to recording children’s arm circumfer-
ences as a way of monitoring malnutrition. In this context of emerging markets, 
expectations have been reported as high that mHealth will have a positive effect on 
the convenience, quality and cost of primary healthcare with PricewaterhouseCoopers 
(PWC 2012) finding patients in emerging markets having a greater awareness of 
mobile health technology than those in developed countries, being much more 
likely to already use mHealth and more interested in starting to use mHealth apps 
and services.
There is a link, furthermore, between mHealth and serious games (as discussed in 
Chaps. 6 (Duplaa et al.) and 7 (Marston et al.), with gamification noted as an element 
in 28% of health apps (Research2Guidance 2015)). Graafland et al. (2014) point, 
furthermore, to a growing literature on the role serious games can play in improving 
quality of life, health and well-being, albeit with outcomes that must await further 
research and evaluation. And Giunti et al. (2015) consider that serious games can be 
at least as effective as conventional approaches in improving the cognitive abilities  
2 The report can be accessed from http://research2guidance.com/the-5-countries-ranked-first- 
choice-for-starting-an-mhealth-business-in-the-eu/
J.K. Lynch and M. Fisk

241
of older people. The utilisation of serious games is, however, in its infancy, whilst the 
uptake of mHealth apps is now a worldwide phenomenon. Kamerow (2013), for 
instance, found over 100,000 health-related apps on Apple and Android smartphone 
platforms. Research2Guidance (2015) noted that Google Play and Apple App Store 
each offered almost 70,000 apps under the Health and Fitness and Medical 
categories.
It is, perhaps, unsurprising therefore that the surge in health-related apps has led 
to debate about the implications for user safety and privacy. Linked with this there 
has been calls for more attention on legal and regulatory frameworks (George et al. 
2013; Gill et al. 2012; Kamerow 2013; Marston and Smith 2013; Vincent et al. 
2015; Yasini and Marchand 2015). The safeguarding of individuals throughout their 
use of mHealth devices is, however, proving to be a far-reaching undertaking with 
divided views on whether a regulatory approach is either viable or desirable (Charani 
et al. 2014; Thompson and Brodsky 2013). What is less disputed are the potential 
threats to users that relate to the quality of the products in terms of the extent to 
which safeguards are included around content and privacy, the vulnerability to data 
breaches and other accidental, criminal or malicious activities, the implications of 
sharing data and, as pointed to by Degli Esposti (2014), ‘dataveillance’ (the system-
atic monitoring of people or groups, by means of personal data systems, in order to 
regulate or govern their behaviour).
11.3  Variable Quality in Health Applications
Critiques of mHealth regulation complain that it will stifle innovation, discourage 
investment and limit choice (Thompson and Brodsky 2013). However, the sheer 
volume of apps available has resulted in variable quality, both with regard to the 
validity and reliability of their content and the privacy safeguards ensured (Lewis 
and Wyatt 2014). The European Commission (2014) has noted that legislation is 
lacking and pointed out that it is ‘not yet clear if and to what extent lifestyle and 
wellbeing apps could pose a risk to citizens’ health’ (p. 3). Standards that focus on 
mHealth are so far absent from the portfolios of the three European standards bodies 
CEN (the European Committee for Standardization), CENELEC (the European 
Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization) and ETSI (the European 
Telecommunications Standards Institute), though some other areas of telehealth are 
embraced. A mHealth subgroup of the European Commission’s eHealth Network is, 
however, examining regulatory approaches. One of their reference points is the 
work undertaken by the British Standards Institution (BSI) in developing a PAS 
(Publicly Available Specification) code of practice for health and wellness apps. 
This does not, however, cover requirements for apps that are classified as medical 
devices (BSI 2015).
11  mHealth, Trust and the Security of Personal Data

242
In the meantime, a number of international studies have raised concerns about 
risks to mHealth users. In a UK study of 111 chronic pain management apps3, it was 
found that healthcare professionals had little involvement in app development or 
content, and the authors concluded that patients were at considerable risk of being 
misled due to spurious claims being made about pain relief through their use (Rosser 
and Eccleston 2011). Further studies in the USA, Australia and Norway have noted 
apps giving incorrect advice on disease management (Haffey et al. 2013; Wolf et al. 
2013) or failing to properly take account of evidence-based recommendations 
(Chomutare et al. 2011).
Moreover, it has been suggested that it is not only patients who are at risk of being 
overwhelmed by incomplete or erroneous information. There are claims that some 
healthcare professionals who may have been enthusiastic adopters of apps to support 
clinical decision-making can be overwhelmed by the choice of apps available to them 
and may be misled by information and features that are fragmented across multiple 
apps (Charani et al. 2014; van Velsen et al. 2013). A ‘critical evaluation framework’ 
(Aljaber and Gordon 2016, p. 1) for mHealth education applications (aimed at both 
health professionals and patients) has been called for by Aljaber and Gordon (2016).
This raises inevitable questions about what happens when a patient or clinician 
acts on bad advice – who is liable? In Europe at least, there is no direct applicable 
liability legislation for eHealth services (as opposed to that which relates to hard-
ware or software). This leaves a pressing need for the development or adoption of 
new frameworks involving legislation or standards that can clarify the responsibili-
ties of the different parties (Andoulsi and Wilson 2013). In addition, there is an 
undoubted need to build people’s digital literacy, by which they are better able to 
use mHealth. The accompanying gains in health literacy will, of course, enable 
them, when using mHealth (including apps), to make more informed decisions 
relating to their lifestyles and the sharing (or not) of their health and related personal 
data. Linked with this will be the extent to which users will be clear regarding their 
liability when using mHealth.
Part of the discussion around liability also relates to the way in which trust in 
mHealth applications is built. This is important both from the perspective of health 
professionals and individuals. It can be noted, for instance, that in a study of persons 
living with HIV in the USA, trust in the creators of mHealth apps, along with the 
perceived usefulness, ease of use and perceived risk, affected participants’ intention 
to use them (Schnall et al. 2015). Alkhudairi and Pemberton (2016) reported on a 
range of factors affecting the acceptance of apps amongst Saudi diabetics and doc-
tors, including concerns about the security of personal information.
With regard to the shortcomings of some apps, an analysis of the challenges 
related to the application of Android-based technology to fall detection found a 
complete absence of a reference framework to facilitate validation or comparisons 
in performance, as well as a lack of research evaluating the applicability of apps to 
fall detection (Casilari et al. 2015). By way of contrast, another study of an app for 
3 The official application stores for the following smartphone platforms were searched: iPhone, 
Android, Blackberry, Nokia/Symbian and Windows Mobile.
J.K. Lynch and M. Fisk

243
patients with diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, hypertension and 
Asperger’s syndrome found that the service, strongly supported by and developed in 
collaboration with clinicians, provided substantial reassurance – the overall service 
being viewed as positive with mutual benefits to patients and health staff (Cund 
et al. 2015). Yasini and Marchand (2015) reported that, in their analysis of apps with 
highly rated usability scores, the presence of related health professionals in the con-
ception or development of the application, along with the use of reliable and valid 
bibliographic references to create content, was a key to their popularity.
Given the difficulties surrounding the need for regulation of mHealth, these stud-
ies suggest that trust and confidence in products or services could, in part, be built 
through standards, a key element of which is, of course, concerned with quality 
criteria. To achieve this, there have been suggestions for the standardisation of 
information through gateway apps that function as mobile portals leading users 
directly to high-demand health content or for a self-certification model to be put in 
place where developers register and distribute through a central platform (Lewis 
2013; van Velsen et al. 2013).
Much of the responsibility rests with health professionals because it is necessary, 
in most instances, for health apps to demonstrably contribute to clinical outcomes. 
Clinicians may not, after all, still have ‘mastery over technologies in healthcare’, 
but they remain the custodians of expert knowledge around health. It follows that 
clinicians and other health professionals need to understand how people, including 
patients, are now incorporating technologies into their everyday lives. This is inevi-
tably complex as mHealth is not only accessible worldwide but is being used in 
environments where external influences are varied and unpredictable. These envi-
ronments and influences unavoidably bear on the user’s experience – with conse-
quences for safety, security and overall adoption (Albrecht 2013; Vincent et  al. 
2015).
11.4  Vulnerability to Data Breaches
If trust is a key component to the successful embedding of mHealth into how we 
manage our health and well-being, then having confidence in the security of the 
software (and hardware) in use is of paramount importance. Goodman (2016) 
reported that by 2013, more than 42,000 apps in Google Store had been found to 
contain ‘spyware and information stealing Trojan programs’ (Goodman 2016,  
p. 162). Lewis and Wyatt (2014) found that only 10% of the 600 health apps they 
investigated had a privacy policy. This is despite the fact that recommendations for 
ensuring data privacy and resistance to theft or hacking abound in the literature. 
These include the need for firewalls, encrypting data, password protection and high-
security Wi-Fi connections (Gill et al. 2012).
Specifically in relation to devices issued by healthcare providers, further recom-
mendations have been made to reduce opportunity for malicious access, such as 
enabling GPS functionality to trace mobile devices and downloading software to 
11  mHealth, Trust and the Security of Personal Data

244
monitor and record activity on devices (Charani et al. 2014; Gill et al. 2012). These 
clearly raise ethical issues about the amount of surveillance (e.g. the sharing of 
health and other personal data) that is warranted and acceptable to the user (whether 
it is an individual or health professional) and how informed consent is sought and 
maintained. Moreover, if devices are privately owned with health apps downloaded 
on the recommendation of a clinician, some safeguards may be difficult to enforce. 
The question once again turns to liability in the case of privacy and confidentiality 
breaches. There is a further point here about the ability of more vulnerable people 
to self-manage the security of their apps and hardware, particularly in a digital age 
where user agreements and requests for permission renewals are regularly updated 
(Batchelor et al. 2012).
11.5  Consent, Sharing Data and Dataveillance
The issue of consent is salient at all ages. However, despite the (correct) emphasis it 
is given to help legitimise people’s usage of mHealth, it is clear that the fully 
informed consent of users in an ever-evolving digital environment can be little more 
than a pipe dream. This further signals the importance of trust and the need for 
frameworks of operation (for the providers of both technologies and services) that 
accord with ethically appropriate governance frameworks. The brutal truth, how-
ever, is that the extent of trust necessary will not be engendered unless data is effec-
tively safeguarded, and in the arena of mHealth, it follows that much of that data is 
of a personal – and can be of a highly sensitive – nature.
Moreover, there are issues that relate to consent for people with diminished cog-
nitive ability. Batchelor et al. (2012), for instance, have highlighted the ethico-legal 
responsibilities and duties of care towards technology users with dementia, as their 
capacity to make decisions changes. They called for updated data protection legisla-
tion to ensure that consent is obtained for specific data usage and for other rights to 
be recognised such as for people to be digitally forgotten (with data erased), once 
capacity to consent declines. However, how the ‘burden’ of expectation to be 
informed and thoughtful about protecting privacy and security may be threatening 
rather than empowering to those with dementia.
Even where dementia is not an issue, it is a matter of concern that in everyday 
interactions with digital technology, users are bombarded with requests to consent 
to updated agreements and terms and conditions. Yet, we all rarely engage in a 
meaningful way with these demands, and as noted by Goodman (2016), most terms 
and conditions remain unread. Where big data analytics are concerned, there is, 
furthermore, the added complication that the long-term usage of data is not predict-
able and therefore the provision of consent may be irrelevant and misleading (Tene 
and Polonetsky 2013).
A further issue relates to the ownership of personal data. In a context in which 
data is routinely shared through mobile devices, debates about ownership may 
J.K. Lynch and M. Fisk

245
supersede the question of consent. Our view is that for health data (that relates to the 
body and its functioning, medication and therapies – current or past), ownership 
must reside with the person (patient), albeit entrusted to the providers of mHealth 
services. The ownership of any mHealth device that is used to store or transmit data, 
in this context, is, arguably, immaterial. Nevertheless, it has been asserted that a lack 
of seamless access to patient information across care pathways is a pressing issue 
for health professionals, leading to some using apps and mobile devices to work 
around the cumbersome bureaucratic systems with which they are confronted 
(Charani et al. 2014).
But how much data should be shared, and with whom? And what different rules 
might there be, e.g. for the purposes of research or for monitoring of public health 
and for the sharing of de-identifiable or anonymised data? We can note in this con-
text that the process of de-identification of data has been called into question, par-
ticularly since a study of US census data found that in 87% of cases, citizens were 
uniquely identifiable from just three characteristics: birth date, zip code and gender 
(Sweeney 2000). On the positive side, Sweeney’s study was a stimulus to the 
improvement of de-identification techniques, leading to a replication study finding 
that cases of unique identification using those data categories had dropped signifi-
cantly a few years later (Golle 2006). Others have claimed that fears about de-
identification have been exaggerated as the risks are much lower than presented in 
either of the above studies, if strong de-identification techniques are employed 
(Cavoukian and Castro 2014).
However, this risk of being identified is not negligible and increases if additional 
datasets can be cross-referenced. For example, providers of wearable fitness track-
ers have been criticised in a recent report by Canadian research organisation for 
exposing device wearers to long-term tracking of their location through the emitting 
of persistent unique identifiers (Hilts et al. 2016). It is claimed, for example, that this 
practice can be used by shopping malls that have Bluetooth beacons that can track 
and profile devices in order to create targeted mobile advertising. Furthermore, the 
research in question found that certain applications could be exploited to create fake 
records – a pertinent finding when fitness tracker data has been used in court cases 
and in assessments of health and life insurance eligibility (Lupton 2016). This brings 
the debate back to questions of trust (Has my data been strongly de-identified?  
How do I know what is happening to my data? Have I given consent for my data to 
be used or shared in this way?).
Degli Esposti (2014) has probed these issues by looking at what has been termed 
‘dataveillance’. She provides examples of how data are collected (e.g. through store 
cards) and acted upon (e.g. with targeted promotions) to demonstrate that even 
when individuals are not identifiable, they may still be reachable. This makes the 
notion of anonymity less meaningful – at least for everyday transactions. Having 
said this, such transactions may be laden with health-related information where 
goods or services relating to lifestyles, illness, disability, etc. are accessed or pur-
chased. One response to this has been the promotion of individuals taking greater 
control by setting up a personal data store that allows users to hold verified informa-
tion about themselves in an encrypted and secure way. Mydex provides one such 
11  mHealth, Trust and the Security of Personal Data

246
example (see https://mydex.org), as does the Hub of All Things (HAT) project, 
which claims to allow individuals to contextualise their data to help them make 
decisions and allow them to control how they interact on the Internet and manage 
relationships with corporations (hubofallthings.com). Therefore, part of the solution 
may well lie in the promotion of products and services where data is strictly held on 
or near to the person, rather than communicated to a remote server.
11.6  Conclusions
In this chapter we have noted how the development and disruptive effect of mHealth 
has the potential to transform healthcare. We have indicated the way it is being har-
nessed by people for a range of health and lifestyle needs. But we have also pointed 
to a number of possible risks for mHealth that relate to privacy, safety and, crucially, 
trust, which need to be addressed if the potential is to be realised.
What becomes clear is that the absence of an ethico-legal framework is hindering 
uptake. Such a framework, we consider, should be prioritised and embedded in leg-
islative frameworks and/or standards, with robust safeguards on personal privacy. 
Alongside legislation, there is also a need for a wide-ranging approach to improving 
people’s knowledge and health literacy and consequently their ability to take advan-
tage of the opportunity that mHealth (and related telehealth initiatives) affords. 
Linked with this are the need to tackle the pivotal issues of consent, trust and control 
(particularly in relation to questions about personal data); the uncertainty around 
ownership of personal (including health) data; and to combat the risks around pri-
vacy and data sharing. There is some urgency that attaches to this agenda if the 
benefits of mHealth are to be harnessed – most importantly with regard to its capac-
ity to help people take more responsibility for their health and health behaviours.
References
Albrecht U-V (2013) Transparency of health-apps for trust and decision making. J Med Internet 
Res 15(12):e277. https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.2981
Aljaber T, Gordon N (2016) Evaluation of mobile health education applications for health pro-
fessionals and patients. In: Multi conference on computer science and information systems: 
eHealth 2016, Funchal, Madeira, pp 107–114
Alkhudairi B, Pemberton L (2016). Factors affecting the acceptance of mHealth technology by 
Saudi diabetics and doctors. In: Multi conference on computer science and information sys-
tems: eHealth 2016, Funchal, Madeira, pp 199–202
Andoulsi I, Wilson PP (2013) Understanding liability in eHealth: towards greater clarity at European 
Union level. In: George C, Whitehouse D, & Duquenoy P (eds) Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
Berlin/Heidelberg. Retrieved from http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-642-22474-4
Arie S (2015) Can mobile phones transform healthcare in low and middle income countries? BMJ 
350(apr22 20):h1975–h1975. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.h1975
J.K. Lynch and M. Fisk

247
Batchelor R, Bobrowicz A, Mackenzie R, Milne A (2012) Challenges of ethical and legal 
responsibilities when technologies’ uses and users change: social networking sites, decision-
making capacity and dementia. Ethics Inf Technol 14(2):99–108. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10676-012-9286-x
Bennett L, Humphries R (2014) Making best use of the better care fund. Spending to save? London
BSI (2015) PAS 277:2015 health and wellness apps. Quality criteria across the life cycle. Code of 
practice. Retrieved from http://shop.bsigroup.com/forms/PASs/PAS-2772015/
Casilari E, Luque R, Morón M-J (2015) Analysis of android device-based solutions for fall detec-
tion. Sensors 15(8):17827–17894. https://doi.org/10.3390/s150817827
Cavoukian A, Castro D (2014) Big data and innovation, setting the record straight: de- 
identification does work. Ontario, Canada. Retrieved from http://www2.itif.org/2014-big-data-
deidentification.pdf
Chambers R, Schmid M, Birch-jones J (2016) Digital healthcare: the essential guide. Otmoor 
Publishing, Oxford
Charani E, Castro-Sánchez E, Moore LS, Holmes A (2014) Do smartphone applications in health-
care require a governance and legal framework? It depends on the application! BMC Med 
12(1):29. https://doi.org/10.1186/1741-7015-12-29
Chomutare T, Fernandez-Luque L, Årsand E, Hartvigsen G (2011) Features of mobile diabetes 
applications: review of the literature and analysis of current applications compared against 
evidence-based guidelines. J Med Internet Res 13(3):e65. https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.1874
Clarke M, Mars M (2015) An investigation into the use of 3G mobile communications to provide 
Telehealth Services in Rural KwaZulu-Natal. Telemed E-Health 21(2):115–119. https://doi.
org/10.1089/tmj.2014.0079
Cristensen CM, Grossmans JH, Hwang JH (2009) The Innovator’s prescription: a disruptive solu-
tion for health care. McGraw-Hill Education, New York
Cund A, Connolly P, Birch-Jones J, Kay M (2015) Self-management: keeping it simple with “Flo”. 
Nurs Res Rev 49. https://doi.org/10.2147/NRR.S72791
Darkins AW, Cary MA (2000) Telemedicine and telehealth: principles, policies, performances 
and pitfalls. SpringerReference. Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/
SpringerReference_84830
Degli Esposti S (2014) When big data meets dataveillance: the hidden side of analyt-
ics. Surveill Soc 12(2):209–225. Retrieved from http://library.queensu.ca/ojs/index.php/
surveillance-and-society/article/view/analytics/analytic
Department of Health (2013) The mandate. A mandate from the Government to the NHS 
Commissioning Board: April 2013 to March 2015. London
Emmanouilidou M (2016) The status of mHealth in Europe and a review of regulative challenges. 
In: Multi conference on computer science and information systems: eHealth 2016. Funchal, 
Madeira, pp 203–206
European Commission. eHealth Action Plan 2012–2020 – Innovative healthcare for the 21st cen-
tury (2012) Brussels
European Commission. COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT on the existing 
EU legal framework applicable to lifestyle and wellbeing apps (2014) Brussels, 10.4.2014 
SWD(2014) 135 final
George C, Whitehouse D, Duquenoy P (2013). Assessing legal, ethical and governance challenges 
in eHealth. In: George C, Whitehouse D, Duquenoy P (eds) Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg, 
pp 3–22. Retrieved from http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-642-22474-4
Gill P, Kamath A, Gill TS (2012) Distraction: an assessment of smartphone usage in health care 
work settings. Risk Manag Healthcare Policy 105. https://doi.org/10.2147/RMHP.S34813
Giunti G, Baum A, Giunta D, Plazzotta F, Benitez S, Gómez A, … González Bernaldo de Quiros 
F (2015) Serious games: a concise overview on what they are and their potential applications 
to healthcare. In: Sarkar IN, Georgiou A, Mazzoncini de Azevedo Marques P (eds) MEDINFO 
2015: eHealth-enabled health: proceedings of the 15th world congress on health and biomedical 
informatics. IOS Press, Sao Paulo, pp 386–390. https://doi.org/10.3233/978-1-61499-564-7-386
11  mHealth, Trust and the Security of Personal Data

248
Golle P (2006) Revisiting the uniqueness of simple demographics in the US population. Alexandria, 
Virginia. Retrieved from http://crypto.stanford.edu/~pgolle/papers/census.pdf
Goodman M (2016) Future crimes: inside the digital underground and the battle for our connected 
world. Anchor Books, Toronto
Government Office for Science (2014) The internet of things: making the most of the second digi-
tal revolution. A report by the UK Government Chief Scientific Adviser, London
Graafland M, Dankbaar M, Mert A, Lagro J, De Wit-Zuurendonk L, Schuit S et al (2014) How 
to systematically assess serious games applied to health care. JMIR Serious Games 2(2):e11. 
https://doi.org/10.2196/games.3825
Greenough J (2015) How the “Internet of Things” will impact consumers, businesses, and gov-
ernments in 2016 and beyond. Retrieved January 8, 2016, from http://www.techinsider.io/
how-the-internet-of-things-market-will-grow-2014-10
Haffey F, Brady RRW, Maxwell S (2013) A comparison of the reliability of smartphone apps for 
opioid conversion. Drug Saf 36(2):111–117. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40264-013-0015-0
Hilts A, Parsons C, Knockel J (2016) Every step you fake: a comparative analysis of fitness tracker 
privacy and security. Retrieved from https://openeffect.ca/reports/Every_Step_You_Fake.pdf
ITU (2015) m-Powering development initiative: a report by the m-Powering development ini-
tiative advisory board. Retrieved from http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Initiatives/m-Powering/
Documents/m-PoweringDevelopmentInitiative_Report2015.pdf
Kamerow D (2013) Regulating medical apps: which ones and how much? BMJ 347(oct08 4), 
f6009–f6009. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.f6009
Lewis TL (2013) A systematic self-certification model for mobile medical apps. J Med Internet 
Res 15(4):e89. https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.2446
Lewis TL, Wyatt JC (2014) mHealth and mobile medical apps: a framework to assess risk and 
promote safer use. J Med Internet Res 16(9):e210. https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.3133
Lupton D (2016) Digital health technologies and digital data: new ways of monitoring, measur-
ing and Commodifying human embodiment, health and illness. In: Xavier Olleros F, Zhegu 
M (eds) Edward Elgar Pub, Northampton. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004
Malvey D, Slovensky DJ (2014) mHealth: transforming healthcare. Springer, New York
Marston HR, Smith ST (2013) Understanding the digital game classification system: a review 
of the current classification system and its implications for use within games for health. In: 
Holzinger A, Ziefle M, Hitz M, Debevc M (eds) Springer, Berlin, pp 314–331
PWC (2012) Emerging mHealth: Paths for growth. Retrieved from www.pwc.com/mhealth
Research2Guidance (2015) mHealth app developer economics 2015: the current status and trends 
of the mHealth app market. Retrieved from http://research2guidance.com/r2g/r2g-mHealth-
App-Developer-Economics-2015.pdf
Research2Guidance (2016) mHealth app developer economics 2016. Retrieved from http://
research2guidance.com/r2g/r2g-mHealth-App-Developer-Economics-2016.pdf
Rosser BA, Eccleston C (2011) Smartphone applications for pain management. J Telemed Telecare 
17(6):308–312. https://doi.org/10.1258/jtt.2011.101102
Schnall R, Higgins T, Brown W, Carballo-Dieguez A, Bakken S (2015) Trust, perceived risk, per-
ceived ease of use and perceived usefulness as factors related to mHealth technology use. Stud 
Health Technol Inform 216:467–471. https://doi.org/10.3233/978-1-61499-564-7-467
Sweeney L (2000) Uniqueness of simple demographics i nthe U.S. Population. Pittsburgh
Tene O, Polonetsky J (2013) Big data for all: privacy and user control in the age of analytics. 
Northwestern J Technol Intellect Property 11(5): xxvii–274. Retrieved from file:///C:/Users/
Admin/Downloads/11NwJTechIntellPropxxvii.pdf
Thompson BM, Brodsky I (2013) Should the FDA regulate mobile medical apps? BMJ 347(aug29 
1), f5211–f5211. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.f5211
van Velsen L, Beaujean DJ, van Gemert-Pijnen JE (2013) Why mobile health app overload drives 
us crazy, and how to restore the sanity. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak 13(1):23. https://doi.
org/10.1186/1472-6947-13-23
J.K. Lynch and M. Fisk

249
Vincent CJ, Niezen G, O’Kane AA, Stawarz K (2015) Can standards and regulations keep up with 
health technology? JMIR mHealth uHealth 3(2):e64. https://doi.org/10.2196/mhealth.3918
WHO (2011) mHealth: new horizons for health through mobile technologies. Global Observatory 
for eHealth series, vol 3. Retrieved from http://www.who.int/goe/publications/goe_mhealth_
web.pdf
Wolf JA, Moreau JF, Akilov O, Patton T, English JC, Ho J, Ferris LK (2013) Diagnostic inaccuracy 
of smartphone applications for melanoma detection. JAMA Dermatol 149(4):422. https://doi.
org/10.1001/jamadermatol.2013.2382
World Health Organisation, & ITU (2015) BE HE@LTHY BE MOBILE: Annual Report January 
2015 to December 2015. Retrieved from http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/ICT-Applications/
eHEALTH/Be_healthy/Documents/BHBM-AnnualReport-2015.pdf
Xiaohui Y, Han H, Jiadong D, Liurong W, Cheng L, Xueli Z, … Bleiberg J (2014) mHealth in China 
and the United States: how mobile technology is transforming healthcare in the world’s two 
largest economies. Retrieved from https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/
mHealth_finalx.pdf
Yasini M, Marchand G (2015) Mobile health applications, in the absence of an authentic regu-
lation, does the usability score correlate with a better medical reliability? MEDINFO 2015: 
eHealth-Enabled Health: Proceedings of the 15th world congress on health and biomedical 
informatics, 127–131. https://doi.org/10.3233/978-1-61499-564-7-127
Dr Jennifer K. Lynch’s research explores the use of technology in support for older people with 
complex health conditions. Her fellowship at the University of Hertfordshire focuses particularly 
on the health and social care needs of people living with dementia and their carers. Jennifer’s PhD 
investigated the policy discourse and multi-agency working in the provision of telecare and tele-
health services in the UK. She has an enduring interest in the ethical debate surrounding the role 
of technology in enhancing (or not) the autonomy and independence of older people living in the 
community. Jennifer currently leads a case study in the Wellcome Trust funded programme Studies 
in Co-creating Assisted Living Solutions (SCALS), which looks at organisational barriers to the 
creative and adaptive use of assisted living technologies by older people with chronic illness and 
the people who support them.
Dr Malcolm Fisk is widely recognised for his work on the experience of people, especially in 
older age, regarding their access and use of technologies and services for health and well-being. He 
leads the European Commission funded PROGRESSIVE project that addresses ‘standards around 
ICT for active and healthy ageing’; and as Director of the Telehealth Quality Group he is actively 
engaged in supporting the development of quality standards for telehealth services. Malcolm’s 
other roles include being an expert advisor for ANEC: The European Consumer Voice on 
Standardisation; and being a member of European CEN Committees concerned with both health 
and care services. He is also a member of a Quality Standards Advisory Committee for NICE, the 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Previously Malcolm was appointed by the 
Welsh Government to Chair the National Partnership Forum for Older People and subsequently to 
provide expert advice to them relating to poverty and inequality; and the housing and related sup-
port needs of older people.
11  mHealth, Trust and the Security of Personal Data

251
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017 
H.R. Marston et al. (eds.), Mobile e-Health, Human–Computer Interaction Series, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-60672-9_12
Chapter 12
Are mHealth Apps Safe? The Intended 
Purpose Rule, Its Shortcomings 
and the Regulatory Options Under the EU 
Medical Device Framework
Eugenio Mantovani and Pedro Cristobal Bocos
Abstract  This chapter discusses the legality of operating commercially available 
applications or ‘apps’ for medical purposes in Europe. The meticulous certification 
process established in the Medical Device Directive (MDD) is seldom applied to 
mHealth apps. This is due to the application of the concept of “intended purpose”, 
which allows app developers to create apps that are analogous to medical devices 
(i.e. having similar functions) but, because they have not been intended by their 
manufacturers to attain a medical purpose, they do not need to satisfy the stringent 
safety checks foreseen in the MDD. The chapter highlights two vulnerabilities of 
this regulatory framework, concerning the reliability of the apps and the traceability 
of “bad apps”. In response to these concerns, the EU has taken a mixed approach-
combining top down regulation with stakeholders’ participation and “self- 
assessment”. A comparison with the regulation of borderline apps in the United 
States allows the authors to make a recommendation for future research and policies 
concerning mHealth apps in Europe.
This chapter discusses the legality of operating commercially available applications 
or “apps” for medical purposes. This chapter observes how the meticulous certifica-
tion process established in the Medical Device Directive (MDD) is seldom applied 
to mHealth apps. This is the result of the application of the concept of “intended 
purpose”. This concept allows app developers to create apps that analogous to medi-
cal devices (i.e. having similar functions), but, because they have not been intended 
by their manufacturers to attain a medical purpose, they do not need to satisfy the 
stringent safety checks foreseen in the MDD. With the aid of concrete examples, 
this chapter highlights two gaps in the regulation of mHealth apps, concerning the 
E. Mantovani (*) • P.C. Bocos 
LSTS – VUB, Brussels, Belgium
e-mail: emantova@vub.ac.be

252
reliability of the apps and the traceability of “bad apps”. In response to these con-
cerns, the EU has taken a mixed approach combining top-down regulation with 
stakeholders’ participation and “self-assessment”. A comparison with the regulation 
of borderline apps in the USA allows the authors to make a recommendation for 
future research and policies concerning mHealth apps.
12.1  Introduction
Mobile health technologies (MHTs or mHealth) are extending beyond the precincts 
of hospitals and health-care services into a growing market of applications (apps) 
for well-being or lifestyle. There are today over 100,000 mHealth apps available on 
the market that work in combination with smartphones, tablets, and wearables 
(European Commission 2016a).
As with any technological development, mHealth is laden with uncertainties, 
ambiguities, and interpretative flexibility in terms of meanings, values, and cogni-
tive frames associated with artefacts (Bijker 2010, p. 68). Regulation, which we take 
as “the intentional activity of attempting to control, order or influence the behaviour 
of others” (Black 2002, p. 1), is one of the elements influencing this interpretative 
flexibility. This holds particularly true for safety regulations, which put constraints 
on developers of mHealth apps.
In Europe, the centrepiece legislation with regard to the safety of medical devices 
is the Medical Device Directive (MDD). This directive, part of the medical device 
framework (MDF), amended in 2007, and currently undergoing a general revision, 
explicitly includes in its scope software that works in combination with mobile 
devices, known as “applications” or “apps”.
Increasingly many mHealth apps that are presently commercially available are, 
in fact, not considered as medical devices (Medical Device and Diagnosis Industry 
2015), but are introduced into the market as simple software. As such, the safety of 
several mHealth apps available in the EU today is gaged against the general require-
ments for information society services, and not against the more stringent, as we 
will see, requirements for medical devices. This chapter puts into question this state 
of affairs.
Section one provides a definition of mHealth and, with the aid of a scenario, 
highlights the importance of guaranteeing the safety of mHealth apps. Section two 
describes the legislative framework, pausing on the definition of medical device, the 
“intended purpose” rule, the essential requirements that app developers need fulfil, 
and the control and supervisory mechanisms that are in place. Recognising that 
many mHealth apps enter the market without going through the safety checks of the 
MDD, section three discusses two problems: the reliability of apps and the trace-
ability of “bad” apps. Section four pauses on the EU regulatory initiatives adopted 
to address the vulnerabilities of the so-called borderline apps. Eventually, section 
five looks at relevant aspects of the US system that departs from the EU.
E. Mantovani and P.C. Bocos

253
12.1.1  Navigating Daily Life with Safe mHealth Apps
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) defines mHealth as “all avail-
able services for delivering care or medical information using mobile equipment 
and networks” (International Telecommunications Union 2014). For the European 
Commission, the term refers to “medical and public health practice supported by 
mobile devices, such as mobile phones, patient monitoring devices, personal digital 
assistants (PDAs), and other wireless devices”(European Commission 2014a, p. 3).
From a technical point of view, mHealth “apps” are software programs that run 
on mobile devices (hardware) such as smartphones, tablets, smartwatches (Huckvale 
et al. 2015). These pieces of software process data collected by sensors, such as 
accelerometers, gyroscopes, ambient light sensors, GPS, cameras, and multitouch 
screen, which are embedded in the (hardware) mobile devices. The flexibility 
offered by a smart device allows applications (software) to collect and process 
information for an astonishing range of purposes (Article 29 Data Protection 
Working Party 2013, p. 2).
A non-exhaustive list of mHealth apps include apps for patient and carer decision 
aids, such as the “Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) – NHS Decision 
Aid” app that helps people make a decision about treatment choices (Google Play 
2013); apps for self-management, such as the “Self-help for Anxiety Management” 
app, which offers a range of self-help methods to manage anxiety (Itunes 2015); 
apps for treatment recommendation, such as the “Micromedex” app, which delivers 
proper drug dosage and medicine recommendations (DigitalTrends 2016); apps for 
monitoring, accessing, and editing electronic health records such as the “MyChart” 
app, which provides access to medical records “through the phone at any time” 
(DigitalTrends 2016); communication apps such as “Telemed”, which enable 
patients to send images of their skin, eyes, or body (Google Play 2016); the 
“UpToDate” app, which “tracks medical advancements and news” (DigitalTrends 
2016), and so on and so forth.
The uptake of mHealth has been dramatic in the last years. In the USA, a third of 
physicians say they have recommended an app to a patient (IHS Report 2013); 7 in 
10 U.S. adults admit to routinely using one or more health tracking apps (Pew 
Research 2013). In Europe, the European Commission estimates that over 100,000 
mHealth apps are currently available on the market (European Commission 2016a). 
Of these, approximately 70% target the wellness and fitness sectors, and 30% of 
apps are specifically designed for health professionals (Deloitte 2012).
It is not only the quantity of mHealth apps that has attracted attention. Mobile 
health, it has been said, has captured our collective imagination (Cortez 2014). 
Observers argue that mobile health technologies will “revolutionise” the way we 
deliver, consume, measure, and pay for health care (Prainsack 2014; Hanlon and 
Thiel 2016; Cortez 2014). In literature, while some authors discuss the impact on 
health-care services and systems, others focus on how technology meddles with 
ordinary, routine life.
12  Are mHealth Apps Safe?

254
In the first chapter of her recent book, legal scholar Mireille Hildebrandt depicts 
in a scenario the life of a young mother, rampant professional, Diana, and of her 
frail old father, Jacob. Both navigate their day accompanied by a personal digital 
assistant (PDAs) (Hildebrandt 2015). The mobile device of old, frail Jacob (in the 
book the PDA is embodied in a robot) is programmed to:
Exchange information with similar devices from the same service provider, and with a 
number of healthcare service providers […]: Jacob’s family doctor, the medical specialists 
who treat his various conditions, the insurance that covers the cost, the pharmacies that sup-
ply his medications, and the local nursing centre that provides him with hands-on medical 
care. (Hildebrandt 2015, p. 6)
Jacob’s PDA is able to detect a serious harm from a mild symptom that is, statis-
tically speaking, to be expected. The application that runs on Jacob’s device has 
been designed to set off an alarm only in case a certain condition threshold is 
crossed. Interestingly, Hildebrandt imagines that the decision of the PDA as to 
whether or not to send out an alert depends on the input that is provided by another 
app running on the PDA. This other app has been designed to learn about old Jacob’s 
vision of the world, values, and, given his advanced age, his attitudes towards end 
of life decisions. In the scenario, the PDA detects an anomaly in Jacob’s biometric 
parameters but, based on previous preferences, decides not to alert him or anyone 
else. Three days later Jacob dies of a stroke.
As Hildebrandt points out, the scenario is not farfetched. Mobile technologies 
are already allowed to make invisible inferences of risks and preferences (e.g. 
playing the right tune for the morning jog, suggesting what to eat, and when to 
train) or make choices on our behalf (e.g. respecting our values and don’t disturb 
me decisions). The story of Jacob suggests several ethical, societal, and legal ques-
tions that are emerging around mHealth: the impact on patients’ autonomy, the 
boundaries of private life and family life, the responsibility of carers, the confiden-
tiality of medical records, the right to be and not to be informed, etc. (Prainsack 
2014).
This contribution departs from the sobering recognition that the scenario 
­portrayed above may never see the light, mHealth apps stop being downloaded 
and sold, if the technology is not safe enough (European Commission 2014b). 
Take Jacob’s mobile device: Will the app send an alarm off when the agreed 
threshold is reached? Is the software assessing Jacob’s value accurately? What 
happens in the case of conflict between two opposed courses of action, e.g. alert 
the ­relatives or not? In the EU, the decision as to whether apps for mobile 
phones are safe to be used and marketed depends on a certification system regu-
lated by the EU medical device framework. Given that Jacob’s and most mHealth 
scenarios are likely to employ medical software, this framework is of cardinal 
importance.
E. Mantovani and P.C. Bocos

255
12.1.2  Safety of mHealth Apps in the EU Medical Device 
Legal Framework
12.1.2.1  Introduction
In Europe, the organisation of health care is firmly in the hands of the Member 
States. After the Maastricht Treaty of 1992, however, the EU introduced a medical 
device framework (MDF) laying down common rules for the safety of medical 
devices produced and commercialised in the internal market. The 2009 Treaty of the 
Functioning of the EU (TFEU) recognises this EU’s exclusive competence, sanc-
tioning it in competence to legislate in “high standards of quality and safety for 
medicinal products and devices for medical use” (European Union 2012, p. 122).
The MDF, which is currently undergoing a process of reform (European 
Commission 2012a), consists of three directives: the Medical Devices Directive 
(MDD) 93/42/EEC (European Communities 1993), amended in 2007 by Directive 
2007/47/EC (European Union 2007), the Active Implantable Medical Devices 
Directive (AIMD) 90/385/EEC (European Communities 1990), and the In Vitro 
Diagnostic Medical Devices Directive (IVDMD) 98/79/EEC (European Communities 
1998).
While the AIMD and the IVDMD apply to specific technologies, the MDD is 
applicable to most medical devices, including software (Callens 2010). Because of 
the main theme of this chapter, only the MDD is considered. In this chapter, the 
expressions “MDF” and “MDD” are used exchangeably to refer to the framework 
described below.
12.1.2.2  The Legislative Framework
Directive 93/42/EEC, the Medical Device Directive (MDD), harmonises national 
provisions for the safety and health protection of patients, users, and other persons 
with regard to the use of medical devices. The MDD covers medical devices, from 
simple bandages, sticking plasters to sophisticated equipment and information tech-
nology tools. The legislative regime introduces a classification schemes geared on 
the risks that a device poses to the human body. The directive puts developers under 
the obligation to respect a series of essential requirements and documentary proce-
dures. National bodies verify this process.
Importantly for mHealth, a series of guidelines complement the MDD clarifying 
some of the obscurities of the directive and its implementation. The European 
Commission’s MEDDEV guidelines (medical devices guidance documents) (last 
amendment 2016b) and the guidelines on assessment of the reliability of mobile 
health applications (2016c) are of particular relevance for the regulation of mHealth 
apps and will be broached below.
12  Are mHealth Apps Safe?

256
12.1.2.3  Definition of Medical Device
The basic idea behind the MDD is that all computer programs that meet the defini-
tion of a medical device must comply with the MDD (Callens 2010). According to 
article 1, point 2, letter a, of Directive 93/42/EEC a medical device is:
Any instrument, apparatus, appliance, software, material or other article, whether used 
alone or in combination, including the software intended by its manufacturer to be used 
specifically for diagnostic and/or therapeutic purposes and necessary for its proper applica-
tion. Such a device should be “intended by its manufacturer.
for a number of defined purposes, including “diagnosis, prevention, monitoring, 
treatment or alleviation of disease” (European Communities 1993, p. 5). As clarified 
in recital 6 of Directive 2007/47/EC, which amends Directive 93/42/EEC, such a 
definition includes software:
Software in its own right when specifically intended by the manufacturer to be used for one 
or more of the medical purposes set out in the definition of a medical device, is a medical 
device. (European Union 2007, p. 1)
12.1.2.4  Essential Requirements
Before being allowed to circulate freely in the EU internal market, article 3 of the 
MDD states, “all devices must meet a series of ‘Essential Requirements’” 
(European Communities 1993, p. 9). These requirements are found in Annex I of 
the directive. They range from general prescriptions, such as “eliminate or reduce 
risks as far as possible” (European Communities 1993, p. 25), to more specific, 
technical, organisational, informational, ergonomic, and requirements. The fol-
lowing list is a non-exhaustive list but purposefully offered to give an idea of the 
multifaceted safety issues that (may) appear on the medical device developers’ list. 
They include the choice of materials; issues of flammability; design, manufacture, 
and packaging; risks connected with environmental conditions such as magnetic 
fields, pressure, temperature or variations in pressure; interference with other 
devices; obsolescence of materials; loss of accuracy of any measuring or control 
mechanism; physical resistance, stability and moving parts, vibrations, noise, heat 
from accessible parts of the device; sufficient levels of accuracy and stability; 
device’s accuracy as stated by the manufacturer; measurement, monitoring, and 
display scales; and the respect of ergonomic principles taking account of the 
device’s intended use, etc.
Importantly, these requirements are said “essential” because they apply to all 
medical devices, although the assessment of the conformity may differ, depending 
on the risk class apps belong to (European Communities 1993, pp. 25–32).
E. Mantovani and P.C. Bocos

257
12.1.2.5  Classification
Article 9 of the directive introduces a classification system based on an estimation 
of the risk posed by a device to the human body and health (European Communities 
1993, p. 12). There are four risk classes: Low – I, IIa, IIb, III – and High. A set of 
criteria, which are listed in Annex IX of Directive 93/42/EEC, determines to which 
class devices belong. These criteria, for example, “duration of contact with the 
body” or “degree of invasiveness”, enable manufacturers to anticipate the risk class 
to which their device belongs, and therefore the type of conformity assessment that 
is required (European Communities 1993, pp. 52–56).
Any mHealth app, which relies on an external energy source in order to function, 
is considered as “active medical devices”. Active medical devices can pertain to dif-
ferent risk classes. For example, devices intended to allow direct diagnosis or moni-
toring of vital physiological processes pertain to Class IIa; devices intended for 
monitoring vital physiological parameters, but “where the nature of variations is 
such that it could result in immediate danger to the patient” (European Communities 
1993, p. 55), say, devices measuring variations in cardiac performance, pertain to 
Class IIb.
In practice, however, it is not always easy to clarify when a given product is a 
medical device, in the first place. Secondly, it is not easy to determine the class. The 
expression “borderline technologies” (European Commission 2011, p. 5) has been 
coined to refer precisely to cases where it is unclear whether a product falls within 
the definition of a medical device and to which class of risk. The aforementioned 
“guidelines” provide practical advice to manufacturers, organisations, public 
authorities, and users to determine when a software falls under the definition of a 
medical device.
12.1.2.6  Conformity Assessment
As mentioned earlier, essential requirements apply to all medical devices; however, 
not all devices are “treated” in the same way. As it is stated in article 11 of the MDD, 
the risk class determines the type of conformity assessment a device must be sub-
jected to (European Communities 1993, pp. 7–8). This means, in clear, a graduated 
system of control, which corresponds to the level of potential hazard inherent in the 
type of device concerned. Once again, the following lines are provided to illustrate 
the detailed assessment a medical app should undergo, if it were considered medical 
device.
For example, manufacturers of low-risk Class I devices are only obliged to write 
a statement to declare that the medical device complies with the requirements in the 
MDD. Manufacturers then need to apply to a notified body to approve and certify 
the parts of the manufacturing process that include a function (European 
Communities 1993, p. 8). Manufacturers of high-risk Class III devices must carry 
out either an annex II audit of the full quality assurance system, including a design 
dossier examination or an annex III type examination plus one examination and testing  
12  Are mHealth Apps Safe?

258
of each product or homogenous batch of products (Annex IV of the MDD), or one 
audit of the production quality assurance system (Annex V of the MDD) or an audit 
of final inspection and testing (Annex VI of the MDD) (European Communities 
1993, p. 7). Once the conformity assessment is completed, medical devices can be 
CE marked (see below) and put into free circulation. Conformity assessment can be 
a long and costly process.
12.1.2.7  The “CE” Marking
The letters “CE” (from the French “Conformité Européene”, meaning “European 
Conformity”) is a declaration informing users that the product bearing it complies 
with the essential requirements of the relevant European legislation. In line with 
article 17 of Directive 93/42, devices considered to meet the essential requirements 
referred to in article 3, mentioned above, must bear the CE marking of conformity 
when they are placed on the market. The CE marking must appear in visible, legible, 
and indelible form on the device, on the instructions for use, and, where applicable, 
on the sales packaging. The CE marking must display the identification number of 
the notified bodies, introduced below, responsible for its quality assurance. It is 
prohibited to affix marks or inscriptions that mislead third parties or hide the CE 
marking (European Communities 1993, pp. 20–21).
12.1.2.8  Notified Bodies, Vigilance System, and the European Database 
on Medical Devices (EUDAMED)
The first placing on the market of a medical device must involve notification to the 
competent national authority of the place of residence of the manufacturer. A noti-
fied body (NB), established in every Member State (Article 16 of the MDD), carries 
out the conformity assessment mentioned earlier (European Communities 1993, 
pp. 19–20). Where a notified body finds that pertinent requirements have not been 
met or are no longer met by the manufacturer or where a certificate should not have 
been issued, it will suspend or withdraw the certificate or place restrictions. These 
bodies are under the obligation to inform the Competent National Authority (CNA), 
such as the “Federal Agency for Medicines and Health Products” in Belgium, of all 
certificates issued, modified, supplemented, suspended, withdrawn, or refused.
In addition, the MDD envisages a Medical Device Vigilance System. The aim of 
this system is to reduce the likelihood of reoccurrence of incidents related to the use 
of a medical device. Adverse incidents are evaluated and information about them 
disseminated, where appropriate (European Commission 2016a). This serves to pre-
vent repetition of incidents, such as the Poly Implant Prothèse (PIP) breast implant 
case, reported below, and improve coordination between notified bodies, for 
instance, via monthly vigilance teleconferences (European Commission 2014b).
The MDD also requires that data about certified “CE” medical devices is stored 
in a standardised format in a database called the EUDAMED, a central repository 
E. Mantovani and P.C. Bocos

259
(European Communities 1993, pp. 17–18). EUDAMED contains information about 
manufacturers and devices, certificates issued or renewed, modified, supplemented, 
suspended, withdrawn or refused, as well as data obtained in accordance with the 
vigilance procedure and data on clinical investigations (European Commission 
2010). Its purpose is to provide national competent authorities with fast access to 
relevant information (European Commission 2012b).
12.1.2.9  The Applicability of Medical Device Law to mHealth Apps: 
The Intended Purpose Rule
Most mHealth apps engage the literal definition of medical device, provided above. 
Despite this, they are not considered as medical devices. Therefore the essential 
requirements and the conformity assessment procedures outlined above do not 
apply to them. The 2016 Commission guidelines’ document, discussed below, 
states: “those apps that are on the borderline and could fall under the medical device 
definition could be aligned with the medical devices requirements as far as possi-
ble” (European Commission 2016b, p. 7, our emphasis).
The reason why most mHealth apps escape the purview of the MDD is that the 
manufacturer, or developer, developed them without an intended medical purpose. 
In clear, only if the intended purpose of the app is medical, the Medical Device 
Directive applies. “Intended purpose” indicates the use for which the device is 
intended “according to the data supplied by the manufacturer on the labelling, in the 
instructions and/or in promotional materials” (European Communities 1993, p. 7). 
The European Court of Justice has confirmed the centrality of the intended purpose 
rule in a case concerning a computer program recording brain activity, called 
“ActiveTwo” by BioSemi VOF (European Court of Justice 2012).
The case originated when a competitor of BioSemi VOF, Brain Products, argued 
that “ActiveTwo” could not be allowed to circulate freely, as it was not marketed as 
a medical device. The Court disagreed, explaining that a medical device must sat-
isfy the essential requirements of the directive and bear the CE marking, only if its 
manufacturer expressly intends to market it for medical purposes. In contrast, a 
device that de facto performs an activity that squarely falls within the letter of the 
definition − such as, in the case at hand, recording brain activity − but is not intended 
to be used for medical purposes by its manufacturer is not a medical device. 
Accordingly, the safety certification as a medical device cannot be required 
(European Court of Justice 2012).
The Court decision clarified that, in order to determine whether a software is a 
medical device or not, the main criterion is the intended purpose. This criterion is 
more important than the risk that the device per se can pose to human health, which 
characterise the US approach and upon which we will return in the conclusion. The 
initial, basic idea behind the MDD evoked earlier, namely, that all computer pro-
grams that meet the definition of a medical device must comply with the MDF’s 
requirements, appears, in fact, as “all computer programs intended by its manufac-
turers to be medical devices must comply with the MDD”. The foregoing means 
12  Are mHealth Apps Safe?

260
that mHealth apps may not be “as safe”. As will be noted below, this situation is 
­unsatisfactory because “people are actually using this stuff and thinking it’s real” 
(Wired, 2014).
12.1.3  Two Gaps of the MDD in Relation to mHealth Apps
12.1.3.1  Reliability of Apps
In 2015, the European Commission organised a series of stakeholders’ meetings 
about the safety risks posed by mHealth apps. The gatherings identified three areas 
of risk and needs:
	1.	 The need to ensure that mobile health applications function based on sound clini-
cal evidence
	2.	 The need to provide users with reliable and transparent information about the 
purpose and functionalities of the apps
	3.	 The need for testing the performance of the apps with different devices (European 
Commission 2016c)
12.1.3.2  Clinical Evidence
Clinical evidence refers to the scientific credibility of an application, which is gen-
erated through validation “by […] specialized professionals, health organization 
and scientific society” (European Commission 2016c, p. 12). Scientific evidence 
includes information regarding studies and researches that have been used to with-
stand it, including clinical evidence, information about the authors and of any con-
flicts of interest (European Commission 2016c, p. 12). An example of an mHealth 
app lacking clinical evidence is the “Instant Blood Pressure” app, reported by tech-
nological magazine Wired (Wired 2014). The app claimed to be working on strong 
clinical evidence as its manufacturers claimed that the app “use[d] a patent-pending 
process developed by a team from the Johns Hopkins University—a world leader in 
health innovation” (Ibid. 2014). In fact, any clinical evidence supported the app, and 
the John Hopkins University had not participated in its development (Ibid. 2014).
12.1.3.3  Claims on the Purpose and Functions of mHealth Apps
Clarity and transparency about the purposes and functionalities of apps are essential 
to enable users, doctors, and patients alike to purchase the “right” app. What an app 
does can be communicated in the logo, in the instructions, in the labelling, or in any 
form of communication designed to promote directly or indirectly its services 
(European Commission 2016c, p. 13).
E. Mantovani and P.C. Bocos

261
Several cases, such as the one shown below, suggest there is a lack of transpar-
ency on the part of developers when they explain the capabilities of their products. 
The latter is justified on the ground that an app with an advertised pseudo-medical 
purpose attracts consumers more than normal apps. For this reason, the indication 
that the app is not intended to serve a medical purpose is not advertised clearly but 
specified only in the instructions, which consumers seldom read before purchasing 
an app. For example, the Instant Blood Pressure app claimed it could take a “blood 
pressure reading in under a minute using only your iPhone—no cuff required” 
(Wired 2014). It is only by scrolling down in the app store description that one could 
find a warning stating that this technology was for “recreational use”.
Reportedly (Wired 2014), this notice arguably did not discourage users. The 
reviews left at the bottom of the app store web page clearly indicate that some users 
downloaded and used the app believing that they were getting accurate blood pres-
sure measurements from it. In 2013 a group of researchers from the University of 
Pittsburgh Medical Center screened the catalogue of the default app stores of IOS 
and Android, searching for apps that claimed to be able to detect skin cancer or to 
assist users in detecting malignant skin lesions (Wolf et al. 2013). In four cases, 
apps were described in the instructions as intended for educational purposes and not 
cancer diagnosis. Despite the obvious medical relevance, the instructions merely 
warned users not to use them to replace standard medical care (Wolf et al. 2013). As 
mentioned earlier, “people are using this stuff and thinking it’s real” (Wired 2014).
12.1.3.4  Test and Validation of Performance
The performance of a device relates to the accuracy of technology features and 
components, such as buttons, menus, resistance over time, after prolonged use, etc. 
(European Commission 2016b, p. 43).
There are general and specific problems related to the testing and validation of 
apps. A general problem is that apps, like any software, are “impossible to guarantee 
[being] error-free” (Forsström 1997, p. 143). In this regard, the best way to mini-
mise errors is to conduct tests with users. However, in the low-cost business model 
of the apps industry, cost-constrained software development validation means that 
software often undergoes “minimal testing” (Lurie 2003). This is the case, for 
example, of the “Instant Blood Pressure” app, presented above. Put to the test after 
being released on the market, the app first measured a heart rate of 55 beats per 
minute. Reactivated after two misfires, the app measured a heartbeat of 74 per min-
ute (Wired 2014).
The specific problem relates to the fact that mHealth apps, unlike conventional 
medical software, are designed to work with a potentially enormous range of generic 
devices. The MDD requires that the testing of a medical device be performed with 
all the accessories with which it is to be used (European Communities 1993, p. 6). 
In other words, the essential requirements must be met by the app, working in com-
bination with the accessory (the mobile device) (European Commission 1994). This 
12  Are mHealth Apps Safe?

262
includes software, called “stand-alone software”, which is not incorporated into a 
device at the time of its placing on the market (European Commission 2016d). To 
come into line with the directive, apps should be tested on every mobile device that 
can run it. In addition, given the versatility of operating systems such as Android, 
such apps may well be capable of being run on phones that did not even exist when 
the app in question was created. This apparent impossibility to test the medical 
device with all available accessories poses unknown safety issues (Quinn 2013).
12.1.3.5  Traceability of mHealth Apps
The other safety issue highlighted in EU-sponsored stakeholders’ meetings con-
cerns the possibility of retrieving defective apps from users. In general, the recall of 
products is exercised when a device is defective, poses a risk to health, or both, for 
example, a critical bug in a software. Launching a recall procedure can be a legal 
obligation. It is found in community legislation on medicinal products (European 
Union 2001, p. 72; European Union 2003, p. 25). Under these directives, manufac-
turers must implement a system for recording and reviewing complaints, together 
with an effective system for recalling promptly and at any time (investigational) 
medicinal products, which have already entered the distribution network.
Recall is also foreseen under the MDD. In Annex IV, the MDD obliges manufac-
turers to implement “any necessary corrective action”, including the recall of 
devices (European Communities 1993, pp. 40–41). Annex VII of the same piece of 
legislation requires manufacturers to notify the competent authorities of “any tech-
nical or medical reason […] leading to systematic recall of devices of the same type 
by the manufacturer” (European Communities 1993, pp. 48–49).
A case in which medical devices had to be recalled occurred in 2009, after some 
French surgeons began reporting an abnormally high rupture rate of breast implants 
produced by a company called Poly Implant Prothèse (PIP). Some months later the 
French medical safety agency (AFSSAPS) issued a recall of PIP implants when it 
found out that company was substituting unapproved silicone in place of approved 
medical-grade silicone (Keogh 2012). The French government later recommended 
the removal of PIP implants and announced that the 30,000 French women who 
received PIP implants were entitled to have them removed at no cost (Chrisafis 
2011).
The PIP case concerns a traditional, material, medical device. In the specific 
context of mobile health apps, however, it may not be easy to implement a recall 
procedure. The reason for this is that it is difficult to trace the different channels 
through which an app without a CE mark can be distributed. An app that is not a 
medical device can be downloaded from app stores or directly from the Internet. A 
manufacturer may contact the app stores to retrace those who downloaded the app 
and contact them (Article 29 Data Protection Working Party 2013, pp. 20–21). But 
in case a defective app has not been downloaded from official channels, for instance, 
from a privately owned website, tracing the user concerned is more difficult. This 
E. Mantovani and P.C. Bocos

263
holds true in particular for apps that, once they are downloaded, work autonomously, 
i.e. without the need to stay connected to the Internet. In this case, it is only the 
owner of the mobile device that can uninstall the defective app. To do so, he or she 
must be told, as the example below shows.
In April 2011, the multinational pharmaceutical company Pfizer Inc. released a 
“Rheumatology Calculator” app. This app was not a CE-marked medical device 
and, once downloaded, could work offline. The app was a calculator, as its function-
ality was to help physicians to “measure the disease activity of patients with various 
inflammatory diseases, in particular that of patients with rheumatoid arthritis” 
(Pfizer 2011). The Pfizer app, more specifically, used an algorithm to measure spe-
cific markers of disease activities of patients based on data provided by their 
doctors.
In October 2011, the app disappeared from the app stores, and Pfizer informed 
the British and the Swiss competent authorities that it had found a bug in the soft-
ware. Pfizer also sent a letter to many doctors based in the UK informing them that:
“a bug in the app […] gives wrong results”, and that “if you have downloaded the “Pfizer 
Rheumatology Calculator” application to your mobile device, the application should not be 
used any longer and should be deleted from the device”. (Ibid, 2011)
It is not clear how many doctors Pfizer tried to contact. It is not equally clear why 
the company decided to send the letter only to British doctors (Ibid, 2011). More 
worryingly, it is unknown whether there are doctors out there who, not having being 
informed, are still using the calculator in their daily work.
12.1.3.6  Regulatory Initiatives to Address the Safety Needs 
of mHealth Apps
European authorities have been hesitant to impose the requirements of the MDD on 
apps (Quinn 2013). The reason for this is that stricter enforcement of the MDD may 
stifle an area of ongoing innovation and potential growth (European Commission 
2012a). Given the costs involved with MDD compliance, a more rigorous applica-
tion of the MDD would likely mean an increase in the cost of such applications 
beyond a level which may be feasible for a low-cost business model.
However, recently, the EU has grown aware that the safety concern is a barrier to 
the very uptake of mHealth. In 2016, the European Commission launched a guide-
lines document to ensure “a consistently high level of health and safety protection 
for EU citizens using mHealth apps” in which the reliability and transparency needs 
discussed earlier are cautiously addressed (European Commission 2016c). In 
response to the specific problem of traceability, no specific initiative has been 
adopted. However, the newly proposed Medical Device Regulation (European 
Commission 2012a) introduces a unique device identifier (UDI) system that may be 
used to mitigate that problem (see below page 12).
12  Are mHealth Apps Safe?

264
12.1.3.7  The EU Guidelines on the Assessment of the Reliability 
of Mobile Health Applications
In 2016, the European Commission adopted the first draft of the “EU guidelines on 
assessment of the reliability of mobile health applications”. The EU guidelines, 
which are not legally binding, deal with the grey zone of “borderline” mHealth apps 
(European Commission 2016c, p. 4). Drafted by a private consultancy contracted by 
the Commission, the “EU guidelines” contain an assessment procedure that takes 
the form of a series of precise questions.
The EU guidelines document is structured in three sections, one for each of the 
three stages of the assessment process. Each step consists of a series of questions 
addressed to app developers, citizens, health professionals, and health providers 
alike.
The first step is concerned with the identification of the app, to discover if it 
exists, if it is appropriate for the evaluation, whether it is downloadable (Ibid., 
pp. 8–9), its name, the supplier and the developer (in the case that they are not the 
same), and the intended use declared by the manufacturer. In the case that the app is 
“CE” marked, there is no need to carry out an assessment (Ibid., p.  8). If not, 
mHealth apps must undergo a simple testing, which consists of installing and unin-
stalling the app on available platforms and verifying whether the app is easy to 
understand, easy to navigate, and if it works as stated (Ibid, p. 9).
In the second step, “risk assessment”, the information gathered about the app is 
used to rank the clinical and technological risk. Depending on its specificities, each 
app will be ranked differently; this ranking, in turn, determines the level of “scru-
tiny” the app should be submitted to (see below third phase “scrutiny”). This stage, 
in other words, helps stakeholders to clarify the appropriate level of conformity 
assessment that the app they have in mind “may” undergo.
In the third phase, called “scrutiny”, a series of questions about the technological 
and the medical aspects of the app are asked (Ibid., pp. 11–15). As far as the prob-
lem of clinical evidence is concerned, the guidelines dedicate seven questions to 
assess the credibility of the app. These questions include: “Does the app provide 
references to the scientific evidence used to ensure content quality?” “Is there 
appropriate information provided about the authors of the app content to generate 
credibility and provide quality assurance?” “Does it indicate how often the app’s 
content is reviewed/updated?” “Does it indicate the last review date?” “Does it 
notify changes/modifications made at the last update?” (Ibid., p. 12).
As far as the transparency about the claims of the app, the EU guidelines recom-
mend, as first step, to give a face to the app, that is, who are those developing and 
introducing the app in the market. Moreover, the guidelines urge more clarity about 
the intended purpose of the app. Users should be able to understand right away what 
the app can do and what it cannot do. The detailed questions asked by the guidelines 
complement the transparency obligations that already exist under community law. 
The eCommerce Directive 2000/31/EC and Directive 2011/83/EC, the Directive on 
Consumer Rights, impose on manufacturers a series of obligations intended to 
ensure that consumers who purchase an app “at the distance” are informed in  
E. Mantovani and P.C. Bocos

265
transparent and clear fashion (European Union 2000; European Union 2011). 
Furthermore, Directive 2005/29/EC on Unfair Commercial Practices sanctions 
unfair commercial practices. On the account of the directive, a commercial practice 
is unfair if it does not comply with the principle of professional diligence, if it is 
likely to distort the economic behaviour of the average consumer, and if it is mis-
leading or aggressive (European Union 2005, p. 28).
As per the problem of testing the performance of the app with the different 
devices, the guidelines propose to involve and, more specifically, to encourage users 
to test the apps “in every platform” (European Commission 2016b, p. 11).
12.1.3.8  The Unique Device Identifier
In 2013 the Commission acknowledged in a recommendation that the “traceability 
of medical devices throughout the whole supply chain contributes to patient safety 
by facilitating vigilance, market surveillance and transparency in this sector” 
(European Commission 2013, p. 1). In that same text, the Commission advocated 
for a unique device identification system of medical devices in the EU (Ibid., p. 1). 
The proposed reform of the MDF, the draft Medical Device Regulation (MDR), 
introduces a unique device identification (UDI) mechanism.
The Unique Device Identification (UDI) is a unique numeric or alphanumeric 
code that pertains to any medical device. Such a unique numeric or alphanumeric is 
composed of two parts, a device identifier and a production identifier. By combining 
these identifiers, the UDI is expected to improve the traceability of devices and 
allow for easier recall of devices, as well as for combatting counterfeiting. The UDI 
will not replace but add to the existing labelling requirements of the Medical Device 
Directive (European Commission 2016a).
In the intention of the Commission, Eudamed is expected to take a more impor-
tant role under the new regulation, improving the capacity of medical authorities to 
trace devices through the supply chain and to facilitate the prompt and efficient 
recall of “bad”, unsafe, devices from the market and from consumers’ hands.
12.1.3.9  A Brief Look into the US Legislative Framework 
for “Borderline” mHealth Apps
The US approach to regulating mHealth apps display similarities and some differ-
ences from the European Union’s. This section presents the US legal framework on 
medical devices, focusing on what interests this chapter, the regulation of “border-
line” mHealth apps.
The centrepiece legislation for the safety for medical devices in the USA is the 
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act) of 1938 (United States Congress 
1938). The Medical Device Amendment of 1976 introduced in the FD&C criteria 
and norms for the classification and regulation of medical devices. The same amend-
ment entrusted to a federal authority, the Food and Drugs Administration (FDA), the 
12  Are mHealth Apps Safe?

266
role of ensuring that a “reasonable assurance of safety and effectiveness” is pro-
vided before medical devices are marketed and, importantly, the power to investi-
gate and discontinue the commercialisation of apps that are deemed to pose a serious 
risk to the health and safety of users/patients (United States Congress 1976).
In the last few years, like in the European Union, the FDA has issued guidelines 
to clarify the application of medical device law to mHealth apps. As in Europe, 
these “guidance documents” do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities but 
contain non-binding recommendations. The most relevant instruments, for our pur-
poses, include:
	(a)	 The Mobile Medical Applications Guidance of 2013, subsequently amended in 
2015, which seeks to provide clarity and predictability for manufacturers of 
mobile medical apps (US Food and Drugs Administration 2013a; US Food and 
Drugs Administration 2015a)
	(b)	 The Medical Device Data Systems, Medical Image Storage Devices, and 
Medical Image Communications Devices of 2015, which covers devices used to 
collect and store data from other medical devices (US Food and Drugs 
Administration 2015b)
	(c)	 The Medical Device Accessories: Defining Accessories and Classification 
Pathway for New Accessory Types Guidance of 2016, which deals with acces-
sories to medical devices (US Food and Drugs Administration 2016a)
	(d)	 The General Wellness: Policy for Low-Risk Devices Draft Guidance of 2016, 
which deals with low-risk products that promote healthy lifestyle or general 
wellness products, such as fitness trackers, calorie trackers, or lifestyle trackers 
(US Food and Drugs Administration 2016b)
The definition of medical device introduced in the FD&C Act is similar to the 
one adopted in the EU. Section 201(h) of FD&C Act considers a medical device “an 
instrument, apparatus, implement, machine, contrivance, implant, in vitro reagent, 
or other similar or related article, including a component part, or accessory” (United 
States Congress 1938, p. 5). In contrast to the European MDD, in order to determine 
whether a device is a medical one, the US legislator appeals to the “intended use” 
criterion. A device is medical if it is:
Intended for use in the diagnosis of disease or other conditions, or […]; or intended to affect 
the structure or any function of the body of man or other animals […]. (United States 
Congress 1938, p. 5)
The intended use may be shown by oral or written statements (by manufacturers 
or their representatives) or by labelling claims or by advertising materials (United 
States Congress 1938, pp. 322–329). As discussed earlier, in the EU MDD, the cri-
terion is the “purpose”, “intended by the manufacturer” (European Communities 
1993, p. 5); in the USA such a specification does not exist. This means that while in 
Europe a company can avoid compliance with the medical device legislation by 
disavowing an app’s medical purpose, in the USA “when it is clear that the app 
serves as a medical device, such disavowals are ineffective” (McFarlane 2014, p. 3). 
E. Mantovani and P.C. Bocos

267
The case of 23andME, discussed below, illustrates the practical implications of this 
provision.
The similarities and differences between the USA and the EU do not stop here. 
Similar to the European MDD, the US FD&C Act organises medical devices into 
classes (United States Congress 1938, pp. 191–200). While in Europe there are four 
classes, US legislation provides for three classes: “low-risk” Class I devices, which 
are subject only to general controls, such as registering their name and products 
with the FDA; medium-risk Class II devices, which are expected to meet perfor-
mance standards and undergo specific controls; and high-risk Class III devices, 
which must be subjected to a review process, including clinical trials, before they 
are allowed to be marketed (Kramer et al. 2012). Notwithstanding the difference in 
the number of classes, the logic behind the classification remains the same, based on 
prior evaluation of the risks that type of device poses to the health and safety of the 
patient.
Both the EU and US regulators face the similar challenge of ensuring that bor-
derline apps that are sold in the market are safe (Sorenson and Drummond 2016, 
pp. 145–150). As discussed earlier, the EU legislator asks manufacturers of border-
line apps to abide by “as close as possible” to the requirements of the MDD. In 
contrast, the US FDA refrains from the attempt of bringing borderline apps under 
the umbrella of the FD&C Act (US Food and Drugs Administration 2015c). The 
FDA reserves to itself the power to intervene if a borderline app is procuring a high 
risk. In its website, the FDA offers a list of examples of mobile apps that “may be 
regulated” (US Food and Drugs Administration 2016c): apps that transform a 
mobile platform into a regulated medical device using sensors or by including func-
tionalities similar to those used in other regulated devices, apps that are used for 
patient monitoring or that analyse data from a connected device, etc. (US Food and 
Drugs Administration 2016c).
Both the EU and the US legislator have put in place vigilance systems. Also in 
the USA, manufactures of marketed devices are, for instance, under the obligation 
to report adverse events and to continue monitoring the device’s safety and effec-
tiveness (Kramer et al. 2012). The FDA also supports a number of the so-called 
surveillance data networks, the Medical Device Epidemiology Network Initiative 
(MDEpiNET) and the Medical Device Surveillance Network (MedSun). These net-
works conduct systematic collection, collation, and analysis of data to identify 
safety problems and advance epidemiological research (Fiedler 2016, p. 56). Since 
2013, a Unique Device Identification (UDI) system and a central database of medi-
cal devices (GUDID) have been in place (US Food and Drugs Administration 
2013c). The system and the database share similarities with the tasks performed by 
European notified bodies, for what concerns the post market surveillance, and by 
EUDAMED, the central database of medical devices, for what concerns surveil-
lance data.
The case of the company “23andMe” offers an example of what we have briefly 
discussed so far concerning the regulation of borderline apps in the USA. 23andMe 
is a private company that provides consumers with information about their genetic 
12  Are mHealth Apps Safe?

268
heritage, using a sample of their saliva, and against the payment of a price ($99) 
(23andme 2013).
In 2011, when it started operating, the purpose of 23andMe was to offer a genetic 
testing service, which provided clients with information about their ancestors. 
Shortly thereafter, the company launched another service: clients could now obtain 
genetic information revealing their predisposition to develop certain pathologies or 
their responsiveness to certain drugs (Brandon 2013). The new service proved 
extremely successful and profitable. The popularity of the service, however, attracted 
the attention of the federal authority, the FDA. Few months after, the FDA ordered 
23andMe to discontinue the marketing of its genetic diseases predictive services, 
while it could keep the genealogical services in place. For the FDA, the genetic test-
ing kit posed a serious risk to individuals because (1) it did not provide sufficient 
information about the reliability of the “predisposition” diagnoses, (2) it did not 
give advice to consumers about how to navigate the information extracted from the 
kit, and (3) it provided misleading information, suggesting to users that the test 
could replace traditional medical diagnosis (US Food and Drugs Administration 
2013b). Today, 23andMe has obtained the certification of the FDA also for its pre-
dictive genetic testing services. However, a warning appears in its website making 
clear that the tests:
Are not intended to diagnose a disease, or tell you anything about your risk for developing 
a disease in the future” and they are “not intended to tell you anything about the health of 
your fetus, or your newborn child’s risk of developing a particular disease later in life. 
(23andme 2016)
In conclusion, there are not substantial differences between the EU and US 
approach to borderline medical apps, which are both lenient in imposing the appli-
cation of the respective medical device frameworks. Under both jurisdictions, regu-
lators have been hesitant to take action that they fear may stifle an area of ongoing 
innovation. The difference between the EU and the USA is perhaps mostly related 
to the regulation technique. The European framework tends to be overarching and 
participative. It seeks to cover all apps, including borderline apps, and promotes 
stakeholders’ self-regulation through self-assessment of their products. In the USA, 
the legislator is less interested in extending the medical devices rules to borderline 
apps or in involving stakeholders. Developers are warned that a US federal authority 
retains the power to intervene at any moment should a borderline app pose serious 
risks to health.
12.2  Conclusion
This chapter has raised the question of the use of commercially available mHealth 
apps for medical purposes. To answer the main research question, “are mHealth 
apps safe?”, it has mobilised the EU’s Medical Device Framework. This detailed 
legal system of administrative rules, checks and testing, documentary procedures, 
E. Mantovani and P.C. Bocos

269
and requirements, amended over the years, does not clearly apply to most mHealth 
apps. “Borderline” apps that are not intended by their manufacturers to be used for 
medical purposes do not have to comply with it. This also holds true if they techni-
cally meet the definition of a medical device and/or they perform acts on subjects 
that doctors would consider pertaining to the medical field. The non-applicability of 
the MDF to borderline mHealth apps implies a general “market clearance” given to 
de facto medical-connected devices that potentially affect individuals’ health, with-
out medical justification.
This situation creates safety problems that, as discussed in this contribution, con-
cern primarily the “reliability” and the “traceability” of “bad” apps. Clinical evi-
dence, claims on the purpose and functions of mHealth apps, procedures for testing 
and validating of performance, and the traceability of mHealth apps are the issues 
of major concern. The recent EU guidelines offer general and specific questions to 
address them by guiding “stakeholders” in the self-assessment of the credibility, the 
solidity, etc. of the apps and their functionalities. The guidelines closely reflect the 
MDD. Indeed, after reading the questions, one comes under the impression of being 
spoon-fed medical device law for non-experts. This is done in the attempt to bring 
the mHealth apps market “as close as possible” to the medical device framework, as 
recommended by the EU.
This apparently positive effort can be put into question. In particular, one may 
raise doubts about the rationale behind the decision of addressing the guidelines not 
only to manufacturers or developers but to all stakeholders. The point should be 
emphasised that stakeholders in mHealth carry different points of view (Bijker 
2010): they have specific interests and concerns and also constraints that limit what 
they can actually do. Manufactures will read the guidelines because they need to 
know whether they have to comply, and with which parts, of the complex medical 
device framework. Other stakeholders, such as doctors and patients, may very well 
read the guidelines, but they cannot really make a difference. Their concern is to 
decide whether or not to use an app, which has already been produced. A more use-
ful guidance is, for example, the Medical App Checker of the Royal Dutch Medical 
Association (KNMG 2016).
What is worrisome is the proclivity of the EU to include “all stakeholders”. This 
choice is seemingly premised on the assumption if the rules are well explained, “all 
stakeholders” will be able to self-assess the risks of apps that are about to develop, 
recommend, purchase, use, etc. In our view, this “pedagogic” approach may create 
unnecessary confusion; it may, most importantly, dilute the responsibilities of those 
primarily concerned with the development of safe apps, app developers, or 
manufacturers.
In an earlier publication (Mantovani et al. 2013, p. 66), one of the authors sug-
gested that we were approaching a fork in the road. In that article, one route led 
towards a future where mHealth apps are regulated according to the same principles 
as conventional medical devices; the other route was to continue with the current 
situation whereby mHealth apps are allowed to avoid the need of complying with 
medical device regulation. Looking at the most recent legislative initiatives, it seems 
that mHealth is threading the second route. In this connection, and to mitigate the 
12  Are mHealth Apps Safe?

270
risk of diluting the responsibilities of the developers, just evoked, the EU could 
benefit from two lessons learnt from the regulation of borderline mHealth apps in 
the USA.
First, while the EU’s technique to regulate borderline mHealth apps appears 
overarching and participative/pedagogical, in the USA the “activity of attempting to 
control, order or influence” (Black 2002, p. 1, mentioned in the Introduction) the 
development of mHealth apps could be said “sector specific” and “adversary”. It is 
sector specific because the regulatory frameworks, including the guidelines, address 
developers of mHealth apps only; it is adversary because a federal authority, the 
FDA, retains a discretionary power of intervention. Although it exercises its power 
only in a restricted number of cases, this system boils down to a warning for manu-
factures that if the use of a device or app poses serious risks to health, the FDA will 
intervene, forcing the application under the medical device framework, regardless 
of the intended use that the developer attributed to it (as in the 23andMe case).
In our view, the EU regulation of mHealth apps may consider an expansion of the 
domain of activity of public authorities in the mHealth safety domain. The EU has 
a long tradition of creating networks of supervisory bodies, for instance, the data 
protection authorities (DPAs) under Directive 95/46/EU. To guarantee a high level 
of health safety in a world of connected devices, the existing independent authori-
ties, at national and/or European level, could be able to receive complaints or noti-
fications by stakeholders concerned with the safety of apps. Legislative change may 
be required to make rights enforceable, and it may be necessary to adopt an approach 
similar to that found in the distant selling and consumer directives, i.e. whereby 
consumers are able to ask questions and obtain genuine information from app 
developers.
Second, the US authorities accept the situation where one does not know if cer-
tain lifestyle and well-being apps pose a risk to citizens’ health and to what extent, 
until they are reported, investigated, and/or accidents occur. It is hard to deny that 
this statement candidly reflects the reality of uptake of mHealth today, not only in 
the USA but also in Europe. What is noteworthy is that the formal recognition of 
this situation in the USA means that if an app poses a risk to health, it will not be 
enough for an app developer to disavow the medical or pseudo-medical purpose of 
use. Regardless of the purpose intended by its manufacturer, if an app poses a risk 
to health, it is stopped and must undergo the medical device standard procedure 
before being marketed again.
In our view, the EU regulation of mHealth apps could also consider risk assess-
ment, in addition to the “intended purpose” rule, to distinguish between medical and 
non-medical mHealth apps. Embracing risk assessment would mean opening the 
doors to independent scientific advice on all aspects relating to safety, communica-
tion, and dialogue with consumers, as well as networking with national agencies 
and scientific bodies. This process may be costly and difficult to realise across dif-
ferent Member States. It may be worth trying. Unchecked medical technology 
developments have the potential not only to harm the health of individual; they can 
also engender fears and mistrust in the public, to the detriment of any medical tech-
nological innovation.
E. Mantovani and P.C. Bocos

271
Acknowledgements  The authors acknowledge the support of the IRIS project – Interoperable 
platform for Remote monitoring and Integrated e-Solutions (Grant agreement Nr. BRGEOZ234), 
funded by INNOVIRIS, the Brussels Institute for Research & Innovation.
References
Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (2013) Opinion 02/2013 on apps on smart devices. http://
ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection/article-29/documentation/opinion-recommendation/
files/2013/wp202_en.pdf. Accessed 21 Dec 2016
Bijker WE (2010) How is technology made?—that is the question! Camb J Econ 34:63–76
Black J (2002) Critical reflections on regulation 27 Australian Journal of Legal Philosophy 1
Brandon R (2013) Body blow: how 23andMe brought down the FDA’s wrath. http://www.thev-
erge.com/2013/11/25/5144928/how-23andme-brought-down-fda-wrath-personal-genetics-
wojcicki. Accessed 21 Dec 2016
Callens S (2010) The EU legal framework on E-health. In: Mossailos E, Permanand G, Baeten R, 
Hervey T (eds) Health systems governance in Europe. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Chrisafis A (2011) French government “to order women to remove defective breast implants”. 
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/dec/20/french-remove-breast-implants-silicone. 
Accessed 21 Dec 2016
Cortez N (2014) The mobile health revolution? http://lawreview.law.ucdavis.edu/issues/47/4/arti-
cles/47-4_cortez.pdf. Accessed 2 Jan 2017
Danzis SD, Pruitt C (2013) Rethinking the FDA’s regulation of mobile medical apps. https://www.
cov.com/~/media/files/corporate/publications/2013/02/rethinking_the_fdas_regulation_of_
mobile_medical_apps.pdf. Accessed 1 Jan 2017
Deloitte (2012) mHealth in an mWorld. https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/us/
Documents/life-sciences-health-care/us-lhsc-mhealth-in-an-mworld-103014.pdf. Accessed 25 
Nov 2016
DigitalTrends (2016) Maintain your health and mind with these 15 medical apps. http://www.
digitaltrends.com/mobile/best-medical-apps/. Accessed 5 Dec 2016
European Commission (1994) MEDDEV 2.1/2 guidelines rrelating to the application of: the 
council directive 90/385/EEC on active medical devices and the council directive 93/42 
on 
medical 
devices. 
http://ec.europa.eu/consumers/sectors/medical-devices/files/med-
dev/2_1-2___04-1994_en.pdf. Accessed 21 Dec 2016
European Commission (2010) 2010/227/: Commission Decision of 19 April 2010 on the European 
Databank on Medical Devices (Eudamed) (notified under document C (2010) 2363) (Text with 
EEA relevance) http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32010D02
27&from=en. Accessed 11 Dec 2016
European Commission (2011) Manual on borderline and classification in the community regulatory 
framework for medical devices. http://ec.europa.eu/consumers/sectors/medical-devices/files/
wg_minutes_member_lists/version1_9_borderline_manual_en.pdf. Accessed 21 Dec 2016
European Commission (2012a) Proposal for a regulation of the European parliament and of the 
council on medical devices, and amending directive 2001/83/EC, regulation (EC) No. 178/2002 
and regulation (EC) No. 1223/2009. http://ec.europa.eu/health/medical-devices/files/revision_
docs/proposal_2012_542_en.pdf. Accessed 15 Oct 2016
European Commission (2012b) Evaluation of the “European databank on medical devices”. http://
ec.europa.eu/DocsRoom/documents/12981/attachments/1/translations/en/renditions/native. 
Accessed 21 Dec 2016
European Commission (2013) Commission recommendation on a common framework for a 
unique device identification system of medical devices in the union text with EEA relevance. 
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32013H0172&from=EN. 
Accessed 17 Dec 2016
12  Are mHealth Apps Safe?

272
European Commission (2014a) Green paper on mobile health. http://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/
document.cfm?doc_id=5147. Accessed 21 Dec 2016
European Commission (2014b) EU consultation on mHealth. https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-
market/en/public-consultation-green-paper-mobile-health. Accessed 5 Dec 2016
European Commission (2016a) Market surveillance and vigilance. Available at: https://ec.europa.
eu/growth/sectors/medical-devices/market-surveillance_en. Accessed 1 Nov 2016
European Commission (2016b) MEDDEV 2.1/6 guidelines on the qualification and classification 
of stand alone software used in healthcare within the regulatory framework of medical devices. 
http://www.twobirds.com/~/media/pdfs/news/articles/2016/firstdraftguidelinesandannexes.
pdf?la=en. Accessed 13 Dec 2016
European Commission (2016c) EU guidelines on assessment of the reliability of mobile health 
applications. http://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/document.cfm?action=display&doc_id=16090. 
Accessed 13 Dec 2016
European Commission (2016d) Code of conduct on privacy in mHealth. http://ec.europa.eu/news-
room/dae/document.cfm?action=display&doc_id=16125. Accessed 13 Dec 2016
European Communities (1990) Directive 90/385 on the approximation of the laws of the member 
states relating to active implantable medical devices. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/
EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:31990L0385&from=EN. Accessed 10 Oct 2016
European Communities (1993) Directive 93/42 concerning medical devices. http://eur-lex.europa.
eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CONSLEG:1993L0042:20071011:EN:PDF. Accessed 21 
Dec 2016
European Communities (1998) Directive 98/79/EC of the European parliament and of the coun-
cil of 27 October 1998 on in vitro diagnostic medical devices. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal- 
content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:31998L0079. Accessed 13 Nov 2016
European Court of Justice (2012) C129/11 Brain Products GmbH v. BioSemi VOF. http://curia.
europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?docid=130247&doclang=en. Accessed 12 Oct 2016
European Union (2000) Directive 2000/31/EC of the European parliament and of the council 
of 8 June 2000 on certain legal aspects of information society services, in particular elec-
tronic commerce, in the internal market (‘Directive on electronic commerce’). http://eur-lex.
europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32000L0031:EN:HTML. Accessed 16 
Nov 2016
European Union (2001) Directive 2001/83/EC of the European parliament and of the council 
of 6 November 2001 on the community code relating to medicinal products for human use. 
http://ec.europa.eu/health//sites/health/files/files/eudralex/vol-1/dir_2001_83_consol_2012/
dir_2001_83_cons_2012_en.pdf. Accessed 16 Nov 2016
European Union (2003) Commission directive 2003/94/ECof 8 October 2003 laying down the 
principles and guidelines of good manufacturing practice in respect of medicinal products 
for human use and investigational medicinal products for human use. http://ec.europa.eu/
health//sites/health/files/files/eudralex/vol-1/dir_2003_94/dir_2003_94_en.pdf. Accessed 16 
Nov 2016
European Union (2005) Directive 2005/29/EC of the European parliament and of the Council 
of 11 May 2005concerning unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices in the inter-
nal market and amending council directive 84/450/EEC, directives 97/7/EC, 98/27/EC and 
2002/65/EC of the European parliament and of the council and regulation (EC) No 2006/2004 
of the European parliament and of the council(‘Unfair Commercial Practices Directive’). 
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32005L0029&from=en. 
Accessed 16 Nov 2016
European Union (2007) Directive 2007/47/EC of the European parliament and of the council of 
5 September 2007 amending council directive 90/385/EEC on the approximation of the laws 
of the member states relating to active implantable medical devices, council directive 93/42/
EEC concerning medical devices and Directive 98/8/EC concerning the placing of biocidal 
products on the market. http://ec.europa.eu/consumers/sectors/medical-devices/files/revision_
docs/2007-47-en_en.pdf. Accessed 17 Nov 2016
E. Mantovani and P.C. Bocos

273
European Union (2011) Directive 2011/83/EU of the European parliament and of the council of 
25 October 2011on consumer rights, amending council directive 93/13/EEC and Directive 
1999/44/EC of the European parliament and of the council and repealing council directive 
85/577/EEC and directive 97/7/EC of the European parliament and of the council. http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32011L0083&rid=1. Accessed 15 
Nov 2016
European Union (2012) Treaty on the functioning of the European union. http://eur-lex.europa.
eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:12012E/TXT&from=EN. Accessed 3 Aug 2016
Fiedler BA (2016) Managing medical devices within a regulatory framework. Elsevier, 
Cambridge, MA
Forsström J (1997) Why certification of medical software would be useful? Int J Med Inform 
47(3):143–151
Google Play (2013) COPD – NHS decision aid. https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=uk.
co.activata.TotallyHealth.condition119. Accessed 5 Dec 2016
Google Play (2016) Telemed. https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.telemed.
ae&hl=es. Accessed 5 Dec 2016
Hanlon B, Thiel S (2016) The mobile health application revolution: tapping its potential. 
http://www.covance.com/content/dam/covance/assetLibrary/whitepapers/Mobile-Health-
Applications-WPCVD002-0816.pdf. Accessed 3 Jan 2017
Hildebrandt M (2015) Smart technologies and the end(s) of law: novel entanglements of law and 
technology. Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham
Huckvale P, Tilney B, Car (2015) Unaddressed privacy risks in accredited health and wellness 
apps: a cross-sectional systematic assessment. BMC Med 13:214
IHS report (2013) The world market for sports & fitness monitors—2013 Edition
International Telecommunications Union (2014) Filling the gap: legal and regulatory challenges 
of mobile health (mHealth) in Europe. https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Regional-Presence/
Europe/Documents/ITU%20mHealth%20Regulatory%20gaps%20Discussion%20Paper%20
June2014.pdf. Accessed 21 Dec 2016
Itunes (2015) Self-help for anxiety management. https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/self-help-for-
anxiety-management/id666767947?mt=8. Accessed 20 Dec 2016
Keogh B (2012) Poly implant Protheses(PIP) breast implants: interim report of the expert group. 
http://www.nhs.uk/news/2012/01January/Documents/pip-report.pdf. Accessed 22 Dec 2016
KNMG (2016) Medical app checker: a guide to assessing mobile medical apps http://www.knmg.
nl/Over-KNMG/About-KNMG/News-English/152830/Medical-App-Checker-a-Guide-to-
assessing-Mobile-Medical-Apps.htm
Kramer DB, Xu S, Kesselheim AS (2012) Regulation of medical devices in the United States and 
European Union. N Engl J M 366(9):848–855
Lurie J (2003) Error-free software is in reach, but is anyone reaching?. http://www.devx.com/
enterprise/Article/16687. Accessed 1 Aug 2016
Mantovani E, Guihen Barry B, Quinn P, Habbig A-K, De Hert P (2013) eHealth to mHealth. A 
journey precariously dependent upon apps? Eur J ePractice 21:48–66
McFarlane B (2014) FDA regulation ofmobile medical apps. https://www.namsa.com/wp-content/
uploads/2015/10/WP-FDA-Regulation-of-Mobile-Medical-Apps-7-7-2014.pdf. Accessed 21 
Dec 2016
Medical Device and Diagnosis Industry (2015) Consumer mHealth app or regulated medical 
device? 
http://www.mddionline.com/blog/devicetalk/consumer-mhealth-app-or-regulated-
medical-device-03-04-15. Accessed on 14 Nov 2016
Pew Research (2013) Tracking for health. Available at http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/01/28/
tracking-for-health-2/. Accessed 2 Sept 2017
12  Are mHealth Apps Safe?

274
Pfizer UK (2011) Dear doctor letter: “Pfizer rheumatology calculator” iPhone/android applica-
tion — important information. Available at: http://www.pharma-mkting.com/images/Pfizer_
Rheum_BugLetter.pdf. Accessed 20 July 2016
Prainsack B (2014) The powers of participatory medicine. PLoS Biol 12(4):e1001837
Quinn P (2013) Medical apps and accountability – where can the patient/consumer find protec-
tion? European Journal of Health Law. Fourth Conference on European Health Law, Book of 
Abstracts
Rübsamen K, Sakellariou S (2015) Mobile health apps: are they a regulated medical device?. 
http://www.whitecase.com/publications/article/mobile-health-apps-are-they-regulated- 
medical-device. Accessed 1 Jan 2017
Sorenson C, Drummond M (2016) Improving medical device regulation: the United States and 
Europe in perspective. Milbank Q 92(1):145–150
United States Congress (1938) Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. https://www.epw.senate.
gov/FDA_001.pdf. Accessed 8 Aug 2016
United States Congress (1976) Medical device amendment. https://www.congress.gov/bill/94th-
congress/house-bill/11124. Accessed 8 Aug 2016
US Food and Drugs Administration (2013a) Mobile medical Applications. http://www.gpo.gov/
fdsys/pkg/FR-2013-09-25/pdf/2013-23293.pdf. Accessed 6 Dec 2016
US Food and Drugs Administration (2013b) 23andMe, Inc. 11/22/13. Available at: http://www.fda.
gov/ICECI/EnforcementActions/WarningLetters/2013/ucm376296.htm. Accessed 6 Dec 2016
US Food and Drugs Administration (2013c) Unique device identification system-final rule. http://
www.fda.gov/downloads/aboutfd/ucm368961.pdf. Accessed 6 Dec 2016
US Food and Drugs Administration (2015a) Mobile medical applications. Available at: http://www.
fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/GuidanceDocuments/
UCM263366.pdf. Accessed 6 Dec 2016
US Food and Drugs Administration (2015b) Medical device data systems, medical image stor-
age devices, and medical image communications devices. http://www.fda.gov/downloads/
MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/GuidanceDocuments/UCM401996.pdf. 
Accessed 6 Dec 2016
US Food and Drugs Administration (2015c) Draft guidance for industry and food and drug admin-
istration staff. http://www.fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/
GuidanceDocuments/UCM429672.pdf. Accessed 6 Dec 2016.
US Food and Drugs Administration (2016a) Examples of mobile apps for which the fda will exer-
cise enforcement discretion. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/DigitalHealth/
MobileMedicalApplications/ucm368744.htm. Accessed 9 Dec 2016
US Food and Drugs Administration (2016b) Medical device accessories–describing accessories 
and classification pathway for new accessory types. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/down-
loads/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/GuidanceDocuments/UCM429672.
pdf. Accessed 6 Dec 2016
US Food and Drugs Administration (2016c) General wellness: policy for low risk devices. 
Available at: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/
GuidanceDocuments/UCM429674.pdf?source=govdelivery&utm_medium=email&utm_
source=govdelivery. Accessed 6 Dec 2016
Wired (2014) These medical apps have doctors and the FDA worried. http://www.wired.
com/2014/07/medical_apps/. Accessed 8 Aug 2016
Wolf J, Moreau J, Akilov O et al (2013) Diagnostic inaccuracy of Smartphone applications for 
melanoma detection. JAMA Dermatol 149(4):422–426
23andMe (2013) A look At 23andMe’s DNA revolution. https://blog.23andme.com/news/a-look-
at-23andmes-99-dna-revolution/. Accessed 8 Aug 2016
23andMe (2016) Order. https://store.23andme.com/en-int/cart/. Accessed 8 Aug 2016
E. Mantovani and P.C. Bocos

275
Eugenio Mantovani is research fellow at the interdisciplinary research on Law, Science, 
Technology and Society (LSTS) at the Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB). Eugenio’s research inter-
ests include the law on data protection and privacy, with particular focus on the area of health care 
delivery. He is interested in the evolving use of technologies for ageing societies and has published 
a number of articles on these issues. His doctoral thesis delves on the relationships between ageing 
and technology, which he broaches from the point of view of the law. Eugenio has been active in a 
number of European research projects with a focus on these themes.
Pedro Cristobal Bocos is a researcher at the VUB, where he focuses on the relation between new 
technologies and fundamental rights from a European Union regulatory perspective. He is cur-
rently working at the Interoperable platform for Remote monitoring and Integrated e-Solutions 
(IRIS) project for the development of an open-source and secure ICT platform for interoperable 
collection and communication of wireless 3G/4G audio-video data, point-of-care device data and 
patient medical history data, across hospitals, emergency vehicles and patient portals at home. He 
is assuring that the IRIS platform will comply with the legislation on privacy and data protection, 
medical device regulations and liability legislation as well as technological regulations. He studied 
political science at the Universidad Carlos III de Madrid (2009–2012, including a stay at Maastricht 
University), European law at the Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia (2012–2013) and 
European Union studies at Maastricht University (2012–2013). He has experience working in 
institutions based in Spain and Belgium, including the International Automobile Federation, 
European Digital Rights and the European Centre for International Political Economy.
12  Are mHealth Apps Safe?

277
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017 
H.R. Marston et al. (eds.), Mobile e-Health, Human–Computer Interaction Series, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-60672-9_13
Chapter 13
Regulation of Medical Digital Technologies
Joris Wiersinga
Abstract  M-Health applications may be subject to regulation. Regulatory require-
ments depend on the geographical area where the application is available, the 
intended use, and the type of data collected. This chapter discusses medical device 
and privacy regulation in the US and EU. Most apps will not be regulated. However, 
if the publisher claims a medical purpose, regulation will apply. The applicable 
regulations have historically been developed for pharmaceuticals; then adapted to 
medical devices; and these have been applied to software. As a result, regulatory 
approaches and software development best practices often clash. Developers should 
have a strategy to cope with regulatory affairs from the start. This article discusses 
the most important requirements, gives suggestions for the best way to handle these, 
and illustrates the approach with practical examples from the Dutch SME SilverFit.
13.1  Introduction
m-Health applications come in many different forms. Some are best compared to 
self-help books, exhorting the user to lead a more healthy life. The app ‘1500 + Health 
Tips’ by the company Smart Droidies, for example, limits itself to giving general 
advice on food, activity patterns and other healthy habits. On the other end of the 
spectrum, e-Health applications can be used to monitor health parameters, diagnose 
patients and even propose therapeutic activities or treatments. As an example, dia-
betes patients can self-monitor their glucose levels and self-administer medicines or 
adjust their activity using a variety of specialised diabetes apps.
The United States, the European Union and many other countries have created 
legislation to ensure that medical equipment complies with certain standards. In the 
offline world, a product that dispenses general health advice would not be regulated; 
however, a product used to measure glucose levels and treat a medical condition 
would be considered ‘medical’. Such a product has to comply with a large number 
of regulatory requirements. The most important among these are that the efficacy of 
the treatment has to be evidence-based, that a risk analysis has to be created and 
J. Wiersinga (*) 
SilverFit BV, Woerden, Netherlands
e-mail: joris@silverfit.nl

278
measures put in place to mitigate risks (World Health Organization 2003) and that 
all data has to be treated as private patient information and enjoys certain protection. 
The regulation, as laid down by the European Union and the Federal Drug 
Administration (FDA) in the United States, was developed using principles and 
methods originally created for the regulation of medicines. These were then adapted 
to medical devices and, by extension, to medical software. This regulatory approach 
is very rigorous and assumes a trajectory in which designers move through carefully 
gated steps towards a fixed end product.
This formal approach contrasts strongly with the daily practice of m-Health 
applications. Users (formerly known as patients) freely and actively share medical 
information online with others. They ask questions, share experiences and often 
provide detailed test data through online fora (such as/r/cancer on reddit.com) or 
specialised sites such as a Dutch forum for people with ME (https://www.me-gids.
net/Forum.html). When and how can others use this data? Most software applica-
tions are not written using the rigorous but very slow methods used for medical 
devices: rather, they are updated weekly or even daily. How should a regulatory 
system cope with this? If we require an evidence-based validation, what exactly has 
to be validated? What is the best way to identify and mitigate risks? This chapter 
will discuss these questions, and the implications for future regulation and m-Health 
design.
13.2  Regulation of Medical Digital Technologies
13.2.1  Introduction
In many ways, m-Health is a world of two opposites. On the one hand, the medical 
device industry is a strictly regulated field; development timelines are long; every 
activity is precisely documented; user testing is only done towards the end of the 
cycle; products cannot be released unless they conform to all stated requirements; 
products will be recalled if nonconformity is detected later on; and user data has to 
be shielded against any privacy intrusions.
Contrast this on the other hand with mobile app development: regulation is much 
less stringent; development times are short; documentation is as-required; user- 
centric design requires user testing to be one of the first steps in the cycle; products 
will be released when they are ‘ready to ship’, with regular patches planned from 
the start; patches replace recalls; and users freely share their data online with friends, 
family and large corporates.
The development time of a medical device from concept to first sales depends on 
a lot of factors. Depending on the type of system and who you ask, estimates range 
from 3 to 7 years (Steinberg et al. 2015). In contrast, mobile apps take between 3 
and 12 months from concept to app store shelf (Crispy Codes 2014). As a result, 
design specifications, development processes, quality control and many other terms 
may mean vastly different things to practitioners from either world.
J. Wiersinga

279
13.2.2  Regulatory Systems
Regulation of medical devices is different on a country-by-country level. Historically, 
the main regulatory systems have been the FDA (Food and Drug Administration) 
requirements in the United States, and the CE mark (Conformité Européenne, 
Medical Device directive 93/42/EEC) used in the countries that form part of the 
common European market.
Most, but certainly not all other countries historically adhered to guidelines that 
were very similar or lacked guidelines altogether, so that FDA and CE compliance 
more or less predicted acceptance in other geographies, at least for simpler devices. 
Getting accepted in all geographies would still sometimes require local paperwork, 
but most of the time did not lead to additional underlying requirements such as 
additional tests, adherence to local environmental rules, or other adaptations that 
require changes to the product itself. Since about 2014, Chinese regulators have 
become more assertive. Given the growing importance of the Chinese market, this 
possibly means global players will have to focus on at least three major regulatory 
systems in future.
Each of these regulatory regimes advices and in certain cases prescribes a lot of 
documentation and an adherence to standards with regard to things like risk and 
quality management. In practice, the standards used are those set by the IEC and 
ISO organisation. ISO guidelines can be pretty hard to interpret, as they normally 
cover specific areas and reference other ISO guidelines for context or adjacent top-
ics. In addition, there are separate regulations for handling personal data (mainly 
relevant in the EU) and medical data (all geographies).
13.2.3  Most Apps Are Not Regulated
From the point of view of the developer, it is normally good news that many health-
related software applications are not classified as medical devices and therefore not 
subject to the stringent regulation associated with such devices. For consumers, this 
can come as a surprise. The expectations of consumers with regard to regulation 
seem not to have been researched in depth; their ability to adequately use online and 
mobile resources, often referred to as e-Health literacy, has received more attention. 
Although the use of e-Health resources is common, many people struggle to find the 
right information as they lack the relevant skills (Van Deursen and van Dijk 2011), 
and this is even true for many people living with chronic diseases (Van der Vaart 
et al. 2013). e-Health literacy consists of many factors; whereas older people often 
lack (or lacked) practical skills, both young and old participants find it hard to ade-
quately judge the quality of information and assess the privacy impact of sharing 
their information online (Van der Vaart et al. 2013).
As an example from medical practice, one patient was quite surprised to hear that 
Wikipedia was not regulated in any formal way—he only found out a week after 
13  Regulation of Medical Digital Technologies

280
opting to get an eye operation, a decision he had based on reading Wikipedia after 
getting conflicting advice from people in his (offline) social network. The informa-
tion itself in this instance turned out to be correct (pers. comm. by the physician).
Although this can be a real challenge for consumers, with regard to the quality of 
information, the online situation is perhaps not too different from that offline world: 
there is no regulatory oversight on the quality of health advice provided daily by 
many magazines and popular books either. Nevertheless, it may indicate that from 
the point of view of the general public, there is probably too little, not too much 
regulation of medical apps.
13.2.4  A Short History of Medical Device Regulation
The medical profession has probably always suffered from unqualified people pre-
scribing useless or harmful medicines and therapies. Bad doctors have been the 
focus of government regulation for centuries (Raach 1944). After serious incidents 
with diethylene glycol poisoning in the United States in 1936 and thalidomide 
(DES)-induced miscarriages in Europe between 1958 and 1960, governments also 
stepped in to regulate the development and safety of medicines (Rägo and Santoso 
2008). In the United States, the Federal Drug Administration (FDA) was created for 
this purpose. In Europe, regulation was originally done at a country-by-country 
level, and then harmonized across the European Union in the 1990s.
In the United States, medical devices were regulated under the same rules as 
medicines until 1976; since then, they have gradually received differential treat-
ment. Most of the regulation is governed by the FDA. In essence, they require the 
producer of a medical device to comply with certain requirements and provide doc-
umentation to the FDA. Software, and therefore apps, is seen as a special class of 
medical devices.
European rules for medical devices have also evolved from regulations originally 
created for medicines. In the European Union, the medical device directive 93/42/
EEC governs most medical devices (in vitro diagnostic devices and active implant-
able devices have their own directives). The medical device guidelines form part of 
a broader European system called CE.  It is said that CE originally stands for 
Conformité Européenne, or ‘European conformity’, but official documents always 
refer to the ‘CE mark’ without explaining this (probable) historical origin. CE 
marks are required on a large number of products that may provide safety hazards, 
such as toys, electrical equipment, elevators or safety equipment. Again, it requires 
manufacturers or importers to comply with certain rules and provide documentation 
of that compliance, or, in some cases, provide a statement that such documentation 
is available for inspection by the authorities.
J. Wiersinga

281
13.2.5  When to Consider Regulation as a Developer
If an app falls under one of the regulatory systems described below, this can have 
serious repercussions on the design, development process, technical standards and 
documentation requirements. It is therefore wise to consider before starting to 
design or develop an app, whether it will be regulated. It is much harder to do so 
after development has been completed.
The most relevant questions to ask are:
•	 In which geographies will the app be used?
•	 What type of medical practitioners will be involved either as a customer or in 
another role?
•	 What type of use will you advertise in marketing materials and in the app itself?
These questions of course are also of vital importance to guide the overall busi-
ness plan and product design. The advantage of considering regulation at the start is 
that it is still possible to adjust either the business plan or the development process, 
based on the commercially and legally required and acceptable levels of 
regulation.
As a first step, it is almost always useful to consider whether it is possible to 
focus the business plan so as to remain outside of the regulated realm. This can be 
done by carefully wording the intended use (in all marketing materials, speeches, 
software text!) and avoiding certain regulated use cases and users. If regulation is 
inevitable, it often makes sense to limit the intended use to low-risk situations which 
carry a lower regulatory burden.
Painting with a broad brush, the FDA regulations exempt a lot of medical soft-
ware and apps from being regulated as medical devices. Many US developers pur-
posefully design software in such a way that they do not fall into a regulated 
category. It is important to note that this type of consideration should be made sepa-
rately for each regulatory regime: what is exempt in the United States will not nec-
essarily be so in the EU.
It may also make sense to evaluate at the start of your development whether your 
customers will demand certification or not. In Europe, the stringency with which CE 
norms are enforced still seems to differ between geographies. Potential customers 
such as hospitals and other care providers have started to be more demanding with 
regard to CE certification of products—but it is still very common to see non- 
medical device home trainers and treadmills in physiotherapy practices and hospi-
tals. The same is undoubtedly true for software. Buyers, sellers and developers are 
often painfully, or blissfully, unaware of the regulatory requirements.
Commercially, the CE certification seems to be very valuable when exporting 
products from the EU to other countries, excluding the United States. Almost every 
Asian partner will ask for ISO and CE certification as a matter of course. In some 
cases, this can provide serious obstacles: products that are not classified as medical 
devices by definition cannot be CE (or FDA) certified as such, and this can be a seri-
ous commercial drawback when selling outside the EU. As an example, I have  
13  Regulation of Medical Digital Technologies

282
personally spent a full day discussing with an Asian reseller the impossibility of 
obtaining an approval by a notified body of a class I medical device. Class I devices 
are self-regulated, and the only ‘proof’ you get for completing a file full of docu-
mentation is a letter stating your certification request has been administered. It is 
impossible to request the government to further certify your product. Nevertheless, 
our Asian partner needed more official documentation in order to satisfy their cus-
tomers. It is perhaps the only time that, as a developer, I actively wished for more 
certification procedures!
13.3  The Situation in the United States
13.3.1  Which Apps Does the Federal Drug Administration 
Regulate?
The Federal Drug Administration (in collaboration with the Center for Devices and 
Radiological Health and the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, two 
other regulatory bodies) has published an excellent nonbinding guidance paper on 
mobile medical applications which clarifies its position on mobile medical applica-
tions (US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration 
(et al.) 2015). It states that the majority of mobile apps currently on the market 
either do not qualify as medical devices, or pose such a low risk to patients that 
medical device requirements will not be enforced. This broadly follows the policy 
set out for nonmobile software and online applications.
Developers of mobile apps should always seek specific guidance with regard to 
the regulatory requirements of their application, based on the most current regula-
tory information. The following is not intended as a substitute for doing so, but as a 
short primer. In a nutshell, to determine whether an app is a regulated medical 
device, the Federal Drug Administration (FDA) looks at intended use: the way the 
manufacturer intends people to use the app, as evidenced by labelling, advertising 
materials, or other public communication by the manufacturer or their representa-
tives. The actual use may be different—a product intended for medical purposes can 
be used outside the medical sphere and still be regulated; and a product intended for 
non-medical use does not become regulated if a user decides to employ it in a medi-
cal setting. It is thus possible in theory to have two identical products with different 
advertising materials, only one of which will be regulated.
Apps that do one of the following are considered regulated devices by the FDA:
•	 Connect to another medical device to control it, monitor patients, or analyse 
medical device data, for example, an app to control inflation and deflation of a 
blood pressure cuff.
•	 Use attachments, display screens, sensors or provide functionalities similar to 
that of regulated devices, for example, attachment of a blood glucose meter.
•	 Perform patient-specific analysis and provide patient-specific diagnosis or treat-
ment recommendations, for example, use patient-specific parameter and calcu-
late dosage for radiation therapy.
J. Wiersinga

283
The FDA states it will exercise ‘enforcement discretion’, meaning it does not 
intend to enforce regulation, for apps that:
•	 Help patients self-manage their condition without providing specific treatments 
or suggestions. Example: promote strategies for staying fit.
•	 Provide patients with simple tools to track information. Example: log, track and 
trend drug intake times.
•	 Provide easy access to information related to patients’ health conditions or treat-
ment. Example: lookup table for best practice guidelines for common illnesses.
•	 Help patients document, show or communicate potential medical conditions to 
healthcare providers. Example: app to use a phone’s camera to transfer pictures 
of a wound to a doctor.
•	 Automate simple tasks for healthcare providers. Example: calculate BMI.
•	 Enable patients or providers to interact with Personal/Electronic health record 
systems.
•	 Are intended to transfer, store, convert format and display medical device data in 
its original format from a medical device. Examples are ‘second screens’ that do 
not fall under the category of regulated devices above.
Apps that are explicitly not considered medical devices include:
–– Electronic ‘copies’ of textbooks
–– Educational tools for medical training
–– Apps for general patient education, which do not intend to diagnose or pro-
vide treatment suggestions.
–– Apps that automate general office operations in a healthcare setting. Example: 
shift planning for doctors.
–– Mobile apps that are generic aids. Example: a magnifying glass app (US 
Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration 
(et al.) 2015).
13.3.2  Federal Drug Administration Medical Device Classes
If an app is regulated as a medical device, the next question is if it is a class I, II or 
III device. The regulatory level depends on the risk associated with using the device. 
For class I devices, only ‘general controls’ are required. These are however already 
quite stringent and include, for instance, the requirement for using a quality system. 
A quality system governs not just the product, but the entire organization; it requires 
you to have a documented and standardized approach to running business processes 
such as hiring and training people, gate-staging decisions, etc.
Class II devices in addition require special controls, which depend on the device 
type, as well as a different notification procedure. Examples of special controls 
include performance standards, post-market surveillance requirements, patient reg-
istries, special labelling requirements and pre-market data analysis requirements.
13  Regulation of Medical Digital Technologies

284
Class III devices require upfront pre-market approval by the FDA. Devices are 
classified as class III if they are implantable, and/or have catastrophic effects if they 
fail, and/or are so new that risks cannot be determined. Therefore, most apps will 
not be class III devices.
The FDA website contains a database with examples of products and their clas-
sification. This can be a good tool to assess the probable classification before seek-
ing specific guidance.
13.3.3  US Data Protection: HIPAA (Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act)
In addition to the FDA medical device regulation, some applications will need to 
comply with data protection law laid down in HIPAA Title II (Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act—but no one ever calls it by its full name). This 
act governs the security and privacy (including disclosure) of patient information in 
a section that has received the somewhat Orwellian title ‘Administrative 
Simplification Rules’. HIPAA sees to patient data processed by so-called covered 
entities. The CMS (Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services 2016) has developed 
a useful tool to determine whether an entity is covered under HIPAA. In short, if a 
US entity provides healthcare services and processes data electronically, it is prob-
ably a covered entity. Any business associate (such as people developing an app for 
a covered entity) also falls under HIPAA rules.
HIPAA has rather stringent rules about who can see a person’s medical records. 
All ‘individually identifiable health information’, that is, all information that can be 
linked to a specific individual, is considered protected health information (PHI). For 
example, if a doctor would prescribe an m-Health app that sends back any informa-
tion about the patient—even if only the patient’s weight or daily activity—this 
would be considered PHI.
Protected health information (PHI) can be disclosed to third parties only in a 
limited number of cases specified by HIPAA. Although it is possible to obtain con-
sent for disclosure, this consent needs to be specific as to the information disclosed 
and who it will be shared with. This severely limits the ability of app makers 
involved in a direct way with professional healthcare providers to do things such as:
•	 Incorporate social media.
•	 Monitor individual usage statistics to improve the app.
•	 Use app data for research.
•	 Monetize the data gathered by the app.
In addition, the so-called security rule regulates the way PHI data has to be stored 
and secured. In practice, a number of specialised service providers have stepped in 
to provide HIPAA-compliant data services. These are quite user-friendly (to a 
developer), although more costly than non-compliant services. Unfortunately, it is 
not easy to comply with both HIPAA and EU data regulations using the same ser-
vice, as both systems somewhat anachronistically require data to be stored in their 
J. Wiersinga

285
respective geographies. This leads to some complexities when developing global 
products; however, these requirements are much less burdensome than those 
imposed by the privacy rule, as they can normally be tackled by technical means.
Information not covered by HIPAA is subject to standard data privacy laws; 
these are much less stringent in the United States than in Europe. Consent given by 
accepting general conditions at installation is normally considered sufficient. Note 
that this type of data may include very private medical information, as long as no 
covered entity (such as a doctor) has been involved in creating, processing or shar-
ing the information.
13.4  The Situation in the European Union
13.4.1  What Is Regulated by the European Medical Device 
Guideline?
The European medical device guidelines have a similar structure as the ones used 
by the FDA; however, there are a lot of small but potentially very relevant differenc-
es.1 One unfortunate difference is that the EU regulator is much less forthcoming 
with providing easy-to-understand, practical guidelines. The official guidelines that 
are available are less easy to read than their US equivalent (European Commission 
2016).
This void has been filled by specialised CE mark consultancy firms. Perhaps as a 
result, most available guidelines for CE marking leave the reader somewhat baffled, 
and likely to call the consultancy firm for further guidance.
Before evaluating if an app falls under the medical device guideline, it is relevant 
to check if it is to be considered ‘stand-alone’ software. Software that is linked to 
another medical device, for instance, to control or monitor it, may be considered 
part of that medical device or an accessory of that medical device. This automati-
cally classifies the software in the same class as the main device. It is allowed to 
create an interface between regulated and nonregulated (or less highly regulated) 
devices or even between two separate pieces of software (modules). This can be a 
very useful way to prevent full-blown regulation on every aspect of the software. 
However, it does require careful design and quality assurance of the interface 
between the regulated and the nonregulated devices.
Similar to the US situation, the CE regulation considers the ‘intended use’ of the 
software: what the manufacturer says the software is for, rather than what the soft-
ware is in fact used for. Software is regulated if it:
•	 Is intended to diagnose, monitor, treat or alleviate human diseases, injuries or 
handicaps
1 Recently, new regulation has been confirmed as of 2020; this chapter does not yet fully reflect 
those changes.
13  Regulation of Medical Digital Technologies

286
•	 Is intended to investigate, replace or modify part of the anatomy or a physiologi-
cal process
•	 Is intended to control conception
If the intended use is not medical in nature, the software will generally not be 
considered a medical device. Specifically, the following are not considered medical 
devices:
•	 Software that only performs simple actions on data (storage, archiving)
•	 Software that does not perform actions for the benefit of specific patients
Unlike in the United States, there are no categories of apps for which regulation 
is ‘not enforced’. However, the requirements for the lowest CE class (class I) are 
relatively easy to comply with—although still a lot of work!
13.4.2  CE Medical Device Classes
The CE system uses subclasses as well as classes, which makes the initial classifica-
tion slightly more complex than the three classes used in the United States. The 
classification rules are detailed in Annex IX, Part III of the Directive. There are a lot 
of useful flowcharts online that can help you through the classification steps (e.g. 
http://www.ce-marking.org/Guidelines-for-Classification-of-Medical-Devices.
html).
Under the CE system, software is automatically classified as a so-called ‘active’ 
medical device. This means that of the 12 main rules in Annex IX, rules 9–12 are 
applicable. Rules 9–11 provide a number of specific cases of devices that fall into 
classes IIa and IIb: Rule 9 considers any device that applies energy to the body, or 
controls or monitors a device that does this; rule 10 considers devices used for cer-
tain forms of diagnosis; and rule 11, devices that are concerned with controlling or 
monitoring the uptake of medicine or the removal of bodily fluids. Cases that do not 
fall into these categories are classified as class I. Within class I, there are special 
rules for any device that has a measurement function or sterile components. 
Technically, there is also the possibility that the app falls under a different directive 
if it is used for in vitro tests—but most apps will not fall into this category.
As mentioned above, if an app is used to monitor or control another medical 
device of a higher class, it does not count as stand-alone software and will take over 
the classification of that device.
13.4.3  Data Protection in the European Union
The EU has privacy regulation covering all use of personal data, not just medical 
use. For now, this is governed by the data protection directive (95/46/EC). The EU 
Agency for Fundamental Rights has developed a useful handbook which covers all 
the rules (EU Agency for Fundamental Rights and Council of Europe 2014).
J. Wiersinga

287
From 2018 onwards, personal data will be governed by the General Data 
Protection Regulation (Regulation (EU) 216/679) or GDPR. This regulation covers 
anyone processing personal data, whether on paper or electronically. Most things 
you may want to track are covered and thus regulated: names, addresses, health 
data, fitness performance data, food intake and shopping habits, for example, would 
all fall under this regulation. Even game high scores might be covered if they can be 
traced back to an individual person.
The GDPR requires that data be collected and processed based on lawful grounds. 
In practice, for most apps this will mean explicit consent. The GDPR provides rules 
on how consent should be given and how it can be withdrawn. Consent should be 
given for the specific use of the data. Default privacy settings should be maximum, 
so that participants always ‘opt in’, not ‘opt out’ of sharing data.
The GDPR also provides rules on how to store and protect the data; specifically, 
you may not export the data outside the EU unless you conform to certain 
guarantees.
Finally, the GDPR provides a number of procedural rules, including (of course) 
a lot of required documentation. Special procedures need to be in place in case of a 
data breach that may pose a risk to the parties concerned. A dedicated Data Protection 
Officer (DPO) has to be appointed if you exceed a certain threshold of personal data 
processed. The DPO has to have an independent role in the organization (they can 
even be external). He or she needs to monitor compliance, ensure documentation of 
procedures, and manage complaints. At the moment, there is no formal qualification 
requirement for the DPO, but this may change in future.
Medical data are not treated the same as non-medical data. Article (35) of the 
GDPR defines medical data as ‘all data pertaining to the health status of a data sub-
ject which reveal information relating to the past, current or future physical or men-
tal health status of the data subject’. This includes all information about admittance 
or treatment by healthcare providers but also ‘information on, for example, a dis-
ease, disability, disease risk, medical history, clinical treatment or the physiological 
or biomedical state of the data subject independent of its source, for example from 
a physician or other health professional, a hospital, a medical device or an in vitro 
diagnostic test’ (Article 35 GDPR).
The GDPR sees health data as especially sensitive. Article (53) says this data may 
only be used for the benefit of the person or society; in most cases, this means only 
persons subject to a legal obligation of professional secrecy may access the data. It 
is allowed to use anonymised data for scientific research, if informed consent has 
been obtained. See (Hordern 2016) for a readable discussion of other requirements.
This area of regulation is quite volatile. Privacy activists and social network com-
panies are still debating the exact interpretation in and out of court. It is also not yet 
clear how severely each of the requirements will be enforced, although the stated 
objective is to become stricter—the rules allow for quite a strict enforcement regime. 
European governments are increasingly worried about the potential privacy infringe-
ments by ‘Big Data’ corporates, many of which are based in the United States. At 
face value, many of the data management practices currently common in social apps 
may be or may become illegal. As is the case with HIPAA compliance in the United 
States, service providers will likely emerge that will help store and process the data 
13  Regulation of Medical Digital Technologies

288
in a way that ensures regulatory compliance, so that the app maker can mostly focus 
on the customer side of things.
13.5  Practical Implications
13.5.1  Help! I’m Making a Regulated Device
If it turns out your app is a regulated medical device, this has a number of conse-
quences. Some of the requirements for medical devices make a lot of sense. For 
others, the best that can be said is that during a dinner party, they trump most other 
anecdotes on superfluous regulation. As an example, our company SilverFit has 
developed a video app allowing elderly people in care homes to cycle on a home 
trainer watching a video of their home town. This video application is classified as 
a class I medical device, and as such, we have had to develop a procedure to warn 
the Ministers of Health of all member states in case of a medical emergency caused 
by our app that may impact the public health—the procedure is operational 24/7 and 
all company employees have to be instructed. It may be of use should one of our 
elderly participants spot an unnoticed zombie invasion on one of the video 
recordings….
A number of advisory firms can help developers navigate through the regulatory 
steps. This can help create the semblance of compliance (at a minimum, you will 
have a lot of documents in a binder), and, if done well, can be a good starting point 
for true compliance. Personally, for the EU I would advocate being closely involved 
with the key steps in the regulatory process and using pre-made templates only for 
fringe requirements (such as the procedure for warning all ministers of health. In 
our company, SilverFit, pre-made templates never elicited any response or change 
to the underlying product. We therefore stopped using them after we had launched 
the first three products.
By contrast collaborative workshops on specific areas did often lead to signifi-
cant improvements. As an example, we organize risk identification and mitigation 
workshops. In a risk identification workshop, we bring together developers, clini-
cians, quality assurance specialists and if possible customers to identify potential 
risks. The ‘official’ approach is to use a very long checklist—however in practice 
we see that the most pressing risks are not included on the checklist, whereas many 
completely irrelevant items had to be considered. As an example of the type of risks 
that can occur, one of SilverFit’s products lets people exercise by themselves as part 
of their rehabilitation process. It has an alarm clock function that tells you when to 
exercise. This alarm clock uses the computer’s inbuilt clock, which unfortunately 
relies on internet connectivity. If the system is not connected to the internet, the 
computer’s clock may be off, leading to an alarm in the middle of the night, which 
can easily cause falls if people try to get out of bed by themselves. No checklist 
would surface such a risk, but a workshop can. The support of an advisor (and some 
checklists) at the same time has been essential to make sure the overall documenta-
tion was complete.
J. Wiersinga

289
The FDA and the European National Inspections (ENI) are often quite open to 
answer questions, which can be extremely useful. They are also, in general, very 
well aware of which regulations make sense and which do not and adjust their 
inspection focus accordingly. In the Netherlands, where our company SilverFit is 
based, one can find contact information easily on the website of the Inspectie 
Volksgezondheid (Inspection for Public Health).
In the EU, the most likely classification an app will end up with is class I. Class 
I devices are self-regulated. The manufacturer has to compile a technical file; the 
software has to be labelled following certain rules (93/42/EEC Annex I point 13) in 
the local language (93/42/EEC Article 4(4)), and the CE classification has to be filed 
with a national authority. The involvement of the national authority is different from 
country to country. In the Netherlands, it is done by the Inspectorate for Health. At 
SilverFit we have consistently had questions or audits following the declaration of 
class I products, but this is not necessarily common practice.
The technical file contains a number of elements that are very useful, even for 
nonregulated products. Two of them can be easily created through collaborative 
workshops:
•	 A statement of intended use. As noted above, this determines the classification. 
The intended use has to be consistent in all communication about the device. 
Best practice is to have a dedicated person check all outgoing marketing materi-
als and software texts with an eye to compliance with the intended use.
•	 A risk file. For our products, this has been the single most useful tool. It consists 
of an exhaustive list of potential risks; each risk is classified according to inci-
dence (how likely is it?) and severity (how much damage will there be). All unac-
ceptable risks should be prevented or mitigated. We create these risk files using 
a number of sessions with experts from different disciplines and users. Doing the 
analysis multiple times during development can greatly help steer the product in 
the right direction. A yearly update of the risk file is required during the product’s 
lifetime.
Another requirement that takes a bit more time but will turn out to be very useful 
is tracking installations and issues. You need to have a system to track installations, 
including different versions. The system also needs to track issues arising from 
these installations, and of course you need a method to address these issues and 
track your improvements. Note that this kind of tracking is specifically allowed 
under the EU privacy regulations.
The technical file also contains two more elements that are very important, but 
more difficult to conform to in the case of software: a set of documents that detail 
design and verification and documentation of validation. The developer is required 
to provide a design, as well as a verification procedure that checks if the final prod-
uct conforms to the original design. This is covered in a guideline called IEC62304, 
which is accepted both by the FDA and the CE system.
To people not versed in software development, this requirement sounds logical 
enough. However, this way of design thinking does not sit well with modern soft-
ware development practices. Modern software companies almost universally aspire 
13  Regulation of Medical Digital Technologies

290
(though they do not always succeed) to use ‘Agile’ development processes. Whereas 
old-fashioned processes prescribed a detailed design of the entire product upfront, 
‘Agile’ recommends designing pieces of software in little steps. Each succeeding 
iteration of the prototype product will teach users about the flaws in the design so 
far. ‘Agile’ has been proven to be much more effective as a software design method 
than the traditional ‘waterfall’ approach (this approach was named for the Gantt 
charts it produces, which look a bit like a waterfall). However, it is hard to reconcile 
an ‘Agile’ process with the design first—then build—then check philosophy of the 
regulator.
There are basically three ways to save your development process and still com-
ply with the guideline (but see (MD101 2012) for a lot more nuances):
•	 Try to start with a full design phase; then work using Agile as much as possible 
while updating all documentation and performing tests on the way; then do a full 
verification at the end of the process. The issue is that you often do not know user 
requirements, software specification or architecture at the start of the process. 
You will be spending a lot of time rewriting documentation when using this 
method.
•	 Start with a high-level, more abstract design phase, then proceed with Agile 
development. At two or three points during the process, spend a serious amount 
of time on refining the documentation (requirements, specification, and architec-
ture) for all elements that are completed. Provide a full verification at the end of 
the process.
•	 Use Agile methods during the entire development phase, then create all docu-
mentation at the end of the process and validate against it.
A legal problem when doing user testing is that EU law considers most testing of 
a medical device to be a clinical trial (Annex X of the directive). This means a pro-
tocol has to be established beforehand; the process has to comply with ethical stan-
dards (Annex X 2.2). In the Netherlands, this means the protocol has to be approved 
by an external medical & ethical committee (METC). These are linked to major 
universities and hospitals. Any company can propose a research protocol for their 
consideration—but of course the step consumes time and budget. Also, it is hard to 
reconcile with Agile principles.
For the initial development, any of these methods can function well. However, 
the same process must be followed for subsequent updates. This can severely limit 
your ability to improve the software. Although small patches can be incorporated as 
add-ons to the technical file, providing regular updates under a regulated regime 
may place too much of a burden on quality control and documentation.
In addition to these ‘difficult’ requirements, there are a number of rules regarding 
things like archiving and emergency procedures, etc. that can easily be complied 
with by using appropriate templates. Some apps may have to comply with addi-
tional regulation, e.g. around electrical safety, correct measurement or specific 
requirements for certain medical devices.
Products in higher classes also follow different procedures with respect to the 
FDA or CE approval process, with more stringent and lengthier checks. Companies 
J. Wiersinga

291
manufacturing more high-risk classes of medical applications (including enforced 
class I FDA) have to subject their overall company processes to ISO certification. 
This involves not only the product development, but other processes such as HR, 
training and sales, etc. ISO certification takes a minimum of 12 months and nor-
mally longer.
13.5.2  Validation of Medical Software
Interestingly, regarding the actual validation of software, the question: does it work? 
is only a small part of the overall regulatory file. It is vital yet this is the step most 
people unfamiliar with the actual requirements, expect to take place. Again, the 
FDA has provided a nice overview in a guideline (FDA 2002).
The developer has to document that the working principle (as evidenced in the 
technical file) has the medical outcomes as described in the intended use. In other 
words, he has to prove (or at least document) that the product works. As before, you 
only have to prove what you claim; if this is hard to do, then it may be wise to claim 
what you can prove. The intended use (see above) forms the core of this claim; it 
should be supported by a document that explains the working principles.
In some cases, proving the claim is relatively straightforward. In many cases 
though, it will require a careful approach and serious clinical trials. In cases where 
proving the ultimate effect of an app is difficult, researchers often look for proxi-
mate outcome measures—e.g. instead of measuring the effect of a fall prevention 
app on the number of falls, they measure the impact on self-reported fear of falling. 
Naturally, this should be reflected in the claims.
In terms of regulatory requirements, the level of evidence required depends on 
the class of the medical device. The medical device guidelines have been derived 
from practices common in developing pharmaceutical interventions and thus see 
randomised controlled trials, or RCTs, as the gold standard. These are not always 
easy to apply to software development (Van der Kooij et al. 2015).
There has been a lot of debate, for instance, on how to test the efficacy of medical 
apps that claim to work through changing users’ behaviours. Many ‘games for 
health’ and ‘fitness trackers’ fall into this category (although as we have seen, such 
apps are not necessarily regulated). In a pharmaceutical RCT, the population you 
study is randomly split into two groups. One group receives the medicine, while the 
control group receives a placebo. A key difficulty when working with software is 
this second group: what kind of placebo should they receive? Researchers have tried 
to create ‘placebo software’, but as the user inevitably notices the difference between 
the real thing and the placebo, this is a very difficult proposition. Others have com-
pared using the software to ‘treatment as usual’. This may underestimate the impact 
of receiving a new/different treatment.
It is often difficult to determine the timeframe in which behavioural change will 
take place (Van der Kooij et al. 2015). Behavioural change is a complex process, 
and it may be hard to pinpoint the effect of an app in the short timeframe of a typical 
13  Regulation of Medical Digital Technologies

292
study. The actual change can occur (long) after the moment of self-reflection or 
insight provided by the game. Again, many researchers revert to measuring proxi-
mate outcome effects (do you know smoking is bad for you vs. did you stop 
smoking).
The Dutch Society for Simulation in Healthcare has developed an international 
Quality Label for validated games for health; their focus is on health education 
games, but the label is not limited to such games. The developer can provide docu-
mentation to the society. It consists of chapters that sound familiar by now: descrip-
tion, rationale, functionality, validity and data protection. A group of independent 
medical experts review the documentation (Dutch Society for Simulation in 
Healthcare n.d.). It remains to be seen whether this—to my knowledge—first 
Quality Label will become important in the market. Undoubtedly though, this type 
of certification will become more important or even required in future.
Validating a software device is a costly and lengthy process; this means it is very 
unlikely that it can be repeated for later updates. It may be prudent to validate cer-
tain core working mechanisms of the software (the EU regulations are more favour-
able to this than the FDA) and keep these stable over time. Updates can be focused 
on areas that do not change the core effectiveness of the app.
13.5.3  Some Practical Examples
Our company, SilverFit, has over time developed different products, both regulated 
and unregulated. It may be instructive to share our approach and experiences here.
First, we always consider carefully whether a product has to be sold making any 
medical claims. Our product SilverFit Alois, for instance, has been developed to 
provide leisure activities for people living with dementia. Although the cognitive 
and physical activities that we provide may have health benefits, there is no specific 
diagnosis, treatment objective or measurement of outcomes. In addition, we do not 
sell this product outside the European Union, and our European customers, residen-
tial care homes and day centres are not required to only use systems that comply 
with the medical device guidelines. So, we decided not to go through the CE pro-
cess. We still used key components of the CE process, such as the risk analysis, to 
improve our product.
On the other side of the spectrum, our product Rephagia is used to treat swallow-
ing disorders in frail elderly people. In this case, there is a very clear medical objec-
tive—and we claim medical outcomes. In addition, the treatment carries certain 
risks, as incomplete swallows can lead to pneumonia, a life-threatening condition 
for our patients. The system therefore had to be classified as a medical device. The 
measurement part, a surface electromyography (sEMG) sensor, was classified as a 
class II device by our manufacturing partner. They provided an API which fully 
shields the behaviour of the sensor from our software. As a result, we were able to 
classify the software as class I, allowing us to more rapidly update the software 
J. Wiersinga

293
component while keeping the patient-linked physical component completely 
stable.
Another product, the SilverFit Mile, falls in between these two extremes. It pro-
vides video images for people cycling or walking on a treadmill. Two customer 
groups, European hospitals on the one hand and Asian distributors on the other, 
demanded medical device certification. At the same time, our medical claims for 
this product are very limited: at the time, we only claimed to make the exercise more 
motivating (we have since added some claims based on further research). The 
National Inspection (of the Netherlands) visited us to inspect our documentation 
and advised us that medical certification would not be required for this product 
based on our claims—however for commercial reasons, we kept the certification 
intact.
For our very first product, the SilverFit Mile, we worked with an external advi-
sory company; they provided us with a checklist of all required documentation and 
templates for each of the documents. We used these templates to provide ‘legal’ 
documentation—still a lot of work as our technicians had to provide the consultants 
with all of the relevant details. A year later, the National Inspection announced they 
would like to visit us, as they were working on refining (or defining) their require-
ments for medical software. To prepare for this, before the visit we quite thoroughly 
reviewed our documentation and decided to redo all documentation that we our-
selves did not understand but felt was important: the essential requirements, product 
documentation and risk file being the key components here. As a result, we also 
implemented the risk workshops described above. For all subsequent products, we 
have used this mix of ‘formal’ and ‘accessible’ documentation.
From the beginning, our development team has been impacted by the regulatory 
demands as the software architecture and functionality has to be documented. 
Although this is good practice in general, few developers enjoy the process and so 
it is often put on the backburner. Over time, we have improved the quality of our 
design and build and test documentation. This has obviously also been very useful 
when adding more and more team members and revising existing products. To be 
fair, a lot of software documentation is still done afterwards, although we strive to 
bring this process forward as much as possible.
Our operations team has also been impacted by regulations from the very start, 
mainly because we have required them to document every customer interaction and 
all available details on hardware and software installations at the customer’s site. 
This means we can track exactly when and where problems occur, and it has been 
extremely helpful to improve our products over time—but most of our technicians 
still really dislike the database logging that is required to keep this information up 
to date.
As our company grows, we have had to implement checks to ensure we do not 
accidentally make medical claims in our brochures or on our website that go beyond 
the medical claims in our documented intended use. For this reason, we have devel-
oped a quality control procedure for all of our marketing materials.
Regulatory matters have also sometimes impeded growth; for example, we built 
an ‘advisory app’ that helps physiotherapists find the right exercise for their patient. 
13  Regulation of Medical Digital Technologies

294
In Europe, it can be used and is very popular; but in the United States, it would 
bump the application into a different regulatory regime, and as a result, we have 
decided not to apply it there. We have had similar experiences when building func-
tionality that tracks a patient’s performance: US and European rules differ quite a 
lot so that two separate designs and implementations are required to serve both 
geographies. Obviously, this leads to a lot of rework.
One of the most difficult things regarding the regulatory regime is not to lose the 
fast, user-centred innovation that makes software companies so successful. Shipping 
or even user testing something that may fail can be risky and/or illegal. At the same 
time, the best (and perhaps the only) way to develop useful software is to put it in 
front of actual users as soon as possible. We believe that in many cases, the risk of 
doing so can be mitigated by using tools taken from the regulatory approach, with-
out going ‘all the way’. The current legality of such an approach is not always clear, 
and in our view software developers, regulators and especially patients could benefit 
tremendously from a more practical approach in this respect.
13.6  Conclusion
The development of medical apps has in many ways been force-fitted into the regu-
latory straightjacket originally created for pharmaceutical research and later adapted 
for medical devices. In practice, the straightjacket provides more room for manoeu-
vre than at first seems to be the case. In many cases, it can be avoided altogether. In 
some cases, obtaining a regulatory seal of approval can be commercially vital.
Although some of the steps are tedious regulatory requirements, many of the 
core components of the regulation are very useful. The most important discrepancy 
is that the regulatory world assumes a design process that has become completely 
outdated. Unfortunately, this design process is at the very heart of the regulatory 
structure. It would be very unwise to use the ‘ship-then-fix’ mentality of modern 
software development for products upon which your life may depend one  day. 
Neither is it desirable that medical software stays stuck in the Stone Age. It would 
be a great contribution to develop a regulatory approach that can cope with the new 
design practices without jeopardising patient safety.
References
Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services (2016) CMA Covered Entities Chart 2016. 
Accessed September 7, 2016. https://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Administrative-
Simplification/HIPAA-ACA/Downloads/CoveredEntitiesChart20160617.pdf
Crispy Codes (2014) How much time it takes to create a mobile app. January 14. Accessed 
September 5, 2016. http://www.crispycodes.com/blog/mobile-app-development/how-much-
time-takes-create-mobile-app.php
J. Wiersinga

295
Dutch Society for Simulation in Healthcare (n.d.) Quality Label Serious Games in Medicine. 
Accessed September 1, 2016. http://www.dssh.nl/en/quality-label/
EU Agency for Fundamental Rights and Council of Europe (2014) Handbook on European Data 
Protection Law
European Commision (2016) MEDDEV 2.1/6 Medical Devices Guidance Document: Qualification 
and Classification of Stand-Alone Software. Legal Guidance Document
FDA (2002) General Principles of Software Validation; Final Guidance for Industry and FDA 
Staffs
Hordern V (2016) The final GDPR text and what it will mean for health data. 20 1. Accessed 
September 1, 2016. http://www.hldataprotection.com/2016/01/articles/health-privacy-hipaa/
the-final-gdpr-text-and-what-it-will-mean-for-health-data/
MD101 (2012) How to develop medical device software with agile methods? Accessed 
September 1, 2016. http://blog.cm-dm.com/post/2012/05/12/How-to-develop-medical-device- 
software-with-agile-methods
Raach JH (1944) English medical licensing in the early seventeenth century. Yale J Biol Med 
16(4):267–288
Rägo L, Santoso B (2008) Drug regulation. History, present and future In: van Boxtel CJ et al. 
(eds) Drugs benefits and risks: international textbook of clinical pharmacology, revised 2nd 
edition, pp 65–77
Steinberg D et al (2015) Building a business model in digital medicine. Nat Biotechnol 33:910–920
US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration et al (2015) Mobile 
Medical Applications, Guidance for Industry and Food and Drrug Administration Staff
Van der Kooij K et al (2015) Validation of games for Behavioral change: connecting the playful 
and serious. Int J Serious Games 2(3):63–75
Van der Vaart R et al (2013) Measuring actual eHealth literacy among patients with rheumatic 
diseases: a qualitative analysis of problems encountered using Health 1.0 and Health 2.0 appli-
cations. J Med Internet Res 15(2) feb: Published online 10.2196/jmir.2428
Van Deursen AJAM, van Dijk JAGM (2011) Internet skills performance test: are people ready for 
e-health? J Med Internet Res 13(2) apr-jun: Published online 10.2196/jmir.1581
World Health Organization (2003, Geneva) Dept. of Blood Safety and Clinical Technology, 
Medical device regulations: global overview and guiding principles
Joris Wiersinga is the co-founder and CEO of SilverFit (www.silverfit.nl). SilverFit develops and 
markets virtual rehabilitation software: computer games to help treat people with stroke, dyspha-
gia, breathing problems, dementia, and other pathologies by guiding them through relevant exer-
cises. SilverFit has developed 9 products and is active in 19 countries. Before SilverFit, Joris 
worked as a consultant at McKinsey & Company with a focus on high tech operations and ports. 
He studied biology and law at Leiden University and holds an MBA from INSEAD. In his free 
time, he likes to design, play and publish boardgames.
13  Regulation of Medical Digital Technologies

Part VII
Conclusions

299
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017 
H.R. Marston et al. (eds.), Mobile e-Health, Human–Computer Interaction Series, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-60672-9_14
Chapter 14
Transcendent Technology and Mobile eHealth
Charles Musselwhite, Shannon Freeman, and Hannah R. Marston
Abstract  Technology is becoming a common place in the lives of all of us, the 
potential for it to help deliver health and social care is exciting. However, the full 
potential of this won’t be recognised if there is a failure to understand how such 
technology is interwoven within our daily lives. It must be remembered not every-
one can interact with technology in the same way. Yet technology is often developed 
around the lives of the imagined average citizen, meaning many people can be dis-
advantaged by not having technology fit their into lives. Systems are still designed 
to help others in a rather paternalistic fashion. Therefore more needs to be done to 
involve the end users of the technology in the design of technology such as mobile 
ehealth (mhealth) and move towards a bottom up transcendent rather than techno-
cratic approach to technology. In addition, there should be more space for under-
standing how technology, such as mhealth, can change society, examining how it 
challenges moral dilemmas and ethics. Regulation is important when developing 
new technology, but it needs to cover changes in practice not just the technology 
itself. Mobile ehealth also effects many current debates in the lives of older people 
and those in marginalised groups of society, including challenging systems of health 
and social care but also housing, transport and economics. More research is needed 
in the area of mhealth but the research must continue to be multi-disciplinary and 
fully involve stakeholders and end-users for full potential to be realised.
C. Musselwhite (*) 
Centre for Innovative Ageing, School of Human and Health Sciences, Swansea University, 
Swansea, UK
e-mail: c.b.a.musselwhite@swansea.ac.uk 
S. Freeman 
School of Nursing, University of Northern British Columbia, 3333 University Way,  
Prince George, BC, Canada
e-mail: shannon.freeman@unbc.ca 
H.R. Marston 
Health & Wellbeing Priority Research Area, School of Health, Wellbeing & Social Care, 
Faculty of Wellbeing, Education & Language Studies, The Open University, Milton Keynes, 
Buckinghamshire, UK
e-mail: hannah.marston@open.ac.uk; marstonhannah@hotmail.com

300
14.1  Current Issues with Mobile eHealth
Technology has become entwined in the lives of persons of all ages, in countries 
across the globe. Information and communication technologies (ICT) connect indi-
viduals globally in just seconds, enabling actions previously not possible and sup-
porting families and friends to stay connected via social media and programmes 
such as Skype, FaceTime, Appletime and WhatsApp. The unprecedented growth in 
social media supports education and training and allows for a virtual environment 
for recreation and fun.
These technologies are becoming so powerful that it is becoming hard to live a 
life without them; we design our society around them. However, not everyone is 
able to interact with the technology in the same way, meaning people are at a disad-
vantage to others. It is our failure to understand life, not technology, which is caus-
ing this disadvantage. Technological systems are most often designed to support or 
enhance lives of the average citizen and quite frequently for the average, well-paid, 
individual living in a high income country. When systems are designed outside of 
this, the technology is then typically designed with a notion to change, challenge or 
improve the lives of these people, as if they only live their lives in deficit.
There is often an implicit assumption that human behaviour and society are 
understood, and it is known how technology can be placed within it for a maximum 
effect, without properly ever examining it. We are still incredibly technocratic and 
top-down in how we go about introducing technology. We need to be much more 
bottom-up and start with community, society and individuals, address how and 
where technology fits within these respective facets and not to go finding a solution 
looking for a problem. Funding mechanisms and emphasis on market-driven poli-
cies fuels this in the western world. To have technology that is harmonious within 
human life, we need to start with understanding and examining our lives.
Therefore, more research is needed to expand understanding of how human 
behaviour connects with life and society and its fit with technology. To create and 
implement technology to work well with people in, for example, a remote northern 
community above the Arctic Circle, developers must first understand how such com-
munities live and where technology can support rather than hinder their daily lives. 
There is a need for greater emphasis on coproduction of technology and more eth-
nographic work with potential users including a range of people and communities.
Contributions to this book have all highlighted the need to increase involvement 
from users in the design of mobile eHealth. Too often the needs of users are assumed 
without the existence of evidence-based research and stakeholder consultation with 
the users first.
Techniques outlined in Ruzic and Sanford’s chapter enable a more user-centred 
design approach to designing the interface between the individual and the technol-
ogy. It is often posited that technology has a mind of its own as it may or it may not 
behave exactly in the way it has been designed and programmed. Indeed, the devel-
opment and introduction of the internet may be considered an example of this. One 
may question whether the developers of the internet ever could have imagined its 
widespread use and integration into daily life of persons across the globe. If the 
C. Musselwhite et al.

301
technology does not perform as expected, then that’s often believed to be a misun-
derstanding of the technology and its resulting interactions with individuals. It is at 
this interface that many of the chapters in this book are calling for the need to pause 
and examine. It is here where the technology, the apps, the games and the widgets 
have a potential to enhance or disrupt the individual’s behaviour, and it is here where 
concentration of further research is needed.
Here, ethics and dilemmas meet and warrant space to identify procedures, stan-
dards and laws to ensure that the interaction is favourable and non-harmful to the 
individual and to society. The book covers these in Part VI – from Lynch and Fisk, 
Mantovani and Cristobek Bocos and Wiersinga. All these chapters highlight the 
contention in that space and offer solutions, but note that solutions are not easy to 
reach and that one size fits all may not always be the solution.
One of the key aspects to emerge in the eHealth and mHealth debate is innova-
tion. Technology is creating completely novel ways of how society and individuals 
interact with health and wellbeing. These completely new structures and ways mean 
that existing structures are challenged, contested or disrupted. Quite often com-
pletely new systems are needed to be created for the technology to become useful.
In terms of regulation, Wiersinga (Chap. 13) reminds us that new apps can be 
seen under the same guidance as medical devices in some countries and in some 
contexts, therefore having to meet stringent guidelines in order for them to become 
used. However, they can also be seen very differently, even if they are doing the job 
of a medical device. Technologies can also bring together professionals. The shar-
ing of expertise matched with sharing of patient records and history must be of 
benefit to the individual patient, for example. But, without proper understanding of 
what is needed from each professional and how they operate and work together, 
along with legal and ethical issues of sharing information, such systems are not 
likely to be used to their potential.
An ultimate goal of such technology is for the individual to truly understand his 
or her health from the eHealth and mHealth supporting systems. How such tech-
nology can enhance the user to become fully informed of their own health and be 
able to make changes in respect of this information is championed. However, the 
psychology of how individuals interpret such data and how they go about acting up 
on such data is not yet well known. It is still not possible to understand how such 
systems should be designed for positive behaviour to follow. Should a system sim-
ply provide passive information for the user to interpret (e.g. steps walked, calories 
ingested, heart bear rate, etc.), or should the system then advise the user (e.g. “you 
need to do more exercise today”) and if so how? How should warnings be com-
municated? How should feedback look? Does it need to be normed at all, for 
example, for age, gender, culture or the individual? Could future systems even go 
one step further and stop the user altogether from conducting behaviours which 
could be perceived bad for their health?
We too often misunderstand that technology entwines with society, with com-
munities and with groups. It is not an individual thing. Yet most of our research 
examines how technology impacts on individuals. Technology mediums change the 
nature of interactions between people. Martin-Khan and colleagues (Chap. 8) pro-
vide a description of the evolution of telehealth and note how health care systems 
14  Transcendent Technology and Mobile eHealth

302
are progressing to an era where telehealth is becoming embedded within ­mainstream 
health services as part of regular care rather than an additional add-on service. There 
are examples such as telehealth where there is a need to examine how technology-
based interactions work and are complementing, contrasting or replacing face-to-
face human contact. Telehealth challenges society to stop viewing technology as 
something that patches a gap or responds to a problem in someone’s life or in soci-
ety and instead that it is part of ensuring efficiency and quality of care from the 
health system. Technology can work with existing structures of society and with 
people, but it cannot alone solve problems without understanding how the problem 
arises and what the problem is in the first place. More understanding of the problem 
would be useful. Naturally, mobile eHealth can aid this.
Technology continues to be treated as a separate entity and as a separate subject. 
Technology involves a sum of much more than engineering, computer programming 
and design. Instead, it is argued that technology should be considered from a multi-
disciplinary vantage point that marries computer science (technology hardware and 
software) with humanities, social sciences and medicine (health promotion, behav-
iour change and improve quality of life (QoL)). Health and social sciences need to 
take on a greater role but, simultaneously, so should the arts and humanities. Ethical 
dimensions of technology must be positioned within comprehension of design. 
People do not live their lives in silos of science and art. Instead, people are immersed 
in a mixture and so, therefore, must our technologies.
The section on the immersive technological art project, Splash, presented in 
Chap. 5 by Paczynski et al., highlighted how creativity and art can improve body 
movements, improving health and well-being through immersive art. How eHealth 
games can improve health and well-being is demonstrated in this book in Chap. 7 
by Marston et al. and in Chap. 9 by Holz et al. When examining how mobile eHealth 
can be used as an intervention to improve health and well-being, one must look 
beyond traditional behaviour change techniques such as the linear deficit. The sim-
plicity of the model is appealing, as the mobile or eHealth intervention only needs 
to contain information and people will change their health behaviour for the better. 
Although it is widely used in behaviour change interventions (e.g. health and safety 
campaigns), it is largely now discredited, at least in its simplest form.
Can mobile eHealth provide a better self-awareness to enact behaviour change? 
The introduction of quantified self can help illuminate individual problems in health 
in a continuous way, something never possible before. Earlier interventions or sup-
port are possible, but only if how to use such data is understood by the user, who can 
make an informed decision. Users must be aware and able to understand what the 
data collected about them can mean and how they may leverage this personal infor-
mation to best inform their behaviours. Part II addressing the quantified self by 
Sacramento and Wanick and De Mayer is an important piece which raises such 
questions.
C. Musselwhite et al.

303
14.2  Future of Mobile eHealth
The future of mobile eHealth and related technologies is fascinating and is evolving 
at a quick pace. Since the turn of the twenty-first century, society has witnessed 
many technological (both software and hardware) developments that have trans-
formed the way societies live their lives. For many in the Generation X (Gen X) 
cohort who grew up in the age of digital games, playing PacMan, Super Mario and 
Sonic the Hedgehog on PCs and respective game consoles, it is difficult to believe 
that within less than a decade or so, communication and gaming technologies were 
about to change to facilitate a different notion of interaction (e.g. Nintendo Wii and 
DS), mobile and smartphones leading onto the mobile (health) apps.
Thus, in less than 20 years, younger generations such as the Millennials have 
borne witness to these technologies which for them are a part of everyday life and 
living. Such as this, social media has also played an important role in these young 
lives, whereby for many retrieving and sharing information such as photographs of 
everyday life, living and activities (e.g. going to a music gig, birth of a child or a 
holiday); communicating with friends and family through different means (e.g. 
sharing photographs, chatting in real time and ‘updating’ one’s status); or ‘adding’ 
people to your friends list who one may have met on a holiday, at a music festival/
gig, at the pub or through education.
A question to think about is what can society and younger generations expect 
from industry and research in the forthcoming decades? Will accuracy and reliabil-
ity of mobile apps improve which in turn will facilitate health practitioners to diag-
nose quicker and in a more cost-effective manner? Will the design and development 
of technologies and their related software be designed with the notion of target users 
being involved from the beginning? Will researchers and practitioners extend their 
exploration to ascertain the barriers and enablers to technology use and ownership 
by our current ageing populations with the notion of preparing for our future ageing 
cohorts such as Gen X and the Millennials, who are in contrast very different to the 
Baby Boomer generation? Keeping in mind, for many Gen X and certainly 
Millennials, they have grown up with technology. Technology and its related attri-
butes are like the television, the washing machine and the ironing board to the Baby 
Boomer generation. Indeed, the importance of access to information and communi-
cation technologies (ICT) for persons residing in rural communities has been 
equated to that of the introduction of the railroad for generations before (Ashton and 
Girard 2013).
For older adults, the exploration of technology use is increasing in popularity 
(Marston et al. 2016; Marston and Graner-Ray 2016) with technology now being 
geared towards improving the quality of life (QoL) of older adults, whether through 
applications for home support services (Marston et al. 2015), medication reminders, 
mirrors that display health data, medical implants or wearable technology (European 
Commission: Information Society and Media 2007). Research shows that technol-
ogy can change the family situations of older people and is of utmost importance 
(Silverstein and Giarrusso 2010). As described by Marston et al. in Chap. 7, the 
14  Transcendent Technology and Mobile eHealth

304
evolution of telehealth services has opened a door to improve accessibility to health 
care for many persons, including older adults. Technology use is becoming a routine 
practice for many older adults, with home computers being used to create a common 
interest among older and younger family members and improve family ties (Cotten 
et al. 2013; Lindsay et al. 2007).
We see through social media, personal experience and news bulletins that tech-
nology and social media can be fun and entertaining, and hopefully this notion will 
continue. Yet, it cannot be ignored that as a society, there is an ageing population, 
increasingly drawing on health and social care services and the need and want to 
maintain independent living, and, thus, is this where technology can really be a key 
player in society in the forthcoming decades?
Will it be the norm to have newly built housing, equipped as ‘smart homes’? As 
a young person, couple or family moves into this new ‘smart home’, will it be ready 
for those living there to age in place, for example, door frames wide enough to allow 
a wheelchair to manoeuvre with ease? Will national and local governments, housing 
developers and contractors communicate and liaise with those who are involved in 
smart home technology and design, to ensure all designs prior to ‘breaking ground’ 
are suitable for those to ‘age in place’ successfully? Thinking about old age is not 
only important for younger generations, but as society continues to age and the cur-
rent and future populations reach into their 100s, the notion of technology to sup-
port ‘ageing in place’ should and needs to be considered.
The future of technology and eHealth in the forthcoming decades will be inter-
esting not only for society but also for researchers, industry and health practitioners. 
The possibility of using and deploying technology solutions to assist varying cohorts 
across the lifespan needs further and extensive exploration and study, in particular 
using mHealth apps which have the potential to assist users to self-­manage and 
monitor their own health alongside their health practitioner.
Authors have noted that throughout their contributions in this book, there is more 
than just one facet that needs exploring. Functionality, usability and acceptability 
require further understanding and a coherent set of guidelines that all users can 
adhere by to be published. Theoretical and international studies should be explored 
to ascertain how different cultures and areas worldwide embrace new technological 
developments.
Further exploration is needed in relation to ethics and research ethics boards 
(REBs). Across academic institutions, public and private organizations and across 
geographies, REBs vary considerably. It is important to consider from a multidisci-
plinary and multi-institutional perspective how familiar REBs may or may not be 
with the associated research domain. Understanding and learning from bad experi-
ences in respective studies are important to the academic community. Transparency 
in both successes and challenges with research should be possible.
This book has provided an insight into the current work within the domain of 
mobile eHealth. A common theme for all respective authors is that more work is 
needed. Great opportunities exist in the development and implementation of suit-
able technological solutions to assist all cohorts of society. Simultaneously, it must 
C. Musselwhite et al.

305
be recognized that there is no one size fits all across the lifespan. Researchers and 
industry practitioners need to be mindful of the different levels of experience and 
ability of all involved from developers to end users. Understanding the needs and 
requirements of the respective target audience is crucial for designing and deploy-
ing technology. However, for mass take-up, patience and understanding what the 
specific technology or solution is going to bring to the person or cohort maybe more 
important than fancy functions and swish interfaces.
References
Ashton B, Girard R (2013) Reducing the digital divide in Manitoba: a proposed framework. 
J Rural Community Dev 8(2):62–78
Cotten SR, Anderson WA, McCullough BM (2013) Impact of internet use on loneliness and con-
tact with others among older adults: cross-sectional analysis. J Med Internet Res 15:1–18
European Commission: Information Society and Media (2007) Ageing society i2010: independent 
living for the ageing society. European Communities, Luxembourg
Lindsay S, Smith S, Bellaby P (2007) The impact of ICT on family: views from an older genera-
tion. In: Family and communication technology workshop. Retrieved from https://www.nor-
thumbria.ac.uk/static/5007/2008pdf/fact_impactfamily.pdf
Marston HR, Graner-Ray S (2016) Older women on the game: understanding digital game perspe-
tives from an ageing cohort. In: Nierling L, Dominguez Rue E (eds) Ageing and technology: 
perspectives from the social sciences. Transcript-Verlag, Bielefeld, pp 67–92
Marston HR, Woodbury A, Kroll M, Fink D, Eichberg S, Gschwind YJ, Delbaere K (2015) The 
design of a purpose built Exergame for fall prediction and prevention amongst older adults. Eur 
Rev Aging Phys Activity (EURAPA) 12:13. doi:10.1186/s11556-015-0157-4
Marston HR, Freeman S, Bishop AK, Beech CL (2016) Utilization of digital games for older adults 
aged 85+ years: a scoping review. Games Health J 5(3):157–174. doi:10.1089/g4h.2015.0087
Silverstein M, Giarrusso R (2010) Aging and family life: a decade review. J Marriage Fam 
72(5):1039–1058. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1741-3737.2010.00749.x
Charles Musselwhite is an associate professor, Centre for Innovative Ageing, at Swansea 
University, and heads-up the groups Environments and Ageing research strand. He is Operational 
Director of the Centre for Ageing and Dementia Research (CADR), an initiative to develop and 
enhance research, policy and practice for older people across Wales. He has a particular interest in 
ageing, travel and transport, addressing technological, environmental, health and sustainability 
contexts of transportation and built environment studies. Prior to joining CIA, his research address-
ing ageing and transport spans four interconnected areas including (1) attitudes to transport and 
travel; (2) older people, travel behaviour change and health and wellbeing; (3) giving up driving 
for later life; and (4) road user safety and ageing. Dr. Musselwhite has been involved in a variety 
of other built environment, mental health and shipping projects. Charles has advised the 
Parliamentary Advisory Council for Transport Safety on older people’s transport issues. He is a 
member of the British Society of Gerontology. His research on older people and their travel and 
driving behaviour has involved several invited international and national presentations at confer-
ences and invited presentations to the House of Commons and the House of Lords. He has appeared 
on BBC TV and UK and Swedish radio stations on the subject.
14  Transcendent Technology and Mobile eHealth

306
Shannon Freeman is an assistant professor in the School of Nursing at the University of Northern 
British Columbia, co-president of the British Columbia Psychogeriatric Association, current vice 
president of the International Association on Geriatrics and Gerontology Coalition of Student 
Organizations and an interRAI Canada researcher. Dr. Freeman’s research interests focus on the 
health and wellbeing of vulnerable populations with current research projects in the areas of geron-
technology, mental health and wellbeing of older adults and First Nations Elders and long-term 
care. She is a director of the Prince George Hospice Society and also takes an active role in research 
examining hospice palliative and end-of-life care.
Hannah R. Marston is a research fellow, in the Health and Wellbeing Priority Research Area 
(http://healthwellbeing.kmi.open.ac.uk/) in the School of Health, Wellbeing and Social Care, at 
The Open University, UK. In March 2017, Dr. Marston organized the first digital health and well-
being symposium as lead of the Digital Health and Wellbeing Special Interest Group in the Health 
and Wellbeing Priority Research Area. The event was attended by external academics from across 
the UK and comprised of several external speakers and a panel discussion. She is currently orga-
nizing the 2nd Digital Health and Wellbeing conference to be held between 1–3 May, 2018, at The 
Open University campus. Hannah has published over 20 journal papers and 5 book chapters and 
currently serves on two editorial boards. Previously, Dr. Marston has worked internationally under-
taking fixed-term positions in Germany as a research scientist on the iStoppFalls EU project at the 
Institute of Movement and Sport Gerontology at the German Sport University Cologne and in 
Canada as post-doctoral fellow at the University of Waterloo. Hannah interests are multi-cross 
disciplinary and include digital games, gender, ageing, lifespan, gamification, technology use and 
health.
C. Musselwhite et al.

