Cambridge University Press
978-1-107-12455-4 — Mobile Phone Behavior
Zheng Yan 
Frontmatter
More Information
www.cambridge.org
© in this web service Cambridge University Press
MOBILE PHONE BEHAVIOR
This book provides the ﬁrst comprehensive introduction to the rapidly
emerged science of mobile phone behavior. It presents the unexpected
complexity of human mobile phone behavior through examining four
basic aspects of mobile phone behavior (users, technologies, activities,
and eﬀects) and four major domains of such behavior (medicine,
business, education, and everyday life). Chapters open with the
common thoughts on mobile phone behavior of ordinary mobile
phone users, then present a series of real-life cases, scientiﬁc studies,
and synthesized knowledge, concluding in complex but highly readable
summaries of each aspect of mobile phone behavior. Readers should
achieve two intellectual goals: gaining a usable knowledge of the
complexity of mobile phone behavior and developing the skills to
analyze the complexity of mobile phone behavior.
is Associate Professor of Developmental Psychology at
University at Albany. He has a doctoral degree from Harvard Univer-
sity and previously lectured at the Harvard University Graduate School
of Education. His previous publications include the Encyclopedia of
Cyber Behavior () and the Encyclopedia of Mobile Phone Behavior
(), and he has been a co-editor of the International Journal of
Cyber Behavior, Psychology and Learning since .

Cambridge University Press
978-1-107-12455-4 — Mobile Phone Behavior
Zheng Yan 
Frontmatter
More Information
www.cambridge.org
© in this web service Cambridge University Press
MOBILE PHONE BEHAVIOR
ZHENG YAN
University at Albany, State University of New York

Cambridge University Press
978-1-107-12455-4 — Mobile Phone Behavior
Zheng Yan 
Frontmatter
More Information
www.cambridge.org
© in this web service Cambridge University Press
University Printing House, Cambridge , United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, th Floor, New York, , USA
Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, , Australia
–, rd Floor, Plot , Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre, New Delhi – , India
Anson Road, #–/, Singapore 
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/
: ./
© Zheng Yan 
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 
Printed in the United States of America by Sheridan Books, Inc.
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
: Yan, Zheng, – author.
: Mobile phone behavior / Zheng Yan, University at Albany, State University of New York.
: New York : Cambridge University Press, . |
Includes bibliographical references and index.
: | (Hardback) |
(Paperback)
: : Cell phones–Social aspects. | Mobile communication systems–Social aspects. |
Interpersonal communication–Technological innovations–Social aspects.
: .| ./–dc
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/
----Hardback
----Paperback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy
of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.

Cambridge University Press
978-1-107-12455-4 — Mobile Phone Behavior
Zheng Yan 
Frontmatter
More Information
www.cambridge.org
© in this web service Cambridge University Press
Contents
List of Figures
page vi
List of Tables
vii
About the Author
viii
Preface
ix

The Science of Mobile Phone Behavior


Mobile Phone Users


Mobile Phone Technologies


Mobile Phone Activities


Mobile Phone Eﬀects


Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine


Mobile Phone Behavior in Business


Mobile Phone Behavior in Education


Mobile Phone Behavior in Daily Life


The Complexity of Mobile Phone Behavior

Index

v

Cambridge University Press
978-1-107-12455-4 — Mobile Phone Behavior
Zheng Yan 
Frontmatter
More Information
www.cambridge.org
© in this web service Cambridge University Press
Figures
.The Basic Relationship between Technologies and Humans
page 
.The Four Basic Elements of Mobile Phone Behavior

.Initial Search of Published Journal Articles on Mobile Phones

.Initial Search of Published Journal Articles on Television

.Initial Search of Published Journal Articles on Computers

.Initial Search of Published Journal Articles on the Internet

.The Overall Organization of the Book

.A Summary Diagram of User-Based Mobile Phone Behavior

.A Summary Diagram of Technology-Based Mobile Phone
Behavior

.A Summary Diagram of Activity-Based Mobile Phone Behavior 
.A Summary Diagram of Eﬀect-Based Mobile Phone Behavior 
.Trend of Published Articles on Medical Mobile Phone Behavior
Research

.A Summary Diagram of Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine

.The Linear Growth Trend of Journal Article Publications
on Mobile Phone Behavior in Business

.A Summary Diagram of Mobile Phone Behavior in Business

.A Summary Diagram of Mobile Phone Behavior in Education 
.A Summary Diagram of Mobile Phone Behavior in Daily Life 
.A Summary of the Complexity of Mobile Phone Behavior

.Two Examples of the Summary Diagrams: (a) the Summary
Diagram of Technology-Based Mobile Phone Behavior and (b)
the Summary Diagram of Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine 
.(a) The Four-Element Basic Model as a General Model for
Structural Equation Modeling and (b) the Speciﬁc
Hypothesized Model for Structural Equation Modeling

.A Simple System Dynamics Model of Two Friends Sending
or Receiving Text Messages Reciprocally and Developing
Together over Time through Co-Construction

vi

Cambridge University Press
978-1-107-12455-4 — Mobile Phone Behavior
Zheng Yan 
Frontmatter
More Information
www.cambridge.org
© in this web service Cambridge University Press
Tables
.The Encyclopedia Chapters on User-Based Mobile Phone
Behavior
page 
.The Encyclopedia Chapters on Technology-Based Mobile
Phone Behavior

.The Encyclopedia Chapters on Activity-Based Mobile Phone
Behavior

.The Encyclopedia Chapters on Eﬀect-Based Mobile Phone
Behavior

.The Encyclopedia Chapters on Mobile Phone Behavior
in Medicine

.Numbers of Journal Articles Published on Diﬀerent
Technology Addictions

.The Encyclopedia Chapters on Mobile Phone Behavior
in Business

.The Encyclopedia Chapters on Mobile Phone Behavior in
Education

.The Encyclopedia Chapters on Mobile Phone Behavior
in Daily Life

vii

Cambridge University Press
978-1-107-12455-4 — Mobile Phone Behavior
Zheng Yan 
Frontmatter
More Information
www.cambridge.org
© in this web service Cambridge University Press
About the Author
is Associate Professor of Developmental and Educational
Psychology at University at Albany since . He graduated from
Harvard University Graduate School of Education with a doctoral degree
in Human Development and Psychology. His research mainly concerns
dynamic and complex relations between contemporary technologies and
human development as well as research methodology of human develop-
ment, and speciﬁcally focuses on computer behavior, cyber behavior, and
mobile phone behavior. He is the editor of Encyclopedia of Cyber Behavior
and Encyclopedia of Mobile Phone Behavior. He is the co-editor of the
International Journal of Cyber Behavior, Psychology and Learning and the
guest editor/co-editor of special issues/sections on mobile technology and
child and adolescent development; mobile computing behavior; children,
adolescents, and the Internet; and the psychology of e-learning.
viii

Cambridge University Press
978-1-107-12455-4 — Mobile Phone Behavior
Zheng Yan 
Frontmatter
More Information
www.cambridge.org
© in this web service Cambridge University Press
Preface
In October , I ﬁnished editing the three volumes of the Encyclopedia
of Mobile Phone Behavior. One of the follow-up projects I was thinking
about was to write an introductory book on mobile phone behavior as a
companion to the Encyclopedia. The reasons are quite simple: () the three-
volume Encyclopedia is really comprehensive, but somehow hard for ordin-
ary readers to learn quickly about mobile phone behavior; and () the
Encyclopedia synthesizes the scientiﬁc literature really eﬀectively, but it is
somehow too technical for ordinary readers to really appreciate the com-
plexity of mobile phone behavior easily. Cambridge University Press has
successfully published multiple widely recognized books on the psychology
of the Internet, such as: The Psychology of the Internet; Psychology and the
Internet: Intrapersonal, Interpersonal, and Transpersonal Implications;
Cyberpsychology: An Introduction to Human–Computer Interaction; and
Psychological Aspects of Cyberspace: Theory, Research, Applications. Mobile
phones are becoming the most ubiquitous technology in human history
and mobile phone behavior is becoming one of the most important social
phenomena of the twenty-ﬁrst century. While the next major wave of the
psychology of mobile phones is rapidly forming, Cambridge University
Press should be leading the wave again. Thus, I sent my pre-proposal
inquiry to Cambridge University Press in January . After just two
hours, I received an enthusiastic e-mail from Senior Editor David Repetto.
This eemail led to the pleasant journey of completing this book in .
Many excellent books on mobile phone behavior are already currently
available, taking diﬀerent perspectives, targeting diﬀerent audiences, and
presenting at diﬀerent levels. These existing books can be grouped into the
three major types: () scholarly monographs on speciﬁc topics of mobile
phone behavior, such as Katz’s Perpetual Contact: Mobile Communication,
Private Talk, Public Performance and Magic in the Air: Mobile Communi-
cation and the Transformation of Social Life, Ling’s Taken for Grantedness:
ix

Cambridge University Press
978-1-107-12455-4 — Mobile Phone Behavior
Zheng Yan 
Frontmatter
More Information
www.cambridge.org
© in this web service Cambridge University Press
The Embedding of Mobile Communication into Society, Ling and Campbell’s
Mobile Communication: Bringing Us Together and Tearing Us Apart,
Baron’s Always On: Language in an Online and Mobile World, Goggin
and Hjorth’s The Routledge Companion to Mobile Media, and Carlo and
Schram’s Cell Phones: Invisible Hazards in the Wireless Age; () general
references on mobile phone behavior, such as Katz’s Handbook of Mobile
Communication Studies and Dushinski’s The Mobile Marketing Handbook;
and () technology books on how to design and use mobile phones, such
as Felkers’ Android Application Development for Dummies, Muir’s iPhone
for Seniors for Dummies, and Meurling and Jeans’ The Mobile Phone Book:
The Invention of the Mobile Telephone Industry. In addition, there are new
books in press or under development (e.g., the Mobile Communication
Research Series which Ling and Campbell have been editing). All of these
indicate that the ﬁeld of mobile phone behavior has been growing expo-
nentially. I highly recommend these excellent books in order for us to
stand on the shoulders of giants. This is the broad intellectual context that
a reader should know when using this book, which features introductory
levels, comprehensive coverage, and interdisciplinary orientation.
Looking back at this pleasant journey, I would like to acknowledge those
who have made invaluable contributions to the completion of this book.
Intellectually, the book was deeply inﬂuenced by a few great thinkers
of our time: () Daniel Kahneman’s theory is one of the primary analytic
frameworks used in the book to analyze mobile phone behavior. A brief
conversation with him on April , when he gave a series of talks at
Harvard inspired and motivated me to study online judgements and
mobile phone judgements as he indicated that it was an emerging area
and the research was still limited. () The complex system theory by
Yaneer Bar-Yam at New England Complexity Institute (my postdoctoral
mentor) and the system dynamics by Jay Forrest and John Sterman at the
MIT Sloan School of Management (the two instructors of multiple
system dynamics courses I audited at Sloan) is another major analytic
framework used in the book. () Donald Norman’s ground-breaking
book, Psychology of Everyday Things, taught me how extremely important
it is to develop deep scientiﬁc insights from everyday observations to
psychological research and how particularly useful it is to write a serious
scientiﬁc book in a relaxing way. () Kurt Fischer and Catherine Snow,
my mentors at Harvard Graduate School of Education, supported my
ideas of examining modern technologies and human development from
the very beginning. Without their encouragement, I might still be
x
Preface

Cambridge University Press
978-1-107-12455-4 — Mobile Phone Behavior
Zheng Yan 
Frontmatter
More Information
www.cambridge.org
© in this web service Cambridge University Press
searching for a dream research topic in the darkness. () Martin Cooper,
the Father of Mobile Phones, is a real role model to me, personally and
professionally. In his fabulous Forward written for the Encyclopedia of
Mobile Phone Behavior, he wrote a short story about a poor woman in an
Indian village. The woman ﬁrst borrowed some money to buy a mobile
phone, and then lent it to other farmers to call the neighboring villages to
ﬁnd the best markets for their farm goods. For the ﬁrst time in my life,
I have learned how powerful a small story like this could be to help
understand the complexity of mobile phone behavior.
I am a student of mobile phone behavior. My understanding of mobile
phone behavior has been developing as a result of learning from many
leading scholars in the ﬁeld, including: Robert Atkinson, Naomi Baron,
Joël Billieux, Karel Brookhuis, Jennings Bryant, Heidi Campbell, Scott
Campbell, Elisabeth Cardis, Susan Carey, Judith Carta, Jonathan Donner,
David Finkelhor, Xiaolan Fu, Cynthia Garcia Coll, Rui Gaspar, Susan
Gelman, Patricia Greenﬁeld, Mark Griﬃths, Leslie Haddon, Lennart
Hardell, Larissa Hjorth, Randi Hjorthol, Gwo-Jen Hwang, Reynol Junco,
Sara Kiesler, Robert Kraut, Amanda Lenhart, Louis Leung, Sonia Living-
stone, Jenny Radesky, Donald Redelmeier, Michael Repacholi, Eric Rice,
Martin Röösli, Matthew Schneps, David Strayer, Kaveri Subrahmanyam,
John Traxler, Marion Underwood, Patti Valkenburg, Dan Wang, Ellen
Wartella, Janis Wolak, Clare Wood, Heng Xu, Kimberly Young, Tingshao
Zhu, and especially James Katz at Boston University and Rich Ling at
Nanyang Technical University, the two pioneering scholars in the ﬁeld.
To all of them, and to many others not listed here, I personally want to
extend my heartfelt thanks.
I wish to express my profound appreciation to ﬁve anonymous reviewers
for their ﬁrst-class reviews of my book proposal. Their insightful reviews
have shaped the book in multiple signiﬁcant ways, from overall book
designs to various technical details, which can be grouped into four
categories: () The overall design. The reviewers stressed the importance
of focusing the book on behavioral and psychological aspects of mobile
phones rather than on “too much discussion of actual mobile phones.”
They recommended “packaging this area of research and theory from a
perspective that is new” and expanding beyond the “usual suspects” of just
putting together the edited collections in order to include more scholarly
breadth in the materials available for teaching and research. They analyzed
the pros and cons of developing and marketing the book as a textbook, a
monograph, or a hybrid one. () The pedagogical features. The reviewers
Preface
xi

Cambridge University Press
978-1-107-12455-4 — Mobile Phone Behavior
Zheng Yan 
Frontmatter
More Information
www.cambridge.org
© in this web service Cambridge University Press
emphasized the importance of pedagogical features of a book to make the
publication “an intuitive and educational read,” with one consistent voice
and various eﬀective uses of introduction, diagrams, images, cases, and
summaries. () The comparative perspective. The reviewers recommended
comparing similarities and diﬀerences among diﬀerent modern technolo-
gies and technology-based behavior (e.g., comparing the prevalence rates
among all the modern technologies) in order to eﬀectively address unique
features of mobile phones and mobile phone behavior. () The technical
treatment. The reviewers discussed possible treatment of various technical
issues, such as how to accurately estimate the number of mobile phone
users, what the logical starting point of mobile phone behavior should be,
and how to include the important topic of privacy and security. I have
taken all of these excellent recommendations to heart and worked hard to
implement them as much as I can. If I ﬁnd out who they are in the future,
I will buy each of them a large beer!
I would like to thank many people at Cambridge University Press who
contributed directly to the completion of the book: Alexandra Poreda, Jane
Bowbrick, Joshua Penney, especially Dave Repetto for his extraordinary
enthusiasm, trust, and wisdom, Bethany Johnson for her exceptional
production management, and Sophie Rosinke for her outstanding editing
abilities.
I must say a special thank you to my wonderful doctoral students: ()
Holly Meredith for her extremely careful proofreading and particularly
insightful comments on the entire book. Without her meticulous correc-
tions of many errors and mistakes, this book simply would have not been
completed; () Samantha Bordoﬀfor her assistance in completing the
references and indexing; () Sung Yong Park for his excellent work in
searching the existing literature on human behavior with telephones,
television, computers, the Internet, and mobile phones; () Quan Chen
for her inspiring studies on multitasking when driving and learning and
for our collaborative work on the science of mobile phone behavior; ()
Fusun Sahin for our collaborative work on mobile assessment; () Dr.
Lai-Lei Lou for our collaborative work on the possible links between
mobile phones and brain cancers; as well as () Dr. Qiufeng Gao at
Southern China Normal University for our collaborative work on mobile
phone school policy. It is my true fortune to work with them and learn
from them all.
I also want to thank many students, friends, and relatives for their quick
responses to my questions about their understanding of mobile phone
xii
Preface

Cambridge University Press
978-1-107-12455-4 — Mobile Phone Behavior
Zheng Yan 
Frontmatter
More Information
www.cambridge.org
© in this web service Cambridge University Press
behavior. Their intuitive and authentic responses form the extremely useful
baseline knowledge of ordinary people and an important part of the book.
Finally, I would like to thank my family, WQY, YAM, ZXS, ZKX, YY,
YH, BJ, LK, and especially ZJK, Riv, and Sisi, for their support during the
special process of ﬁnishing this book while ﬁghting against unusual odds.
Zheng Yan
Newton
October 
Preface
xiii


The Science of Mobile Phone Behavior
Outline
.
Surprising Responses
.
Mobile Phones
.
Classic Mobile Phones
.
Modern Mobile Phones
.
Future Mobile Phones
.
Mobile Phone Behavior
.
The Human Side
.
A Special Human Behavior
.
The Four Basic Elements
.
The Four Complex Systems
.
Diverse Contexts
.
The Science of Mobile Phone Behavior
.
Mobile Phone Behavior Research
.
The Intellectual Childhood (–)
.
The Intellectual Adolescence (–)
.
Understanding Mobile Phone Behavior
.
Target Readers
.
Intellectual Goals and Content Organization
.
The Style
.
Surprising Responses
One afternoon in , I received an email inviting me to give a talk to a
group of graduate students about mobile phone behavior. This was the
very ﬁrst time I had received such an invitation to talk about mobile phone
behavior. Since this is my current research focus, I accepted the invitation
with great pleasure. In preparing for this talk, I found that I knew little
about how much my audience would know about mobile phone behavior.

2
13:08:25, subject to the Cambridge Core

Thus, I started my talk by ﬁrst asking participants whether they had
mobile phones and whether they used them daily. Everyone immediately
raised their hands, indicating that each of them had a mobile phone and
used it daily. Then I asked them to quickly write down their initial
thoughts about a few brief questions so that I could learn their initial
knowledge about mobile phone behavior, adjust my speech plan based on
their knowledge, and warm them up for my talk on mobile phone
behavior.
The talk went well and we had an interesting discussion about mobile
phone behavior research. After the talk, I read their responses again and
summarized them as follows: () When they were asked to quickly write
down two key features of mobile phones, the majority of them indicated
calling and texting. () When they were asked to quickly list two to three
examples of mobile phone behavior, the majority of them listed sending
text messages, looking up emails, and using Facebook. () When they were
asked to estimate how many journal articles have been published on
mobile phone behavior, the majority of them came up with a number
ranging from to with an average of .
These responses were both interesting and surprising to me for several
reasons. First, although I have been studying mobile phone behavior for
several years and at the time of my talk had just ﬁnished editing the
Encyclopedia of Mobile Phone Behaviora few weeks prior, this was the
ﬁrst time I was able to explicitly see what people’s intuitive knowledge
about mobile phone behavior actually looked like. Obviously, these were
very quick and informal responses from a group of graduate students.
However, these quick and informal responses delivered authentic and
interesting information: how much ordinary people may intuitively know
about mobile phones, mobile behavior, and mobile behavior research.
Second, although we all know that many people have their own mobile
phones and they use their mobile phones every day, looking at these
responses, I was quite surprised to see how limited the knowledge was that
some ordinary people had about their mobile phones and their mobile
phone behavior. They tended to substantially oversimplify the complexity
of mobile phone behavior. As we will ﬁrst discuss in this introduction
chapter and throughout this book later on, modern mobile phones, mobile
phone behavior, and mobile phone behavior research are much more
complex than we thought. After the talk, I had several more opportunities
to communicate with multiple institutions, groups, and individuals
Yan, Z. (ed.). (). Encyclopedia of Mobile Phone Behavior. Hershey, PA: IGI Global.

The Science of Mobile Phone Behavior
2
13:08:25, subject to the Cambridge Core

informally about their intuitive knowledge about mobile phone behavior.
The results remained quite similar: there is substantial oversimpliﬁcation
of the complexity of mobile phone behavior, despite the diverse back-
grounds, needs, and knowledge that people have. This eventually became
the primary motivation, central theme, and major goal of writing this
book: to describe, analyze, synthesize, and explain the complexity of
mobile phone behavior that is related to a pocket-sized mobile phone.
Third, now we might wonder why some people tend to oversimplify the
complexity of mobile phone behavior. There could be diﬀerent theories
and speculations to explain this phenomenon. Based on the Nobel Laure-
ate Daniel Kahneman’s intuitive judgement theory:() people think with
two systems – intuitive thinking (System ) and rational thinking (System
); () intuitive thinking is limited due to various cognitive heuristics and
biases; and () people tend to think intuitively in their daily lives often, but
can think rationally only after making extra eﬀorts or improving existing
knowledge. In the context of mobile phone behavior, people may develop
their intuitive thinking based on their daily use of mobile phones. How-
ever, their intuitive thinking about mobile phone behavior is limited due
to various cognitive biases. Eﬀortful learning and training is needed to
develop rational thinking about mobile phone behavior in order to develop
an understanding and appreciation of its unusual complexity. Thus, in
this book, we will use the concepts of intuitive thinking (System ) and
rational thinking (System ) as the main conceptual framework to analyze
mobile phone behavior.
In the text that follows in this introductory chapter, we will brieﬂy
discuss some basic knowledge about mobile phones, mobile phone behav-
ior, and mobile phone behavior research, and provide an overview of the
book, including two primary goals to achieve after reading the book. This
is to set the stage for further in-depth discussions of various topics in the
entire book to reveal the complexity of mobile phone behavior.
.
Mobile Phones
In BC, Pheidippides, a Greek professional courier, ran over kilo-
meters from the battleﬁeld of Marathon to Athens to deliver a message of
the Greek victory over Persia. At the end of his running, he said: “Joy to
you, we’ve won!” Right after that, he collapsed and died.
Kahneman, D. (). Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
. Mobile Phones

2
13:08:25, subject to the Cambridge Core

In , ,years later, Alexander Graham Bell, an American
inventor and then a professor of Vocal Physiology and Elocution at Boston
University, sat in his laboratory and made the ﬁrst successful telephone call
to his research associate, Thomas Watson, and said: “Mr. Watson, come
here, I want to see you.” Since then, humans have used telephones to
deliver voice messages across a long distance eﬀectively and eﬃciently,
rather than having someone run a long distance to deliver a message.
In , almost years later, Martin Cooper, another American
inventor and then the head of Motorola’s communications systems div-
ision, stood on the Sixth Avenue of Manhattan, New York, and made the
ﬁrst mobile phone call in public to Joel Engel, then the head of research at
AT&T’s Bell Labs, and said: “Joel, this is Marty. I’m calling you from a
cell phone, a real handheld portable cell phone.” After that, only forty-two
years later, worldwide mobile phone subscriptions had grown to .
billion, with a penetration rate of .per cent.
The mobile phone held in the right hand of Martin Cooper was
DynaTAC, one of the earliest classic mobile phones. Nowadays, mobile
phones have remarkably wide variations. We hear various names, such as
basic phones, feature phones, smartphones, cellular phones, cell phones,
VoIP phones, satellite phones, or app phones. These names represent
various features of mobile phones and can generally be used interchange-
ably. We see diﬀerent brands on the market, such as Nokia , Moto
, iPhone , BlackBerry Passport, Samsung Galaxy, or Xiaomi Mi.
Each is made by diﬀerent companies, such as Samsung, Nokia, Apple,
LG, ZTE, and Huawei. We have mobile phones connecting with diﬀer-
ent cellular networks (e.g., G, G, G, G) or Wi-Fi networks (e.g.,
regular station-based Wi-Fi, campus-wide Wi-Fi, city-wide Wi-Fi, ad
hoc Wi-Fi). We know millions of apps from the Apple App Store,
Google Play, Windows Phone Store, or BlackBerry App World to
perform unlimited speciﬁc functions, such as emailing, maintaining a
calendar, looking up stock information, weather, and news, as well as
apps for health care, ﬁnance, gaming, reading, cooking, banking, ﬁtness,
navigation, travel, task management, getting a taxi, and almost any kind
of app we can imagine. To know what mobile phones are and what basic
features mobile phones have, we should examine mobile phones at
diﬀerent stages of the mobile phone history and understand the similar-
ities and diﬀerences between classic mobile phones and modern mobile
phones.
See www.itu.int/net/pressoﬃce/press_releases//.aspx#.V_jrcmLeY.

The Science of Mobile Phone Behavior
2
13:08:25, subject to the Cambridge Core

.
Classic Mobile Phones
Although such a wide variety of mobile phones exist, each and every classic
mobile phone, frequently called basic phones, such as DynaTAC, Nokia
, and Moto , share two basic features.
The ﬁrst feature can simply be called phone – the second part of the term
mobile phone. That is, a mobile phone must have a function of communi-
cation, either voice-based like a traditional telephone or text-based like a
traditional telegraph. In this regard, mobile phones are essentially a tech-
nology of communication.
The second feature can be called mobile – the other part of the term
mobile phone. Mobile generally means that a mobile phone needs to be
movable so that people can carry it with them and use it freely in a large
area. This feature of mobility requires at least four elements: () it must be
able to conveniently move with users themselves rather than with other
moving objects such as a police car or an airplane; () it must be small and
light enough for a user to carry it; () it must be able to have wireless access
to both strong base stations and reliable cellular or Wi-Fi networks
through suﬃcient and eﬃcient radio frequency spectrums so that low-
power radio signals can be sent or received by thousands of users even in
peak use time; and () it must have a small but powerful battery to provide
power for long-term use.
These two basic features are useful for distinguishing a mobile phone
from other various relevant technologies (e.g., mobile phones vs. cordless
phones), clarifying various existing confusions among ordinary mobile
phone users (e.g., mobile phones vs. automobile phones), and providing
a good conceptual base for further research and application (e.g., When
should we consider the starting point of mobile phones to be? Should we
include both mobile phones and cordless phones together to study the
possible cancer-causing eﬀects of mobile phones?).
For instance, DynaTAC is a mobile phone because it has the two basic
features. However, a traditional landline phone is a phone but not a
mobile phone because it is not mobile and wireless. A cordless phone is a
wireless phone but not a mobile phone because it does not connect with
the cellular networks or with the Internet and can only be used to make
calls within a small area. Automobile phones that are used in police cars
or ambulances are not mobile phones because these phones are only
mobile in the sense that you can drive around with them, but they are
actually ﬁxed in the vehicle and are too large and heavy to put into a
pocket. A desktop computer is not a mobile phone since it does not have
. Mobile Phones

2
13:08:25, subject to the Cambridge Core

the two basic features, despite it often having Internet access and the
ability to send or receive emails. A pager is not a mobile phone because
while it is portable, it does not really have the feature of voice or text
communications. A television is neither mobile nor does it yet have a
phone function, but it can actually become a feature of a mobile phone if
it is integrated into a mobile phone, via various TV apps. A GPS device is
not a mobile phone. While it is wirelessly connected to a satellite, its
connection is one-way and is not interconnected with the public phone
network. However, if it is integrated into a mobile phone, it becomes a
feature of a mobile phone. A gaming console may be portable and
interconnected to cellular networks (i.e., mobile gaming) or the Internet
(e.g., online gaming), but its primary function is not for communication.
However, if it is integrated into a mobile phone, it becomes a feature of
mobile phone games. As for a computing tablet, it could be considered as
a hybrid of a mobile phone and a computer. Given that a mobile phone
normally has various computational functions (e.g., playing games) and a
computer normally has various communicational functions (e.g., posting
on Facebook), there is essentially no diﬀerence between a large mobile
phone and a small tablet, as long as they meet the above two basic
features.
.
Modern Mobile Phones
From DynaTAC or MicroTAC, the earliest classic mobile phones, to the
iPhone Plus or Samsung Galaxy SG LTE, the most modern mobile
phones, there are substantial diﬀerences. While modern mobile phones
still share the two basic features, mobile and phone, they have been
transformed into multi-functional, personal technologies.
According to Clayton Christensen,the world’s foremost authority on
disruptive innovation, there exist four types of innovation: () Sustaining
Innovation (it is expected and has no large eﬀects, e.g., Microsoft produced
Encarta as a digital encyclopedia to compete against Encyclopædia Britan-
nica as the best print encyclopedia; () Evolutionary Innovation (it is
expected and has large eﬀects, e.g., fuel injection has become the current
fuel delivery system in car engines to replace carburetors as the less eﬃcient
one); () Revolutionary Innovation (it is unexpected, but does not have
large eﬀects, e.g., the Concorde aircraft is supersonic, but ended its service
Christensen, C. (). The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail.
Brighton, MA: Harvard Business Review Press.

The Science of Mobile Phone Behavior
2
13:08:25, subject to the Cambridge Core

in ); and () Disruptive Innovation (it is unexpected and has large
eﬀects, e.g., e-mail after postal mail, digital photography after chemical
photography, and mobile phones after ﬁxed line phones). Thus, we can
consider that modern mobile phones are the new technology with two
disruptive innovations.
First, multi-function technology. Due to the technology advancements,
the modern mobile phones, often called smartphones, have become much
more powerful than the classic mobile phones. This is achieved by ()
adding various new hardware devices such as cameras, GPS, and sensors,
() having millions of new apps, and () linking with various new networks
such as G or Wi-Fi. These so-called “smartphones” create additional
capabilities besides the two basic functions. As a result, a small phone is
no longer just a single voice-based communication tool with good mobil-
ity, but rather a strong technology that has multiple functions. It essen-
tially integrates communicational technologies (e.g., a telephone from
which one user can call or text to another), informational technologies
(e.g., an Internet application that allows one user to browse the Internet),
and computational technologies (e.g., a personal computer that allows one
user to generate a ﬁle in Word) into a complex platform within a small
size. Thus, a mobile phone may be able to identify its location using global
positioning, may include a camera and various sensors, and may have
substantial computing and memory abilities to make the device more
useful to the user.
Second, personal technology. Along with the new feature of a multi-
function technology, modern mobile phones become much more mobile
in the sense that they do not limit the mobility of their users and
eventually become much more personal. They have become cheaper,
smaller, thinner, and faster, with a better interface. They are more useful
and have more eﬃcient batteries that can be recharged wirelessly. They
have become much “smarter,” with new sensors, new CPU chips, and new
screens. Thus, mobile phone users start to build strong physical, cognitive,
social, and emotional bonds with their mobile phones. Mobile phones can
be used almost anywhere, at any time, by anyone, for anything.
As we can see, the two basic features of a classic mobile phone, phone
and mobile, are closely related to the two advanced features of a modern
mobile phone, multi-function and personal. It is extremely important for
mobile phone users to know not only the basic features, but also the
signiﬁcant changes from the basic features to the advanced features.
Mobile phones are no longer just mobile phones, but have evolved and
transformed into a multi-function, personal technology. Knowing these
. Mobile Phones

2
13:08:25, subject to the Cambridge Core

core changes enables us to see the current status of mobile phone use, the
latest developments of mobile phones, wide variations of the mobile
phone, actual impacts on humans, and tremendous potentials for mobile
phone use.
.
Future Mobile Phones
If classic mobile phones are a communication tool with mobility,
and modern mobile phones are a powerful multi-function personal
technology, we might wonder: What will be the key feature of future
mobile phones?
Right now, at least two major features have emerged. First, mobile phones
are becoming a powerful remote control or a command center for the
Internet of Everything. Second, mobile phones are becoming more wear-
able. An iWatch is a good example. In the next ﬁfty years or so, with mobile
phones becoming much more powerful and much more wearable, future
mobile phones might possibly become a powerful artiﬁcial organ or the
second brain of human beings for the ﬁrst time in human history. The
human body has various biological organs such as ears, eyes, heart, brain,
arms, and legs. Future mobile phones might be so seamlessly personalized
with human bodies that they become a special organ, and so powerful for
serving human needs that they become a highly complex artiﬁcial technol-
ogy. They will build on the current multiple functions and personal tech-
nologies. They might have strong artiﬁcial cognitive intelligence, artiﬁcial
social intelligence, and artiﬁcial emotional intelligence. They might have a
wide variety of modern sensors to receive input seamlessly and automatic-
ally, develop more computational capacities and various apps to store and
analyze big data, and become a command execution center to eﬀectively and
eﬃciently perform almost every function for humans. Wherever the future
might lead humans, one thing is clear: mobile phones will no longer feature
just two functions, calling and texting.
.
Mobile Phone Behavior
What we have discussed in the previous section is about what mobile
phones are rather than what mobile phone behavior is or how humans
interact with mobile phones or how mobile phones aﬀect human life.
What is mobile phone behavior? How are mobile phones and mobile
phone behavior related to each other? Is it true that mobile phone behavior
is simply about calling parents or texting friends, as shown in those

The Science of Mobile Phone Behavior
2
13:08:25, subject to the Cambridge Core

informal responses from the graduate students? What are other kinds of
mobile phone behavior? To answer these kinds of questions we might
have, let us discuss ﬁve core concepts of mobile phone behavior in the
following ﬁve subsections.
.
The Human Side
As mentioned earlier, the mobile phone DynaTAC used by Martin
Cooper in is among the earliest mobile phones made by Motorola.
Besides the mobile phone, there is much more involved in the ﬁrst
mobile phone call made in public in , including the users of the
mobile phone (the caller Martin Cooper to the invisible receiver Joel
Engel), the action of making the call (e.g., dialing, walking while calling,
purpose and content of the phone conversation), and the eﬀect of the call
(e.g., immediate and historical eﬀects on human beings; possible cogni-
tive, social, and emotional eﬀects on Martin and Joel), as well as the
context of the call (e.g., public relationships, media communications,
research and development of mobile phones, the speciﬁc setting of
Manhattan). These are all related to mobile phone use or mobile phone
behavior, which is the human side of mobile phones rather than the
technology side of mobile phones themselves.
As shown in Figure ., the basic relationship between mobile phones
and mobile phone behavior is analogous to that of a car and driving a car, a
TV and watching a TV, a computer and using a computer. The former is
about how an engineer invents and develops a technology – the technology
side, and the latter is about how a user accesses and uses a technology – the
human side. If the last section focuses on mobile phones as a powerful
personal technology – the technology side of mobile phones, this section
focuses on mobile phone use as a complex human behavior – the human
side of mobile phones.
Human
Technology
Human
The technology side
The human side
Figure .
The Basic Relationship between Technologies and Humans
. Mobile Phone Behavior

2
13:08:25, subject to the Cambridge Core

.
A Special Human Behavior
Researchers have studied various types of human behavior, such as health
behavior, organization behavior, entrepreneurial behavior, violent behavior,
economic behavior, sexual behavior, consumer behavior, social behavior,
motor behavior, aggressive behavior, addictive behavior, machine behavior,
cyber behavior (some of these are actually names or parts of names of
academic journals). Behavioral science essentially is an interdisciplinary ﬁeld
that examines human behavior across various disciplines, including psych-
ology, sociology, biology, medicine, law, business, education, criminology,
neuroscience, psychiatry, economics, anthropology, and so forth.
As one speciﬁc type of human behavior, mobile phone behavior can
broadly refer to any physical, cognitive, social, or emotional activity that
humans engage in while using mobile phones. As observed in our daily
lives and reported in the existing research literature, there exists a wide
variety of mobile phone behavior, such as the use of mobile phones by
people who are deaf or have dyslexia, sexting and its eﬀects on children’s
social development, m-gaming, using mobile phones during disasters,
mobile phones and sleep disturbances, m-consulting, mobile phones and
brain tumors, calling and texting while driving, mobile phone distraction,
mobile phone addiction, m-therapy, m-shopping, m-banking, m-learning,
and m-voting. These types of mobile phone behavior will be systematically
discussed in the subsequent nine chapters.
.
The Four Basic Elements
As shown in Figure ., despite the extremely wide variety, mobile phone
behavior primarily concerns four basic elements: mobile phone users,
mobile phone technologies, mobile phone activities, and mobile phone
eﬀects. Based on the four elements, mobile phone behavior could be
Mobile phone 
users
Mobile phone 
technologies
Mobile phone 
activities
Mobile phone 
effects
Figure .
The Four Basic Elements of Mobile Phone Behavior

The Science of Mobile Phone Behavior
2
13:08:25, subject to the Cambridge Core

categorized into four general types: () user-based mobile phone behavior;
() technology-based mobile phone behavior; () activity-based mobile
phone behavior; and () eﬀect-based mobile phone behavior. Extensive
research has been conducted to study each of the four types of mobile
phone behavior, accumulating scientiﬁc knowledge about mobile phone
behavior, and revealing the extreme complexity of mobile phone behavior.
.
The Four Complex Systems
The four basic features actually concern four complex systems. In the real-
life world, there exist diﬀerent mobile phone users (e.g., ordinary users and
people with special needs), diﬀerent mobile phone technologies (e.g., text
messenger, GPS, cameras, apps), diﬀerent activities (e.g., m-learning, m-
shopping, m-therapy), and diﬀerent eﬀects (e.g., positive and negative
eﬀects on human cognition or emotion). These four complex systems lead
to a wide variety of mobile phone behavior among human beings. In this
book, four speciﬁc chapters (i.e., Mobile Phone Users, Mobile Phone
Technologies, Mobile Phone Activities, and Mobile Phone Eﬀects) focus
on the four types of mobile phone behavior (i.e., user-based, technology-
based, activity-based, and eﬀect-based mobile phone behavior).
.
Diverse Contexts
Mobile phone behavior always takes place in various contexts of human
activities, such as daily settings, medicine, business, education, justice,
agriculture, government, arts, and religions. Thus, the four complex
systems (i.e., users, technologies, activities, and eﬀects) apply to various
contexts, generating an extremely wide variety of mobile phone behavior in
the real world and making mobile phone behavior particularly compli-
cated. In this book, four speciﬁc chapters focus on various types of mobile
phone behavior in four contexts (i.e., mobile phone behavior in medicine,
business, education, and daily life) as selected examples, illustrating com-
plex mobile phone behavior in diverse contexts.
.
The Science of Mobile Phone Behavior
.
Mobile Phone Behavior Research
Given the complexity of mobile phone behavior, how much do we know
about it? As you may recall, the students responded to the question of how
. The Science of Mobile Phone Behavior

2
13:08:25, subject to the Cambridge Core

many journal articles have been published on mobile phone behavior and
the majority of them came up with a number ranging from to , with
an average of . Is this correct? Is it important to know this question and
how it is related to the science of mobile phone behavior? What is the
science of mobile phone behavior? Is it a new and emerging ﬁeld of study?
These questions will be discussed below.
First, we can perform an initial database search to quickly estimate the
general scope of the literature on mobile phone behavior. Among three
excellent databases, PsycINFO, PubMed, and WOS, it is desirable to choose
PubMed for the ﬁrst search for two reasons. First, PsycINFO is produced by
the American Psychological Association and focuses more on the psychology
literature with nearly million records, and thus it is a little too narrow.
WOS is produced by Thomson Reuters and focuses more on the science,
social science, arts, and humanities literature, with nearly million
records, and thus it is a little too broad. PubMed is produced by the
National Institutes of Health and focuses on the life sciences and biomedical
sciences, including the behavioral sciences, with million records, relatively
close to the interdisciplinary nature of the science of mobile phone behavior,
especially given the particularly extensive literature on the impacts of mobile
phones on human health. Second, besides the desirable coverage of
PubMed, it also has a desirable technical feature to visually demonstrate
the publication record change over years easily and quickly. This feature can
be used to analyze and compare growth trends of given research areas.
As of April , if we use the keyword of mobile phone to perform an
initial search in the PubMed database, there are a total of ,publica-
tions between and , including clinical trial articles and
review articles. Furthermore, as shown in Figure ., based on the data
from PubMed, the number of publications rapidly increased over the
years, especially after . Due to the publication lag and especially the
database entry lag, the data of and are not complete and should
be much more if we check the data after or . It is clear that the
students’ estimation of total publications is much lower than the
,identiﬁed publications in PubMed, let alone the exponential growth
trend in the past ﬁve years.
Second, the number of journal article publications is a basic and
important indication of the development of a given ﬁeld of study. Of
course, there are other indicators, such as citation rates or impact factors.
Bibliometrics or scientometrics are the methods often used by scholars to
study various indications related to scientiﬁc publications. As a basic
indicator of scientiﬁc research, the number of journal article publications

The Science of Mobile Phone Behavior
2
13:08:25, subject to the Cambridge Core

on mobile phone behavior can be used to answer various interesting
questions: How many researchers in the world have been studying mobile
phone behavior? Who are the leading experts in the ﬁeld? What topics
have been heavily studied or hardly examined? What are the leading
journals in the ﬁeld? What are general and speciﬁc trends of scientiﬁc
outcomes? One thing is very clear: if an area of study has only 
publications, one would very likely conclude that this area of study is still
in its infancy. However, if an area of study has ,publications, one
would very likely believe that this area of study is quite established.
To make a comparison, when we use the keyword television to perform
an initial search in PubMed, ,journal articles have been published
since , with ,clinical trials and ,review articles. This area of
research is still growing, but shows some sign of slowing down in the past
ﬁve years (see Figure .).
When we use the keyword computer, an initial search in PubMed results
in ,journal articles having been published since , with ,
clinical trials and ,review articles. This area of research, as shown in
PubMed, is still growing strongly (see Figure .).
When we use the keyword Internet, an initial search in PubMed results in
,journal articles having been published since , with ,clinical
trials and ,review articles. This area of research, shown in PubMed,
started growing very strongly in and is still growing strongly (see
Figure .).
0
500
1,000
1,500
92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Figure .
Initial Search of Published Journal Articles on Mobile Phones
. The Science of Mobile Phone Behavior

2
13:08:25, subject to the Cambridge Core

While these comparisons are initial and rudimentary, we can make two
basic observations from the ﬁgures of growth trends of the four areas of
research regarding the behavior science literature of four modern technolo-
gies. First, the literature on mobile phone behavior is relatively young
compared to the literature on televisions, computers, and the Internet.
Second, the literature on mobile phone behavior already has a good
knowledge foundation and has been growing particularly fast since .
0
500
1,000
1,500
1929
1947
1949
1951
1953
1955
1957
1959
1961
1963
1965
1967
1969
1971
1973
1975
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
Figure .
Initial Search of Published Journal Articles on Television
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
35,000
40,000
45,000
1937
1946
1948
1950
1952
1954
1956
1958
1960
1962
1964
1966
1968
1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
Figure .
Initial Search of Published Journal Articles on Computers

The Science of Mobile Phone Behavior
2
13:08:25, subject to the Cambridge Core

It is certainly not in its infancy with less than articles, as estimated by
some graduate students.
Third, to describe or analyze the science of mobile phone behavior, it is
useful to do so from a historical perspective or developmental perspective.
A person’s life generally consists of three major developmental stages:
childhood, adolescence, and adulthood. Childhood (–years old) is the
initial stage of human development for individuals to develop fundamental
physical, linguistic, cognitive, and social abilities. Adulthood (after years
old) is the ﬁnal stage for individuals to perform independently in society
with matured physical, cognitive, and social abilities. Adolescence (–
years old) is a transitional stage between childhood and adulthood. Taking
the perspective of human development, metaphorically, we could consider
the science of mobile phone behavior as growing from childhood into
adolescence. This is because the ﬁeld has developed a fundamental know-
ledge and methodology base in the past twenty-ﬁve years of its childhood
(e.g., currently ten to twenty academic journals publishing mobile phone
behavior articles), but has not yet fully matured intellectually and is not yet
widely recognized as an independent ﬁeld of research. For example, there is
no one single entry covering mobile phone behavior among the ,
entries of the International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences.
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
1947
1950
1951
1955
1960
1964
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
Figure .
Initial Search of Published Journal Articles on the Internet
Smelser, N. J. and Baltes, P. B. (eds.). (). International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral
Sciences. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
. The Science of Mobile Phone Behavior

2
13:08:25, subject to the Cambridge Core

And one entry was included in the second edition of the International
Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences edited by James Wright and
published in .The entry title is “The Mobile Communication” and
was written by Rich Ling, a renowned scholar in the ﬁeld. Thus, we would
argue that the ﬁeld is currently in the transitional stage of adolescence. One
useful way to collect evidence and substantiate this assessment is to
examine both quantitatively and qualitatively the current status of schol-
arly journals focusing on mobile phone behavior.
.
The Intellectual Childhood (–)
The science of mobile phone behavior has a history of nearly twenty-ﬁve
years since Karel Brookhuis and his collaborators’ article,The eﬀects of
mobile telephoning on driving performance, was published in Accident
Analysis & Prevention. Like Sherry Turkle’s seminal book Second Self ,
marking the beginning of cyber behavior research, Brookhuis’s article is
the ﬁrst published study on mobile phone use from the perspective of the
behavioral sciences. Twelve adults participated in this three-week study.
Each of them drove hour every weekday. They used two modiﬁed
Volvos as well as multiple measures, including lane tracking for lateral
position, event recorder for a keyboard input, electrocardiogram for cardiac
inter-beat-intervals, a video camera for rearview mirror check, potentiom-
eter, speed radar, and distance laser. By comparing driving with and
without using mobile phones, they found: () diﬀerences in turn control
for light traﬃc, but no diﬀerence for heavy traﬃc; () no diﬀerence in
steering control for light traﬃc, but diﬀerences were found for heavy
traﬃc; () no diﬀerence in rearview mirror checking for light traﬃc, but
diﬀerences were found for heavy traﬃc; () no diﬀerence in car following
for both light and heavy traﬃc, but there was a speed change delay of
ms and braking delay of ms while using mobile phones; and ()
higher heart rate due to mental workload for both light and heavy traﬃc
while using mobile phones. This ﬁrst empirical study demonstrated two
important features in the very beginning of mobile phone use research.
First, it chose an urgent and timely issue. It focused on driving safety rather
than other common topics such as daily usage. It was published as early as
Wright, J. D. (). International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences (nd edn.).
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Brookhuis, K. A., de Vries, G., and de Waard, D. (). The eﬀects of mobile telephoning on
driving performance. Accident Analysis & Prevention, (): –.
Turkle, S. (). The Second Self: Computers and the Human Spirit. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

The Science of Mobile Phone Behavior
2
13:08:25, subject to the Cambridge Core

when the mobile phone was just starting to be used by ordinary users
in developed countries. Second, it used rigorous experimental methods to
collect multiple data rather than questionnaire surveys or other commonly
observed data collection methods.
.
The Intellectual Adolescence (–)
Since , the science of mobile phone behavior has been growing
exponentially. To further estimate the scope of the research literature in
this ﬁeld, a few years ago, we conducted a scoping review entitled “The
science of cell phone use: Its past, present, and future.”In this review, we
searched nineteen databases, including PsycINFO, PubMed, and ERIC.
Keywords such as cell phone use, mobile phone use, cellular phone use,
smartphone use, iPhone use, behavior, and behavioral science were
searched in diﬀerent variations and combinations. In addition, we also
conducted a dialog search with senior university librarians to conﬁrm our
search results and contacted leading experts for their guidance and con-
sultation. Based on several speciﬁc exclusion and inclusion criteria, we
identiﬁed and conﬁrmed a total of ,publications from to 
that explicitly examined the use of mobile phones across various disciplines
in the behavioral sciences, such as medicine, education, psychology, soci-
ology, political science, and business. In alone, for example, jour-
nal articles on mobile phone behavior were published. Major research
journals that have published studies on mobile phone behavior include
Accident Analysis and Prevention, Human Factors, Traﬃc Injury Prevention,
Computers in Human Behavior, and Computers and Education. New jour-
nals exclusively publishing mobile phone behavior research are Mobile
Media & Communication, the International Journal of Mobile Communi-
cations, Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing, and the Inter-
national Journal of Interactive Mobile Technologies. On the basis of quality,
quantity, and inﬂuence of their work, leading researchers in the ﬁeld
include James Katz at Boston University, David Strayer at the University
of Utah, Naomi Baron at American University, Rich Ling at Telenor
R&D and the University of Michigan, Scott Campbell at the University
of Michigan, Nenagh Kemp at the University of Tasmania of Australia,
Anne McCartt at the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety of the United
Yan, Z., Chen, Q., and Yu, C. (). “The science of cell phone use: Its past, present, and future.”
International Journal of Cyber Behavior, Psychology and Learning (IJCBPL), (): –.
. The Science of Mobile Phone Behavior

2
13:08:25, subject to the Cambridge Core

States, and Mike Sharples at the University of Birmingham of the United
Kingdom.
For twenty-ﬁve years, researchers in ergonomics, medicine, sociology,
education, psychology, and various other disciplines have been extensively
examining how people use mobile phones and how mobile phone use
inﬂuences people’s lives. As a result, the science of mobile phone behavior
has produced broad and profound social impacts and implications for a
wide variety of areas, such as mobile phone use and brain tumors, phoning
during driving, mobile phone distraction, mobile phone addiction, m-
health, m-business, and m-learning.
The twenty-ﬁve-year-long history, current high productivity, and par-
ticularly promising future in the ﬁeld of mobile phone behavior research
justiﬁes a multi-volume encyclopedia project that synthesizes signiﬁcant
contributions of mobile phone research to the behavioral sciences.
The Encyclopedia of Mobile Phone Behavior was published in by
IGI Global. Nearly authors from almost forty countries across ﬁve
continental regions (Africa, the Americas, Asia, Europe, and Oceania) have
contributed to the Encyclopedia. Among these authors, besides pioneering
and leading experts, the majority of them are active researchers who have
published their empirical research in some of the best journals in more
than ten diﬀerent scientiﬁc disciplines, such as psychology, medicine,
business, education, communication, sociology, economics, political
science, law, and computer science. Through this Encyclopedia, these
researchers disseminated their research work to a worldwide readership
and at the same time more readers across the world can really beneﬁt from
their wisdom, knowledge, and expertise. Readers will be able to know
about both pioneering scholars and leading scholars of the science of
mobile phone behavior and the new generation of promising researchers
across the world.
The Encyclopedia is intended to produce a multi-volume authoritative
reference to synthesize the accumulated knowledge of mobile phone
behavior research. Speciﬁcally, it includes chapters that are arranged
alphabetically with twelve major category sections. It consists of four major
parts: () an introduction to the science of mobile phone behavior (under
the category of Discipline and Methodology); () four major sections
(under the categories of Activities and Processes, Eﬀects and Impacts,
Technologies and Apps, and Users and Special Population) that focus on
four fundamental elements involving mobile phone use (i.e., mobile
technologies, mobile users, mobile processes, and mobile eﬀects); () six
major sections (under the categories of Business and Commerce,

The Science of Mobile Phone Behavior
2
13:08:25, subject to the Cambridge Core

Communication and Daily Life, Education and Pedagogy, Health Care
and Medicine, Politics and Policy, Traﬃc and Transport) that focus on six
domains of mobile phone behavior (i.e., mobile business, mobile commu-
nication, mobile education, mobile health, mobile policy, and mobile
safety); and () a conclusion presenting mobile phone behavior across
diﬀerent countries in the mobile world (under the categories of Regions
and Countries). With this overall content structure, the Encyclopedia
provides a fundamental presentation of what the past, present, and future
of the science of mobile phone behavior is and how complex human
mobile phone behavior is.
It is foreseeable that the ﬁeld will continue its exponential growth in the
next decade due to both further fast development of mobile phone
technologies and the unprecedentedly ubiquitous and profound inﬂuence
of mobile phone use on human beings. Thus, we can state that mobile
phone behavior research is an emerged ﬁeld of study rather than an
emerging one, and it is completing its energetic, intellectual adolescence
and soon will start its even more prosperous adulthood.
.
Understanding Mobile Phone Behavior
.
Target Readers
The target readers of this book are individuals who are interested in
knowing about the profound eﬀects of mobile phones on human behavior.
They perhaps have been using mobile phones for years or may not even
own a mobile phone. They could be graduate and undergraduate students,
academic specialists, industrial developers and researchers, business profes-
sionals, policy makers, or grandparents who just had their own mobile
phones and are curious about various issues related to mobile phone use.
They could be in the ﬁelds of behavioral sciences, such as psychology,
communication, sociology, health care, business, or education, and are
interested in studying more about technologies and media in general and
mobile phone behavior in particular. Thus, given the wide readership, this
book features introductory-level comprehensive coverage with an interdis-
ciplinary orientation.
.
Intellectual Goals and Content Organization
Considering both our limited intuitive thinking shown in the informal
survey presented at the outset of this chapter and the last twenty-ﬁve years
. Understanding Mobile Phone Behavior

2
13:08:25, subject to the Cambridge Core

of development in the science of mobile phone behavior presented there-
after, we will set up two primary intellectual goals for us to accomplish
together after studying this book: readers will develop () a usable know-
ledge of the complexity of mobile phone behavior and () a workable skill to
analyze the complexity of mobile phone behavior. The ﬁrst goal sets the
stage for the second goal by providing basic concepts and tools for the
eﬀective analysis of mobile phone behavior. The second goal will help to
better achieve the ﬁrst goal by deepening the knowledge.
To achieve these two goals, this book is organized into four major
sections, as shown in Figure .. In the ﬁrst section, Chapter introduces
basic knowledge of mobile phones, mobile phone behavior, and mobile
phone behavior research and speciﬁes the two major goals. The second
section consists of four chapters, each discussing the four basic elements of
mobile phone behavior (users, technologies, activities, and eﬀects) to
develop the knowledge of the complexity of mobile phone behavior and
the skill to analyze this complexity. The third section also has four
chapters, presenting the four major domains of mobile phone behavior
(medicine, business, education, and everyday life) to further develop
readers’ knowledge of the complexity of mobile phone behavior and
readers’ skill in analyzing this complexity. The last section summarizes
the essential knowledge of the complexity of mobile phone behavior and
the core skill of analyzing the complexity of mobile phone behavior,
ending with two future goals of developing an advanced knowledge of
the complexity of mobile phone behavior and an eﬀective skill to analyze
this complexity. The content is organized in this way to ﬁrst introduce a
basic knowledge of mobile phone behavior, then break down this behavior
into four basic elements and apply them in major, real-life domains
involving mobile phone behavior. It is hoped that the general sequence
Intuitive thinking
Complex thinking
Understanding the 
complexity 
Analyzing the 
complexity
Daily observations
Empirical studies
Knowledge syntheses
Comparative analyses
Figure .
The Overall Organization of the Book

The Science of Mobile Phone Behavior
2
13:08:25, subject to the Cambridge Core

of moving from more basic issues to more complex topics will develop the
usable conceptual knowledge and the workable analytic skill in under-
standing the complexity of mobile phone behavior.
In addition, in order to achieve the two major goals of this book, each of
the main chapters from Chapter to Chapter follows a similar six-step
sequence:
Intuitive Thinking ►Daily Observations ►Empirical Studies ►
Knowledge Syntheses ►Comparative Analyses ►Complex Thinking.
Each major chapter will () start with intuitive thinking shown in a
mini-survey of actual real-life people I have met, then () present multiple
real-life cases to show readers some observed mobile phone behavior in the
real world, then () discuss multiple research articles to help readers see
speciﬁc scientiﬁc evidence, then () provide readers with several literature
reviews to show the real scope of the existing scientiﬁc knowledge, then ()
compare similar human behavior (e.g., users with disabilities or addictive
behavior) with other diﬀerent technologies (e.g., television, computer, and
the Internet) to further expand readers’ knowledge, and, ﬁnally, () end
with a summary of complex thinking of the given topic of that chapter.
This sequence is largely based on Daniel Kahneman’s intuitive judgement
theory. As we discussed earlier, this theory speciﬁed and explains two basic
systems of human thinking – intuitive thinking and rational thinking.
Intuitive thinking operates automatically with little eﬀort and arises from
heuristics and biases that lead to various human errors. Rational thinking
operates deliberately with considerable eﬀort and develops through learn-
ing, training, and education.
Note that this book will still use intuitive thinking, but will use complex
thinking instead of rational thinking to discuss initial and developed
knowledge of mobile phone behavior. This is because we consider complex
thinking to be a special type of rational thinking that focuses on the ability
to understand and analyze the complexity of a given object. In other
words, this book aims to help readers develop their complex thinking
about mobile phone behavior rather than their ﬂawless or perfect under-
standing of mobile phone behavior. It is hoped that this sequence in each
major chapter will help readers gradually develop from their intuitive
thinking based on their daily experiences to their complex thinking based
on the analysis and discussion of various kinds of materials presented in the
chapters. In fact, the overall book also started with intuitive thinking that a
group of graduate students had about mobile phone behavior and now
ends with a summary of complex thinking about mobile phone behavior
that readers are expected to achieve.
. Understanding Mobile Phone Behavior

2
13:08:25, subject to the Cambridge Core

.
The Style
Given the rapid growth and genuine interdisciplinary nature of scientiﬁc
knowledge of mobile phone behavior, deliberately, the book is not written
in a style of a presumably very knowledgeable senior scholar standing in
front of a group of students and giving a long lecture in a large lecture hall.
Instead, by design, it is written in a style of a series of intellectual dialogs
and discussions among a group of curious and analytic individuals who
attend a graduate proseminar or a professional seminar. Everyone partici-
pates in and contributes to the intellectual dialogs and discussions. As a
deliberative practice routine throughout the book, we will use WE as the
intellectual group instead of YOU as the listeners and I as the speaker. It is
my sincere hope that WE as a group work and grow together to develop a
better understanding of the complexity of mobile phone behavior and to
help millions of mobile phone users across the world beneﬁt more from
our scientiﬁc knowledge and complex thinking.

The Science of Mobile Phone Behavior
2
13:08:25, subject to the Cambridge Core


Mobile Phone Users
Outline
.
Initial Thinking: Responses from Three Graduate Students
.
Daily Observations: From the Tsarnaev Brothers to Jorma Ollila
.
The Tsarnaev Brothers and the Farook Couple
.
A -Year-Old Boy and a Group of Seniors
.
Danny Bowman and Matthew Schneps
.
Barack Obama and Bill Gates
.
Martin Cooper and Jorma Ollila
.
Empirical Studies: From Penetration Rates to Multiple User Groups
.
PEW and ITU: How Many Mobile Phone Users?
.
Teens Sexting Explicit Sexual Images
.
Young Australian Users
.
Users with Diﬀerent Personalities
.
Users with Dyslexia
.
Users Who Plan to Use Mobile Phones While Driving
.
Multiple User Groups Involved in Mobile Phone School Policy
.
Knowledge Syntheses: From Users in Latin America to Problematic Users
.
Encyclopedia Chapters: Users in Latin America and with Visual Impairment
.
Review Articles: Young Users and Radiation Exposure, and Problematic Users
.
Comparative Analyses: From TV Viewers to Mobile Phone Users
.
Reviewing Users of Four Technologies
.
Comparing Users of Four Technologies
.
Complex Thinking: Diverse Users, Complex Behavior
.
Initial Thinking: Responses from Three Graduate Students
“Who are the mobile phone users? Please give three to ﬁve short examples
coming to your mind as quickly as you can.” This is a simple question

3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

I asked three graduate students to solicit their intuitive thoughts about
mobile phone users. Below are the answers I received:
:
Mobile phone users I think are adolescents, young
adults, adults, and the elderly. I think all people except toddlers would be
users of the mobile phone.
:
I think everyone is a mobile phone user, they just may
use it for diﬀerent things. Even little kids use mobile phones to play games
and for entertainment. At this point, I don't know a single person who does
not own a mobile phone.
:
I think almost everyone is a mobile phone user now
(% of US population?). Therefore, I think the diﬀerence should be who
spends more time on mobile phones and who spends less time on mobile
phones. People who spend more time on mobile phones: younger people,
especially college students, business men (or any other job that requires
extensive communication), people who travel a lot (spend a lot of time
on the road, can’t access a laptop), and less self-regulated people. People
who spend less time on mobile phones: older age group (i.e., +)
who were less educated, people in rural areas, low home income, oﬃce
workers (can’t use cell phone during working, i.e., :to :), and busy
housewives.
These responses, from relatively brief to relatively elaborated, are par-
ticularly interesting for at least two reasons. First, in terms of similarities,
they all considered that mobile phone users are everyone or almost every-
one. Responder A indicated that: “I think all people except toddlers would
be users of the mobile phone.” Responder B indicated that: “At this point,
I don't know a single person who does not own a mobile phone.” And
Responder C indicated that: “I think almost everyone is a mobile phone
user now (% of US population?).” Second, in terms of diﬀerences,
while they all agreed that almost everyone is a mobile phone user, each of
them focused on diﬀerent aspects of mobile phone users to categorize
users. Responder A focused on the ages of diﬀerent users, Responder
B focused on the ways in which diﬀerent users use mobile phones, and
Responder C focused on amount of time spent on mobile phones by
diﬀerent users.
Looking at these responses, many of us might feel that these responses
are quite good and that we ourselves might come up with similar answers.
However, some of us might come up with more questions: e.g., What
do the similarities and diﬀerences of these responses tell us? Do their
responses represent correct, thoughtful, and comprehensive understand-
ing of mobile phone users? Is it true that almost all people are mobile

Mobile Phone Users
3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

phone users? Is it true that almost all people are mobile phone users, but
diﬀer in ages, ways of use, or time spent?
In this chapter, we will address these questions and expand our initial
understanding to a much more complex understanding of mobile phone
users. Speciﬁcally, we will () discuss a few examples from real life, ()
analyze a few studies from the research literature, () synthesize the current
knowledge in this area, and () compare users of diﬀerent technologies
(e.g., television, computer, and the Internet). By the end of the chapter, we
should be able to see that our initial knowledge actually only covers a small
portion of the current knowledge of mobile phone users, and mobile
phone users perhaps are one of the most complex concepts for us to deﬁne,
understand, study, and apply.
.
Daily Observations: From the Tsarnaev Brothers to Jorma Ollila
Mobile phone users could be easily and simply deﬁned as anyone who
owns or uses a mobile phone. However, from the real-life examples
presented below, we might see that mobile phone users are much more
complex than this simple deﬁnition suggests.
.
The Tsarnaev Brothers and the Farook Couple
In April ,Tamerlan Tsarnaev and Dzhokhar Tsarnaev used their cell
phones to detonate two pressure cooker bombs as improvised explosive
devices near the ﬁnish line of the th Boston Marathon. This terrorist
attack led to six deaths and injuries. Based on the deﬁnition, the
Tsarnaev brothers are mobile phone users. They purchased mobile phones,
owned the phones, and used them for their daily communication and
special ignition of bombs. Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, the younger brother, even
deliberately smashed his cell phone to destroy possible critical information
in it before he was arrested. However, they are not typical mobile phone
users. They are criminal mobile phone users.
During this terrorist attack, there were actually various kinds of mobile
phone users involved. For example, many marathon runners used their
mobile phones to text a safe message to their families. Friends identiﬁed a
victim who was a Chinese student after texting her but never receiving a
See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boston_Marathon_bombing.
. Daily Observations

3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

reply from her cell phone. The police decided to search for the Tsarnaev
brothers in Watertown by tracking a cell phone belonging to Danny – a
middle-aged man whose car was stolen by the brothers from a gas station
and whose cell phone remained in his car when the brothers drove it away.
Khairullozhon Matanov, a close friend of the brothers, deleted hundreds of
documents and threw away his cell phone in order to hide his relationship
with the brothers. In short, they were all mobile phone users, but diﬀered
signiﬁcantly in many ways.
In December ,Syed Rizwan Farook and Tashfeen Malik killed
fourteen people and injured twenty-two in a terrorist attack in San
Bernardino, California. During the terrorist attack, Farook coordinated
the shooting with his wife via his cell phone and even tried to use it to
ignite self-made bombs. The two killers later died in a shoot-out with
police.
After the attack, the FBI asked San Bernardino County, who had issued
the mobile phone to government employee Farook for his work, to reset
the password to the shooter’s iCloud account in order to acquire data from
the iCloud backup. However, this rendered the phone unable to back up
recent data to iCloud unless the original password was entered. After the
attack, the police recovered the phone intact, but could not open it due to
its password protection feature. All the data in the phone would be
eliminated after ten failed password attempts. The FBI wanted Apple to
create new software that would enable the FBI to unlock the iPhone C.
Apple declined to create the software in order to protect the security of all
other iPhone users. This became the well-known court case between the
FBI and Apple.
Based on the typical deﬁnition of mobile phone users, Farook, the
husband, might not be considered to be a mobile phone user because he
did not own a mobile phone. He used an iPhone C, but this phone was
issued by his governmental employer. During this terrorist attack, Farook
tried to use it to ignite self-made bombs. Furthermore, what makes this
case more complicated is that there are three major parties involved: San
Bernardino County as the owner of the phone, who did not know the
password; the FBI, who possessed the phone for criminal investigation but
could not open it; and Apple, who were capable of opening and using the
phone, but did not want to do so in order to protect the product security
for all other iPhone users.
See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/_San_Bernardino_attack.

Mobile Phone Users
3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

.
A -Year-Old Boy and a Group of Seniors
One day, I observed a very young boy outside of a dance classroom. He
took a mobile phone quickly from his mother, skillfully touched a few
buttons on the screen, and played a children’s game on the phone. His
mother told me that her son was year old and loved to play games on the
phone. He did not own the phone, he might not have known how to use
the phone well, but he knew exactly how to play his games on the mobile
phone – his favorite toy.
Another day, I also saw a group of senior citizens, about to years
old, in an Apple store. They had just purchased iPhones from the store and
had not yet used them. Each of them held an iPhone in their hands and sat
around a table and listened to a technician from the store about how to use
their phones. I was very impressed by their desire and enthusiasm to learn
how to use this new technology given their ages.
The -year-old boy should be considered a mobile phone user, even
though he might only have known how to play games on the phone and
did not own a mobile phone. The group of seniors should also be
considered mobile phone users: they owned a mobile phone and were just
learning how to use it. They might be among the newest mobile phone
user groups. Thus, in terms of age diﬀerences, the boy might be among the
youngest users and these seniors might be among the oldest users. Besides
age, mobile phone users might have other important demographic
characteristics such as gender, ethnicity, education, social class, religion,
culture, and country origin.
.
Danny Bowman and Matthew Schneps
Danny Bowmanis a teenager from the United Kingdom who was
extremely obsessed with selﬁes, a self-portrait photograph typically taken
with a mobile phone camera and often shared on Facebook or Instagram.
Danny had an iPhone and would spend hours a day taking up to
photos of himself, constantly trying to take the perfect selﬁe. How-
ever, one day, he realized he could not achieve the perfect selﬁe and
attempted to commit suicide. By deﬁnition, Danny is a typical mobile
phone user because he owns and uses his mobile phone. However, his
addiction to the selﬁe made him an atypical mobile phone user.
See http://time.com//selﬁe-addict-attempts-suicide.
. Daily Observations

3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

Matthew Schneps is a Professor of Physics at Harvard University. He
has been leading a group of researchers in his lab to study how to use
technologies to help those with learning disabilities. He also has dyslexia, a
reading disorder with various diﬃculties in spelling words, pronouncing
words, reading proﬁciency, or understanding text. Thus, he developed a
special way to read and text with his mobile phone. In recent years, he and
his collaborators published several articles examining how mobile phones
can help dyslexic people read better. By common deﬁnition, he is a mobile
phone user, but he is a very special user with dyslexia who studies how to
help other dyslexic mobile phone users.
Danny Bowman and Professor Matthew Schneps are two extremely
special mobile phone users, one addicted to selﬁes and another with
dyslexia. However, they share one common feature: they are special mobile
phone users with psychological or behavioral diﬀerences. Across the world,
mobile phone users could have a wide variety of psychological diﬀerences in
physical, neurological, cognitive, social, moral, and behavioral aspects.
Many of them are special mobile phone users, either with various disabil-
ities (e.g., deaf, blind) or various talents or giftedness.
.
Barack Obama and Bill Gates
President Barack Obama is well known for using BlackBerry for over a
decade. After becoming president in , he had to use a highly secured
Blackberry developed speciﬁcally by the National Security Agency (NSA)
to protect national security. Other users of the highly secured mobile
phones included Vice President Joe Biden, First Lady Michelle Obama,
and Obama’s top advisers. President Obama recently borrowed an iPhone
from his staﬀback in and posted his ﬁrst Twitter message: “Hello
Twitter! This is Barack. Really!” President Obama was a user of three
mobile phones: He owned a regular BlackBerry, he then used a very special
highly secured BlackBerry, and he borrowed an iPhone for tweeting. As a
political leader, he was a special phone user, like German President Angela
Merkel, whose mobile phone was monitored by the NSA, or Chinese
President Xi, who presents mobile phones made by China as gifts to his
special guests. These political leaders in the world are all among a special
group of mobile phone users.
As a world technology leader rather than a world political leader, the
former Microsoft CEO Bill Gates used an iPhone s while traveling for
his philanthropic endeavor. However, the Gates family has an informal
family policy regarding mobile phones: their children, Jennifer Katharine

Mobile Phone Users
3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

(born in ), Rory John (born in ), and Phoebe Adele (born in
), were not allowed mobile phones until they were years old.
Several IT CEOs in the United States also have a similar family policy
regarding mobile phones for their children. Based on the typical deﬁnition,
Gates is obviously a mobile phone user, but his children younger than
are not. Many other young children whose families do not allow them
to have mobile phones too early are not typical mobile phone users.
However, these children see other people using phones, are familiar with
mobile phone use, and really want to have their own phones, and thus
might be categorized as a special group of mobile phone users, the hidden or
would-be mobile phone users, just like the Russian President Vladimir
Putin, who is famous for claiming to have no mobile phone.
.
Martin Cooper and Jorma Ollila
Martin Cooper, often known as the father of mobile phones, is a mobile
phone user. He used a Motorola DynaTac and made the ﬁrst public
mobile phone call in . He probably is one of the earliest mobile
phone users, in addition to being one of the earliest mobile phone
developers. Similar to Martin Cooper, Jorma Jaakko Ollila is a Finnish
entrepreneur and a mobile phone pioneer. He was chairman (–)
and CEO (–) of Nokia Corporation and was credited with
turning the company into the then world's largest handset maker. Again,
he is a mobile phone user and mobile phone developer. Like Martin
Cooper and Jorma Ollila, there are many special mobile phone users
who are mobile phone designers, mobile phone engineers, and mobile
phone entrepreneurs. They are the superstars of mobile phone users.
To sum up, from these ten real-life examples brieﬂy discussed above, we
can see that the concept of mobile phone users is more complex than we
might have earlier assumed. These examples can be used to show a general
typology of mobile phone users: users who are bad vs. good; and users with
diﬀerent demographic, behavioral, and special characteristics. Compared
with the three intuitive responses presented at the outset of this chapter,
we can see substantial diﬀerences. First, it might be true that all people are
mobile phone users in general, but it is important to be aware that these
users can be good or bad users. None of the three student responders was
clearly aware of this and generally and implicitly assumed that all mobile
See http://betanews.com////bill-gates-loves-his-new-iphone-s-can-now-beat-bono-at-candy-
crush/.
. Daily Observations

3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

phone users are good. Second, age is one feature, but not all demographic
features of users, such as gender, ethnicity, and social economic status,
were considered by the graduate students. Third, whether a person uses a
mobile phone or not is a natural feature of users, but it is more complex in
real life: considering the examples of the FBI, Apple, and IT CEOs
discussed above, users are much more complicated. Fourth, whether one
spends a little or a lot of time using phones is an interesting observation,
but it should not be a deﬁning feature of mobile phone users. Finally, there
are various special groups of users such as users with disabilities or political
leaders such as President Obama.
.
Empirical Studies: From Penetration Rates
to Multiple User Groups
Having discussed some real-life examples of mobile phone users, let us
now consider how researchers examine these users. In the ﬁeld of the
science of mobile phone behavior, researchers have been examining behav-
ior among diﬀerent users for years. There exists extensive literature on
user-based mobile phone behavior. In this section, we will discuss ﬁve
examples.
.
PEW and ITU: How Many Mobile Phone Users?
As presented at the beginning of this chapter, the three individuals all
believed that everyone or almost everyone is a mobile phone user. Is this
true? Is there any scientiﬁc evidence to support this? Where is the scientiﬁc
evidence? Is it true that almost everyone is a mobile phone user in the
United States? Is it true that almost everyone is a mobile phone user in the
world? These questions should be among the ﬁrst to address when we
study mobile phone users.
In general, two of the best and most cited sources in estimating the
number of mobile phone users are the International Telecommunication
Union (ITU) and the Pew Research Center (PEW). Google Our Mobile
Planet is another source that tends to provide detailed data, but does so
inconsistently. Normally, the index commonly used is penetration rates of
mobile phones. In the business literature, penetration rate is typically used
to measure the performance of brand penetration or market penetration,
and generally means the percentage of the relevant population that has
Ansoﬀ, H. I. (). “Strategies for diversiﬁcation,” Harvard Business Review, (): –.

Mobile Phone Users
3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

purchased a product or a service at least once in the time period under
study.For mobile phones, if a country has a percent mobile phone
penetration rate, that generally means percent of the population in that
country has used a mobile phone.
PEW reports on USA. The best estimation of the penetration rate of
mobile phones in the United States is provided by the Pew Research
Center. PEW was created in as a separate operating subsidiary of
The Pew Charitable Trusts, an independent, non-proﬁt organization
founded in by the Pew family. It conducts policy analysis on public
opinion polling, demographic research, media content analysis, and other
empirical social science research. It is well known for its high-quality
surveys on various important trends of technology use.
Based on PEW, in , percent of American adults owned a mobile
phone of some kind. Although these mobile devices are ubiquitous today,
the share of adults who own one has risen substantially since , when
PEW conducted its ﬁrst poll on cell phone ownership. At that time, only
percent of Americans owned a cell phone.The estimation of percent
penetration rate was based on two Pew Research Center surveys. The ﬁrst
survey was conducted in March through April, , among a national
sample of ,adults, ages and older, living in all ﬁfty US states and
the District of Columbia. A total of respondents were interviewed on a
landline telephone, and ,were interviewed on a cell phone, including
who had no landline telephone. For the second survey, the smart-
phone ownership data were based on telephone interviews conducted in
June through July, , among a national sample of ,adults, ages
and older, living in all ﬁfty US states and the District of Columbia.
A total of respondents were interviewed on a landline telephone, and
,were interviewed on a cell phone, including who had no
landline telephone.
PEW has used ownership to estimate the popularity of mobile phone
behavior. In the interview, participants were asked to respond to a simple
question: Do you have a cell phone? The main advantage of using
ownership as a measure of mobile phone behavior is being able to quickly
and simply see if one owns a phone or not. The main disadvantage is that
ownership is not a direct estimation of the number of mobile phone users.
See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Market_penetration.
PEW (factsheet). Monica Anderson, “Technology device ownership: ” (Pew Research Center,
October , ), available at: www.pewinternet.org////technology-device-ownership-
.
. Empirical Studies

3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

ITU reports on the world. For the penetration rate of mobile phones
in the world, the most comprehensive estimation is provided by ITU. ITU
is a United Nations specialized agency for information and communi-
cation technologies. Its main mission is to allocate global radio spectrum
and satellite orbits, develop the technical standards that ensure networks
and technologies seamlessly interconnect, and strive to improve access to
ICTs to underserved communities worldwide.
Based on ITU data, worldwide mobile phone subscriptions have grown
to .billion, representing .percent of the world’s population, com-
pared with .percent for traditional telephones, .percent for
computers at home, and .percent for Internet access at home
(ITU, ).
Here, ITU used subscription rather than ownership to estimate the
number of mobile phone users. Quite similar to traditional telephones, a
mobile phone user needs to not only buy a mobile phone (e.g., an iPhone
or Blackberry), but also subscribe to a mobile phone service provided by a
mobile phone network company (e.g., T-Mobile or Verizon Wireless) to
make the mobile phone active or workable. Based on World Bank data,
mobile subscriptions are subscriptions to a public mobile phone service
that provides access to the public switched telephone network (PSTN)
using cellular technology. Technically, PSTN is the underlying infrastruc-
ture network of all public telecommunication networks that are operated
by national, regional, or local telecommunication companies across the
world. It consists of telephone lines, ﬁber optic cables, microwave trans-
mission links, cellular networks, communications satellites, and undersea
telephone cables that are interconnected by switching centers to allow all
mobile and ﬁxed phones to communicate with each other.
Just like ownership, the number of mobile phone subscriptions is not
exactly the same as the number of mobile phone users. Based on an
estimation by Ericsson (February ),there were .billion mobile
subscriptions worldwide at the beginning of , but there are only
around .billion mobile users. This is because many users have several
subscriptions for diﬀerent devices. The main advantage of using subscrip-
tions to estimate the number of mobile phone users is that it is related to
current active use of mobile phones. However, the main disadvantage is
that it is based on the number of service subscriptions rather than a direct
estimation of mobile phone users.
See http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IT.CEL.SETS.P.
See www.ericsson.com/mobility-report.

Mobile Phone Users
3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

In summary, penetration, ownership, and subscription rates are all
relative approximations of the estimation of mobile phone users. It is a
complex issue and a challenging task to accurately estimate the number of
mobile phone users. However, two things are clear: mobile phones are
extremely popular; and not everyone is a mobile phone user. In the United
States, percent of adults have a cell phone. Across the world, percent
of the population is actively subscribing to a mobile phone service. But
exactly how many mobile phone users are in the United States or the
world? This is still a mysterious and puzzling question that remains to be
solved.
.
Teens Sexting Explicit Sexual Images
Having discussed the challenging issue surrounding how many mobile
users there are in the world, let us now discuss some speciﬁc groups of
mobile phone users.
The empirical article we will discuss is entitled “How often are teens
arrested for sexting? Data from a national sample of police cases.”In the
article, sexting was speciﬁcally deﬁned as a behavior when youth created and
distributed explicit sexual images that are legally considered to be child
pornography. The data were based on a mail survey with heads of law
enforcement agencies and a telephone interview with police oﬃcers in the
United States. The authors are Janis Wolak, David Finkelhor, and Kimberly
Mitchell, three well-established scholars in the area of crimes against chil-
dren at the University of New Hampshire. The article was published in
in Pediatrics, the oﬃcial journal of the American Academy of Pediat-
rics and the most cited journal in the ﬁeld of pediatrics.
In the study, the authors surveyed a nationally representative sample of
,law enforcement agencies for sexting cases handled in to 
in the United States and then interviewed investigating police oﬃcers for
cases. Further analysis of these cases indicated the following major
ﬁndings: () During to , about ,cases were handled by the
law enforcement agencies. () percent of these cases were serious
because either adult oﬀenders were involved or a youth’s sexting behavior
was intentionally harmful or really reckless. For instance, a girl, aged ,
sent a nude photo to her boyfriend. After they broke up, the boy, aged ,
used his cell phone to send the photo to about students. () percent
Wolak, J., Finkelhor, D., and Mitchell, K. J. (). “How often are teens arrested for sexting?
Data from a national sample of police cases,” Pediatrics, (): –.
. Empirical Studies

3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

of the cases were experimental for romantic relationships or sexual atten-
tion seeking. For instance, a boy, aged , received a video of another boy
masturbating. () Over percent of young sexters are to years old.
About percent of the cases involved sexual images showing genitals or
explicit sex acts. The majority of these sexual images were of themselves
and taken and distributed by themselves. () For over percent of the
cases, the sexual images were sent to others through cell phones, but not
posted onto the Internet.
This study shows the dark side of mobile phone users, especially young
mobile phone users. First, the study focused only on youth-produced
explicit sexual images, the heavy side of sexting behavior, rather than other
types of sexting behavior (e.g., sexting verbal messages). Even for this
heavy side of sexting behavior, the authors show two major types – severe
and experimental, with seven subtypes. Thus, youth’s sexting behavior is
diverse and complex. Second, these ,cases are only those that even-
tually came to the police. Many more cases, especially less serious ones,
might have been unnoticed by adults or not handled by police. Third,
mobile phones rather than stand-alone computers or stand-alone cameras
are the dominant means for young sexters to produce, store, and distribute
the sex images.
.
Young Australian Users
Age is the most often studied demographic feature of mobile phone users.
So is the original country of users. For the demographic features of mobile
users, we can use the article entitled “Over-connected? A qualitative
exploration of the relationship between Australian youth and their mobile
phones”by Walsh and her collaborators as a good example to show
the scientiﬁc evidence that reveals how young ages of users are associated
with speciﬁc mobile phone behavior, i.e., mobile addiction. Walsh is an
established counseling psychologist in Australia. She and her group have
published a series of articles focusing on mobile phone use among Austra-
lian youth. Thus, we have reasons to believe that she is an experienced
researcher before discussing the article.
In this study, the researchers aimed to ﬁnd potential indicators of
mobile phone addiction among Australian youth. To achieve this research
Walsh, S. P., White, K. M., and Young, R. M. (). “Over-connected? A qualitative exploration
of the relationship between Australian youth and their mobile phones,” Journal of Adolescence, 
(): –.

Mobile Phone Users
3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

goal, they used a research design called focus groups (interviewing a
speciﬁc group of individuals through natural conversations) to collect
qualitative data of self-reported experiences. They then analyzed emerging
themes and used speciﬁc addiction criteria as the framework for investi-
gating addiction indicators.
Speciﬁcally, they recruited thirty-two participants, aged between and
years old, with occupations ranging from ﬁrst-year, full-time psych-
ology students, to trade and oﬃce workers, to high-level white-collar
workers. They formed six focus groups. Participants were required to use
their mobile phone at least once per day. Participants used their phones
between one to more than twenty-ﬁve times per day and the length of
ownership varied from two months to eight years. They used a snowballing
method to recruit participants, i.e., researchers sending an email to initial
contacts and the initial contacts then forwarding the email to their own
networks.
They developed a guide for focus group discussions that contained a
series of discussion points and suggested questions. There were three types
of suggested questions, including: () general questions about mobile
phone use (e.g., What do you mainly use your mobile phone for?); ()
more speciﬁc situational questions (e.g., I’d like you to think of a situation
where you are asked to turn your mobile phone oﬀ. What do you do with
your phone in those situations?); and () questions related to problems
arising from use (e.g., Have you experienced any problems from using
your mobile phone? If so, can you explain what happened?) and addictive
use (e.g., Thinking about addiction, do you think that there is a potential
for people to become addicted to their phones? If so, what would be
happening that would indicate its occurrence?). Clearly, the third type of
question is most directly related to their research goal of ﬁnding potential
indicators of mobile phone addiction.
The procedure for collecting the focus group data had several features:
() The researcher moderated the entire focus group session. () The
session lasted approximately hour. () Each focus group was audio-
recorded for further analysis. () Participants were invited to discuss each
focus question within the group openly and honestly. The moderator
probed for clariﬁcation if required and used validation comments. () At
the conclusion of the discussion on each question, member checking was
conducted. Participants’ general comments and a summary of the discus-
sion were stated. This process ensured that the researcher understood
participants’ perspectives, and allowed participants to clarify or conﬁrm
any ambiguous points. () Following the conclusion of each focus group,
. Empirical Studies

3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

the researcher noted any questions that lacked clarity or resulted in new
themes being uncovered. As a result of this process, questions were reﬁned
over the duration of the focus groups. Data collection ceased once no new
themes emerged, indicating theoretical saturation had been reached.
From this study, there were two major ﬁndings. First, the Australian
youth discussed numerous beneﬁcial functions of using mobile phones to
users (e.g., safety and convenience) as an intrinsic part of most young
people’s lives. For instance, a -year-old female said that her phone really
becomes a part of her because it’s with her more than anything else in the
world. Second, potential indicators of mobile phone addiction emerged
from the focus group discussion and some young people are extremely
attached to their mobile phone with early symptoms of behavioral addic-
tion. The most frequently mentioned early symptoms in participants’
discussions include: () cognitive and behavioral salience (e.g., a female
wakes up and checks her phone right away. Then after having a shower,
she checks the phone again). () Conﬂict with other activities, but not
interpersonal conﬂict (e.g., a participant said that if someone texts him, he
stops what he is doing and texts back). () Enthusiasm and relief (e.g., a
young girl discussed that when someone wants to talk to her she just feels
anxious or excited and wants to answer it). () Loss of control or tolerance
(e.g., a participant tells herself not to call anyone anymore, but she keeps
calling others. She does not even know when she does it). () Withdrawal
(e.g., a participant talked about if no one has contacted her she gets really
depressed and feels that no one loves her). () Relapse and reinstatement
(e.g., one young woman mentioned that when she has big phone bills she
thinks about cutting down, but for years she has never gotten her bill
much lower).
This study has multiple strengths. () It collects qualitative data about
young users from Australia that are rich, unique, intriguing, and
informative rather than often-observed general survey data. () It con-
ducts a thoughtful and well-executed focus group study. () It used
Brown’s criteria as a framework to code the data and thus enhance its
theoretical base.
It has also a few weaknesses. () The one-year requirement for partici-
pation in the study might be too short and should be longer, given that
percent of Australian youths use mobile phones and the research goal of
the study is to ﬁnd addictive precursors. () While using the speciﬁc
addiction criteria is useful, the existing mobile phone addiction research
and the existing Internet addiction research should be used to develop
more speciﬁc questions rather than general questions. () The grounded

Mobile Phone Users
3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

theory approach, as the author pointed out, should be used to identify
authentic themes from the data. () Given the as low as to percent
Internet addiction rate, it might not be feasible to ﬁnd true symptoms of
addiction among regular populations or ordinary students. It is diﬃcult to
distinguish addiction from excessive behavior. For the current sample, it is
not surprising to observe low levels of addiction indicators rather than the
typical addiction level that meets the clinical standard of addiction. ()
Given the pilot nature of the study and the predetermined criteria, it is an
overstatement to claim that “results will provide a solid foundation for
developing a targeted investigation of mobile phone addiction using the
speciﬁc indicators identiﬁed in this study.” However, these weaknesses are
understandable given that this qualitative study was conducted in ,
relatively early for this type of study.
From the perspective of mobile phone users, there are two most inspir-
ing contributions of the study. First, the study suggests that young
Australian mobile phone users might experience a dynamic process between
positive attachment and negative over-attachment to mobile phones.
Young mobile phone use might start with a positive emotional attachment
when using mobile phones, and then the positive attachment may develop
into negative addiction. In other words, some of these young Australian
mobile phone users are not mobile phone addicts right away when they
have their mobile phones. Second, it provides detailed qualitative data
about six types of early addiction symptoms of young Australian users
rather than general survey data that we have seen too often in the literature.
It is always useful to ﬁnd the initial identiﬁcation of symptoms of mobile
phone addiction to investigate the precursors of mobile phone addiction in
young people rather than to see the clinical symptoms so that prevention
and intervention can take place in a timely manner. In summary, mobile
phone users are diverse and complex, and this article enriches our under-
standing of mobile phone users by introducing two speciﬁc demographic
features of users (i.e., younger Australian users in terms of age and country)
and describing their six speciﬁc early symptoms of mobile phone addiction
(e.g., withdrawal and relapse). Here, Bill Gates might be right to allow his
children to have mobile phones after they turn so that they can use the
phones more appropriately.
.
Users with Diﬀerent Personalities
The example discussed above focuses on demographic characteristics of
mobile phone users. The next example we will discuss focuses on behavioral
. Empirical Studies

3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

or psychological characteristics. In methodological terms, the former is about
variables that are “ﬁxed” and normally cannot be changed or modiﬁed,
whereas the latter is about random variables that can be changed or modiﬁed
through prevention and intervention.
The title of the article is “Correlating personality and actual phone
usage: Evidence from psychoinformatics.”The lead author, Christian
Montag, is a biological psychologist at the University of Ulm in Germany.
His publications mainly focus on using genetics and neuroscience to study
psychiatry such as depression and addiction to the Internet or games and
his article is his ﬁrst in studying mobile phone behavior.
In this study, the authors attempted to test a hypothesis that users with
higher levels of extraversion should be associated with more frequent use of
the mobile phone (e.g., incoming and outcoming calls, length of telephone
calls, and the number of diﬀerent persons directly contacted).
To test this hypothesis, the authors recruited forty-nine undergraduate
students from Germany. The design of the study was straightforward.
Each student had to have their own smartphone already. A special app
called Menthal was installed on their phones to collect the mobile phone
data automatically. They also asked the participating students to complete
the German version of the Big Five Personality Questionnaire as another
set of independent variables. In personality psychology, “The Big Five”
typically refers to ﬁve personality traits, including openness to experience
(e.g., a person who is quick to understand things), conscientiousness (e.g.,
a person who is always prepared), extraversion (e.g., a person who feels
comfortable around people), agreeableness (e.g., a person who feels others'
emotions), and neuroticism (e.g., a person who gets upset easily). They
assessed these ﬁve personality factor scores as independent variables and
ten types of mobile phone behavior (e.g., call in count, call out duration,
SMS in participants, and SMS out length) as dependent variables. The
study took ﬁve weeks to complete.
Their major ﬁndings include that: () All ten calling variables (e.g., call
in count, call out count, and call miss count) are positively and signiﬁ-
cantly related to extraversion. Only two calling behaviors (call out duration
and call total duration) are related to conscientiousness. Thus, certain
personality characteristics such as extraversion and conscientiousness did
make various kinds of mobile phone calls more often. () Diﬀerent from
Montag, C., Błaszkiewicz, K., Lachmann, B. et al. (). “Correlating personality and actual
phone usage,” Journal of Individual Diﬀerences, (): –.

Mobile Phone Users
3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

calling behavior, seven texting behaviors (e.g., SMS in count, SMS out
count, SMS total count, and SMS in length) are positively and signiﬁ-
cantly related to all the ﬁve personality factors. SMS in length and
conscientiousness were related negatively.
This study has multiple strengths. () It pioneered a method to collect
big data automatically via an app. () The unique data collection process is
thoughtful and clearly presented, including recording, extracting, categor-
izing, and selecting. () The results are particularly informative in revealing
the signiﬁcant diﬀerences among ﬁve personality factors, especially extra-
version, and the signiﬁcant diﬀerences between calling behavior and text-
ing behavior.
However, this study has several weaknesses. () The data analysis cannot
test the hypothesis. It should have compared all the ﬁve personality factors
to show why extraversion rather than the other four factors is particularly
important to users’ calling or texting behavior. () The regression analysis
did not report model ﬁt, used extraversion scores as the predictor based on
the reason of technical inconvenience only, and justiﬁed using personality
as the predictor, but actually used it as an outcome variable. This is partly
due to the beginning stage of analyzing big data, where collecting data is
strong, but analyzing data is weak. For the future, an eﬀective method of
analyzing a large number of outcomes should be developed and used.
However, despite these data analysis limitations, the study contributed
to the current knowledge by using big data to show signiﬁcant diﬀerences
in how extraversion is related to calling and texting behavior. In other
words, it is important to know how diﬀerent personality factors play a role
and how diﬀerent types of mobile phone behavior, calling or texting, play
their roles. From this study, we can develop a speciﬁc understanding of
mobile phone users regarding diﬀerent personalities rather than a general
knowledge.
.
Users with Dyslexia
Mobile phone users are extremely diverse, given that nowadays almost
everyone owns, uses, or plays on one or more than one mobile phone.
They have diﬀerent demographics (e.g., age, gender, race, SES, religion,
education), diﬀerent characteristics (e.g., personality, intelligence, atti-
tude, motivation), and they show diﬀerent types of mobile phone behav-
ior. Among the existing empirical research on diverse mobile phone users
is a particularly interesting experimental study conducted recently by
Matthew Schneps and his collaborators. Its title is “Shorter lines facilitate
. Empirical Studies

3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

reading in those who struggle.”Matthew Schneps is a Professor of
Physics at Harvard University and an individual with dyslexia himself.
Dyslexia generally refers to a neurological and genetically based reading
disability. His current publications focus on how to use mobile devices to
help dyslexic individuals read text.
In this study, the authors primarily asked one central research question:
Is the smaller phone-sized screen of an iPod better than the larger book-
sized screen of an iPad for individuals with dyslexia to read text? Mobile
phones typically have a much smaller screen, and each line of text is much
shorter; whereas computers or tablets typically have larger screens similar
to a conventional book size, and each line of text is much longer. For
individuals with dyslexia who have diﬃculties reading text, would it be a
new challenge to further intervene with their reading struggles or a new
opportunity to help them read text on the small screen of a mobile phone?
To answer this question empirically, the researchers recruited twenty-
seven high-school students with lifelong histories of reading struggles at a
school exclusively for students with language disabilities. The reading
materials used in the study were sixteen non-ﬁction passages, each
words in total. In this meticulously and carefully designed experi-
mental study, the authors used a regular within-subject design. Each
student read the sixteen passages in two inter-letter spacing patterns
(normal vs. spaced), two reading devices (iPod vs. iPad), and two hand
positions (hand holding vs. without hand holding). To avoid the ordering
eﬀect, the order of the passages to read and the assignments to diﬀerent
conditions was arranged in the orthogonal Latin square sequence. This
generated three independent variables: device, crowding, and hand-
position. Students’ reading was assessed based on seven aspects of their
eye movement data recorded by eye tracking equipment, leading to seven
dependent variables: reading speed in words per minutes (faster = better);
number of ﬁxations (less = better); number of regressive saccades (less =
better); number of ineﬃcient saccades (less = better); number of gaze
motions up (lower = better); number of gaze motions down (lower =
better); and number of gaze motions oﬀ-page (lower = better). In addition,
each participant was asked to recall the details of the passages they read and
assess for ﬁdelity on a four-point scale (higher = better).
They used hierarchical linear modeling to analyze the data and found no
hand-position eﬀects, some text-spacing eﬀects, and signiﬁcant eﬀects in
Schneps, M. H., Thomson, J. M., Sonnert, G. et al. (). “Shorter lines facilitate reading in those
who struggle,” PloS one, (): e.

Mobile Phone Users
3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

seven out of eight reading performance variables, indicating the iPod
condition leads to faster reading speed, more eﬃcient eye movements,
fewer reading errors, and better reading comprehension. Their major
ﬁndings suggest that reading using a small screen resulted in substantial
beneﬁts in reading performance for students with dyslexia. This beneﬁt
could be due to the reason that short lines on the small screen reduce
crowdedness or density in each line of the text to dyslexia students, which
thus makes their reading process easier, quicker, and better.
Overall, this study has several strengths. () It used the within-subject
experimental design rather than cross-sectional design that generates
experimental evidence; () it used the mutually orthogonal Latin squares
to deal with ordering eﬀects; () it used multiple dependent variables to
assess multiple aspects of reading rather than just one; () it collected eye
movement data rather than often-observed, self-reported data; () it ana-
lyzed data by controlling for potential confounding variables such as visual
attention span and previous reading abilities; and () it used experimental
design to rule out other factors, such as line spacing, letter spacing, and
line width. Its limitations include: () its relatively small sample size of
twenty-seven students rather than multiple groups of dyslexic people;
() lack of control groups; () lack of variations of line widths to estimate
the line-widths eﬀect; () not investigating attention and crowding in
dyslexia under conditions of gaze motion; and () no diﬀerent oral and
written languages were tested.
Mobile reading among regular users is rapidly increasing, as part of the
mobile reading revolution, and is becoming a particularly promising and
emerging area of research, but the research on mobile reading for users with
special needs is particularly sparse. It discovers beneﬁts that we normally do
not expect. Its implications indicate large potentials due to the ﬂexibility
aﬀorded by mobile phones for providing a critical advantage: electronic text
can easily adapt to the needs of individuals. Therefore, by reinventing
reading in this mobile era, everyone may be able to gain, and impairments
in reading may cease to be a barrier for many people with dyslexia. For these
reasons, overall, this study provides a good example of m-user research, and
made scientiﬁc contributions to the mobile phone behavior literature by
pioneering the area of mobile phone reading (m-reading). It provided
experimental evidence of how using iPods can improve multiple aspects of
reading performance for dyslexic students, a special group of mobile phone
users. In short, can readers with dyslexia use or beneﬁt from mobile phones?
Yes, they can, but beneﬁts should be speciﬁc and complex rather than
general and simple. Here, we can learn about mobile phone users from
. Empirical Studies

3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

the perspective of disability, especially the unexpected unique beneﬁts of
using mobile phones for a special population.
.
Users Who Plan to Use Mobile Phones While Driving
Besides common demographic and general behavior characteristics, char-
acteristics of special groups of mobile phone users such as those of drivers,
patients, and politicians are widely studied. Here, we introduce an article
entitled “An examination of the factors that inﬂuence drivers’ willingness
to use hand-held mobile phones.”It focuses on characteristics of a group
of users who use mobile phones while driving. While there is little infor-
mation about the ﬁrst author as a student author, the corresponding
author, Dr. Ioni Lewis, is a counseling/health psychologist in Australia.
Her several publications focus on mobile phones and driving. The article
was published in a journal with an unusual name called Transportation
Research Part F. The journal of Transportation Research was one of the
earliest and best journals that have been publishing strong research on
calling while driving since and later was divided into six journals to
focus on speciﬁc topics. These speciﬁc journals are: Part A: Policy and
Practice; Part B: Methodological Issues; Part C: Emerging Technologies; Part
D: Transport and Environment; Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review;
and Part F: Traﬃc Psychology and Behavior.
In this study, the authors attempted to test three hypotheses about
whether () situation-based external factors (e.g., urgency while driving),
() intention-based internal factors (e.g., planned behavior), and ()
personality-based internal factors (e.g., extraversion) are related to willing-
ness to use a mobile phone while driving. The research motivation is that
hand-held mobile phone use while driving is illegal in Australia, yet many
drivers persist with this behavior.
To test these hypotheses, the authors used a repeated measures design
(i.e., testing the same participants multiple times) and developed a
scenario-based survey (i.e., asking participants to respond to four diﬀerent
driving scenarios). They recruited Australian undergraduate students.
Hierarchical regression analyses were used to analyze the data. Speciﬁcally,
the outcome variable is the willingness to use mobile phones while driving
in the next three months. The predictors are time urgency while driving,
Rozario, M., Lewis, I., and White, K. M. (). “An examination of the factors that inﬂuence
drivers’ willingness to use hand-held mobile phones,” Transportation Research Part F: Traﬃc
Psychology and Behaviour, (): –.

Mobile Phone Users
3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

passenger presence while driving, planned behavior, extraversion, and
neuroticism. The control variables included age and gender (included in
the data analysis), traﬃc density, and weather conditions (included in the
scenario instruction). The study was conducted in a scenario-based survey
format in a classroom setting using the questionnaire consisting of the
planned behavior scale and the personality scale under four scenarios.
The study found that, for this group of Australian undergraduate
students who plan to use their own mobile phones while driving, multiple
characteristics rather than one single characteristic are needed to identify
them. Speciﬁcally, () these mobile phone users’ beliefs regarding their
favorable behavior, their social norms, and their ability to perform are
signiﬁcant predictors of drivers’ willingness to use a mobile phone, ()
neuroticism and extraversion are not signiﬁcant predictors of drivers’
willingness to use a mobile phone, and () passenger presence, but not
time urgency, are signiﬁcant moderators with three planned behavior
variables (i.e., favorable behavior, social norms, and ability to perform),
but not two personality variables (i.e., neuroticism and extraversion).
The study has several strengths. () This is a well-designed, well-
executed, and well-written study. () It uses a repeated measures design
which is better than simple cross-sectional, survey-based studies. () It
controls several potential confounding factors. () Its data analysis is
careful. () Hierarchical regression analysis is appropriate and eﬀective. ()
It uses the scenarios-based survey. () It uses a counterbalanced sequence
to run experiments. () It draws on two theoretical models – the Theory of
Planned Behavior and the Prototype Willingness Model. () It distin-
guished between spontaneous behavior, habitual behavior, and planned
behavior.
Its weaknesses include that: () it focuses on willingness, but not actual
behavior; and () it still relies on using the self-reported data rather than
objective observational data. Although the research questions match the
research design, it is not real-life, true observation, and thus less authentic
in order to have good ecological validity.
From the perspective of user-based mobile phone behavior, this study
shows another aspect of its complexity. First, it concerns a special group of
mobile phone users: Australian undergraduate students who plan to use
their own mobile phones while driving. It is not easy to use one single
common demographic or behavioral characteristic (e.g., age or intelli-
gence) to label them. Second, a complex combination of multiple charac-
teristics is needed to identify them. These characteristics might include
their behavioral tendencies and personality traits and might be directly or
. Empirical Studies

3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

indirectly related to their demographic features such as age and gender and
their reactions to speciﬁc situations such as passenger presence, time
urgency, traﬃc density, and weather conditions.
.
Multiple User Groups Involved in Mobile Phone School Policy
All the examples we discussed above essentially come from a perspective
of an individual mobile phone user (e.g., a user with diﬀerent personality
characteristics or with dyslexia) or a single user group (e.g., young users
who might use mobile phones while driving). However, in real life,
mobile phone users might form diﬀerent user groups and have to play
multiple roles or might have multiple indirect relationships to other
mobile phone users at the same time. Here, we will discuss a good research
example about multiple user groups. The title is “Three diﬀerent roles, ﬁve
diﬀerent aspects: Diﬀerences and similarities in viewing school mobile
phone policies among teachers, parents, and students.”The ﬁrst author,
Dr. Qiufang Gao, is a young researcher at Shenzhen University of China
and this is her second article co-authoring with me as her mentor on
mobile phone school policy.
In this study, researchers aimed to address four research questions,
examining the diﬀerent views of teachers, parents, and students on ()
motivation, () implementation, () evaluation, and () improvement of
mobile phone school policy. To address these questions, the study
surveyed elementary, middle-school, and high-school students in a
city of China, parents of these students, and teachers of these
students. The survey had three similar versions for students, parents, and
teachers, each consisting of a twenty-ﬁve-item questionnaire with -point
Likert scale items (= strongly disagree and = strongly agree), assessing
perceptions of mobile phone use policies at school. The major ﬁndings
include that students, parents, and teachers have signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
views on: () reasons to use mobile phones (e.g., does mobile phone use
help students’ learning?); () policy content regarding the use of mobile
phones (e.g., should mobile phones be allowed during classes and exams?);
() implementation details regarding the use of mobile phones (e.g.,
should the school’s mobile phone policies be emphasized at parent–teacher
conferences?); () evaluation regarding the use of mobile phones (e.g., are
Gao, Q., Yan, Z., Wei, C. et al. (). “Three diﬀerent roles, ﬁve diﬀerent aspects: Diﬀerences and
similarities in viewing school mobile phone policies among teachers, parents, and students,”
Computers & Education, : –.

Mobile Phone Users
3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

the existing policies eﬀective?); and () improvement regarding the use of
mobile phones (e.g., should the school increase the number of public
telephones for safety on campus?) – all ﬁve ﬁndings with the largest
diﬀerence being between students and teachers (the most positive view
from the students and the most negative view from teachers).
The study has several strengths. () It used three user groups in one
single study to compare the perception diﬀerences regarding the mobile
phone school policy. () It had a relatively large sample size and a well-
tested questionnaire with three versions for three groups. () Its data
analysis was well performed, starting with overall analysis of variance
(ANOVA) and then with follow-up ANOVA. The weaknesses include:
() the teachers, parents, and students are partially, not fully matched; and
() it focuses on users’ views rather than users’ actual behavior. Future
research can be undertaken to examine the matched triple of teacher–
parent–student by using hierarchical linear modeling.
From the perspective of user-based mobile phone behavior, students,
parents, and teachers are all mobile phone users in a broad sense and all
involved in the mobile phone school policy process. However, these three
user groups play diﬀerent roles: teachers are usually school policy makers,
students are mobile phone users regulated directly by the school policy,
and parents perhaps could be supporters/attackers of the school policy or
monitors of students’ mobile phone use. These three user groups form a
complex relationship. For various reasons, these three groups diﬀer in
various important ways and consequently show diﬀerent views toward
the policy. Eventually, they may have diﬀerent behaviors toward the
policy, leading to varying eﬀectiveness of the policy.
To sum up the section on empirical studies, we have discussed the two
reports and six articles in this section. From these studies, we can see
scientiﬁc evidence of various mobile phone users, including users in the
United States, users throughout the world, users charged for sexting,
young users addicted to mobile phones, users with diﬀerent personal-
ities, users with dyslexia, users who engage in distracted driving, and
multiple users in diﬀerent relationships with each other. The empirical
literature indicates that: () not everyone is a mobile phone user; ()
mobile phone users are a complex concept involving diﬀerent types of
users with diverse demographical, behavioral, and special characteristics;
and () diﬀerent users are associated with diﬀerent mobile phone behav-
iors (e.g., sexting, mobile reading, or distracted driving), which is the
most important aspect that we care about in studying and understanding
mobile phone users.
. Empirical Studies

3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

Now, after our discussions on intuitive thoughts, everyday observations,
and scientiﬁc research on mobile phone users, thoughtful and interested
readers might become more eager to learn how much we know about
mobile phone users overall and how we can develop a comprehensive
knowledge about mobile phone users in order to develop an understanding
of their complexity and their mobile phone behavior. The next section
addresses these two questions.
.
Knowledge Syntheses: From Users in Latin America
to Problematic Users
There are two particularly useful ways to develop comprehensive know-
ledge of a given area of research: reading handbook/encyclopedia chapters
and reading review articles. Of course, for any given research, there must
be substantial literature accumulated over time, and there must be scholars
to synthesize the literature and publish the synthesized work in hand-
books/encyclopedias or journals. Thus, whether a given area of study is
emerging, emerged, or well established, the review literature rather than
the empirical literature should be a quick indication. Below, we will discuss
these two types of knowledge synthesis literature, the encyclopedia chap-
ters and published review articles, on mobile phone users.
.
Encyclopedia Chapters: Users in Latin America
and with Visual Impairment
As shown in Table ., about thirty chapters in the Encyclopedia of Mobile
Phone Behavior focus on diﬀerent mobile phone users and relevant mobile
phone behavior. About half of these present mobile phone users with
diﬀerent demographic and behavior characteristics, and about another half
deal with mobile phone users in health care, education, and everyday
settings. These chapters vividly show the unusual diversity of mobile phone
users in the world. For instance, the chapter on Mexican mobile phone use
indicates that the mobile phone network has provided new service to those
poor people who were previously excluded from the world of technology
and has transformed the lives of the poor. However, the mobile broadband
penetration in Latin American countries is still low, averaging percent.
For another example, the chapter on mobile phone users with visual
impairment indicates that smartphones with touch screens present new
challenges for this group of users because the ﬂat screen does not have
visually perceptible features for them. However, researchers have developed

Mobile Phone Users
3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

diﬀerent ways to overcome this problem, including clear sound, perceptible
feedback, synthetic speech, voice command, and gesture-based input.
.
Review Articles: Young Users and Radiation Exposure,
and Problematic Users
The empirical literature on mobile phone users is substantial. However,
the number of published review articles is limited. If searching the database
of PsycINFO using the two keywords, cell phones and literature review,
Table .The Encyclopedia Chapters on User-Based Mobile Phone Behavior
Feature
Chapter Title
Age
Children, risks and the mobile Internet
Age
Teenage sexting: Sexual expression meets mobile technology
Age
Keitai and Japanese adolescents
Age
Textism use and language ability in children
Age
Adolescent text messaging
Country
Generation Y and mobile marketing in India
Country
Mobile internet use in Japan: Text-message dependency and social
relationships
Country
Social impacts of mobile phones on the life of the Chinese people
Country
Focus on text messages: A review of studies in French
Country
Mobile communications in Mexico in the Latin American context
Country
Mobile phones’ inﬂuence on journalism practice in Africa
Country
Mobile screen media practices in Korea
Country
Mobile user behaviors in China
Disable
Deaf adolescents’ textisms
Disable
Mobile phone technology for ALL: Towards reducing the digital divide
Disable
Use of mobile phones by individuals with visual impairments
Disable
Mobile phone: Repurposed assistive technology for individuals with
disabilities
Disability
Mobile phones as assistive and accessible technology for people with
disabilities
Disability
The use of mobile phone technology to support people with autism spectrum
disorders
Education
Exploring the use of mobile devices to support teacher education
Education
Mobile phone use by middle school students
Medicine
Mobile health in emergency care
Medicine
Use of mobile phones to help prevent child maltreatment
Medicine
Students hurting students: Cyberbullying as a mobile phone behavior
Medicine
mHealth in maternal, newborn, and child health programs around the world
Everyday
The role of mobile phones in romantic relationships
Everyday
Divorced coparents’ use of communication technology
Everyday
Portable social groups
. Knowledge Syntheses

3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

we might ﬁnd only about ﬁve relevant reviews. You might ﬁnd reviews
in the database of WOS, but very few directly focus on users and most are
on medical research on brain cancers and addiction. Here, we will discuss
two relatively recent and quite informative examples: “Mobile phone use
and exposures in children” by Joachim Schüz ()and “Problematic
use of the mobile phone: A literature review and a pathways model” by Joël
Billieux ().
Schüz pointed out that the main diﬀerence in radio wave exposures
concerning the use of mobile phones between today’s children and adults
is () the longer lifetime exposure of children when they grow older, due to
starting to use mobile phones at an early age, and () higher frequency of use
among children, including higher popularity of mobile phones and features
speciﬁcally designed to attract children. The review indicates that the
prevalence of mobile phone users is already as high as percent among
adolescents in some countries. For children, mobile phones are dominant
sources of radio wave exposure and relevant sources of extremely low
frequency magnetic ﬁelds. Children will have a much higher cumulative
exposure to radio waves than today’s adults when they were at the same age.
Radio wave exposure of children may be estimated more easily, because the
variety of exposure sources is smaller than for adults. It concludes that as
long as adverse health eﬀects cannot be ruled out, it is appropriate to instruct
children and their parents about careful use of mobile phones.
Billieux deﬁned problematic use of the mobile phone as an inability to
regulate mobile phone use, leading to negative impacts on mobile phone
users’ daily life. He reviewed the existing literature on risk factors for
problematic mobile phone use. Based on his review, the risk factors are
associated with three types of characteristics of mobile phone users. The
ﬁrst type is demographic characteristics. Mobile phone users’ gender and
age but not educational level and socioeconomic status are related to
problematic mobile phone use. The second type is personality traits.
Mobile phone users’ neuroticism (i.e., the tendency to be emotionally
unstable) and extraversion (i.e., the tendency to be sociable), but not other
personality traits (e.g., agreeableness, consciousness), and impulsivity are
related to problematic mobile phone use. The last type is mobile phone
users’ low self-esteem, which is related to problematic mobile phone use.
Schüz, J. (). “Mobile phone use and exposures in children,” Bioelectromagnetics, (S):
S–S.
Billieux, J. (). “Problematic use of the mobile phone: A literature review and a pathways
model,” Current Psychiatry Reviews, (): –.

Mobile Phone Users
3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

These two reviews present in-depth, speciﬁc, synthesized knowledge
about two speciﬁc topics – young users’ risk of radiation exposure and
users’ characteristics related to addiction. It helps us understand the
complexity of mobile phone users related to two adverse aspects. However,
these are speciﬁc narrative reviews rather than systematic or scoping
reviews and thus do not provide a comprehensive knowledge about mobile
phone users in general.
In summary, similar to the scientiﬁc research, the scientiﬁc synthesis of
the literature still focuses on speciﬁc features of mobile phone users (e.g.,
demographic features such as age or region or behavioral features such as
addiction or visual impairment). However, it focused on various studies
rather than on one so that we can see speciﬁc aspects of the complexity of
users in a relatively broad way (e.g., diverse ﬁndings about mobile phone
users and various needs of mobile phone users).
.
Comparative Analyses: From TV Viewers to Mobile Phone Users
After considering the real-life observations, scientiﬁc research, and research
synthesis about mobile phone users, it is natural for us to wonder whether
and how users of mobile phones diﬀer from those of other technologies,
such as television, computers, and the Internet. Due to the methodological
challenges in comparison, the complexity of this topic, and the space
limitation, here we will only be able to brieﬂy compare users of diﬀerent
technologies by discussing four reviews that touch on a few key issues of
users of diﬀerent technologies.
.
Reviewing Users of Four Technologies
TV viewers. The ﬁrst review is a meta-analysis, a special type of review
based on quantitative data. It is entitled “Relationships between media use,
body fatness and physical activity in children and youth: A meta-analysis”
by Simon Marshall and his three collaborators.An expert panel stated in
that youth’s obesity is related to their increased hours of viewing TV
and decreased physical activities. Thus, one of the primary goals of the
meta-analysis was to review the published English journal articles from
to and to verify the above expert statement. The relevant major
Marshall, S. J., Biddle, S. J., Gorely, T. et al. (). “Relationships between media use, body
fatness and physical activity in children and youth: A meta-analysis,” International Journal of
Obesity, (): –.
. Comparative Analyses

3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

ﬁndings based on over thirty studies include: () The relationship between
TV viewing and body fatness is positive and statistically signiﬁcant, but the
eﬀect size is small (Pearson r = ., p < .). Some age-based diﬀerence
was found among three age groups (–, –, –), but no gender
diﬀerence was found. () The relationship between TV viewing and
physical activity is negative and statistically signiﬁcant, but the eﬀect size
is small (Pearson r = –.p < .). Some age diﬀerence was found
among three age groups (–, –, –), but no gender diﬀerence
was found.
Computer users. The second review is also a meta-analysis, entitled
“Computer anxiety and its correlates: A meta-analysis” by Siew Lian Chua
and his two co-authors.Computer anxiety was deﬁned in the study as an
emotional fear of computers when individuals use computers or consider
using computers. Since computer anxiety leads to computer user avoid-
ance, the authors attempted to examine whether computer anxiety is
related to gender, age, and computer experiences, the three most com-
monly considered correlates. The meta-analysis of thirty-six relevant art-
icles suggests the following: () Gender is signiﬁcantly related to computer
anxiety among undergraduate students. Female students had higher levels
of computer anxiety than male students. () Computer experience is
signiﬁcantly related to computer anxiety among undergraduate students.
Students with less computer experience had higher levels of computer
anxiety than students with more computer experience. () No suﬃcient
studies examining age diﬀerences were available for meta-analysis.
Internet surfers. The third review is, again, a meta-analysis. Its title is
“Internet use and psychological well-being: A meta-analysis” by Chiung-
jung Huang.The eﬀect of Internet use on well-being is the most popular
topic in Internet behavior research. The author aimed to synthesize the
existing studies and ﬁnd meta-analytic evidence on this topic. The author
identiﬁed forty relevant studies, yielding forty-three samples, nearly ,
participants. The major ﬁndings include: () a small negative relationship
exists between Internet use and well-being; and () no consistent and
inclusive evidence shows signiﬁcant age or gender diﬀerence.
Mobile phone users. The last review is a regular narrative review,
entitled “The sensitivity of children to electromagnetic ﬁelds” by Leeka
Chua, S. L., Chen, D. T., and Wong, A. F. (). “Computer anxiety and its correlates: A meta-
analysis,” Computers in Human Behavior, (): –.
Huang, C. (). “Internet use and psychological well-being: A meta-analysis,” Cyberpsychology,
Behavior, and Social Networking, (): –.

Mobile Phone Users
3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

Kheifets at UCLA and her collaborators from WHO.Mobile phones
and brain cancers has been one of the most studied topics in mobile phone
behavior research. However, no meta-analysis has been published in
synthesizing eﬀects of mobile phones on brains of young mobile phone
users. One primary reason is that speciﬁc empirical research is rapidly
emerging, but this has not been suﬃciently accumulated for a meta-
analysis. In this review, the authors pointed out multiple important issues:
() Children have a longer time of exposure to radio frequency energy from
mobile phones than the childhood of adults today. () Children may be
biologically vulnerable to radio frequency energy from mobile phones.
Their brain tissue is more conductive than that of adults and thus has
greater absorption of radio frequency energy. () Children’s vulnerability
to radio frequency energy might be greater and have longer impacts during
certain critical time periods, such as the prenatal period. () Residential
exposure (e.g., television signals and Wi-Fi at home) and parental exposure
(e.g., mobile phone use by mothers with infants) are two major exposure
resources for young children. More children often use their parents’ mobile
phones and more adolescents will have their own mobile phones at home
and at school. () Potential health risks to children from radio frequency
ﬁelds include an increase of temperature in body tissues, blood circulation
of the fetus and the mother during pregnancy, changes in the formation of
proteins, and development of brain tumors.
.
Comparing Users of Four Technologies
What can we learn from these four articles regarding users of diﬀerent
technologies? First, in general, studies of users of diﬀerent technologies
always further examine similar characteristics of users, either as demo-
graphic background variables or independent and moderating variables.
For TV viewers, in the meta-analysis of over thirty students, age and
gender were further examined as two independent variables to see if TV
viewing will inﬂuence fatness and physical activity for TV viewers with
diﬀerent ages and genders. Similarly, for PC users, in the meta-analysis of
thirty-six students, age and computer experience were also examined as
two independent variables and signiﬁcant gender diﬀerences and
experience-based diﬀerences in computer anxiety were found. For Internet
users, in the meta-analysis of forty studies, age and gender were further
Kheifets, L., Repacholi, M., Saunders, R., and Van Deventer, E. (). “The sensitivity of
children to electromagnetic ﬁelds,” Pediatrics, (): e–e.
. Comparative Analyses

3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

examined as two moderators. No consistent and inclusive evidence was
found for the observed small negative relationship between Internet use
and well-being and this changed among diﬀerent age groups and diﬀerent
genders. For mobile phone users, children at young ages are considered to
be more vulnerable than adults, biologically, developmentally, and envir-
onmentally, to radio frequency energy from mobile phones.
Second, diﬀerent technology users might face unique challenges and thus
draw from extensive research as the empirical base for meta-analysis
studies. For instance, as indicated in the three meta-analyses and one
review, television viewers might face a challenge of decreasing physical
activities, computer users (especially female college students) might face a
challenge of computer anxiety, Internet users might face a challenge
concerning psychological well-being, and mobile phone users might face
radiation exposure problems.
Third, it is extremely diﬃcult, if it is possible at all, to have a direct,
straightforward comparison of users of diﬀerent technologies. One of the
reasons is that mobile phones integrate diﬀerent technologies. Thus,
mobile phone users can be television viewers (e.g., via mobile TV),
computer users (e.g., calculating arithmetic problems), or Internet users
(e.g., using smartphones going online) at the same time. Another reason is
that diﬀerent technologies are going through diﬀerent stages of adoption
and diﬀusion of their own history. Television public viewing might have
about eighty years of history since the s, personal computer use might
have about ﬁfty years of history since the s, popular Internet use
might have twenty years of history since the s, and pervasive mobile
phone use has about thirty years of history since the s. It is diﬃcult to
compare users of diﬀerent technologies in their diﬀerent stages at the same
time. The third reason is that unit of use diﬀers for the diﬀerent technolo-
gies. Television viewers are related to households rather than individuals.
Computer users are attached to diﬀerent computers at home or at work.
Internet users are attached with Internet accessibility at home and at work.
However, mobile phones are attached with each individual user.
Thus, it is hard to compare users of diﬀerent technologies, even for the
most basic issues about how many users there are of diﬀerent technologies.
Recall that the three graduate students’ intuitive responses indicated that
everyone is a mobile phone user. Is this also similar for television viewers,
computer users, and Internet surfers? To make the comparison simple and
feasible, let us look at the situation of using diﬀerent technologies at home.
Certainly, everyone can be a television viewer as long as the television set is
there and people have the capacity to view it. Television can be viewed

Mobile Phone Users
3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

alone, but is often shared by multiple viewers. Typically, one home might
have one or two television sets. At home, adults usually have their personal
computers, older kids have a desktop or a laptop, and young kids might
have a laptop or a tablet. Each family member will access the Internet.
Typically, one home will have one Internet service line. As for a mobile
phone, the major diﬀerence is that it becomes a personal device. Typically,
each family member will have their own mobile phone and hardly share
them with each other. In addition, many functions of previous technolo-
gies, such as television, computers, and Internet, are included in modern
mobile phones. Based on ITU data, worldwide mobile phone subscrip-
tions have grown to .billion, representing .percent of the world’s
population, compared with .percent for traditional telephones, .
percent for computers at home, and .percent for Internet access at
home. These ﬁgures are more related to the number of technologies (i.e.,
computers or Internet) rather than actual technology users (e.g., people
who actually use, play, or share mobile phones). In short, given the lack of
good statistical reports, it is diﬃcult to state that users of one technology
are more or less than those of another technology, which makes the
scientiﬁc comparison of penetration rates of diﬀerent technologies in the
world almost impossible at present. Nevertheless, it is much needed in the
near future to conduct innovative and rigorous comparative studies of
users of diﬀerent technologies so that we can better understand the mobile
users as well as other technological users based on scientiﬁc comparisons.
.
Complex Thinking: Diverse Users, Complex Behavior
At the beginning of this chapter, we discussed intuitive responses about
mobile phone users from three graduate students. These three graduate
students all considered that mobile phone users are everyone or almost
everyone, but each of them focused on diﬀerent aspects of mobile phone
users (e.g., their ages, their ways of using mobile phones, and their amount
of time spent on mobile phones). After reading this chapter, we should be
able to easily and clearly see that their intuitive knowledge is authentic, but
not deep, broad, and sophisticated enough. To reﬂect on what we have
discussed and learned from this chapter: () Perhaps we now have realized
that mobile phone users do not necessarily have to be mobile phone
owners. Mobile phone users as a concept is much broader and more
complex than the owners. () Perhaps we now understand that mobile
phone users are a key element of mobile phone behavior. We should
always look at the users ﬁrst when we study mobile phone behavior. ()
. Complex Thinking

3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

Perhaps we know much more about the users by being familiar with the
substantial literature on mobile phone behavior among diﬀerent mobile
phone
users
with
diverse
demographical,
behavioral,
and
special
characteristics, and even the complex relationship among diﬀerent users.
These pieces of knowledge are more scientiﬁc rather than intuitive, and
research-based rather than perception-based.
Figure .provides a brief summary of this chapter. It shows that this
chapter presents mobile phone users and relevant mobile phone behavior
from four major dimensions, the good-vs.-bad dimension, demographic
characteristics, behavioral characteristics, and special characteristics, and
reveals the complexity of user-based mobile phone behavior. For bad users,
we discussed the cases of the Tsarnaev brothers and the Farook couple and
the studies of teens arrested for sexting and addicted users. For demograph-
ical characteristics, we discussed the cases of a -year-old boy playing a
mobile game, several seniors learning to use mobile phones, and studies of
young Australian users with early symptoms of addiction. For behavior
characteristics, we discussed the cases of Danny Bowman and Professor
Matthew Schneps and studies of users with diﬀerent personalities, users
with dyslexia, users who use mobile phones while driving, and problematic
users. For special characteristics, we discussed the cases of Barack Obama,
Mobile phone
technologies
Mobile Phone Users
1. Ordinary and Criminal Users
2.1 The Tsarnaev Brothers and the Farook Couple 
3.2 Teens Arrested for Sexting
2. Demographical Characteristics  
2.2 A 1-Year-Old Boy and Several Seniors
3.3 Young Australian Addictive Teens
3. Behavior Characteristics 
2.3 Danny Bowman and Prof. Matthew Schneps 
3.4 Users with Different Personalities 
3.5 Users with Dyslexia 
3.6 Users who Use Mobile Phones while Driving  
4. Special Characteristics 
2.4 Barack Obama and Bill Gates
2.5 Martin Cooper and Jorma Ollila 
3.7 Multiple User Groups
Mobile phone
activities
Mobile phone
effects
Figure .
A Summary Diagram of User-Based Mobile Phone Behavior

Mobile Phone Users
3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

Bill Gates, Martin Cooper, and Jorma Ollila, and for special users, we
discussed the study on user relationships among students, teachers, and
parents. Toward the end of the chapter, we compared TV viewers,
computer users, Internet surfers, and mobile phone users in terms of
technology users and human behavior in using diﬀerent technologies.
We know now that: mobile phone users are particularly diverse;
user-based mobile phone behavior is particularly complex; and the research
on user-based mobile phone behavior is particularly extensive. As a result,
we should always consider who uses mobile phones ﬁrst when we examine
various mobile phone behaviors in the real-life world and in the scientiﬁc
world.
Previous research always inspires and motivates future research. It can
be predicted that, in the next ﬁve to ten years, we will and should see some
major breakthroughs in mobile phone user research. Several particularly
important topics should be examined more proactively in future research
and will make timely and important contributions to the ﬁeld of mobile
phone behavior.
First, for the bad mobile phone users, we need to know more about the
mobile phone behavior of criminal users. With cyber safety and cyber
security becoming a serious global concern, we need to examine criminal
users, including their behavioral characteristics and their mobile phone
behavior. Furthermore, we need to study criminal users and victim users
as a pair together to better understand the complex interaction between
them.
Second, for the users with diﬀerent demographic characteristics, we need
to know more about mobile phone behavior of users younger than the age
of , users older than , and female users. Currently, the most studied
population is college students, one of the most active groups of mobile
phone users. However, with the global penetration rate of mobile phones
approaching percent, the numbers of younger users, older users, and
female users are rapidly increasing. Thus, their mobile phone behavior is in
particular worth further research.
Third, for the users with diﬀerent behavioral characteristics, we need to
know more about the mobile phone behavior of criminal users. The
current research has examined personality traits, attitudes, perceptions,
and other behavioral characteristics of ordinary users. We need to know
more about gifted or talented users. The current research has examined
various users with special needs. While this line of research should con-
tinue and be expanded, we should start to develop strong research pro-
grams to study gifted or talented users, especially young, older, and female
. Complex Thinking

3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core

talented users. The current positive psychology movement across the world
suggests that talented user research will advance knowledge not only about
what the extraordinary strengths of talented users are, but also about how
ordinary users, including users with disabilities, can learn from these
extraordinary strengths.
Fourth, for the users with special characteristics, we need to know more
about several groups of users and their mobile phone behavior. Such
groups of users include users in business settings, clinic patient users,
and users from special cultures. The current research focuses more on
individual users and their mobile phone behavior. It is time for the mobile
phone behavior research community to identify, describe, analyze, and
support many more groups of users. In addition, we need to know more
about romantic partners, intergenerational users, and multi-task users. The
current research focuses more on users on their own. We should study
users in more complex relationships with other users or non-users. This
line of research will help us to understand complex mobile phone behavior
in the real world.
We have discussed some examples of future research. However, it is
neither an exhaustive list nor a ﬁxed one. If we continue and accelerate our
research eﬀorts, after ﬁve or ten years, we will have a much better
understanding of mobile phone users and the related mobile phone
behavior. As a result, more mobile phone users will beneﬁt more from
the research.

Mobile Phone Users
3
13:08:55, subject to the Cambridge Core


Mobile Phone Technologies
Outline
.
Intuitive Thinking: Words from Sunny
.
Daily Observations: From Signature Touch to the Right to Know
.
Mobile Phones: Signature Touch and Freedom 
.
Mobile Phone Features: Flight and Ferry Sewol
.
Mobile Phone Software and Hardware: Leo Grand and Vincent
.
Mobile Phone Batteries and Chargers: Galaxy Sand Energous
.
Mobile Phone Networks: Wi-Fi in Nanjing and Li-Fi in Dubai
.
Empirical Studies: From Apps to Base Stations
.
Smartphone Apps: Users in Korea
.
Calling vs. Texting: Adolescents’ Decisions
.
Mobile Cameras: Patients with Nasal Bone Injuries
.
Base Stations: Childhood Cancers
.
GPS: Children’s Mobility
.
Knowledge Syntheses: From Mobile Security to Battery Explosion
.
Mobile Devices: Security
.
Mobile Texting: Positive and Negative Sides
.
Mobile Apps: Health-Care Implications
.
Mobile Sensing: Ubiquitous, Complex, and Fast Growing
.
Mobile Phone Batteries: Fire and Explosion
.
Comparative Analyses: From Closed Captions to Texting
.
Study : Closed Captions
.
Study : Microsoft Word
.
Study : E-mail
.
Study : Texting
.
Complex Thinking: Diverse Technologies, Complex Behavior
.
Intuitive Thinking: Words from Sunny
Sunny is a Korean man who is technology savvy and has several mobile
phones. I know this because a thief broke into his apartment at midnight

4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

and took all of his mobile phones. Mobile phone theft and robbery,
privacy protection of lost phones, and localization and self-destruction of
lost phones are interesting issues of mobile phone behavior that we will
discuss in later chapters. One day, half out of curiosity and half challen-
ging him, I asked Sunny for his intuitive thoughts about mobile phone
technologies: What technologies are mobile phone technologies? What
technologies are not mobile phone technologies? Please give three to ﬁve
quick examples of mobile phone technologies. His quick answers are as
follows: First, mobile payment. The mobile phone allows us to pay or
transfer money easily and safely. Second, GPS. Mobile phones, especially
smartphones, provide us with GPS services such as Google maps, enab-
ling us to ﬁnd a location easily and quickly. Third, text messenger.
Nowadays, there are many types of messenger apps such as KakaoTalk
and WeChat that are embedded in the mobile phone, allowing us to
communicate with others eﬃciently. In addition, mobile phones may be
used for accessing social networking sites (SNS), watching movies,
recording sound and video, listening to music, taking pictures, and
more. It is diﬃcult to actually identify what technologies are not mobile
phone technologies as most technologies can be embedded in the
mobile phone.
Sunny’s intuitive responses outlined above are interesting. What can we
learn from his intuitive responses about mobile phone technologies? We
can learn at least four points. First, from his three examples of mobile
phone technologies, mobile payment, GPS, and text messenger, we can say
that Sunny knows mobile phone technologies pretty well in terms of
software and hardware. He knows mobile apps such as the one used to
make his mobile payments; he knows mobile phone hardware such as
GPS. Second, from his brief description, we can also say that he knows
why and how to use these hardware and software. He has a great deal of
knowledge about diﬀerent features or functions of mobile phones, such as
watching movies, recording, listening to music, and taking pictures, based
on his own experience. Third, he has had experience using KakaoTalk and
WeChat, two speciﬁc programs that are widely used in Korea. Fourth, he
is obviously aware of technology embeddedness or the technology integra-
tion of mobile phone technologies, believing that most technologies can be
embedded in the mobile phone.
Clearly, Sunny’s knowledge focuses on various features of mobile phones,
but does he have comprehensive knowledge about mobile phone technolo-
gies? Of course, I speciﬁcally asked him about mobile phone technologies

Mobile Phone Technologies
4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

rather than about mobile phone behavior, but does he have a strong
awareness of mobile phone behavior that is related to various mobile
technologies? After studying this chapter, we should have a relatively
clear answer to these two questions. Now, we will use his initial thoughts
as a starting point for further understanding the content of this chapter.
The goal of the chapter is to understand the complexity of mobile phone
behavior that is speciﬁcally related to mobile phone technologies. To
achieve this goal, we will use four strategies: daily observations, empirical
studies, knowledge syntheses, and comparative analyses, each of which
represents the four major sections of this chapter. Let us work together to
achieve this goal.
.
Daily Observations: From Signature Touch
to the Right to Know
.
Mobile Phones: Signature Touch and Freedom 
In October ,Vertu, a British manufacturer and retailer of luxury
mobile phones, announced that their latest ﬂagship model, the 
Signature Touch, would hit the market, with a price of nearly $,,
about thirty times more expensive than an iPhone. It is generally con-
sidered to be one of the most luxurious phones on the market. This
model has multiple luxury features, from handcrafted parts, a wireless
charger, a sapphire glass screen, robust speakers, an integrated calf leather
case, and a personalized concierge service for the annual fee of nearly
$,.
In February ,Ringing Bells, a little-known Indian company,
launched the world’s cheapest smartphone, called Freedom , for a
price of Indian Rupee (about $.). This smartphone is a dual-
SIM, G-capable phone, equipped with multiple fancy technical features,
including a -inch WVGA resolution display, a .Ghz quad-core pro-
cessor, GB RAM, GB total storage space, a .megapixel camera on the
back, .megapixel camera on the front, and a ,mAh battery. How
much does an Indian earn per day on an average? By one estimate it is also
around Indian Rupee!
See www.digitaltrends.com/android/vertu-new-signature-touch-hands-on/#:SpTKJuEofrfzA.
See http://indianexpress.com/article/technology/mobile-tabs/india-cheapest-smartphone-rs--make-
in-india-ringing-bells/.
. Daily Observations

4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

These two observations underline the complexity of mobile phones, as
well as the complexity of mobile phone behavior. First, when we talk about
mobile phone technologies, one of the ﬁrst issues that we will naturally
consider is mobile phones themselves as a technology product. There are
various software and hardware in a mobile phone, but ﬁrst and foremost,
the mobile phone is a whole handset. Sunny, the Korean man we discussed
at the beginning of this chapter, did not explicitly mention what kinds of
mobile phones he was referring to. From his initial responses, he might
very likely be referring to Samsung or LG smartphones, two of the most
popular Korean mobile phone brands.
Second, mobile phones as a high-tech product are particularly complex.
From the perspective of the mobile phone industry’s history, there is a long
list of various types of mobile phones produced by more than twenty
major companies, from the Motorola Personal Phone and Nokia, released
in , to Apple’s iPhone G and Samsung Tocco released in , to
the Samsung Galaxy S III and Xiaomi Mi released in . Generally,
low-end phones are called basic phones, whereas high-end phones are
called smartphones. But in the real world, with extremely fast develop-
ments of mobile phone technologies, this general categorization might not
work very well. Vertu’s Signature Touch and Ringing Bells’ Freedom
are just two unique examples among hundreds of mobile phones that
have been produced throughout mobile phone history.
Third, diﬀerent mobile phones are associated with diﬀerent types of
mobile phone behavior. The signiﬁcant diﬀerence in price between Signa-
ture Touch and Freedom is obvious. But more importantly, these two
types of mobile phones are owned by users with diﬀerent social and
economic statuses (e.g., a wealthy businessman vs. a poor farmer), and
are used for diﬀerent types of activities (e.g., showing it oﬀat a celebrity
party in Paris vs. using it for phone calls in a remote Indian farm market)
that lead to diﬀerent types of eﬀects on people’s lives (e.g., having a
personal phone number of a famous celebrity or paying $for a good
deal in the farm market).
.
Mobile Phone Features: Flight and Ferry Sewol
On September , ,United Airlines Flight was hijacked by four
terrorists. After the hijackers took control of the plane, several passengers
and ﬂight attendants were able to make about thirty-seven phone calls to
See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_Airlines_Flight_.

Mobile Phone Technologies
4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

airplane oﬃcials using airplane phones and to family members using
personal mobile phones. Tom Burnett, one passenger on the ﬂight,
successfully made several phone calls to his wife Deena Burnett. He told
his wife that the plane had been hijacked and learned from his wife about
the attacks on the World Trade Center in New York City. He ended his
last call by saying, “Don’t worry, we’re going to do something.” Jeremy
Glick, another passenger, was also luckily able to have a -minute phone
conversation with his wife Elizabeth Glick and her parents. Jeremy told his
wife that he loved her and to take good care of their -week-old daughter
Emmy. Tom Burnett, Jeremy Glick, and other passengers bravely stepped
up to ﬁght against the hijackers’ plan to crash the plane into the White
House or Capitol Building. To prevent the passengers from regaining
control of the plane, the hijackers crashed it in a Pennsylvania ﬁeld, killing
all forty-four people on board.
On April , ,a Korean ferry named Sewol capsized and sank in a
disaster. There were people on that boat – only survived and 
died. Most of the victims were students of Danwon High School on a ﬁeld
trip. After months, a heartbroken father missed his young son who lost
his life so much that he sent a text message to his son’s mobile phone via
KakaoTalk. To his surprise, he received a text reply from his son’s phone,
saying how much he loved the father, telling the father to take care of
himself, and asking the father to pass his greetings to other family
members. In the end, it was found that another young Korean boy bought
a mobile phone and the previous owner’s phone number was assigned to
the phone. This boy knew of the disaster and tried to comfort the father.
The features or functions of mobile phones refer to the set of technical
capabilities, carrier services, hardware devices, and software applications
that they oﬀer to their users. Generally speaking, mobile phone features
can be grouped into three basic types: communication (e.g., making a
phone call), information (surﬁng the Internet), and computation (playing
a mobile game such as Angry Birds). We can learn a few important points
about mobile phone features from the two cases presented above. First,
calling and texting are two of the most common features of communi-
cation with mobile phones. Diﬀerent software and hardware have to work
together in a mobile phone to make calls or send texts. The two cases
highlight two features of mobile phone communication respectively –
calling and texting. Second, these basic features of mobile phones can be
associated with some of the most uncommon mobile phone behaviors.
See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sinking_of_MV_Sewol.
. Daily Observations

4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

The two cases show two emotional behaviors – ﬁghting against terrorists
and missing a deceased, beloved son. There are many more technical
features related to common mobile phone behavior, e.g., sharing photos
via Instagram, contacting friends via Facebook, locating your current
position using GPS, monitoring personal health with health apps, and
having password protection via pupil recognition.
.
Mobile Phone Software and Hardware: Leo Grand and Vincent
Leo Grandwas a homeless African American man living in Manhattan,
New York after losing his job at MetLife in . In August , after
two years of homeless life, he met Patrick McConlogue, a computer
programmer. Patrick asked him to choose between receiving $or
learning how to code. Leo chose to learn how to write code. Patrick then
provided him with books on programming, a cheap but durable laptop,
and daily lessons every morning. After only four months of learning with
Patrick, Leo wrote an app by himself called Trees for Cars, a ride-sharing
app. The app cost $.to download and had two features: () The app
will suggest nearby riders who may want to share a ride for interested
drivers. () The app tracks how much carbon dioxide emission was
prevented by the shared riding. After only a few weeks of releasing the
app, he had made about $,. This case has drawn wide attention from
the media and on the Internet.
Vincent Quiggis a young man from California. He has a special skill of
repairing iPhones for less than $within minutes. He often repairs
broken screens. He founded a company called TechWorld in . He
ﬁrst diagnoses problems and then repairs or replaces the cracked screens.
At the time he started his phone-repair business, he was only years old,
raised by a single mother. Quigg says he ﬁxes up to ten phones per week
and makes about $,in sales per month. He has hired two employees
as his company expanded. He attributes his knowledge for ﬁxing iPhones
to watching lots of video tutorials and says Steve Jobs is his idol. He was
hired at Best Buy when he was , working there for two years selling
HDTVs and computers, but had always been involved with the iPhone
ecosystem. People referred to him as the iPhone guy. So he decided to use
his acquired knowledge from Best Buy to create what he originally called
“iRepair,” an iPhone repair business. In addition to his excellent
See www.businessinsider.com/leo-the-homeless-coder--.
See www.voanews.com/content/young-entrepreneur-specilizes-in-iphones/.html.

Mobile Phone Technologies
4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

technology and business talents, he is also a skilful basketball player. He
started playing basketball at the YMCA when he was years old and
played for his high school varsity basketball team as a point guard for four
years. This is also a case receiving wide media attention.
What can we learn from these two real-life cases? () Mobile phone
technologies consist of millions of apps and hundreds of hardware. () Leo
wrote a software app for mobile phones and Vincent repaired the hard-
ware. () The software and hardware technologies involve interesting
mobile phone behavior: sharing car driving and protecting the environ-
ment in Leo’s case and ﬁxing the broken phones and earning money to
help support his single-parent household in Vincent’s case. () Even novice
people can create apps or ﬁx hardware within a short period of time and
with limited or no formal training.
.
Mobile Phone Batteries and Chargers: Galaxy Sand Energous
In July ,Mr. Du, a -year-old resident in Hong Kong, was
charging his newly purchased Samsung Galaxy Swhile playing with it
in his living room. Suddenly, the phone exploded in his hand. He was
scared and dropped the phone on the sofa. The phone began to burst into
ﬂames, burning the sofa and window curtain before rapidly spreading to
the entire room. He and his wife escaped out of the apartment with their
dog and only minor hand injuries. Their neighbors were also able to
escape. The ﬁre was eventually put out by ﬁreﬁghters. The apartment they
bought in for ,Hong Kong dollars and all the furniture inside
was totally damaged. The phone and the charger were completely burned.
The phone, charger, and battery were all made originally by Samsung.
Three surprisingly similar cases of a Samsung phone bursting into ﬂames
were reported in a -day period that month.
In May ,Energous announced a joint development agreement
with a leading commercial and industrial supply company to further
develop industrial and commercial applications for the full-size WattUp,
which enables wire-free charging at distances of up to feet. This might
remove the need for continual battery replacement or dedicated power
cable runs. Developed by Energous, WattUp is a revolutionary radio-
frequency-based wireless charger that delivers scalable power via the same
See http://orientaldaily.on.cc/cnt/news//_.html.
See www.marketwired.com/press-release/energous-partners-bring-wire-free-charging-industry-leading-
commercial-industrial-supply-nasdaq-watt-.htm.
. Daily Observations

4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

radio bands as a Wi-Fi router. WattUp diﬀers from current wireless
charging systems in that it will deliver contained, useable power, at a
distance, to multiple devices, resulting in a wire-free experience that saves
users from having to remember to plug in their devices.
We can take away a few things from these two cases presented above.
First, batteries and chargers are generally considered to be accessories of
mobile phones. However, they can be technically complicated (e.g., a new
wireless charger of WattUp). Second, although these are just accessories
rather than the main handsets, these can lead to life-threating outcomes or
even death (e.g., the exposure of Galaxy S). Third, these accessories are
related to real users, real processes, and real eﬀects, leading to various
mobile phone behaviors (e.g., the Hong Kong man charged his new
mobile phone and the phone exploded). Fourth, while there are always
negative problems emerging (e.g., mobile phone battery explosion), there
will always be a motivation to develop new solutions to address these
problems. For example, we might see that a new type of wireless charger
perhaps might become a surprising solution to the battery explosion issue.
.
Mobile Phone Networks: Wi-Fi in Nanjing and Li-Fi in Dubai
In April ,the quiet and normal life of residents in a building in Nanjing,
China was disturbed by a series of knocking sounds on apartment doors. An
old man was knocking on the doors of each apartment in the building to ask if
the people living there had a Wi-Fi router and, if so, begged them not to use it.
The old man had a daughter-in-law who was pregnant and he believed that
the Wi-Fi router would hurt the health of the mother and future baby. In one
day, it was told that he knocked on the door of one of his neighbors fourteen
times to make sure the Wi-Fi router would not be used.
In July , Harald Haas, who teaches at the University of Edinburgh
in the United Kingdom, coined the term “Li-Fi” at his TED Global Talk,
where he introduced the idea of “wireless data from every light.” At TED
Global, Harald Haas demonstrated, for the ﬁrst time, a device that could
do exactly that. By ﬂickering the light from a single LED light, a change
too quick for the human eye to detect, he can transmit far more data than a
cellular tower and do it in a way that is more eﬃcient, secure, and
widespread. In April ,ﬁve years after Harald Haas’ TED talk,
See http://news.ifeng.com/a//_.shtml.
See www.indiatimes.com/news/world/dubai-to-roll-out-high-speed-li-ﬁ-this-year-where-internet-will-
ﬂow-through-city-s-streetlights-.html.

Mobile Phone Technologies
4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

Dubai announced its plan to roll out public high speed Li-Fi this year
where Internet will ﬂow through the city’s streetlights. This is part of the
ﬁrst-phase plan for creating a Dubai smart city. Internet users in Dubai
will soon switch to the next generation technology for data transfer, aka Li-
Fi, dubbed as the next generation of high-speed Internet and times
faster than Wi-Fi. If so, Dubai will be the ﬁrst city in the world to get the
Li-Fi service. What is even more interesting is that the Li-Fi service will be
transmitted through the city’s streetlights. Each of these high-end design
lamps will cost around $,. While Wi-Fi transmits data using radio
waves, Li-Fi transmits data through LED light bulbs. With visible light,
Li-Fi is able to transmit much more information at much higher speeds.
These two cases indicate the following: () Mobile phone networks are
an important part of mobile technologies. Without cellular, Wi-Fi, and
various other networks, a mobile phone is just a handset in our hands. ()
One major concern related to the networks is the eﬀects of radiation on
human health. It was this concern that caused the Chinese man in Nanjing
to knock on the door of his neighbors. () The mobile network technolo-
gies have gone through major revolutions, G, G, G., G, and G.
One of the latest developments is Li-Fi, as shown in Dubai. () Besides the
large concern about Wi-Fi and the good news about Dubai’s streetlights
delivering Li-Fi, there are various other behavior issues related to the
networks, such as the satisfaction with network services and switching
among diﬀerent networks.
To end our discussion in this section of daily observations of
technology-related mobile phone behavior, let us quickly compare Sunny’s
initial responses and the ten observations presented above. One easy and
immediate ﬁnding is that while Sunny did show strong knowledge about
mobile phone features and mobile phone software and hardware, his
knowledge about mobile phone technologies is actually quite narrow.
The ten observations reveal that mobile phone technologies are much
broader and much more diverse and concern at least ﬁve major types:
() mobile phones as handsets (e.g., Signature Touch vs. Freedom );
() mobile phone features (e.g., calling vs. texting); () mobile phone
hardware (e.g. broken screen repair) and software (e.g., Leo’s app of Trees
for Cars); () mobile phone networks (e.g., Wi-Fi vs. Li-Fi); and () mobile
phone accessories (e.g., batteries and chargers).
The second ﬁnding is that the ﬁve major types of mobile phone
technologies are associated with complex mobile behavior, with diverse
mobile phone users (e.g., Leo and Vincent), mobile phone activities (e.g.,
the phone conversation on Flight and decision making regarding
. Daily Observations

4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

texting or calling), and mobile phone eﬀects (e.g., battery explosion).
Nevertheless, these daily observations are essentially anecdotal evidence
rather than robust evidence of scientiﬁc research. After studying and
analyzing a series of daily observations, let us study and analyze a few
examples of empirical studies on technology-centered mobile phone
behavior in the next section.
.
Empirical Studies: From Apps to Base Stations
.
Smartphone Apps: Users in Korea
The ﬁrst article we will discuss is entitled “Diﬀerential innovation of
smartphone and application use by sociodemographics and personality”
published in Computers in Human Behavior by Yeolib Kim, Daniel
A. Briley, and Melissa Ocepek from the University of Texas in Austin.
The two major reasons to choose this article for our ﬁrst discussion in this
section are that this article presents details of use of smartphone applica-
tions (very few studies were published) and examines demographic and
behavioral characteristics of smartphone users (many studies were pub-
lished). The ﬁrst author, Yeolib Kim, was a doctoral student in the School
of Information at the University of Texas at the time the article was
written. He completed his dissertation entitled “A meta-analysis of online
trust: Examining main and moderating eﬀects” in . He has published
four articles on technology use based on a quick search in Webs of Science.
The second author has published eighteen articles on behavioral genetics
and the third author has published twenty-one articles on information
behavior based on Research Gate.
The article presents a survey study that was completed in Korea in
with ,participants. Measures included a series of survey ques-
tions on media use, demographics, and an adapted scale of a version of the
Ten-Item Personality Inventory. The major ﬁndings include the following:
() About half of the participants were smartphone users. These mobile
phone users used ﬁve major types of apps: relational applications such as
instant messaging and social networking; entertainment applications such
as games, music/video/pictures, and sports; information applications such
as lifestyle and news; e-commerce applications such as ﬁnance and
Kim, Y., Briley, D. A., and Ocepek, M. G. (). “Diﬀerential innovation of smartphone and
application use by sociodemographics and personality,” Computers in Human Behavior, :
–.

Mobile Phone Technologies
4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

shopping; and literacy applications such as books, education, and reference
management. () Participants who were male, younger, more educated,
and had a higher income were more likely to use smartphones and
participants with openness, extraversion, and conscientiousness were also
more likely to use smartphones. () Gender, education, openness, con-
scientiousness, and emotional stability in particular play an important role
in using diﬀerent types of smartphone applications.
We can analyze these results in several ways. First, from the perspective
of mobile phone technologies, this article presents self-report evidence of
the ﬁve types of smartphone applications that are used in Korea, rather
than listing all the thousands of mobile phone applications. Second, from
the perspective of mobile phone behavior, this article provides initial
evidence of how ordinary smartphone users in Korea are associated with
certain types of smartphone applications and how often smartphone
activities are implemented, although there was not much information
about eﬀects of mobile phone behavior in the study.
.
Calling vs. Texting: Adolescents’ Decisions
The second article we will discuss is “Cell phone decision making: Adoles-
cents’ perceptions of how and why they make the choice to text or call” by
Bethany Blair, Anne Fletcher, and Erin Gaskin.Bethany Blair is from
the Department of Human Development and Family Studies at the
University of North Carolina in Greensboro. The article was published
in Youth & Society, a well-established, peer-reviewed journal focusing on
the social, contextual, and political issues that have inﬂuenced develop-
ment of the - to -year-old population since . We chose this
article to discuss in this section because it is one of the few studies available
examining how and why teenagers choose to call or text their friends/
family rather than how often they call or text, which is much more widely
studied. In addition, this article uses a qualitative method rather than the
frequently used survey method so we can see how qualitative data can
generate empirical evidence.
This study is a particularly thoughtful interview study with forty-one
high-school students in North Carolina. During the interview, the
researchers asked two types of open-ended questions about how and why
the students decide to call or text, and what the content of the
Blair, B. L., Fletcher, A. C., and Gaskin, E. R. (). “Cell phone decision making: Adolescents’
perceptions of how and why they make the choice to text or call,” Youth & Society, (): –.
. Empirical Studies: From Apps to Base Stations

4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

conversation is when they call or text. They used the grounded theory
method to analyze the interview data. The grounded theory was appropri-
ate to be used in this study because this method allows researchers to
develop their own theory based on the data rather than start with research-
based hypotheses and then conﬁrm or reject them with the collected
quantitative data. The major ﬁndings are as follows: () All adolescents
strongly preferred texting over calling, but ﬁve factors (restraints, urgency,
emotionality, content, and perceived eﬃciency) inﬂuenced how they chose
between the two. () Adolescents repeatedly used words such as “easier,”
“faster,” and “more convenient” to explain why they chose texting over
calling. () There were three speciﬁc reasons for choosing texting: maxi-
mizing multitasking, minimizing forethought, and accommodating peers.
There are at least two ideas that we can learn from this article. First,
texting and calling are two of the most common communication features
of mobile phones. From the technology history perspective, calling is
related to the most basic voice-based function of a telephone and texting
is related to the most basic text-based function of a telegraph. However,
from the mobile phone behavior perspective, it has become more compli-
cated. The major ﬁnding of the study shows that, for adolescents, they
prefer to use texting rather than calling. Second, the decision-making
process involves all four basic elements of mobile phone behavior: mobile
phone users (e.g., teenagers, peers), technologies (e.g., technical restraints,
asynchronized methods), activities (e.g., engaging in easy rather than hard
tasks, activity eﬃciency, urgent activities, multitasking processes), and
eﬀects (e.g., feeling comfortable and meeting emotional challenges). The
mobile phone behavior involved in this decision-making process is much
more complex than just knowing about calling vs. texting, the two
common features for communicating with mobile phones.
.
Mobile Cameras: Patients with Nasal Bone Injuries
Here, let us discuss another article, “The use of a camera-enabled mobile
phone to triage patients with nasal bone injuries,” by Taleb Barghouthi
and others.One of the reasons to discuss this study is that it focuses on a
common mobile phone hardware, an iPhone camera, with a very simple
design to address a very simple question. The article was published in
Barghouthi, T., Glynn, F., Speaker, R. B., and Walsh, M. (). “The use of a camera-enabled
mobile phone to triage patients with nasal bone injuries,” Telemedicine and E-Health, ():
–.

Mobile Phone Technologies
4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

in Telemedicine and E-Health. This journal has been one of the two
oﬃcial journals of The American Telemedicine Association for twenty-two
years since . It is the leading international peer-reviewed journal
covering the full spectrum of advances and clinical applications of tele-
medicine and management of electronic health records. It places special
emphasis on the outcome and impact of telemedicine on the quality, cost
eﬀectiveness, and access to health care. The second journal, Journal of
Telemedicine and Telecare, focuses on high quality scientiﬁc work and
provides excellent coverage of developments in telemedicine and e-health,
with a focus on clinical trials of telemedicine applications.
This is a very simple study reporting whether a camera is useful and
accurate in diagnosing patients with nasal bone injuries. Fifty-ﬁve patients
participated in the study. A total of percent required and underwent
nasal bone manipulation, whereas the remaining percent required no
intervention. There was no control group. Instead, to examine the eﬀect-
iveness, the study compared the diagnosis results of the same patients with
the mobile camera method to the results of the regular examination
method. It was found that twenty-ﬁve patients received a needed interven-
tion based on both the camera and actual examination with no missing
cases; twenty-two patients were correctly discharged from the clinic with-
out intervention, but three cases should have had an intervention and did
not receive one. Clearly, the new diagnosis method of using mobile
cameras has achieved eﬀectiveness similar to that of the regular method.
How can this study help us understand mobile phone behavior related
to mobile technologies? First, a mobile camera is a common hardware
installed in mobile phones. Instead of using traditional X-rays, a good-
quality mobile camera can now be used in emergency rooms for accurately
determining the priority of patients’ treatments based on the severity of
their condition of nasal bone injuries. Second, doctors as mobile phone
users can use this common mobile technology to engage in the new
diagnosis process of nasal bone injuries and achieve positive results.
.
Base Stations: Childhood Cancers
Now, we will discuss another article entitled “Mobile phone base stations
and early childhood cancers: Case-control study.”The ﬁrst and corres-
ponding author is Paul Elliott, a professor of epidemiology and public
Elliott, P., Toledano, M. B., Bennett, J. et al. (). “Mobile phone base stations and early
childhood cancers: Case-control study,” British Medical Journal, : c.
. Empirical Studies: From Apps to Base Stations

4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

health medicine at Imperial College in London. The article was published
in the British Medical Journal in .
This is a case-control study. The object was to investigate the risk of
early childhood cancers associated with the mother’s exposure to radio
frequency from mobile phone base stations (a cell tower installed at a ﬁxed
location to provide the connection between mobile phones and wider
cellular networks) during pregnancy. To achieve this, the researchers
reviewed ,cases of cancer in children aged to from the UK
national cancer registry between and to compare with ,
birth records which served as the control cases from the UK national birth
registry. The three dependent variables were distance, exposure, and
density of radiation of base stations at the birth address. The independent
variables were the number of cases of cancer and leukemia. The major
ﬁnding was that no association was found between exposure and cancer.
What does this study help us to understand about the complexity of
mobile phone behavior? First, mobile phone technologies include more
than just the phones themselves and the hardware or software in them.
Our understanding of what mobile phone technologies are needs to be
expanded to include base stations, cellular networks, or Wi-Fi networks, as
they are important parts of the entire array of mobile phone technologies.
Second, in the case of the base station, various technical issues such as
distance, exposure, and density of radiation of base stations are involved.
Third, base stations are not just about technical issues, but have a lot to do
with mobile phone behavior. They are related to the potential risk of
various possible complex health concerns (e.g., cancers) on various users
(e.g., children or pregnant women) via various activities (e.g., outside or
indoor activities). Fourth, although this study did not ﬁnd an association,
the scientiﬁc investigation is still needed, and many other researchers have
been studying this line of research.
.
GPS: Children’s Mobility
The next article we will introduce is entitled “Is children’s independent
mobility really independent? A study of children’s mobility combining
ethnography and GPS/mobile phone technologies.”The two authors are
Miguel Romero Mikkelsen from the University of Copenhagen and Pia
Mikkelsen, M. R. and Christensen, P. (). “Is children’s independent mobility really
independent? A study of children’s mobility combining ethnography and GPS/mobile phone
technologies ,” Mobilities, (): –.

Mobile Phone Technologies
4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

Christensen from the University of Warwick. It was published in in a
journal called Mobilities. I’ve chosen this article for discussion because it
focuses on GPS, one common feature of a mobile phone related to the
aspect of hardware.
The article reports a qualitative study. The main goal of the study was to
examine the impact of the physical and the social environment on chil-
dren’s mobility by using GPS in their mobile phones. The participants
were forty children, aged to , from one suburban area and one rural
area of Demark. The study started in and lasted for over one year.
Besides ethnographic ﬁeldwork and a mobile phone survey, the researchers
used GPS to collect quantitative mobility data and created two maps of
both where the children go and how long it took them to get there using a
special software called ArcGIS to show location and duration of children’s
everyday mobility movement patterns. The ﬁnding relevant to the GPS
component of the study suggests that the suburban children’s daily mobil-
ity is largely related to their friends rather than mainly traveling by their
own independently. Moving around on their own is not children’s ﬁrst
priority. Moving around based on the physical environment is also not
their preferred activity. Instead, children’s everyday mobility shows strong
social characteristics.
What can we learn from this study from the perspective of mobile
phone behavior? First, as one common mobile phone technology, GPS
can be used not only to guide people when traveling, but also to collect
empirical data about how children move around. This is an innovative use
of GPS in scientiﬁc research. Second, this study shows the complexity of
mobile phone behavior in two types of ways occurring almost simultan-
eously. This small group of Danish children carried mobile phones with
them when moving around daily for one week. At the same time, a few
researchers as another group of mobile phone users in this case used GPS
in the same mobile phones the children were carrying to track children’s
mobility and found speciﬁc patterns for their research. Third, the data
collected through GPS in the mobile phone can eﬀectively lead to visual-
ization of adolescents’ daily mobility patterns. Thus, it makes the graphic
data analysis possible.
.
Knowledge Syntheses: From Mobile Security
to Battery Explosion
After examining multiple everyday observations and empirical studies on
mobile phone technologies, it is time for us to view the forest of the
. Knowledge Syntheses

4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

scientiﬁc knowledge in this area. There are about twenty-ﬁve chapters in
the Encyclopedia of Mobile Phone Behavior that synthesize the scientiﬁc
knowledge about mobile phone behavior speciﬁcally related to diverse
mobile phone technologies. As shown in Table ., these chapters sum-
marize two sets of mobile phone technologies: () various technical fea-
tures, such as smartphones, text technology, apps, and sensors; and ()
various technologies used in diﬀerent contexts, such as those in medicine,
business, education, and daily life.
In addition to the Encyclopedia chapters, published review articles are
another eﬃcient way to access the synthesized knowledge about mobile
phone technologies. There are about twenty published reviews. Let us
focus on ﬁve good reviews as examples on ﬁve topics – security, texting,
apps, sensors, and batteries.
Table .The Encyclopedia Chapters on Technology-Based
Mobile Phone Behavior
Feature
Chapter Title
Smartphone
Using smartphones in the college classroom
Smartphone
Predicting psychological characteristics by smartphone usage behaviors
Smartphone
Smartphone health applications
Text
Texting: Its uses, misuses and eﬀects
Text
Adolescent text messaging
Text
Focus on text messages: A review of studies in French
Text
Text messaging in social protests
Text
Texting and Christian practice
App
Branded mobile apps: Possibilities for advertising in an emergent mobile
channel
App
The usage and applications of mobile apps
App
D talking-head mobile app
Sensor
Cognitive phone for sensing human behavior
Sensor
Mobile phone sensing in scientiﬁc research
Sensor
Mobile phones as ubiquitous social and environmental geo-sensors
Medicine
Healthcare applications for smartphones
Medicine
Mobile technology and cyberbullying
Medicine
Mobile phones for plastic surgery and burns: Current practice
Business
Human resource recruiting and selection using cellphone apps
Education
Educational potentials of SMS technology
Education
Mobile games and learning
Education
Exploring the use of mobile devices to support teacher education
Daily
Cell-phones, distracted driving, bans and fatalities
Daily
Mobile phones and driving
Daily
Mobile technology and social identity

Mobile Phone Technologies
4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

.
Mobile Devices: Security
The ﬁrst review article focuses on mobile devices or smartphones, espe-
cially on an important issue for smartphones, mobile security, from a
technical perspective. It is entitled “Survey on security for mobile devices”
and was published in in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorial by
two Italian researchers and one UK researcher, Mariantonietta La Polla,
Fabio Martinelli, and Daniele Sgandurra.The ﬁrst author is from the
Institute for Informatics and Telematics at the National Research Council
in Pisa, Italy, and has published multiple articles on security, data mining,
computer and society, and computer security and IT forensics. IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials is a free online journal published by
the IEEE Communications Society for tutorials and surveys covering all
aspects of the communications ﬁeld.
This twenty-six-page long review has seven major highlights related to
mobile security for smartphones. () Smartphones are becoming an ideal
target for security attacks for three major reasons: more people use smart-
phones to access the Internet via various networks, more malware pro-
grams have been produced by security attackers, and more users download
third-party apps into their smartphones without knowing they are rapidly
spreading malware. () Compared with computer security, smartphones
have more major security concerns due to mobility (e.g., being tampered
with easily), personalization (e.g., taking personal pictures), connectivity
(e.g., doing online banking any time), and multiplicity (e.g., having
multiple Internet apps). () As of , over distinct kinds of malware
have been identiﬁed. There are ﬁve major types of malware based on
methods of malware infection, including virus (replicating malware itself,
e.g., Dust), worm (replicating malware from one device to another, e.g.,
Cabir), Trojan (hiding malware inside a regular program, e.g., Liberty
Crack), rootkit (hiding malware inside an operating system, e.g., Locknut),
and botnot (allowing attackers to remotely control a device, e.g., Yxes). ()
Malware creates multiple security threats on privacy, intellectual property,
classiﬁed information, ﬁnancial assets, devices and services, and other
aspects through ten types of attacks, including data leakage, unintentional
disclosure of data, phishing attacks, spyware attacks, surveillance attacks,
and ﬁnancial malware attack. () There are two major types of technical
solutions to mobile security, including detecting intrusions in smartphones
La Polla, M., Martinelli, F., and Sgandurra, D. (). “A survey on security for mobile devices,”
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, (): –.
. Knowledge Syntheses

4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

(e.g., identifying smartphones’ abnormal behavior, such as higher power
consumption) and building trusted smartphones by measuring, storing,
reporting, and remedying malware programs (e.g., running a mandatory
procedure of secure booting while starting a smartphone).
.
Mobile Texting: Positive and Negative Sides
The second review we will discuss is a chapter from the Encyclopedia of
Mobile Phone Behavior. It is entitled “Texting: Its use, misuse, and eﬀects”
and is by Paola Pascual-Ferra from Loyola University in Maryland. She is
an Assistant Professor of Communication who has published several
articles on text-based communication and research methods. Although
she is still a junior researcher, her review on texting is comprehensive,
balanced, thoughtful, and interesting, and it is one of the outstanding
chapters of the Encyclopedia in synthesizing the current knowledge in a
given topic.
There are ﬁve highlights in this review. First, this chapter clariﬁes a few
related terms. Texting is the short term for text messaging, referring to
receiving and sending text messages via mobile phones. It diﬀers from
instant messaging, which is related to an application via the Internet rather
than via mobile phones. It also diﬀers from multi-media messaging services
that use multiple media (e.g., pictures and video) rather than text. Second,
the chapter speciﬁes multiple leading scholars, such as Chrispin Thurlow,
Naomi Baron, Clare Wood, and Scott Campbell, in the area of texting,
but it should also have included Larry Rosen. It will be particularly useful
for students and young researchers to stand on the shoulders of these giants
in future research. Third, the chapter analyzes both negative and positive
sides of texting behavior. Fourth, the chapter reviews seven major areas of
texting behavior: education, health, language, privacy, relationships, bully-
ing, and traﬃc safety. Fifth, it speciﬁes future research directions, includ-
ing the extension of the current research on privacy, bullying, safety, and
linguistic creativity, and the development of future research on new
applications such as Whatsapp and WeChat.
.
Mobile Apps: Health-Care Implications
Apps generally refer to mobile software applications. The Encyclopedia of
Mobile Phone Behavior includes multiple chapters on behavior related to
apps in () medicine (e.g., “Healthcare applications for smartphones,”
“Smartphone health applications”) and () business (“The usage and

Mobile Phone Technologies
4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

applications of mobile apps,” “Branded mobile apps: Possibilities for
advertising in an emergent mobile channel,” “Human resource recruiting
and selection using cellphone apps”). The chapter entitled “Healthcare
applications for smartphones” provides an excellent review of mobile apps
and is brieﬂy summarized below.
Relevant highlights of this review include the following: () the health-
care system is highly mobile in nature and the adaptation rates among
health professionals are about to percent in in some countries;
() apps are used by three major groups of users: professionals, students,
and patients; () for professionals, there are seven major types of apps:
diagnosis, drug references, medical calculation, literature search, clinic
communication, hospital information system, and medical training; and
() three important future research directions include identiﬁcation of the
best set of apps, use in developing countries, creation of quality control
and improvement, and standardization of the use of Bluetooth.
.
Mobile Sensing: Ubiquitous, Complex, and Fast Growing
The third review work we will discuss is “A survey of mobile phone
sensing.”There are a wide variety of mobile sensors installed in a mobile
phone, e.g., accelerometer, pedometer, light sensor, thermometer, air
humidity sensor, heart rate monitor, ﬁngerprint sensors, and radiation
sensor. This review eﬀectively synthesizes the basic knowledge of mobile
sensing, an important and fast-growing feature of mobile phones. Since
, it has been cited times and is rated as a highly cited paper based
on Web of Science (WOS). The authors are all researchers at the Mobile
Sensing Group at Dartmouth College. The ﬁrst four authors, Nicholas
Lane, Emiliano Miluzzo, Hong Lu, and Daniel Peebles, are PhD students,
and the last two, Tanzeem Choudhury and Andrew Campbell, are senior
scientists and faculty members in computer science, while Dr. Campbell
leads the Mobile Sensing Group. The ﬁrst author has published eight
articles on mobile sensing based on an initial search on WOS. The article
was published in IEEE Communications Magazine. The articles published
in this journal normally cover the latest advances in communication
technologies and are written by leading experts in a tutorial style. This
journal is the most popular among various important journals such as
IEEE Wireless Communications and IEEE Internet Computing Magazine
Lane, N. D., Miluzzo, E., Lu, H. et al. (). “A survey of mobile phone sensing,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, (): –.
. Knowledge Syntheses

4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

published by the IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers)
Communications Society – an independent society with over ,
members. Note that IEEE journals are typically labelled as magazines or
transactions (e.g., IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and
Networking, IEEE Transactions on Communications), but the contents are
research-oriented and the quality is particularly high. Based on the initial
screening presented above, we have reasons to believe that this article
should be trustworthy and readable.
The review has seven major sections and synthesizes various important
topics about mobile sensing, such as various sensors, various apps, major
sensing scales (individual sensing, group sensing, and community sensing),
and mobile sensing architecture. There are seven major ideas highly
relevant to mobile phone behavior research and analysis: () Sensors are
often invisible to ordinary users, but are extremely ubiquitous hardware
within a sensor-enabled mobile phone. Various powerful yet embedded
sensors in a mobile phone include a digital compass, gyroscope, GPS,
microphone, camera, and an accelerometer, and even more will be added
in the future. () There are extensive applications available in various areas,
including business, health care, social networks, environmental monitor-
ing, and transportation. () Various applications are used for diﬀerent
purposes of collecting, analyzing, and sharing simple and complex sensor
data. () Each major smartphone vendor has an app store (e.g., Apple
AppStore, Android Market, and Microsoft Mobile Marketplace). ()
Mobile sensing can be used on three major scales: personal (e.g., personal
ﬁtness), group (e.g., friend network), and community (e.g., an urban area)
sensing. () The process of data analysis and interpretation includes three
general steps: capturing raw sensor data from mobile phones; extracting
key features using learning algorithms; and identifying classes of human
behavior (e.g., driving, in conversation, making coﬀee). () There are two
major ways for users to be involved: participatory sensing – where the user
actively engages in the data collection activity and manually determines
how, when, what, and where to collect sensing data; and opportunistic
sensing – where the data collection is fully automated with no direct
control by users. () Users’ privacy is currently a major concern.
What can we learn from this technical review? From the mobile phone
behavior perspective, we can learn at least three ideas: () Sensors are
ubiquitous, complex, promising, and fast-growing technologies with broad
implications for modern human life. () Mobile phone sensors lead to
various unique, sensor-based mobile phone behaviors. () Sensors can be
used to study and modify human behavior eﬀectively and eﬃciently.

Mobile Phone Technologies
4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

.
Mobile Phone Batteries: Fire and Explosion
The last review is entitled “Thermal runaway caused ﬁre and explosion of
lithium ion battery” by Qingsong Wang, Ping Ping, Xuejuan Zhao,
Guanquan Chu, Jinhua Sun, and Chunhua Chen, a group of researchers
from State Key Laboratory of Fire Science at the University of Science and
Technology in China.The article was cited times based on Google
Scholar. Qingsong Wang is an Associate Professor of Fire Safety and has
published multiple articles on lithium battery safety. The review was
published in the Journal of Power Sources, an international journal on the
science and technology of electrochemical energy systems, including pri-
mary and secondary batteries, fuel cells, supercapacitors, and photo-
electrochemical cells since .
Batteries provide the power source for the mobile phone functions.
Without batteries, mobile phones cannot work. Historically, batteries have
been the bottleneck of mobile phone development. The battery is essen-
tially a device to store energy to make using a mobile device possible.
There is a large demand but slow progress for developing batteries. The
generations of batteries have moved from zinc-based, lead-based, nickel-
based, and now lithium-based. The lithium-ion battery is currently the
predominant power source for mobile phones, laptop computers, and
many other portable electronic devices, and is being used increasingly in
electric vehicles. Various battery problems are related to overcharging it,
charging it too fast, misuse, and malfunctions.
This is a very technical review involving substantial mathematical and
electrochemical background and thus it is not an easy read. There is no
good review available on mobile batteries and mobile phone behavior.
However, this review oﬀers the following insights relevant to mobile phone
batteries: () The current mobile phones most often have lithium-ion
batteries, with a few other types of batteries. The energy of a lithium-ion
battery is generated through an electrochemical process. It involves three
primary functional components – anode, cathode, and electrolyte. () Fires
and explosions of mobile phones or laptop computers have been widely
reported in the public media and many large companies recalled their
batteries. However, research data indicate the probability of battery ﬁres or
explosions is much lower than ordinary people initially thought, with a
probability of only one incidence in to million batteries. () The main
Wang, Q., Ping, P., Zhao, X. et al. (). “Thermal runaway caused ﬁre and explosion of lithium
ion battery,” Journal of Power Sources, : –.
. Knowledge Syntheses

4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

cause of ﬁres or explosions is overheated temperature or circuit short-
cutting in the battery. The large current ﬂows through the battery in a
short time period generate heat, trigger thermal runaways, and eventually
lead to ﬁres and explosions. () Technically, for the lithium-ion battery, it
is so-called thermal runaway that causes ﬁres or explosions. Generally,
thermal runaway occurs as a chain reaction, like the process of an atom
bomb. When an exothermic reaction as a heat-related chemical process in
a battery goes out of control, an increase in temperature causes the reaction
rate to increase, which causes a further increase in temperature and hence a
further increase in the reaction rate, which possibly results in an explosion.
() More speciﬁcally, usually, some rise in temperature is normal, as long
as the heat balance is made. The temperature of a lithium-ion cell is
determined by the heat balance between the amount of heat generated
and that dissipated in the cell. The heat generation follows the exponential
function and the heat dissipation keeps the linear function. When a cell is
heated above a certain temperature (usually above to degrees
Celsius), a chemical reaction between the electrodes and electrolyte occurs,
raising the internal temperature within the cell. If the cell can dissipate this
heat, its temperature will not rise abnormally. However, if the heat
generated is more than the amount that can be dissipated, the cell’s
temperature will increase rapidly. The rising temperature will further
accelerate the chemical reactions, causing even more heat to be produced,
eventually resulting in thermal runaway. () Two ways to enhance the
safety of batteries is either to have better materials and better safety designs
for the lithium-ion battery or to ﬁnd a way to release high pressure and
heat before thermal runaway occurs. New battery safety features such as
safety vents, thermal fuse, shutdown separators, and special battery man-
agement systems have been developed and tested.
In summary, the ﬁve reviews published either in several technology
journals or in the Encyclopedia of Mobile Phone Behavior synthesize the
existing research literature on how diﬀerent mobile phone technologies are
related to diﬀerent types of mobile phone behavior. Speciﬁcally, we can
develop a much broader view of: () how smartphones are vulnerable to
potential mobile security attacks; () how a common feature of mobile
phones, texting, can have both negative and positive behavior in
education, health, language, or traﬃc safety; () how health-care apps are
used by professionals for diagnosis, drug references, medical calculation,
literature search, clinic communication, hospital information system, and
medical training; () how a common hardware in mobile phones, sensors,
can be used in business, health care, social networks, environmental

Mobile Phone Technologies
4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

monitoring, and transportation; and () how a basic accessory of mobile
phones, batteries, are related to various overcharging battery problems,
including ﬁre and explosion.
.
Comparative Analyses: From Closed Captions to Texting
Televisions, computers, the Internet, and mobile phones are all modern
technologies for communication, information, and/or computation. How-
ever, these technologies have distinct technical features and serve diﬀerent
functions. An initial comparison of how these technologies are related to
human behavior will help us further understand mobile phone behavior
that is related to mobile phone technologies.
Historically, televisions became a popular device in the s, computers
in the s, the Internet and mobile phones in the s. Considering
diﬀerent technologies, one might think that the earlier technologies (e.g.,
televisions) are simpler than the more current ones (e.g., smartphones).
However, it is much more complicated in the real-life world because each
technology involves unique or similar technical features, has always improved
over time substantially, and is often integrated with other technologies.
Consider technology-related human behavior. One might think that each
technology has its own set of features and thus each must be related to a
distinct set of human behavior. The existing literature indicates, however,
that for various technologies, their technical features and behavioral features
interact with each other in complex ways due to diverse users, diverse
activities, and diverse eﬀects. Below are four examples of text-related tech-
nology applications, i.e., closed captioning for television, Microsoft Word for
computers, e-mail for the Internet, and text messaging for mobile phones.
.
Study : Closed Captions
The ﬁrst example relates to “On-screen print: The role of captions as a
supplemental literacy tool” by Deborah Linebarger and Jessica Taylor Pio-
trowski from the Annenberg School for Communication at the University of
Pennsylvania.It was published in in the Journal of Research in Reading.
The study was an experimental one. The participants were seventy-two
elementary students in the United States, many of whom spoke English as
their second language. They were randomly placed in the intervention group
Linebarger, D., Piotrowski, J. T., and Greenwood, C. R. (). “On screen print: The role of
captions as a supplemental literacy tool,” Journal of Research in Reading, (): –.
. Comparative Analyses

4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

watching six -minute television programs with on-screen closed captions
and the control group doing so without on-screen closed captions. After
viewing each clip, students were assessed on word recognition and compre-
hension, as well as six general literacy and reading skills. The intervention
group was found to perform signiﬁcantly or nearly signiﬁcantly better in all
tasks than the control group.
.
Study : Microsoft Word
Another example concerns “Comparative study between two ESL writing
approaches: Computer processing Microsoft Word vs. hand writing of two
freshmen college Saudi student groups.” This comparative study was a
dissertation study. It investigated the eﬀectiveness of two writing methods,
hand writing (using paper and pencil) and computer processing (using
Microsoft Word), in improving the English writing of freshmen students at
two colleges in Saudi Arabia. One hundred students studying English from
two colleges in Saudi Arabia were selected. One group of students was
designated to write using Microsoft Word and the other wrote by hand using
paper and pencil. Their writing quality was assessed twice. Three dependent
variables were measured: overall writing quality, writing apprehension, and
attitudes toward writing with a computer. They were based on two independ-
ent variables: gender and writing method. The research was designed to assess
whether students actually wrote better using word-processing software than
they did when writing with paper and pencil. The results showed that: () for
overall writing quality, the students using Word wrote signiﬁcantly better
than the students using paper and pencil; () for writing apprehension, no
signiﬁcant diﬀerences were found between the students using Word and the
students using paper and pencil; and () for attitudes toward writing with a
computer, again, no signiﬁcant diﬀerences were found between the students
using Word and the students using paper and pencil.
.
Study : E-mail
The third article we will brieﬂy introduce is “An exploratory study of
e-mail application on FL writing performance” by Hui-Fang Shang,a
Professor of Applied English at I-Shou University in Taiwan who has
multiple publications on teaching English as a foreign language and
Shang, H. F. (). “An exploratory study of e-mail application on FL writing performance,”
Computer Assisted Language Learning, (): –.

Mobile Phone Technologies
4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

curriculum/instructional design. This article was published in in
Computer Assisted Language Learning, a journal that has focused on the
use of computers in ﬁrst and second language learning, teaching, and
testing for twenty-nine years since . In the study, the main objective
is to examine the overall eﬀects for non-traditional students of using
electronic mail on the improvement of syntactic complexity, grammatical
accuracy, and lexical density.
The participants were forty freshmen students enrolled in an English
reading course. The students were asked to e-mail their initial writing to a
peer for feedback and then submit their ﬁnal writing. Two computer
programs, Wordsmith Tools and Word Perfect Grammatik, were used
to assess the writing quality – an innovative approach. The major ﬁndings
were that signiﬁcant improvements were found for the writing in all three
aspects – syntactic complexity, grammatical accuracy, and lexical density.
.
Study : Texting
The last article is entitled “Supporting mobile learners: An action research
project.”The authors are two researchers from Auckland University in
New Zealand: Krassie Petrova, a Senior Lecturer in Information Systems
and Information Technology who has published extensively on mobile
learning, and Chun Li, an innovations specialist. This article was published
in the International Journal of Web-Based Learning and Teaching Technolo-
gies, a relatively new journal of eleven years, launched in . It is among
the few that have examined how to use texting/SMS to help students who
speak English as their second language. Twenty international undergradu-
ates participated in the study for eight weeks. Students ﬁrst learned new
words in a class. After the class, the researcher texted students a test
question based on the new words learned in the class, the students
answered, and then the researcher provided feedback. At the end of the
study, students were given an overall vocabulary test and an interview. For
the second cycle, the procedure was modiﬁed by asking students questions
about new words ﬁrst and ending with a survey. The study found that: ()
students’ vocabulary test scores improved signiﬁcantly after they actively
engaged in text-based learning; and () students reported that the text-
based learning was a useful experience.
Petrova, K. and Li, C. (). “Supporting mobile learners: An action research project,” Web-Based
and Blended Educational Tools and Innovations, (): –.
. Comparative Analyses

4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

To summarize this section on comparative analyses, we can think about
what we can learn from them in better understanding the complexity of
technology-focused mobile phone behavior. First, one might intuitively
consider television-related behavior, computer-related behavior, Internet-
related behavior, and mobile phone-related behavior separately. However,
comparative analysis helps us to see the integration and interrelationship of
behavior, just like the integration of technology. We might call respecting
each technology and appreciating each technology-related behavior the
diversity principle. Second, the four study examples discussed above (i.e.,
closed captions, Microsoft Word, e-mail, and texting) suggest two basic
ways to use text-based technologies to help ESL students. One is to use the
technology to promote English as second language learning directly (see
the ﬁrst study on reading and the second study on writing) or indirectly
(see the third study on peer review and the fourth study on after-class
exercises and tests). Third, despite the speciﬁc focus on texting and ESL
deliberately chosen in this section to compare relatively similar cases, there
is still a wide variety of dimensions and aspects of mobile phone behavior.
For instance, Study on closed captions focused on diﬃcult word recog-
nition for young readers, Study on Microsoft Word focused on English
class writing with college students, Study on e-mail focused on Taiwanese
adult students and writing complexity, and Study on texting focused on
New Zealand college international students learning new words. Fourth, it
has been widely discussed that the medium is the message (i.e., the form of
a medium inﬂuences how the message is perceived)and technological
aﬀordances are important (i.e., we should understand inherent and per-
ceived potentials that a new technology can oﬀer).Mobile phone tech-
nologies are rich, diverse, and integrative. Thus, mobile phone behavior
involves more technology options than traditional TV, PC, and Internet,
while each technology oﬀers unique features in relation to mobile phones
(e.g., mobile TV, tablet computer, and mobile Internet).
.
Complex Thinking: Diverse Technologies, Complex Behavior
At the beginning of this chapter, we saw Sunny’s quick responses about
mobile phone technologies. Now it should be clear to us the strengths and
limitations of his intuitive knowledge. First, his responses focused on
Marshall, M. and Fiore, Q. (). The Medium is the Message. An Inventory of Eﬀects. New York:
Bantam Books.
Norman, D. A. (). The Psychology of Everyday Things. New York: Basic Books.

Mobile Phone Technologies
4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

features, hardware, and apps – three components of mobile phone tech-
nologies. This is, of course, useful and important. Second, his responses
concerned only a small part of the diverse mobile technologies. Mobile
phones, networks, and accessories are all important components, as we can
see from the ten cases, the ﬁve studies, and the four review articles
discussed above. Third, although he was not asked about how mobile
phone behavior is related to mobile technologies, this chapter shows that
diﬀerent technologies will connect with diﬀerent users and form diﬀerent
activities, leading to diﬀerent eﬀects.
In contrast to Sunny’s intuitive responses, Figure ., as a summary of
the entire chapter, shows how diverse mobile phone technologies are and
how these technologies are related to complex mobile phone behavior. The
ten daily observations reveal a typology of mobile phone technologies,
mobile phone handsets, features, hardware and software, network services,
and accessories such as batteries and chargers. The ﬁve studies show how
smartphones, apps, features, GPS, cameras, and base stations are related to
various users, activities, and eﬀects, resulting in various mobile phone
behaviors. Five review articles or chapters synthesized ﬁve areas of research
on mobile phone behavior related to security, texting, apps, sensors, and
batteries. Four articles were used to show comparative similarities and
diﬀerences in using text to help ESL individuals through televisions,
personal computers, the Internet, and mobile phones.
Mobile phone
users
Mobile Phone Technologies
1. Diverse Phones 
2.1 Signature Touch and Freedom 251 
4.1 Mobile Devices: Security 
2. Diverse Features
2.2 Flight 93 and Ferry Sewol
3.2 Calling vs. Texting: Adolescents’ Decisions
4.2 Mobile Texting: Positive and Negative Sides
3. Diverse Software and Hardware
2.3 Leo Grand and Vincent
3.1 Smartphone Apps: Users in Korea
3.3 Mobile Cameras: Patients with Nasal Bone Injuries
3.5 GPS: Children’s Mobility
4.3 Mobile Apps: Health-Care Implications
4.4 Mobile Sensing: Ubiquitous, Complex, and
      Fast Growing
4. Diverse Accessories
2.4 Galaxy S4 and Energous 
4.5 Mobile Phone Batteries: Fire and Explosion
5. Diverse Networks
2.5 Wi-Fi in Nanjin and Li-Fi in Dubai 
3.4 Base Stations: Childhood Cancers
Mobile phone
activities
Mobile phone 
effects
Figure .
A Summary Diagram of Technology-Based Mobile Phone Behavior
. Complex Thinking

4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

Of course, more eﬀects are needed to further understand the complexity
of mobile phone behavior related to diverse technologies. Among various
future directions, two are important. First, how should we keep up with
new advances in mobile phone technologies and deal with new mobile-
phone-related behavior? Getting familiar with various core journals by the
IEEE, publishing good reviews, receiving continuing education, and
timely updating and brieﬁng are useful. Second, how should we handle
the diversity in medicine, education, business, and other domains? The
knowledge and eﬀorts are unevenly distributed across domains. Thus,
interdisciplinary research communications and collaborations are useful.

Mobile Phone Technologies
4
13:09:00, subject to the Cambridge Core


Mobile Phone Activities
Outline
.
Intuitive Thinking: Elizabeth’s Thoughtful Responses
.
Everyday Observations: From Draining a Pond to Recycling Mobile Phones
.
Access: Draining a Pond
.
Use: Greeting the Pope and Dining without Smartphone
.
Action: Hacking into Mark’s Accounts and Hacking into SS
.
Reuse: Collecting Mobile Phones
.
Empirical Studies: From Accepting Services to Managing Waste
.
Access: Accepting Advanced Services
.
Use: Using Mobile Phones in Africa and Misusing at the Workplace
.
Action: Sexting and Gaming
.
Reuse: Recycling in China
.
Knowledge Syntheses: From Complex Access to WEEE Management
.
Four Kinds of Access
.
Three Areas of Use
.
Three Types of Gaming
.
Four Trends of Recycling
.
Comparative Analyses: From Screen Time to Tweeting Diﬀerence
.
Screen Time
.
Tweeting
.
Complex Thinking: Diverse Activities, Complex Behavior
.
Intuitive Thinking: Elizabeth’s Thoughtful Responses
Elizabeth is a talented graduate student. When I asked her about what kinds
of human activities are involved with the use of mobile phones and to give
three to ﬁve quick examples, she gave very detailed responses, the kind that
an outstanding student would give in a ﬁnal exam. Her detailed responses
are as follows: () Connecting with each other through mobile phones in

5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

diﬀerent ways: making phone calls, sending WeChat voice messages, using
FaceTime, making video calls, texting, using WeChat word messages, using
Facebook messenger, and using QQ messenger. () Sharing and gathering
information/thoughts: posting on Facebook/Instagram/Twitter/Weibo/
WeChat within friendship circles, posting in public forums, using Google
search, using LinkedIn for job postings, and using Google maps. ()
Entertainment: shopping (Amazon, Taobao, Walmart, Target . . . all have
smartphone apps), watching videos/listening to music/the radio (YouTube,
mobile phone games). () Banking: using Bank of America, Chase, or
Discover apps. () Travelling: booking hotels, buying tickets, etc. via Price-
line app or calling taxi/car rental (e.g., Uber). () Health monitoring:
keeping track of heart rate, walking distance, and sleeping quality.
In her responses above, Elizabeth presented six major types of mobile
phone activities, from interpersonal communications to information
sharing, entertainment, banking, travelling, and health monitoring. She
also oﬀered various speciﬁc examples, such as making video calls, posting
on Instagram, shopping with a Walmart app, and using Uber to get taxis.
Nobody perhaps would criticize that her responses are too narrow or too
general. Nobody would deny that her knowledge about mobile phone
activities is comprehensive and speciﬁc. If it were in a ﬁnal exam, such
thoughtful responses would likely receive a perfect score.
What can we learn from these responses from the perspective of mobile
phone activities? First, Elizabeth speciﬁed various mobile phone activities.
Mobile phone activities refer to various interactions between mobile phone
users and mobile phone technologies. Casually, this concept might be
confusing to some people. For example, they might think that mobile
phone activities are equivalent to or synonymous with mobile phone
behavior. By the deﬁnition made in this book, however, mobile phone
behavior consists of four basic elements (users, technologies, activities, and
eﬀects), with mobile phone activities being the third basic element. In a
real-life process, mobile phone users interact with mobile technologies to
generate mobile phone activities, resulting in mobile phone eﬀects. Con-
sider a mobile phone user (e.g., a teenager) and a mobile phone technology
(e.g., an iPhone). The teenager interacts with the iPhone to generate a
mobile phone activity (e.g., texting a friend), which yields a mobile phone
eﬀect (e.g., an existing friendship bond is enhanced). In other words, a user
and a phone need to connect and interact with each other to develop a
meaningful activity that eventually leads to a certain type of eﬀect. These
four elements in a sequence form various types of mobile phone behavior.
That is why we need to study mobile phone activities, after studying

Mobile Phone Activities
5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

mobile phone users and mobile phone technologies, and before studying
mobile phone eﬀects.
Second, although Elizabeth’s responses were quite thoughtful, the activ-
ities she discussed were generally on the positive side (e.g., communicating
with good friends or conveniently banking through an app) rather than on
the negative side (e.g., bullying among classmates or hacking into a bank).
We should not always automatically assume that every mobile phone
activity we are experiencing is useful and beneﬁcial to everyone at all times.
Third, despite the fact that Elizabeth’s knowledge about mobile phone
behavior is comprehensive, her six types of activities and dozens of
examples generally focus on a typical aspect, that is, mobile phone use across
diﬀerent contents and domains. These two concepts, mobile phone use
and mobile phone activity, are often used interchangeably. However, while
regular mobile phone use is indeed an important part of mobile phone
activities, it is not all of them. We should look at mobile phone activities
even more broadly and comprehensively, from the very beginning when
mobile users start to interact with mobile phones (e.g., buying a phone) to
the very end when mobile users stop interacting with mobile phones (e.g.,
updating to a new phone), rather than focus only on mobile phone use. In
other words, it is important to explore the two ends of mobile phone
activities rather than focus just on the in-between.
After discussing mobile phone users and mobile phone technologies in
previous chapters, this chapter focuses speciﬁcally on mobile phone
activities. Our learning goals are to appreciate the complexity of mobile
phone behavior more broadly and deeply and to analyze the complexity of
mobile phone behavior more eﬀectively and eﬃciently from the perspec-
tive of mobile phone activities such as mobile learning and mobile gaming.
After reading this chapter, we should develop better scientiﬁc knowledge
about mobile phone activities than Elizabeth’s initial ones.
.
Everyday Observations: From Draining a Pond to
Recycling Mobile Phones
.
Access: Draining a Pond
In August ,a -year-old German boy was ﬁshing with his friends in
a small pond owned by a ﬁshing club. He accidentally dropped his iPhone
See http://metro.co.uk////german-schoolboy-drops-phone-on-ﬁshing-trip-drains-entire-pond-
to-look-for-it-/?iframe=true&preview=true.
. Everyday Observations

5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

from his ﬁshing boat into the pond. He loved his phone, especially since it
had all of the phone numbers, pictures, and videos of many good friends
stored on it. Thus, he tried to get his phone from the bottom of the pond.
First, he asked the ﬁshing club to loan him a diving suit but the club
refused to do so. Then, he found a powerful water pump from somewhere,
went back to the pond that evening, and attempted to drain all of the
water out of the small pond. He hooked the pump up to a nearby toilet in
the club, but the toilet was not connected to a sewer line. All of the drained
water came out of the toilet and turned the club’s parking lot into a little
swimming pool. Eventually, the club owner found out what had caused
the water problem in the parking lot and called the police. This German
boy was required to pay for the toilet damage, clean up the mess, and reﬁll
the pond. Reﬂecting on this accident, the boy only regretted that he could
have made his plan work and found his iPhone if he had brought two
powerful pumps rather than just one.
We do not know whether or not this stubborn German teenager
eventually got his iPhone back from the bottom of the pond, but what
can this funny story tell us about mobile phone activities? First, this story
illustrates beautifully that phone ownership is not equal to phone accessi-
bility. By dropping the phone into the pond, this teenager, while still being
the owner of the phone, could not access his phone. Users must need
access to the phone after buying it and before using it. Thus, accessibility is
the starting point for mobile phone activities and interactions.
The second point we can take away from the German boy’s story is that
phone accessibility could be related to various sophisticated issues of mobile
phone behavior. For the German boy, he took several ridiculous actions in
order to regain accessibility to his mobile phone. Other similar accessibility
issues include mobile phone theft, phone power shutdown, skills to use
mobile phones, privacy information protection, and password set-up
procedures.
Third, the German boy’s story shows that phone accessibility has two
sides – the positive side (e.g., how to increase accessibility) and the negative
side (e.g., when one loses accessibility). Ordinary users will face various
challenges of losing or decreasing accessibility to mobile phones in daily
life rather than always gaining it. Often, losing accessibility, like the
German boy dropping his phone into the pond, may be even more
devastating for him than gaining accessibility (e.g., buying a new phone).
In other special cases, like Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, the younger of the Tsar-
naev brothers who was responsible for the terrorist attack during the
Boston marathon, he was the owner of his mobile phone, but really

Mobile Phone Activities
5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

wanted to destroy the phone so that police could not regain accessibility to
ﬁnd evidence of his criminal behavior in his phone. Thus, we might need
to pay more attention to the negative side of accessibility.
Lastly, besides the story about the German boy draining the water out
of the pond to ﬁnd his iPhone, many similar stories about people going to
great lengths to avoid losing access to their phones have been reported. For
instance, after a Chinese farmer dropped his phone into a large septic tank,
he jumped into it and lost consciousness due to the strong chemical smell.
A few of his family members then jumped into the tank to try and save
him but everyone ended up dying. An American girl refused to give her
new iPhone to a street robber in the evening and almost got killed. An
Asian boy addicted to his mobile phone tried to poison his grandma after
she hid his phone. Of course, one of the largest and most controversial
cases of mobile phone accessibility was when the FBI wanted to hack into
the iPhone belonging to the San Bernardino shooter in California
and demanded that Apple unlock the phone. Thus, we need to understand
more about this issue of phone accessibility.
.
Use: Greeting the Pope and Dining without Smartphone
In February ,Pope Francis visited Mexico for the ﬁrst time.
A member of the organizing committee for the visit announced at a news
conference that Mexican worshipers wanted to receive the Holy Father
with a special wall, a wall of light and prayer. After Pope Francis landed at
the airport, he took the bulletproof Popemobile to the Vatican’s diplo-
matic mansion in Mexico City. The road he had to travel on is about
miles long. Most Mexican people own mobile phones, so thousands of
worshipers lined the roadside holding up their mobile phones to form the
special wall of light for Pope Francis.
Before his Mexican visit, on November , ,Pope Francis actually
talked about mobile phone use at St. Peter’s Square in the Vatican. He
commented that a family that rarely eats together or just looks at smart-
phones or watches television without good conversations is not much of a
family. The Pope felt that the family meal is a great symbol of togetherness,
but is disappearing in some societies. He advised people to not use their
phones at the family dinner table. This was not the ﬁrst time the Pope spoke
See www.theguardian.com/world//feb//pope-francis-to-be-greeted-by-km-of-mobile-phone-
lights-on-mexico-city-visit.
See www.romereports.com////pope-put-down-your-cell-phones-and-talk-to-one-another.
. Everyday Observations

5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

out against the misuse of mobile phones. In August , he warned that
while the Internet and smartphones can simplify and improve quality of life,
they may distract attention away from what is really important.
These small stories about Pope Francis vividly illustrate the second issue
related to mobile phone activities, the issue of mobile phone use. First, it is
easy to see through the story of the Mexican wall of mobile phones how
popular mobile phone use is right now, even in developing countries like
Mexico. It may not have been possible to create the Mexican wall of
mobile phone lights as little as ﬁve years ago, but now mobile phones
are a common part of everyday life. Second, while mobile phones can be
used in a wide variety of conventional ways, such as calling, texting,
gaming, and sharing, as Elizabeth pointed out rightfully, they can also be
used for various special purposes. The Mexican wall of mobile phones
represents one of the very special mobile phone activities that Mexican
people used to creatively express their extraordinary enthusiasm for the
Pope’s visit. Lastly, we can take away from the stories about the Pope that
while mobile phones can be used in normal and even positive, creative
ways, there can be a negative side of mobile phone use, from non-use, to
misuse, excessive use, problematic use, and pathological use. Pope Francis’
advice of eating with your family but not with your mobile phones pointed
out the adverse impact of mobile phone misuse on family life and the fact
that he had to address it shows how pervasive this issue has become. Thus,
like the issue of accessibility we discussed in the previous section, we
should always look at mobile phone use from both sides, positive and
negative, rather than just one side.
.
Action: Hacking into Mark’s Accounts and Hacking into SS
On June , ,Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg’s social media
accounts, including Twitter, Instagram, and Pinterest, were hacked by a
hacker group called OurMine. They found that Mark used a very simple
password, “dadada,” for all of his accounts. To prove their hacking success,
OurMine posted a screenshot on the Internet, claiming that they knew
Mark’s password through a leaked LinkedIn database, gained access to his
Twitter, Instagram, and Pinterest accounts, and wanted to test the security
of his accounts and sound the alert about the security ﬂaws that existed in
Mark’s accounts. It is not the ﬁrst time that hackers have reported
See www.nbcnews.com/tech/tech-news/zuckerberg-s-social-media-accounts-hacked-password-revealed-
dadada-n.

Mobile Phone Activities
5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

accessing Mark’s accounts. On August , , his Facebook account
was hacked by a Pakistani hacker who successfully posted his own message
on Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg’s oﬃcial page.
On April , ,the television program Minutes on ABC aired a
report called Hacking Your Phone. In this report, Sharyn Alfonsi inter-
viewed Karsten Nohl, a top German hacker, who demonstrated how to
actually hack into the phone of Representative Ted Lieu, a congressman
from California with strong knowledge about cyber security and a Stanford
graduate with a computer science degree. During the interview, Nohl
speciﬁed that his team had the ability to exploit a security ﬂaw they
discovered in Signaling System Seven (SS), a vital global network that
connects various phone carriers. Nohl and his team were legally granted
access to SSby several international cell phone carriers. In exchange, the
carriers wanted Nohl to test the network’s vulnerability to attack.
These two stories share a key similarity. They both involve hacking
activities related to mobile phones, OurMine hacking into Mark Zucker-
berg’s accounts and Karsten Nohl’s team hacking into SS. From the
mobile phone activity perspective, these two stories show that the hun-
dreds of mobile phone interactions include not only many typical ones
such as learning, banking, shopping, and gaming, but also some atypical
ones such as hacking, stealing, and robbing mobile phones. On the other
hand, these two stories have one important diﬀerence. OurMine hacked
into Mark Zuckerberg’s accounts without his consent for the purposes of
drawing attention to his security and privacy setting ﬂaws while showing
oﬀtheir hacking skills. In comparison, companies actually hired and paid
Karsten Nohl to hack into SSwith their consent in order to ﬁnd system
vulnerabilities they should then improve on. Overall, even for the atypical
activity of hacking, there are diﬀerences in positive or negative intentions
and inﬂuences of these activities. Again, it is important to always be aware
that mobile phone activities can have both positive and negative sides.
However, this key issue was not mentioned at all in Elizabeth’s intuitive
responses as presented at the beginning of this chapter.
.
Reuse: Collecting Mobile Phones
James Maturo is a resident of Paulsboro, New Jersey. Since ,he has
been collecting old mobile phones and then donating them to community
See www.cbsnews.com/news/-minutes-hacking-your-phone/.
See www.cellphonebank.org/press-coverage.asp.
. Everyday Observations

5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

service organizations. For example, he donated phones to the Red
Cross, which distributed them to Hurricane Katrina victims. He also
donated another phones to the Cell Phone Bank, which was
founded in and has provided thousands of emergency cell phones to
victims’ services organizations nationwide. These old phones have been
used for senior citizens, abused or battered women, and disabled veterans
for communication. In case of emergencies, people can dial even
without a proper cell phone plan. One such phone was given to a woman
in Las Vegas who had been abused by a man who was in and out of prison.
One night, the abuser showed up at the victim’s house after he cut the
victim’s landline phone so she could not call for help. The victim grabbed
the emergency phone provided to her by the Cell Phone Bank, ran
into a locked bedroom, and was able to call for help. As a result, the abuser
was caught, arrested, and the victim is alive today. After that, James
Maturo received a letter from the Cell Phone Bank thanking him
for collecting and donating the old phone.
This is a very interesting story for two major reasons. First, while
millions of new mobile phones are sold, thousands of old, used phones
retire every year. How to handle these old phones leads to one special
mobile phone activity, the mobile phone recycling activity. In general, we
can consider mobile phone recycling as the end point of mobile phone
interaction for mobile phone users and mobile phone technologies, while
mobile phone accessing is the beginning of the interaction. Second, mobile
phone recycling can further lead to diﬀerent results, from accumulating a
large amount of electronic waste and seriously polluting the environment
to recycling old phones. James Maturo and the Cell Phone Bank
maximized mobile phone donations and their behavior not only helps
reduce electronic waste and protects the environment, it also helps oﬀer
special social services and support to many of those, like the abused woman
in Las Vegas, who might otherwise not be able to access a phone for
emergencies. There are many other good stories like these.We should not
ignore this type of mobile phone activity.
To end this section, we can compare Elizabeth’s initial responses with
the stories discussed here. Elizabeth’s responses covered various typical,
positive mobile phone activities, like communicating, banking, and
gaming. The cases that followed further indicate two important points.
First, mobile phone activities have both positive and negative sides rather
than a positive side only. Elizabeth listed typical positive everyday phone
See www.cellphonebank.org/press-coverage.asp.

Mobile Phone Activities
5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

activities such as collecting and donating old phones and the other stories
pointed out atypical negative activities such as hacking into people’s
accounts. Second, mobile phone activities concern various time points,
from the starting point of mobile phone accessibility to the end point of
mobile phone recycling, rather than just mobile phone use and actions. In
other words, there is a life cycle of mobile phone interactions between
mobile users and mobile technologies, and while we tend to think about
and focus on use and activities in the middle of the life cycle, we should
not ignore the beginning and end points where equally important activities
occur. Clearly, these stories create a much more complex picture of mobile
phone activities by deepening (e.g., considering the negative side) and
broadening (e.g., considering the recycling) Elizabeth’s intuitive responses.
The next section will present mobile phone activities in the research world
rather than in the real-life world.
.
Empirical Studies: From Accepting Services to Managing Waste
.
Access: Accepting Advanced Services
The ﬁrst article we will discuss is called “An assessment of advanced mobile
services acceptance: Contributions from TAM and diﬀusion theory
models.”It uses two well-known theories, TAM and diﬀusion theory,
to examine how people accept new mobile services for banking, gaming, or
parking rather than traditional mobile services for calling and texting.
Developed by Fred Davis,the technology acceptance model (TAM)
suggests that when users are presented with a new technology, important
factors (e.g., perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use) inﬂuence their
decision about how and when they will accept it. Advanced by Everett
Rogers,the diﬀusion of innovations theory describes and explains the
process of adaptation of new technologies. The article has been widely
cited times according to Google Scholar. The authors are two Spanish
researchers, Carolina López-Nicolás and Francisco Molina-Castillo, and
one Dutch researcher, Harry Bouwman. The ﬁrst author Carolina López-
Nicolás, is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Management and
López-Nicolás, C., Molina-Castillo, F. J., and Bouwman, H. (). “An assessment of advanced
mobile services acceptance: Contributions from TAM and diﬀusion theory models,” Information &
Management, (): –.
Davis, F. D. (). “Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of
information technology,” MIS Quarterly, (): –.
Rogers, E. M. (). Diﬀusion of Innovations (th edn.). New York: Free Press.
. Empirical Studies

5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

Finance at the University of Murcia, Spain. She has published about forty
articles on knowledge management, information systems, and mobile
communications based on information on ResearchGate. The article we
will be discussing was published in in Information & Management,
which has published articles on designing, implementing, and managing
information systems applications (e.g., training and education, managerial
policies and activities) since . The fact that this article has been cited
times, the author’s forty publication records, and established journal
reputation gives us a good impression about its credibility.
In the study, the authors chose a representative sample of Dutch
residents to participate in a survey. The researchers attempted to test how
behavioral intention is associated with seven variables, such as media
inﬂuence (e.g., advertisements suggest people should use advanced mobile
services), social inﬂuence (e.g., people around us think we should use
advanced mobile services), perceived ﬂexibility beneﬁts (e.g., people can
use mobile services anytime and anywhere), and perceived status beneﬁts
(e.g., using advanced mobile services is valuable). Structural equation
modeling was used to analyze the data. It was found that: () media
inﬂuence impacts social inﬂuence; and () social inﬂuence impacts all ﬁve
remaining mediating variables (e.g., perceived ﬂexibility beneﬁts and per-
ceived status beneﬁts) related to behavioral intention.
This is a typical study that we frequently see on the topic of behavioral
intention in various journals. What can we learn about the complexity of
activity-related mobile phone behavior from this study? First, a number of
issues, such as mobile phone services, advanced mobile phone services,
intention to use these services, and switching between diﬀerent services are
real-life, complex, and important issues related to accessing mobile phones
rather than just issues related to mobile phones alone. Without basic and
advanced services, mobile phones will not be able to work and mobile
phone behavior will not be able to occur. Second, related to the ﬁrst point,
users’ acceptance, adoption, attitude, or intentions of using mobile phones
and mobile phone services all concern mobile phone access and are the
very beginning of mobile phone activity. Only after users ﬁrst decide to use
a certain mobile phone or a certain service will we be able to see how they
will use mobile phones for various purposes and functions such as calling,
texting, gaming, or learning. Third, besides many other factors such as
product/service price and technical features, media inﬂuence and social
inﬂuence play an important role in inﬂuencing users’ acceptance of a given
mobile phone service. Fourth, multiple other factors also inﬂuence users’
intended action after media inﬂuence and social inﬂuence. Therefore, we

Mobile Phone Activities
5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

can conclude that the process of determining how and why to use a phone
or a service is complex rather than simple, involving multiple factors
through multiple pathways.
.
Use: Using Mobile Phones in Africa and Misusing at the Workplace
Now we will examine a research report released by the Pew Research
Center in . As we introduced in Chapter , the Pew Research Center,
or Pew, is an internationally well-known research ﬁrm or fact tank (a
research institution for producing fact-based information rather than one
for generating idea-based solutions, or a so-called think tank) that has
published a series of highly regarded reports on trends of using media, the
Internet, and mobile phones for decades. The title of the report we will be
discussing is “Cell phones in Africa: Communication lifeline.” It addresses
the current status of mobile phone use in Africa.This report was
produced by a team of more than ﬁfteen researchers, with the lead
researcher being Jacob Poushter. Jacob Poushter is a senior researcher at
the Pew Research Center and has written multiple research reports on
international public opinions, including “Internet usage in the emerging
and developing world.” While the “Cell Phones in Africa” report is not a
typical journal article having gone through the peer-review process, it was
produced by a group of researchers and methodologists at Pew and should
pass our initial trustworthiness screening.
The report presents a survey study examining mobile phone use in seven
sub-Saharan African nations, namely: South Africa, Nigeria, Senegal,
Kenya, Ghana, Tanzania, and Uganda. Roughly ,residents from each
of the seven countries participated in a survey with a sampling method
called “multi-stage cluster sampling” and stratiﬁed by certain features such
as region and urbanicity. A total of ,face-to-face interviews with
adults were conducted from April to June , . The results were
from multiple survey items in the Spring Pew Global Attitudes
Survey (e.g., Question #: Do you own a cell phone? Question #b:
In the past months, have you used your cell phone to do any of the
following things? b. take pictures or video.).
The major ﬁndings include that: () to percent of the participants
reported owning mobile phones, and this penetration rate of mobile
phones (i.e., the percentage of the population in a given area that has
purchased or owned a mobile phone) in South Africa and Nigeria was the
See www.pewresearch.org.
. Empirical Studies

5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

same as in the United States, while more than percent did not have a
working landline telephone at home; () , , and percent of the
participants reported using their mobile phones for sending text messages,
taking pictures or video, and doing mobile banking as the top three most
popular activities respectively; () educated (e.g., percent in Nigeria),
younger (e.g., percent in Nigeria), and English-speaking Africans (e.g.,
percent in Nigeria) own smartphones; and () substantial variations in
mobile phone use exist among the seven countries, with South Africa and
Nigeria at the high end and Tanzania and Uganda at the low end (e.g.,
percent of the participants in South Africa had smartphones, compared
with only percent in Uganda). What do these results mean and why are
they important? These ﬁndings provide a general picture of mobile phone
use as well as mobile phone ownership in Africa, with variations being a
key feature.
After seeing what happened with mobile phone use in Africa, now let us
discuss a diﬀerent topic: mobile phone misuse rather than regular mobile
phone use. The article we will examine is entitled “Managing mobile
phones: A work/non-work collision in small business,”which looks at
mobile phone use for work and non-work purposes in the small business
setting. This article has been cited twenty-two times by researchers study-
ing work–life balance in using mobile phones based on Google Scholar.
The authors are Keith Townsend and Lyn Batchelor. The ﬁrst author,
Keith Townsend, is an Associate Professor in the Department of Employ-
ment Relations and Human Resources at Griﬃth University of Australia
and has published several articles on mobile phone use at work in his early
career. This article was published in in New Technology, Work and
Employment, an established Wiley journal publishing research on techno-
logical changes in the workplace for thirty-one years.
This article reports two case studies. The ﬁrst is about a small real estate
ﬁrm with ten employees. The researchers interviewed one manager and
four employees from the real estate ﬁrm in . The second case study is
about a retail business store that also had ten full-time workers. The
researchers interviewed two managers and three employees from the store
in . Interviews were transcribed and analyzed to ﬁnd emerging themes
of work/non-work interactions and control and technology. A major dif-
ference was found between these two small business units. The real estate
ﬁrm actually provided mobile phones to their employees, who used them
Townsend, K. and Batchelor, L. (). “Managing mobile phones: A work/non-work collision in
small business,” New Technology, Work and Employment, (): –.

Mobile Phone Activities
5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

for business and personal matters. In contrast, the retail store did not even
allow employees to use phones at work unless it was an emergency.
However, some store employees complained about the no mobile phone
use policy and still often used them for personal matters when their bosses
were not there. So, in the setting of the real estate ﬁrm, mobile phone use
was typical and even encouraged, whereas in the setting of the retail store,
it was considered misuse.
Comparing the two articles, we can learn several ideas. First, after
mobile phone accessibility, we need to consider mobile phone use as the
second major theme of mobile phone activities. If one accesses a mobile
phone but never uses it, then mobile phone behavior cannot possibly
occur. If we know how one can own or access a mobile phone (i.e.,
ownership rate or penetration rate), what one does with one’s phone
(i.e., use), how frequently one uses the phone (i.e., use frequency), or
how long one uses the phone at one time (i.e., use duration), we can
further our knowledge of various types of mobile phone behavior. How-
ever, mobile phone use is complex. Besides the rapid growth of mobile
phone use (e.g., the current pervasive use in Africa) and mobile phone
misuse (e.g., the misuse in the retail store of Australia), we might encoun-
ter various use-related topics, including overuse, abuse, excessive use,
addictive use, multitasking use, hidden use, and non-use. Second, diﬀerent
types of use or misuse of mobile phones by diﬀerent users (e.g., realtors or
retail salespeople) with diﬀerent technologies (e.g., texting or calling)
might lead to diﬀerent eﬀects (e.g., increasing sales or reducing productiv-
ity). The article on mobile phone use in the workplace in the real estate
ﬁrm vs. the retail store illustrates the positive and negative eﬀects. In other
words, mobile phone use, like accessibility, also has two sides, the positive
and negative, rather than just one.
.
Action: Sexting and Gaming
Now we will study another article related to mobile phone activities. The
article is entitled “Sexting among young adults”and examines how
young mobile phone users send or receive sexually explicit text, pictures,
or video messages. It has been cited ninety-three times by multiple
established scholars such as Michelle Drouin, Christopher Ferguson, Shel-
ley Walker, and Kimberly Mitchel based on Google Scholar. The four
Gordon-Messer, D., Bauermeister, J. A., Grodzinski, A., and Zimmerman, M. (). “Sexting
among young adults,” Journal of Adolescent Health, (): –.
. Empirical Studies

5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

authors are public health researchers from the University of Michigan,
with the ﬁrst author, Deborah Gordon-Messer, having published several
articles on adolescent health behavior. The article was published in in
the Elsevier Journal of Adolescent Health, the oﬃcial publication of the
Society for Adolescent Health and Medicine, which has been publishing
research on adolescent medicine and health topics ranging from the basic
biological and behavioral sciences to public health and policy since .
One piece of useful information is that at the end of the article, the authors
acknowledged their funding sources (e.g., the National Institute of Drug
Abuse research challenge grant and the National Institutes of Health
Career Development Award). This type of information gives people inter-
ested in this area of research a good idea of some of the grants that are
available and where to apply for them.
In this study, ,American young adults participated in a survey. To
determine these young adults’ sexting behavior statuses, the researchers
asked the participants two questions: () whether they had ever sent a nude
photo or video of themselves to someone else using their cell phones; and
() whether they had ever received a nude photo or video of someone on
their cell phones. Based on the responses to these two questions, the
researchers determined four types or statuses of lifetime sexting behavior:
() non-sexters who have never sent or received sext messages; () senders
who have only ever sent sext messages; () receivers who have only ever
received sext messages; and () two-way sexters who have both sent and
received sext messages. These four types of sexters were then used as the
independent variable of the study. The major dependent variables were
individuals’ sexual behavior and depression. It was found that: () a total of
percent of the respondents were non-sexters, .percent were two-
way sexters, .percent were receivers, and percent were senders; and
() after excluding the senders who were only percent of the sample,
sexting was signiﬁcantly related to risky sexual behavior or depression
among the remaining three types of sexters.
We can learn a few points about mobile phone activities from this
article. First, texting or sending a text message is a common mobile phone
activity. Ordinary people send texts frequently in everyday life. It is
particularly popular among young users to text rather than call each other.
However, sexting or sending or receiving sexually explicit cell phone text or
picture messages is a serious social concern. The study we just discussed
indicates that, just in terms of sending or receiving a nude photo or video,
.percent of young adults were two-way sexters, .percent were sext
receivers, and percent were sext senders, totalling about percent of

Mobile Phone Activities
5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

,participants. Given that the study used young adults’ self-report data
and focused only on nude photos or videos and excluded sexually explicit
text messages, we might consider that an even higher percentage of young
adults are involved in general sexting. Second, while this study found
signiﬁcant associations between sexting behavior and sexual risks and
depression in this speciﬁc sample, further studies are needed to identify
the potential serious eﬀects of sexting behavior among various subgroups
of sexters, especially sext receivers and two-way sexters, and among various
types of populations with diﬀerent ages, genders, social classes, or cultures.
While one of the most common mobile phone activities, texting, could
involve a popular yet negative activity – sexting, another common mobile
phone activity, mobile gaming, could lead to unexpected yet useful activ-
ities. The next article we will discuss provides a good example and is
entitled “Caring for mobile phone-based virtual pets can inﬂuence youth
eating behaviors.”It illustrates how a mobile phone game where players
take care of virtual pets can be used to improve how children actually eat
their breakfast in real life. A group of seven authors from Cornell Univer-
sity contributed to the article, and the ﬁrst author is Sahara Byrne, an
Associate Professor who has published multiple articles on health commu-
nication. The virtual pets article was published in in the Journal of
Children and Media, a peer-reviewed Taylor & Francis journal publishing
studies of media in the lives of children and adolescents since .
In the virtual pets study, thirty-nine middle-school students were ran-
domly assigned to three groups who received diﬀerent types of feedback,
i.e., positive and negative, positive only, and no feedback as a control. Each
student was given an iPhone that had a game on it where they had to care
for a virtual pet of their choice for nine days. For each of these nine days,
students received a breakfast reminder message on their iPhone from their
virtual pet, requiring them to send a photo of themselves eating breakfast
in real life to their pet. Students then received three types of feedback from
their pets depending on their group assignment. The main result was
amazing: the average percentage of breakfasts eaten in the nine days for
the group receiving both positive and negative feedback was percent,
while it was only percent for the group receiving only positive feedback,
and percent for the control group who received no feedback. The
percentage diﬀerences between the ﬁrst and second groups and between
the second and third groups were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. In other words,
Byrne, S., Gay, G., Pollack, J. P. et al. (). “Caring for mobile phone-based virtual pets can
inﬂuence youth eating behaviors,” Journal of Children and Media, (): –.
. Empirical Studies

5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

students who received both positive and negative feedback from their
virtual pets were more likely to eat breakfast than students who received
positive feedback only or no feedback at all. Therefore, it is critically
important to provide speciﬁc and appropriate feedback, both positive
and negative, and doing so through the pet care mobile phone game can
actually improve real-life breakfast-eating habits.
This article is interesting from the perspective of mobile phone activities
for a few reasons. First, this study provides experimental evidence rather
than survey-based, self-reported data. Through the true experiment design,
researchers were able to examine the real causal eﬀect of feedback methods
through a mobile phone game on adolescents’ breakfast-eating behavior.
Second, while many studies focus on the negative eﬀects of gaming (e.g.,
violence and aggression), this study shows some positive eﬀects of mobile
gaming on eating habits. We hope to see more studies of this type, i.e.,
studies investigating the positive eﬀects of mobile gaming, as advocated in
the current positive psychology movement. Third, from the mobile phone
activity perspective, we see a good example of activity-based mobile phone
behavior: a small group of adolescents used a relatively simple mobile game
and a mobile camera to take care of virtual pets. With diﬀerent types of
feedback from the pets, this pet care gaming activity in nine days will lead
to diﬀerent patterns of adolescent breakfast-eating habits in real life.
.
Reuse: Recycling in China
The next article we will discuss is entitled “Survey and analysis of con-
sumers’ behaviour of waste mobile phone recycling in China.”The
authors are Jianfeng Yin, Yingnan Gao, both from Nankai University of
China, and He Xua from the Policy Research Center for Environment and
Economy in Ministry of Environmental Protection. The publication
record of these authors cannot be found. The article was published in
in the Journal of Cleaner Production, one of the two journals exten-
sively publishing studies on mobile phone recycling by Elsevier since .
The other journal is called Waste Management. Note that Cleaner Produc-
tion in the journal name is a concept that goes beyond pollution control,
involving not only active research and development of new structures, but
also educational, training, management, and technical assistance programs
to accelerate the adoption of cleaner production and sustainability.
Yin, J., Gao, Y., and Xu, H. (). “Survey and analysis of consumers’ behaviour of waste mobile
phone recycling in China,” Journal of Cleaner Production, : –.

Mobile Phone Activities
5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

This is a survey study that was conducted in in China.
A nationally representative sample of ,individuals was obtained with
stratiﬁed random sampling. The Likert-scale questionnaire used in the
study consists of three major sections: () consumers’ behavior and atti-
tudes on recycling and treatment of waste mobile phones; () the con-
sumers’ environmental awareness of waste mobile phones, recycling, and
treatment; and () consumers’ willingness to pay for recycling and treat-
ment of waste mobile phones. The major ﬁndings include: () percent
of the participants reported that the service life of their mobile phone was
generally less than two to three years, and the major reasons that most
consumers replaced their mobile phones were that their phones were
damaged (.percent) or their phones were unfashionable (.percent).
() Participants had ﬁve ways of dealing with waste mobile phones:
percent reported storing them at home; percent reported giving
them away or they were stolen; percent participated in the paid
recycling “Green Box Program”; percent threw their phones away; and
percent participated in the free recycle “Old-for-New” program. () The
main reasons why many waste mobile phones were not recycled were that
most participants did not know where to send the phones (.percent) or
they would rather give their phones to family or friends (.percent).
Moreover, .percent of participants were afraid of privacy disclosure
and .percent used waste mobile phones purely as data storage equip-
ment. () A total of .percent of participants indicated that the main
reason for the low recycling rate was the absence of a sound recycling
system. Approximately ., ., and .percent believed the prime
element behind the low rate was weak environmental awareness, the
absence of government management, and the absence of laws and regula-
tions, respectively. () In terms of participants’ environmental awareness,
they reported having some knowledge about waste mobile phones con-
taining toxic and hazardous substances (e.g., lead, mercury, or arsenic) and
recyclable precious metal substances (e.g., gold, silver, or palladium), and
having little knowledge about the “Green Box Environmental Protection
Program” proposed jointly by China Mobile, Motorola, and Nokia in
, Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) stipulated in electric waste
management laws, and the meaning of Extended Producer Responsibility.
From the perspective of mobile phone behavior, we can learn a few useful
points from this study. First, it is helpful to know that a regular mobile phone
will normally have two to three years of life. Thus, it is not a trivial issue wecan
ignore. Instead, it is now important to learn how to deal eﬀectively with old
mobile phones as well. How to handle old phones should be as important as
. Empirical Studies

5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

how to access new phones. Second, ordinary people have various ways of
treating old phones, whether it is storing them at home, giving them to
relatives, recycling them through certain programs, or simply throwing them
away. Third, multiple sophisticated factors are involved in inﬂuencing
people’s attitude and behavior of treating old phones, even including increas-
ing concerns about security and privacy. Fourth, many ordinary mobile
phone users might have very limited awareness of sophisticated environmen-
tal and social issues behind the treatment of old phones.
In summary, this section presents and discusses six empirical studies
related to mobile phone activities and activity-based mobile phone behav-
ior. As we discussed before, Elizabeth’s initial thinking focused on several
common mobile phone activities such as shopping and gaming; and the six
everyday life observations presented after Elizabeth’s responses further
illustrate the breadth of mobile phone activities and activity-based mobile
phone behavior (e.g., draining the pond or donating old phones). The
seven journal articles illustrate various speciﬁc aspects of mobile phone
activities, from gaining access to new services, to switching networks, using
phones in Africa, employees struggling to use phones when they are not
allowed, American young users’ sexting, middle-school students’ gaming
with virtual pets, and ordinary Chinese people’s behavior, attitudes, and
knowledge about recycling mobile phones. This should further deepen and
broaden our scientiﬁc knowledge about the complexity of mobile phone
behavior from the mobile activities perspective. We can learn at least two
major lessons: () mobile phone activities have both positive and negative
sides rather than either positive only or negative only; and () mobile
phone activities have a wide spectrum, starting with accessibility and
ending with recycling, with various concerns of mobile phone use and
various mobile phone functions in between.
.
Knowledge Syntheses: From Complex Access to WEEE
Management
Mobile phone users can use mobile phones to engage in a wide variety of
mobile phone activities, such as accepting, adopting, advising, assessing,
worshiping, bullying, communicating, campaigning, connecting, consum-
ing, controlling, coordinating, developing, gaming, information-seeking,
intervening, learning, marketing, practicing, preventing, protesting, recruit-
ing, recycling, sexting, socializing, studying, multitasking, teaching, or text-
ing, to name just a few. Because mobile phone activities are extremely diverse,
we can classify them in multiple ways. First, the activities can be organized in

Mobile Phone Activities
5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

terms of four diﬀerent stages of interactions between users and mobile phones
(access, use, action, and reuse). Second, mobile phone activities can be
grouped on the basis of diﬀerent domains (medical, education, business,
and daily). Third, another simple way of categorization is to base activities
ondiﬀerent eﬀects (physical, cognitive, social, and emotional). Fourth, we can
group the activities simply based on whether it is a single activity or multiple
activities (learning, gaming, calling while driving, texting while learning).
Fifth, we can group the activities based on three major technologies – those
relating to computation, communication, and information. In addition to the
top-down approach, we can use a bottom-up approach to group the activities
simply by actual everyday real-life observations or accumulated empirical
research, like a ground theory approach. These typologies can further help
us understand the complexity of mobile phone activities in particular and the
complexity of mobile phone behavior in general.
Clearly, this chapter uses the ﬁrst classiﬁcation system based on the
interaction stages to describe mobile phone activities. One of the major
reasons for this is that both people’s attention (like Elizabeth) and research
eﬀects (e.g., gaming to care for virtual pets) tend to normally focus on the
middle stages, the stages of using and functioning, but it is important to
examine the starting and end points as well, the starting stage of accessing
and the end stage of recycling, in order to have a complete picture of how
mobile phone users and mobile phone technologies interact with each
other to generate various mobile phone activities.
Extensive literature exists on major issues of mobile phone activities.
The Encyclopedia of Mobile Phone Behavior, especially the chapters in the
section on mobile phone activities and processes, provides a good synthesis
of the existing body of the literature. Nearly ﬁfty chapters address various
topics of mobile phone activities and can be organized into four themes:
access, use, action, and reuse. Table .presents a brief summary.
Instead of covering all the topics on mobile phone activities, we will
discuss a few published review articles and Encyclopedia chapters to illustrate
the breadth and depth of the current literature on mobile phone activities.
.
Four Kinds of Access
The ﬁrst article is “The digital divide as a complex and dynamic phenom-
enon.”The concept of the digital divide generally means inequalities in
Van Dijk, J. and Hacker, K. (). “The digital divide as a complex and dynamic phenomenon,”
The Information Society, (): –.
. Knowledge Syntheses

5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

Table .The Encyclopedia Chapters on Activity-Based Mobile
Phone Behavior
Feature
Chapter Title
Access
Consumer acceptance of the mobile internet
Access
Mobile coupons: Adoption and use
Access
Consumer adoption of mobile e-WOM messages
Use
Using mobile phones for educational assessment
Use
The conceptualization and assessment of problematic mobile phone use
Use
Religious use of mobile phones
Use
Divorced coparents’ use of communication technology
Use
Textism use and language ability in children
Use
Emoticon use in mobile communications :-)
Use
Positive technology: Using mobile phones for psychosocial interventions
Use
Use of mobile phones to help prevent child maltreatment
Use
Using mobile phones to control social interactions
Use
Mobile phone use enhances social connectedness
Use
Exploring the use of mobile devices to support teacher education
Use
Texting and Christian practice
Use
Mobile health in emergency care
Use
Mobile phones for plastic surgery and burns: Current practice
Use
The use of mobile phone technology to support people with autism spectrum
disorders
Action
Sex, cyberbullying and the mobile phone
Action
Students hurting students: Cyberbullying as a mobile phone behavior
Action
Connecting ‘round the clock: Mobile phones and adolescents’ experiences of
intimacy
Action
Cell phone conversation while driving
Action
Cell-phones, distracted driving, bans and fatalities
Action
Cellular phones’ contribution to dangerous driving
Action
Mobile phone and driving
Action
Waste time or lose life: Assessing the risk of phoning while driving
Action
Mobile games and learning
Action
Mobile seamless learning from the perspective of self-regulated learning
Action
Mobile phone use and children’s literacy learning
Action
Microlearning and mobile learning
Action
Mobile learning
Action
Science learning games for mobile platforms
Action
Mobile communication tools as morality-building devices
Action
Text messaging in social protests
Action
Human resource recruiting and selection using cellphone apps
Action
Teenage sexting: Sexual expression meets mobile technology
Action
Mobile phone multitasking and learning
Action
Adolescent text messaging
Action
Mobile tracking for mental health and wellbeing
Reuse
Sustainability of the use of mobile phones
Reuse
Generation, collection and recycling of used and end-of-life mobile phones

Mobile Phone Activities
5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

accessing digital technologies. The article is well cited perhaps due to its
thorough analysis of the concept of the digital divide based on a thoughtful
typology. The authors are Jan van Dijk and Kenneth Hacker. The ﬁrst
author, Jan van Dijk, is a Professor of Communication at the University of
Twente in the Netherlands, who has published extensively on the social
aspects of information and communication technology, especially on the
digital divide. The article was published in in The Information
Society, an established Taylor & Francis journal publishing studies on
relationships between technological change and social change since .
This article can be called a theoretical or position article rather than a
typical review article. It uses both an eﬀective analytical framework and
existing survey data from the Netherlands and the United States to
analyze the complexity and dynamics of the concept of the so-called
“digital divide.” It mainly focuses on information and communication
technologies (computers and the Internet) broadly rather than mobile
phones exclusively. There are at least eight major points we can learn
from this article about accessibility. First, as one of two major themes of
the article, the authors consider the issue of accessibility as a complex
concept with four aspects: () mental access (whether individuals have
interest, computer anxiety, or are attracted to the new technology); ()
material access (whether individuals possess computers and network
connections); () skill access (whether individuals obtain digital skills);
and () usage access (whether individuals have signiﬁcant usage oppor-
tunities). Next, as the second central theme, the authors consider the
four types of access as a dynamic sequence that changes substantially over
time, usually with the ﬁrst two accesses (mental and material accesses)
improving gradually and with the second two accesses (skill and usage
accesses) facing more challenges later on. Third, for mental access, the
authors speciﬁed that about as many as percent of the Dutch users in
the study lacked computer use skills due to substantial technology
anxiety, negative attitude, and low-level motivation. Fourth, for material
access, the technology possession gap increased over time between
groups that diﬀered by age, gender, education, income, and race. This
is often due to a saturation eﬀect – an eﬀect that the group with a higher
level of material access will remain at the same level, but the group with
a lower level of material access will fall behind further. Fifth, for skill
access, the digital divide will be observed not only in instrumental skills
(how to use hardware and software), but more importantly in infor-
mational skills (how to search for information) and strategic skills (how
to apply skills in personal careers or development). Sixth, for usage
. Knowledge Syntheses

5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

access, a usage gap will emerge. While some individuals take full advan-
tage of and beneﬁt more from a wide variety of advanced technologies,
other individuals might only be able to use some simple technologies
(e.g., people mainly use technologies at home for basic word processing
and gaming). This article helps us further understand the complexity of
mobile phone activities, especially accessibility and the digital divide, in
two important ways. First, it categorizes the issue of accessibility into
four major types: mental access, material access, skill access, and usage
access. This comprehensive conceptual framework helps us appreciate
the complexity of accessibility. In other words, there are four diﬀerent
kinds of digital divide rather than just one. For mobile phones, the
digital divides in mental and material access might not be major con-
cerns; however, there may be concerns about the digital divides in skill
access (e.g., how to use mobile phones for searching medical or business
information) and usage access (e.g., how to beneﬁt most from the latest
advances in mobile phone technologies in health care and learning).
Second, although this conceptual framework was presented almost
ﬁfteen years ago, we can still use it to see or ﬁnd a wide variety of
speciﬁc research ﬁndings on various topics. These ﬁndings help us
appreciate the richness of accessibility. While Elizabeth’s initial
responses do not touch on the issue of accessibility at all, and the
everyday real-life observations and empirical studies demonstrate the
breadth and depth of the issue of accessibility, this review article opens a
large door into the enormous literature on accessibility.
.
Three Areas of Use
The second review is entitled “Research approaches to mobile use in the
developing world: A review of the literature,” and is written by Jonathan
Donner.Although this title sounds like a research methodological
review, it actually is a typical review article of the literature on mobile
phone use in developing countries, a timely, important, and much-
needed research topic. Jonathan Donner is a researcher at Microsoft
Research and has published extensively on mobile use in developing
countries, including his recent book After Access,which examines major
Donner, J. (). “Research approaches to mobile use in the developing world: A review of the
literature,” The Information Society, (): –.
Donner, J. (). After Access: Inclusion, Development, and a More Mobile Internet. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

Mobile Phone Activities
5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

implications of mobile internet in developing counties. The review we
will be discussing was published in in The Information Society, the
same journal in which the article discussed in the previous section was
published.
This review article takes a broad approach to information and com-
munication technologies and development (ICTD) to review nearly
relevant publications. There are at least ﬁve major points we can
learn about mobile phone use in developing countries. First, the existing
literature has concentrated on three areas: mobile phone adoption,
mobile phone impacts, and the interrelationship between users and
mobile phones. Second, for mobile phone adoption, there are three
speciﬁc areas of research: patterns of mobile phone adaptation in diﬀer-
ent developing countries based on diﬀerent theories, such as the diﬀusion
theory, the technology acceptance theory, or the reasoned action theory;
various policy issues regulating mobile phone services in diﬀerent
developing countries; and the new unique nature of digital divides or
access gaps in mobile phone access. Third, for mobile phone impacts,
various research ﬁndings indicate the economic impacts of mobile
phones, showing the close association between increase of penetration
rates and improvements in gross domestic product, inﬂows of foreign
direct investment, small business start-ups, and ﬁshing product sales. It
also reports that mobile phones have other positive non-economic
impacts on e-learning, health care, emergency, and family relationships.
Fourth, for the phone-user interrelationship, the review synthesized four
speciﬁc areas of research: modernization and globalization with mobile
phone use; daily-life changes with mobile phone use; technological
design changes with mobile phone use; and community sharing with
mobile phone use.
This review broadens the traditional conceptualization of mobile phone
use. Instead of just focusing on penetration rates or diﬀusion processes of
mobile phones, mobile phone use in developing countries involves many
more issues regarding new meanings of the digital divide, broad impacts on
economic development, and various changes in human development. This
is not something that Elizabeth thought about, as shown in her initial
responses.
.
Three Types of Gaming
Mobile gaming is an interesting and common mobile phone activity.
A chapter of the Encyclopedia of Mobile Phone Behavior, entitled “Mobile
. Knowledge Syntheses

5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

games,” oﬀers a good synthesis. The authors are two scholars from
Australia, Ingrid Richardson and Larissa Hjorth, who have both pub-
lished extensively on mobile games from epistemological and ethno-
graphical perspectives.
Quite diﬀerent from a typical review, this Encyclopedia chapter intended
to oﬀer a critical review of three types of mobile games. First, it starts with
the popularity of mobile games, pointing out that between and ,
percent of all mobile phone downloads were games. Angry Birds alone,
for example, since its release in , was downloaded over billion times in
and over billion times in . Second, it presents the app-based
mobile games, the ﬁrst of the three major types of mobile game. Tradition-
ally, games are categorized into two groups, casual games that involve brief,
simple, and non-skill-demanded gameplay and hardcore games that concern
long, complex, and skill-demanded gameplay. However, app-based mobile
phone games really make the casual-vs.-hardcore classiﬁcation almost
unworkable because gamers now can play any downloadable mobile game
anytime and anywhere. Current app-based mobile games (e.g., Bad Piggies)
are not only diﬀerent from traditional portable or handheld games (e.g.,
Nintendo’s GameBoy), but also from early mobile phone games (e.g.,
Nokia’s NGage). They are so much more ﬂexible, complex, and dynamic
that they become assemblages in which game elements and rules are ﬂexible
and dynamic rather than typical games with ﬁxed game elements and rules.
Third, the chapter discussed location-based mobile phone games (e.g., Geo-
caching), the second of the three major types of mobile game. Traditional
location-based games (e.g., MyTown) include urban games, big games,
pervasive games, and mixed reality games. Since smartphones have GPS as
a common feature, when gamers play location-based games, they themselves
can integrate their immediate real-life perception, GPS location information,
and augmented and networked game situations all together, thus creating a
special hybrid gaming experience that mixes the real world with the virtual
world. Fourth, the last type of mobile game is the social-media-based game
(e.g., Words with Friends or I Love Coﬀee). Social media games are embedded
within social media websites such as Facebook, YouTube, Twitter, and
Kakao so that social interactions and gameplays become almost seamless.
Fifth, through their review and discussion of mobile phone games, the
authors stress several important concepts in mobile games, such as assem-
blage (featuring ﬂexible, dynamic, and complex gaming activities) and
gamiﬁcation (making non-game applications game-like, fun-oriented activ-
ities). These will eventually make mobile gaming behavior more rich,
diverse, and complex.

Mobile Phone Activities
5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

.
Four Trends of Recycling
The last review article we will discuss is entitled, “How are WEEE doing?
A global review of the management of electrical and electronic wastes.”
The “WEEE” speciﬁed in the title is an acronym that stands for waste
electrical and electronic equipment, or equipment that is being thrown
away. This review is well cited (times based on Google Scholar). The
authors are three UK researchers, Francis Ongondo, Ian Williams, and
Tom Cherrett. The ﬁrst author, Francis Ongondo, has published multiple
articles on mobile phone reuse, while the second author, Ian Williams, is
Ongondo’s mentor and an expert on waste and environmental issues. This
review was published in in Waste Management.
This review oﬀers a comprehensive overview of global trends in man-
aging waste electrical and electronic equipment in the world. Major points
include the following: () Geologically, the quantities of WEEE generated
are high and/or increasing in Africa, in the poorer regions of Asia, and in
Latin and South America, but not in Europe. () For regulations, infor-
mational technologies and telecommunications equipment seem to be the
dominant WEEE being generated, and many countries lack or are slow in
initiating, drafting, and adopting WEEE regulations. () For management
strategies, repairing and reusing within a largely informal recycling sector is
typical in developing countries, landﬁlling is still used in both developed
and developing nations, and stockpiling of unwanted electrical and elec-
tronic products is common in both the United States and less developed
economies. () Four common priority areas are resource depletion, ethical
concerns, health and environmental issues, and WEEE take-back strat-
egies. () The four future trends of WEEE management are that: (a) global
amounts of WEEE will continue to increase due to emerging new tech-
nologies and aﬀordable electronics; (b) informal recycling in developing
nations will play an important role in WEEE management; (c) the pace of
initiating and enacting WEEE-speciﬁc legislation will be very slow across
the globe; and (d) there will be a large need for more accurate and current
data on amounts and types of WEEE.
From this review, we can further expand our knowledge of mobile
phone reuse in at least four aspects. First, there is an imbalance in WEEE
accumulation between developing vs. developed countries. Second, there is
an imbalance between the rapid increase in WEEE and the slow response
Ongondo, F. O., Williams, I. D., and Cherrett, T. J. (). “How are WEEE doing? A global review
of the management of electrical and electronic wastes,” Waste Management, (): –.
. Knowledge Syntheses

5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

in managing it. Third, there is an imbalance of having relatively strong
technological and policy programs in place, but relatively weak study and
encouragement of individuals’ awareness, adaptation, and assessment of
WEEE. Fourth, there is an imbalance of formal and informal channels in
managing WEEE.
.
Comparative Analyses: From Screen Time to
Tweeting Diﬀerence
There are at least two ways to compare human behavior with diﬀerent
technologies. One, as used in the previous chapters, is to compare them
across studies, e.g., comparing human behavior with televisions, com-
puters, the Internet, and mobile phones across four diﬀerent studies.
One of the advantages of this approach is the ﬂexibility to choose diﬀerent
studies. One of the disadvantages is that diﬀerent studies have diﬀerent
designs, samples, instruments, and data analyses, making the comparison
diﬃcult. Another way is to compare them within studies, e.g., comparing
human behavior with televisions, computers, the Internet, and mobile
phones all within the same study. One of the advantages of the second
approach is that the studies use similar designs, samples, instruments, and
data analyses, making the comparison easy. One of the disadvantages is
that it is hard to identify such studies comparing all these technologies at
once. In this section, we will show two examples of mobile phone activity
and related behavior within one study.
.
Screen Time
The ﬁrst study comparing media use is entitled “Young children’s screen
time: The complex role of parent and child factors.” It was published in
by Alexis Lauricella, Ellen Wartella, and Victoria Rideout in the
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology.The existing literature indi-
cates that higher parent television use is associated with higher levels of
child television time, but is it still true with other types of technology? In
this study, a nationally representative sample of more than ,American
parents who had children aged years and under participated in a -
minute survey. Major measures included access to technologies at home,
parent attitude toward technologies (positive or negative), parent time of
Lauricella, A. R., Wartella, E., and Rideout, V. J. (). “Young children’s screen time: The
complex role of parent and child factors,” Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, : –.

Mobile Phone Activities
5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

using technologies (low, medium, and high), and children’s time of using
technologies (low, medium, and high, based on parents’ report). Tech-
nologies covered in the study were television, computers, smartphones,
and tablet computers. It was found that children’s screen time with the
four technologies was signiﬁcantly related to both parent screen time with
the four technologies and parent attitude toward the four technologies.
.
Tweeting
The second study is entitled “Do we tweet diﬀerently from our mobile
devices? A study of language diﬀerences on mobile and web-based twitter
platforms.”It was published by Dhiraj Murthy, Sawyer Bowman, Alex-
ander Gross, and Marisa McGarry in in the Journal of Communi-
cation. In this study, researchers collected over million tweets over the
course of six weeks in the summer of by using Twitter’s Application
Programming Interface (API), which allows automatic collection of a
stream of sampled tweets from the overall ﬂow of all global tweets at any
given time. For the independent variable, researchers classiﬁed collected
tweets in English as either mobile (e.g., Twitter for iPhone or Twitter for
Android) or non-mobile (e.g., Twitter for desktop-based Web or Tweet-
Button, where mobile tweet button usage is rare). For the dependent
variables, the researchers coded n-grams (a series of unbroken characters
or words in tweets) in four language styles: self style, gender style, emo-
tional style, and agentic and communal style. Their major ﬁndings were as
follows: () mobile tweets are more egocentric in language than non-
mobile tweets; () no gender style diﬀerence exists; both mobile tweets
and non-mobile tweets use words traditionally associated with the mascu-
line; () no diﬀerence exists in negative and positive language use; both
mobile tweets and non-mobile tweets have equal amounts of negative and
positive language; and () no diﬀerence exists in agentic behavior; both
mobile and non-mobile tweets employed language associated with com-
munal behavior.
These two studies further expand our understanding of the complexity
of mobile phone activities and behavior. First, for young children aged
years and under, their use of diﬀerent technologies (television, com-
puters, smartphones, and tablet computers) was strongly associated with
Murthy, D., Bowman, S., Gross, A. J., and McGarry, M. (). “Do we tweet diﬀerently from our
mobile devices? A study of language diﬀerences on mobile and web-based twitter platforms,”
Journal of Communication, (): –.
. Comparative Analyses

5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

parent technology use and parent technology attitude. In short, parent
behavior always matters. Second, the use of Twitter across diﬀerent
platforms leads to diﬀerent types of language behavior; tweeting with
mobile phones leads to more egocentric language, while tweeting through
non-mobile means like a desktop-based website does not. Users tweet
diﬀerently in several aspects, depending on using mobile devices or non-
mobile web devices. Mobile tweeting is forming new behaviors, attitudes,
and linguistic styles online. In short, the technology does matter since it
plays a role in mobile phone behavior; the medium is indeed the message
since it allows features for new mobile phone behavior.
.
Complex Thinking: Diverse Activities, Complex Behavior
Now, after reading this chapter, we should much more easily see the
strengths and limitations of Elizabeth’s intuitive responses. We should
have a much more sophisticated knowledge about the complexity of
mobile phone activities. The breadth and depth of our previous under-
standing should have expanded. Mobile phone activities are not just
simply calling a parent or texting a friend. Instead, they are much more
rich, dynamic, and complex due to diverse users, diverse technologies,
diverse activities, and diverse eﬀects. But, most importantly, we should
consider them from the positive side to the negative side of the entire
spectrum and from the beginning point to the end point of the entire
process.
Speciﬁcally, as shown in the summary diagram in Figure ., we should
examine the mobile phone activities from four aspects: access, use, action,
and reuse, from both positive and negative perspectives. First, mobile
phone access should be considered the beginning point of mobile phone
interactions or activities. Access involves various speciﬁc issues such as
adopting, accepting, switching, discontinuing, and terminating in both
positive and negative ways. We discussed the story of the -year-old
German boy draining a pond, the empirical study on how Dutch residents
accepted advanced services, and the review about four aspects of the digital
divide (i.e., mental, material, skill, and usage access).
Second, mobile phone use may be a common topic, but it involves
various complex issues such as innovative use (e.g., using mobile phones to
Author’s note: “The medium is the message” is a widely accepted statement, arguing that, besides
the content of a medium, the form of a medium itself also delivers speciﬁc messages. McLuhan, M.
(). Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Mobile Phone Activities
5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

greet the Pope), non-use (e.g., avoiding mobile phone use for religious
reasons), semi-use, misuse, overuse, excessive use, and addictive use.
Speciﬁc examples we discussed include the two stories of Pope Francis
(using mobile phones to welcome the Pope, and the Pope recommending
eating dinner as a family with no phone use), the two studies of mobile
phone use in Africa and misuse at work, the review on mobile phone use in
developing countries, and the comparative study of parental inﬂuence on
the use of diﬀerent technologies.
Third, mobile phone action such as mobile learning, mobile banking,
and mobile gaming is the most common among mobile phone activities.
However, we can see its complexity, especially the positive and negative
sides, from diﬀerent examples, including the story of negative hacking
without consent vs. “positive” hacking with consent, the two studies on
youths’ sexting behavior and adolescents’ mobile gaming with pets, the
review on the three unique types of mobile games, and the comparison of
Tweeting between mobile phones and non-mobile websites.
Fourth, mobile phone reuse can be considered the end point of mobile
phone activities from both the positive and negative aspects. The examples
we have discussed include the story of donating used mobile phones by
James Maturo, the empirical study on recycling behavior in China, and the
comprehensive review about global recycling behavior.
We need to further advance our scientiﬁc understanding of mobile
phone activities. The future directions of mobile phone activity research
are largely determined by the practical need of the mobile phone users and
Mobile phone
users
Mobile Phone Activities
1. Access
2.1 Access: Draining a Pond
3.1 Access: Accepting Advanced Services
4.1 Four Kinds of Access  
2. Use
2.2 Use: Greeting the Pope and Dining Without
Smartphone  
3.2 Use: Using Mobile Phones in Africa and 
Misusing at the Workplace
4.2 Three Areas of Use
3. Action
2.3 Action: Hacking into Mark’s Accounts and 
Hacking into SS7 
3.3 Action: Sexting and Gaming
4.3 Three Types of Gaming 
4. Reuse
2.4 Collecting 500 Mobile Phones
3.4 Reuse: Recycling in China
4.4 Four Trends of Recycling 
Mobile phone
effects
Mobile phone
technologies
Figure .
A Summary Diagram of Activity-Based Mobile Phone Behavior
. Complex Thinking

5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core

the scientiﬁc demand of mobile phone activity research. For instance, in the
real-life world, people are using mobile phones while simultaneously
engaging in other activities such as driving and learning. Thus, future
research eﬀorts should be made to identify and examine more multiple
activities besides the multitasking research and the calling while driving
research. In addition, in the scientiﬁc world, a large proportion of the
current research is using simple survey methods to collect self-report data.
Future research should develop and encourage complex survey methods
such as experimental surveys and story-based surveys to study mobile phone
activities. Furthermore, other innovative methods such as the big data
method and the sensor-based method should be used to collect large,
high-quality data over time. Finally, research on mobile phone recycling
behavior, rather than programs or policies, should be enhanced to really
promote and advocate the recycling programs eﬀectively and eﬃciently.
Successful macro-level policy decisions on mobile phone recycling really
depends on eﬀective micro-level psychological processes of individual users’
mobile phone recycling behavior as the ideal starting point (e.g., a need
assessment) and the desirable end point (e.g., an outcome assessment).

Mobile Phone Activities
5
13:09:08, subject to the Cambridge Core


Mobile Phone Eﬀects
Outline
.
Intuitive Thinking: Frances’ Quick Responses
.
Daily Observations: From Jennifer Lawrence to Ebola Outbreak
.
Negative and Positive Eﬀects: Jennifer Lawrence and Tao Liu
.
Health Eﬀects: Simon Park and Jenny Fry
.
Psychological Eﬀects: Barack Obama and Valerie Kusler
.
Social Eﬀects: Sit-Down Protest and Ebola Outbreak
.
Empirical Studies: From Mobile Phone Allergy to Crime Rate Drop
.
Health Eﬀect: Sources of Metallic Allergy from Mobile Phones
.
Health Eﬀect: Signiﬁcant Bacterial Contamination in Patients’ Mobile Phones
.
Psychological Eﬀect: Phantom Vibration Syndrome among Medical Workers
.
Social Eﬀect: Crime Rate Drop in the s
.
Knowledge Syntheses: From Mobile Phone Allergy to Child Maltreatment
Prevention
.
Various Mobile Phone Eﬀects
.
Consistent Mobile Phone Dermatitis
.
Risky Bacterial Infections within Hospitals
.
Debatable Phantom Vibration Syndrome
.
Comparative Analyses: From Device Allergy to Device Bacterial Contamination
.
Device Contact Dermatitis
.
Device Bacterial Contamination
.
Complex Thinking: A Complex Double-Edged Sword
.
Intuitive Thinking: Frances’ Quick Responses
Frances is a faculty member at a university in China. I asked her: What are
the eﬀects of mobile phones on human beings? I speciﬁcally asked her to
give three to ﬁve ideas with three to ﬁve short examples that came to mind
as quickly as she could.

6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

Here are her responses: () Mobile phones make broader interactions
and collaborations: With the use of the app Weixin, you can quickly know
what is happening with your friends. () Mobile phones help you share
various resources, such as cloud services, online classrooms, online shop-
ping, online counseling, or using Uber or DiDi to get a taxi. () Mobile
phones provide easy and eﬃcient information services, such as no need to
use paper-based newspapers and books to get information. () Mobile
phones make payment extremely easy, such as making payments through
Weixin or Zifubao (i.e., Alipay) and you can order anything from ﬂight
tickets to drinks, even in rural areas. () Most importantly, mobile phones
can be used anytime and anywhere, such as using mobile Internet.
Are Frances’ quick responses good? We would say that Frances’ quick
responses are pretty good. First, her responses are broad, concerning
various eﬀects related to social interacting, resource sharing, information
seeking, personal ﬁnancing, and living everyday life. Second, her responses
include various speciﬁc examples, such as Weixin, Uber, and mobile
Internet. Third, her responses stress the core feature of mobile phones –
the ability to use them anytime and anywhere. Clearly, these are major
strengths. However, her quick responses reveal some problems. First, her
responses focus on the positive eﬀects without mentioning anything about
the negative eﬀects. Second, understandably, her responses are narrowly
based on her experience in China, including her examples such as Weixin,
Didi, and Zifubao. Note that Uber is an American company, but is
operating in China, and has been competing with Zifubao since .
Clearly, these are some limitations. Nevertheless, these are some mobile
phone eﬀects, but certainly not all of the eﬀects. Mobile phone eﬀects are
much more complicated than we thought and they are the last element in
the basic model of mobile phone behavior.
Now, some of us might think: This discussion on mobile phone eﬀects
seems similar to the discussion in the previous chapter on mobile phone
activities. What is the diﬀerence between mobile phone activities and
mobile phone eﬀects? How do mobile phone eﬀects ﬁt into the basic
model of mobile phone behavior? These questions are important and
timely for us to better understand not only mobile phone eﬀects, but also
the basic element model of mobile phone behavior.
Let us brieﬂy address them by looking at an example. Frances’ ﬁrst
response consisted of a general statement: “Mobile phones make broader
interactions and collaborations,” and one speciﬁc example, “With the use
of the app Weixin, you can quickly know what is happening with your
friends.” First, mobile phone activities refer to the interactions between

Mobile Phone Eﬀects
6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

users and mobile phones, whereas mobile phone eﬀects are the results of
the mobile phone activities. In Frances’ ﬁrst response, she mentioned one
general mobile phone activity, interactions and collaborations, and one
speciﬁc mobile phone activity, using the app Weixin. She also indicated
one general mobile phone eﬀect, make broader interactions and collabor-
ations, and one speciﬁc mobile phone eﬀect, quickly know what is
happening with your friends. Here, we can see that the mobile phone
activities and mobile phone eﬀects are both logically related to each other,
but conceptually diﬀerent from each other. Second, based on the basic
element model, mobile phone behavior consists of four elements: users,
technologies, activities, and eﬀects. Mobile users interact with mobile
phones to generate mobile phone activities, leading to mobile phone
eﬀects. Frances’ ﬁrst response implicitly suggests one general mobile phone
behavior: mobile users interact with mobile phones to generate mobile
phone activities, i.e., interactions and collaborations, resulting in mobile
phone eﬀects, i.e., making broader interactions and collaborations. She
also explicitly described one speciﬁc mobile phone behavior, you (user)
interact with Weixin (the app) and generate an activity (using Weixin),
resulting in an eﬀect (quickly knowing what is happening with your
friends). Now we might see more clearly two key points in understanding
the diversity and complexity of mobile phone behavior. First, it is useful to
always study mobile phone behavior as a basic unit based on its four basic
elements and their sequential relationship. We follow this approach
throughout the book. Second, it is also useful to sometimes analyze mobile
phone behavior by focusing on one element at a time with a speciﬁc angle.
This is why we use the four chapters to analyze mobile phone behavior
from the perspective of mobile phone users, mobile phone technologies,
mobile phone activities, and mobile phone eﬀects individually and sequen-
tially. Because these chapters talk about mobile phone behavior while
emphasizing an element such as users or mobile phone eﬀects, the chapter
titles could be called user-emphasized mobile phone behavior or eﬀect-
emphasized mobile phone behavior. So, even though the chapters are
focusing on one element in particular, the chapters are still about mobile
phone behavior.
In this chapter, we will carefully and systematically examine mobile
phone eﬀects to further understand the complexity of mobile phone
behavior. First, we will examine multiple everyday observations to see
what types of mobile eﬀects there are and try to broaden our knowledge
about mobile phone eﬀects. Second, we will examine details of scientiﬁc
evidence from multiple studies and try to deepen our knowledge about
. Intuitive Thinking: Frances’ Quick Responses

6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

mobile phone eﬀects. Third, we will study a few reviews to help us view
the big picture of this research area. Fourth, we will compare the similar-
ities and diﬀerences of diﬀerent technologies and their eﬀects to further
understand mobile phone eﬀects. As always, we will end the chapter with a
summary.
.
Daily Observations: From Jennifer Lawrence to Ebola Outbreak
.
Negative and Positive Eﬀects: Jennifer Lawrence and Tao Liu
In August ,more than ﬁfty nude pictures of actress Jennifer Lawrence
and dozens of other famous female celebrities were stolen and posted on
websites which rapidly spread on the Internet. These private pictures of
Lawrence were taken on her personal iPhone and automatically uploaded in
and downloaded from iCloud. The hackers had been targeting Jennifer and
other celebrities systematically and eventually hacked into iCloud to steal
these pictures. After hours of investigation, Apple announced that they
did not ﬁnd any breaches in Apple’s network systems, including iCloud or
the Find My iPhone service that resulted in the leaking of these pictures.
However, they did ﬁnd that someone accessed celebrities’ accounts using the
celebrities’ user names, passwords, and security questions. It was likely that
the hackers used a hacking program such as iBrute that can repeatedly try
diﬀerent combinations of letters and numbers to ﬁnd possible passwords.
The hacker might have ﬁgured out the password of Apple’s Find My iPhone
service and then used that to get the iCloud password via Find My iPhone,
and eventually was able to open and take images and other data stored in
that iCloud account. After over a year, Lawrence was ﬁnally able to talk
publicly about her experience: “I felt angry at websites reposting them . . .
I can’t really describe to you the feeling that took a very long time to go
away . . . It was an unshakable, really awful feeling that after it healed a little
bit made me incredibly angry.”
To understand what happened with this case, we need to know a few
key technical terms. () Cloud or Cloud computing is a new kind of
Internet computing system that provides shared processing resources and
data to computers and other devices on demand. It is like the electricity
grid over a network to achieve economy and eﬃciency. The metaphor
of cloud implies that all the network elements representing the
See www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/////celebrity-photo-leak-puts-spotlight-
on-the-cloud-and-security.

Mobile Phone Eﬀects
6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

provider-rendered services are invisible, but at the same time accessible
for a user, as if a Greek mythological hero has a super power in the
heavens, but is hidden behind a cloud. It diﬀers from a traditional
network system in a few important ways. It is a model for enabling
ubiquitous demand-based access, instead of delivery-based access, to a
shared pool instead of a designated system of conﬁgurable computing
resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, and services),
which can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal manage-
ment eﬀort. Cloud computing and storage solutions provide users with
various capabilities to store and process their data in third-party data
centers. This allows users to store data in the cloud and free up space on
mobile phones while providing the ﬂexibility to still access their data
from anywhere that you can access the cloud. () iCloud is a cloud
storage and computing service released in by Apple. By linking
an iPhone to iCloud, users can wirelessly store their data such as docu-
ments, photos, and music, download the data to iOS, Macintosh, or
Windows devices, share the data with other users, manage their Apple
devices if lost or stolen, and back up iOS devices directly to iCloud. It is a
service for which users pay extra money per month if they want add-
itional storage space. Access requires passwords via iPhones. Cloud
computing in general and iCloud in particular are new technologies
and can have various positive eﬀects on users, but will also lead to some
unexpected negative eﬀects, like the case of Jennifer Lawrence, whose
iCloud account was hacked.
In December ,Tao Liu, a Chinese movie/TV star, perhaps as
popular in China as Jennifer Lawrence is in the United States, visited
Demark. However, one day when she came back to her luxury hotel
room in Copenhagen, she discovered that all her property, jewelry, and
money, worth million Chinese Yuan (equivalent to $,), had
disappeared. She did not know what to do. She used her iPhone s and
sent her friends a text message asking for urgent help. Surprisingly, her
text message spread out widely and quickly on social media through an
app called Weixin. Within a few hours, she received ,responses
and her text was forwarded ,times, and got ,likes/sup-
ports. First, people suggested that the Danish Embassy in China could
provide assistance in this matter. Second, people recommended reporting
the loss to the hotel, meeting with senior hotel managers, and checking
hotel cameras for evidence. Third, the embassy contacted the Danish
See http://blog.sina.com.cn/s/blog_fwacp.html?tj=.
. Daily Observations

6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

Government, notiﬁed the police in Copenhagen to start an investigation,
and contacted the Bureau of Policy and Bureau of Tourism Aﬀairs.
Shortly thereafter, police posted a tweet and announced that they
arrested a -year-old suspect from Poland at the border with Tao Liu’s
jewelry, her expensive Bvlgari watch, and her Tiﬀany diamond ring.
A Danish local newspaper reported the investigation. Within hours,
all of Tao Liu’s property was returned. After the ordeal came to an end,
she did not forget to text everyone: “This trip to Demark, felt cold in one
day, but warm in the entire process. Thank all friends [sic], everything is
ﬁne now and I will come back to China soon.”
From observing these two real-life cases, we can learn a few important
points. First, the eﬀects of mobile phones can be positive or negative and,
often, an initial negative eﬀect might turn into a positive one or, vice versa,
an initial positive eﬀect might turn into a negative one. If our property is
unfortunately stolen, we can use mobile phones to ask for help. Fortu-
nately, our stolen property can be returned to us, as experienced by the
Chinese actress Miss Liu in Denmark. However, while new devices or
services of mobile phones give us convenience, enjoyment, or excitement,
they might lead to various harsh and even severe or permanent damage to
ourselves, like in the case of Jennifer Lawrence.
Second, mobile phone eﬀects may be intentional or unintentional. For
example, some grandparents want to use mobile phones to get daily
updates about their beloved grandsons and granddaughters thousands of
miles away. However, in many cases, various mobile phone eﬀects are not
what we expected, like the negative eﬀect of the Jennifer Lawrence case
and the positive eﬀect of the Tao Liu case.
Lastly, the four-element model can be used to describe the eﬀect-focused
mobile phone behavior related to the two observations of Lawrence and Liu.
For Jennifer Lawrence, initially, she (the user) used her iPhone camera (the
technology) to take her own pictures (the activity), and then her pictures
were automatically stored in iCloud (the eﬀect). Something unexpected then
happened to Lawrence. The hackers (the user) used iBrute (the technology)
to hack into her iCloud (the activity) and stole and posted the pictures
online, causing emotional distress for the actress (the eﬀect). For Tao Liu,
she (the user) used her iPhone s (the technology) to text her friends for help
after personal possessions were stolen (the activity) and the news spread
rapidly (the eﬀect). This devastating story then had an unexpected happy
ending. Her friends (the user) used a mobile app Weixin (the technology) to
share cues and solutions (the activity) and all of her lost property was
returned within hours (the eﬀect).

Mobile Phone Eﬀects
6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

.
Health Eﬀects: Simon Park and Jenny Fry
In February ,Dr. Simon Park, a senior lecturer in molecular biology
at the University of Surrey in the United Kingdom, did an experiment
with his students in his class of Practical and Biomedical Bacteriology. He
asked his undergraduate students to imprint their mobile phones onto
Petri dishes to study bacteriological growth. Note that a Petri dish was
named after the German bacteriologist Julius Richard Petri. It is a shallow,
cylindrical, glass or plastic lidded dish, partially ﬁlled with warm liquid
containing agar and a mixture of speciﬁc ingredients. Biologists use the
Petri dish to culture cells, such as bacteria. After three days, his students
were shocked to see the phone-shaped pattern of development of various
bacteria in the dish. Many of the bacteria found were harmless, but some
of those present, like staphylococcus aureus, cause diseases. Dr. Park notes
that bacteria can utilize many diﬀerent things to promote their transmis-
sion. Insects, water, food, coughs and sneezes, sexual contact, and rain are
just a few examples. Now the mobile phone is another mechanism for
carrying invisible bacteria. It might be eighteen times dirtier than a toilet.
On June , ,Jenny Fry, a -year-old British girl, committed
suicide near her home by hanging herself from a tree. Since , she
suﬀered from irritation, headaches, fatigue, and other symptoms. Her
mother Debra believed that her symptoms were due to her allergy to WiFi
signals, known as electromagnetic hypersensitivity (EHS). Her family had
removed the WiFi router from their home. However, her school still had
WiFi routers, so Jenny still always felt the eﬀects. She felt better only when
she was away from WiFi. Thus, she always tried to leave classrooms to ﬁnd a
place on campus far away from WiFi to do her school work. Her school
administrator did not believe that WiFi caused her symptoms and gave her
detention for her “strange” behavior. After texting her friend to say she could
no longer cope with her WiFi allergies, Fry ended her young life. Now her
family wants to raise awareness of EHS and is campaigning to remove
wireless technology from nurseries and schools. However, Simon Duﬀy,
the head teacher of Fry’s former school, indicated that the school needs WiFi
to enable it to operate eﬀectively and the installed WiFi complies with the
relevant regulations and the school will ensure that this continues.
See
www.news.com.au/world/europe/study-reveals-just-how-dirty-your-phone-could-be/news-story/
dbeebceaaad.
See www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/school-girl-found-hanged-after-suﬀering-from-allergy-
to-wiﬁ-a.html.
. Daily Observations

6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

These two cases highlight one dimension of mobile phone eﬀects – the
eﬀects on physical and mental health. Dr. Park’s experiment shows pos-
sible bacterial contamination from mobile phones. The Jenny Fry case
shows a possible physical reaction or allergy to the WiFi network of mobile
phones. Whether these problems are proved scientiﬁcally is one matter
that we will discuss in the chapter on mobile phones in medicine, but the
potential consequences might be severe (e.g., Fry’s death). Furthermore,
mobile phone eﬀects have multiple dimensions. Besides the positive and
negative eﬀects on human health, mobile phones might have positive or
negative impacts on human cognition, social ability, emotional experience,
and moral behavior, as we will discuss later in this chapter. Lastly, these
two eﬀect-focused mobile phone behaviors can be summarized based on
the four-element model. For Dr. Park, his students (the user) took their
mobile phones (the technology) and imprinted them onto Petri dishes (the
activity) and various bacteria were observed (the eﬀect). For Jenny Fry, she
(the user) was exposed to WiFi signals (the technology) and felt the
unusual pain of WiFi allergy (the activity) and eventually committed
suicide (the eﬀect).
.
Psychological Eﬀects: Barack Obama and Valerie Kusler
On November , ,President Barack Obama left the Oval Oﬃce
and boarded Marine One on the South Lawn of the White House for a
scheduled presidential trip. However, shortly after boarding, he hurried oﬀ
Marine One and returned to the White House. When he came outside
again, he held his BlackBerry in his hand, waved it in the air, and told
reporters gathering at the White House: “Didn’t you guys ever forget
something?” Everyone then realized that President Obama had forgotten
his BlackBerry and needed to get it before setting oﬀon the trip.
Note that Marine One is the US Marine Corps aircraft carrying the
President of the United States. It usually denotes a helicopter operated by
Marine Helicopter Squadron One. Whenever the President has an import-
ant trip, he needs to ﬁrst take Marine One from the White House and
then take Air Force One from Andrews Air Force Base.
This incident reveals two important aspects of what researchers are now
calling “nomophobia” (or, no-mobile-phone-phobia): () the feelings of
anxiety or distress that some people experience when not having their
See
www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-/Obama-keeps-Marine-One-waiting-heads-White-
House-saying-s-forgotten-Blackberry.html.

Mobile Phone Eﬀects
6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

phone; and () the degree to which we depend on mobile phones to
complete basic tasks and to fulﬁll important needs. President Obama felt
the need to hurry oﬀMarine One and return to the White House,
indicating that he might experience certain anxiety when his BlackBerry
was not with him. Afterwards, he must have experienced certain pleasure
when he got his BlackBerry and waved it in his hand since he could then
use it for his everyday communication.
In September ,Valerie Kusler, a woman working on a large cattle
ranch in Tennessee, was interviewed by National Public Radio reporter
Elise Hu about her experience of phantom vibration syndrome, a phe-
nomenon where you think your phone is vibrating when it is not. She said
that she does experience phantom vibration syndrome, especially when
many cows make a deep sound of lowing or mooing and she is confused as
to whether it is the deep and low sound of cows or the sound of her mobile
phone vibrating. To deal with this phantom vibration syndrome, she is
setting a personal goal to have a better boundary between her work life and
her mobile phone.
As we will quite often come across various types of frequency in reading
about mobile phone behavior, a few brief notes on this topic follow here:
() In science, frequency refers to the number of occurrences of a repeating
event in a unit of time. The common unit is hertz, meaning the number of
cycles per second. For instance, the frequency of the alternating current in
household electrical outlets is to hertz. In other words, the alternat-
ing current repeats its cycle to times per second. () Diﬀerent sounds
have diﬀerent frequencies. People perceive frequency of sound waves as
pitch (e.g., low or high pitch). When cows make a deep sound of mooing,
the frequency of the sound ranges between and hertz. Coinci-
dently, the frequency of vibration alerts used in mobile phones is also in
that range (e.g., the default vibration frequency of an iPhone is around 
hertz). The similar frequency between the mooing of cows and the
vibration of phones is just one reason why our brains could trick us into
thinking our phone is vibrating when it is not. () Mobile phones receive
signals from and send signals to mobile phone networks. These signals
involve a certain form of electromagnetic radiation waves. Typically, most
cellular networks worldwide use portions of the frequency in the electro-
magnetic spectrum, so-called radio frequency, between and ,
megahertz for the transmission and reception of signals. This is why many
See
www.npr.org/sections/alltechconsidered/////phantom-phone-vibrations-so-
common-they-ve-changed-our-brains.
. Daily Observations

6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

people now worry about the negative impacts of the electromagnetic
radiation emission from mobile phones on users’ health, a topic that we
will discuss in detail in the chapter on mobile phone behavior in medicine.
From these two cases, we can learn two relevant psychological phenom-
ena. The Obama case is related to nomophobia and the Kusler case is
related to phantom vibration syndrome. More importantly, besides both
nomophobia and phantom vibration syndrome, these two cases suggest
another important dimension of mobile phone eﬀects, the psychological or
behavioral eﬀects. In other words, mobile phone use might impact various
aspects of users’ behavior, including cognition skills (e.g., memory), social
interactions (e.g., friendship), emotional status (e.g., addiction), and moral
behavior (e.g., bullying). These eﬀects can be negative or positive,
intended or unintended, severe or mild, and short-term or long-term.
.
Social Eﬀects: Sit-Down Protest and Ebola Outbreak
In June ,a group of democratic congress representatives participated
in a sit-down protest in the House of Representatives, seeking a vote on
gun control measures after the Orlando nightclub shooting. A series
of unexpected events then occurred. First, the group wanted their protest
to be known to the nation. The ﬁrst media responder would normally be
C-SPAN, but this was impossible because the C-SPAN cameras in the
galleries above the House ﬂoor are actually controlled by Republicans in
the House. Second, Republican House Speaker Paul Ryan declared the
House in recess. As a result, all of the cameras went black and could not
capture the drama playing out. Third, the protesting House Democrats
decided to use their own smartphones to document their protest. Sud-
denly, instant video feeds aﬀorded by Periscope and Facebook Live started
to show the protest. Note that Periscope is a company solely hosting live
videos posted by anyone and viewed by anyone so that we can see a
collection of live broadcasts from around the world with no account
sign-up needed. Fourth, C-SPAN ended up showing video made by these
House members on their smartphones – so did the major commercial
cable news channels. In the end, this sit-down protest, led by the legendary
civil rights leader and Representative John Lewis, had the live streams from
the House ﬂoor and won great publicity online and on cable television.
See
www.npr.org/sections/alltechconsidered/////house-democrats-deliver-sit-in-
via-digital-platforms.

Mobile Phone Eﬀects
6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

In December , the ﬁrst case of Ebola occurred in a forested area of
Guinea. As of January , , ,cases and ,deaths have been
reported worldwide, with the vast majority of them being in Guinea,
Liberia, and Sierra Leone. This is the largest outbreak of Ebola in history
that West Africa has ever experienced. At the height of the Ebola crisis, the
Sierra Leone Government turned to mobile wallets, a way to pay with a
mobile phone that stores credit card or debit card information in it, to
make fast, accurate, and secure payments to emergency workers. Before
digitization, cash payments were slow and inaccurate. The mobile wallet
accomplished multiple achievements: () Mobile payments to emergency
workers dramatically shortened payment times, from over one month to
around one week, putting an end to many payment-related strikes by
emergency workers and thereby allowing for more people to be treated by
emergency workers. () Mobile payments stopped double payments and
streamlined payments, saving the country more than $million. ()
Mobile payments transfer the money directly to the bank account of
emergency workers, reducing fraud, removing the costs of physical cash
transportation and security, and cutting travel costs for response workers.
This Sierra Leone experience shows that governments in developing coun-
tries can use mobile payments to strengthen their capacity to contain the
Ebola disease, treat those infected, and ultimately save lives.
These two cases present other aspects of mobile phone eﬀects. First,
these two cases concern social eﬀects or political and economic eﬀects,
whereas the previous cases concerned physical and mental health eﬀects
(e.g., mobile phone allergy, bacterial contamination, phantom vibration
syndrome, or nomophobia). Second, these two cases concern macro-level
mobile phone eﬀects rather than micro-level eﬀects. The cases discussed
earlier are primarily related to micro-level individual activities (e.g., Jenni-
fer Lawrence’s privacy, Jenny Fry’s allergy to mobile phone WiFi signals,
Valerie Kusler’s experience with phantom vibration syndrome, Obama’s
attachment to his BlackBerry as a sign of nomophobia). In contrast, the
sit-down protest and Ebola cases are mainly related to macro-level state
aﬀairs: the mobile phone users are congressmen and governmental leaders,
and their activities impact on society.
Let us brieﬂy summarize this section. The eight cases presented here
expand our knowledge about mobile phone eﬀects in the real world.
Mobile phone eﬀects have both positive and negative directions. Further-
more, mobile phone eﬀects have diﬀerent dimensions, such as health,
psychological, behavioral, and social eﬀects. Often, mobile phone eﬀects
can occur at a micro-level aﬀecting only one individual or at a macro-level
. Daily Observations

6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

aﬀecting the larger society. However, these cases are merely media head-
lines and anecdotal news. Do we trust them? Are they true? Have research-
ers found solid evidence to support these cases? To answer these questions,
we should examine some research articles to ﬁnd out exactly what research-
ers have found and what scientiﬁc knowledge tells us about mobile phone
eﬀects.
.
Empirical Studies: From Mobile Phone Allergy to
Crime Rate Drop
.
Health Eﬀect: Sources of Metallic Allergy from Mobile Phones
In the previous section, we discussed the Jenny Fry case. While various
other complex factors were related to Fry’s death (e.g., her depression and
her school environment), allergy to WiFi signals was certainly a potential
major factor. We might then have one question: Is there any scientiﬁc
evidence of allergy to mobile phones or mobile phone networks? Let us
now examine one journal article that provides empirical evidence of the
possible allergic eﬀects of mobile phones, entitled “Mobile phones: Poten-
tial sources of nickel and cobalt exposure for metal allergic patients.”It
was written by a group of American medical doctors, Marcella Aquino,
Tania Mucci, Melanie Chong, Mark Davis Lorton, and Luz Fonacier. It
was published in in Pediatric Allergy, Immunology, and Pulmonology,
an established research journal by Mary Ann Liebert since .
In this study, metal allergic patients in a New York hospital who were
over years old and owned mobile phones were invited to the study.
They were asked to contribute one or more of their phones to test whether
they contained any nickel and cobalt, which have been known to cause
skin inﬂammation (e.g., redness, swelling, itching, or blistering). Note
that, by design, the researchers did not collect data of both these patients’
clinical history and their mobile phone use history to directly determine
the causal relation between mobile phone use and contact allergy. Popular
brands of mobile phones (e.g., Apple, Samsung, and LG) were selected.
A total of seventy-two mobile phones from seven diﬀerent manufacturers
were tested. The test program is common but has a very long name, called
the Reveal and Conceal Nickel and Cobalt Spot Test Kits made by
Aquino, M., Mucci, T., Chong, M. et al. (). “Mobile phones: Potential sources of nickel and
cobalt exposure for metal allergic patients,” Pediatric Allergy, Immunology, and Pulmonology, ():
–.

Mobile Phone Eﬀects
6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

SmartPractice. Five areas of these phones were tested, including the camera,
keypad, metal logo, side panels, and speakers. Each area was swabbed ﬁrst
with the nickel cotton-tipped plastic applicator for to seconds. A known
nickel-containing coin was used as a positive control, and a non-nickel-
containing plastic case served as a negative control. The nickel spot test was
followed by the cobalt spot test. It was found that twenty-four out of seventy-
two mobile phones (percent) tested positive for nickel and ten out of
seventy-two mobile phones (percent) tested positive for cobalt. The
researchers concluded that patients with a known nickel or cobalt allergy
may consider their mobile phones as a potential source of exposure and
further studies are needed to determine the direct relationship between
speciﬁc metal contents in mobile phones and speciﬁc metal allergy symptoms.
The story we discussed before about Jenny Fry was an everyday obser-
vation. In contrast, the research article we discuss here demonstrates how a
carefully designed experimental study can generate scientiﬁc evidence
about potential sources for allergy to mobile phones. Of course, an allergy
to mobile phones such as iPhone or Blackberry due to users’ contact with
nickel and cobalt is diﬀerent in many ways from an allergy to mobile
phone networks such as cellular networks or WiFi networks due to
electromagnetic radiofrequency radiation from mobile phone signals.
While we have seen empirical evidence that certain mobile phones contain
nickel and cobalt that might lead to certain allergies, the research evidence
does existindicating that individuals like Jenny Fry might indeed be
allergic to mobile phone network signals and we should work to prevent
such a tragedy from happening to other users in the future.
.
Health Eﬀect: Signiﬁcant Bacterial Contamination
in Patients’ Mobile Phones
In the previous section, we also discussed the case where a professor
showed his students how much bacteria their phones could be contamin-
ated with. Is there any scientiﬁc evidence for this? Actually, there is
extensive literature on contamination of mobile phones among medical
Hedendahl, L., Carlberg, M., and Hardell, L. (). “Electromagnetic hypersensitivity – an increasing
challenge to the medical profession,” Reviews on Environmental Health, (): –; Carpenter, D.
O. (). “The microwave syndrome or electro-hypersensitivity: Historical background,” Reviews on
Environmental
Health,
():
–;
Hillert,
L.
and
Kolmodin-Hedman,
B.
().
“Hypersensitivity to electricity: Sense or sensibility?” Journal of Psychosomatic Research, ():
–; and De Graaﬀ, M. B. and Bröer, C. (). “‘We are the canary in a coal mine’:
Establishing a disease category and a new health risk,” Health, Risk & Society, (): –.
. Empirical Studies

6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

workers, but the next article we will discuss is a unique one. The title is
“The mobile phone technology and hospitalized patients: A cross-sectional
surveillance study of bacterial colonization, and patient opinions and
behaviours.”It examines how much bacteria are on mobile phones used
by patients, as opposed to doctors as in many other research studies, in the
hospital setting. Note that there are two public health terms in the title: ()
“colonization” means the development of a bacterial infection on an
individual, as demonstrated by a positive culture;and () “public health
surveillance” is also known as epidemiological surveillance, clinical surveil-
lance, or syndromic surveillance. It is, according to the World Health
Organization (WHO), “the continuous, systematic collection, analysis and
interpretation of health-related data needed for the planning, implementa-
tion, and evaluation of public health practice.”
The article was cited forty-nine times based on Google Scholar, one of the
highest among the research articles on this topic. The authors are a group of
researchers from two UK hospitals. It was published in in Clinical
Microbiology and Infection, an established Wiley journal since (which
has transferred to Elsevier as of January ) with a quite high impact
factor of .. A specialty journal like this one typically has an impact
factor of lower than , whereas a general journal like Science or The Lancet
usually has an impact factor of higher than . It was associated with the
European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases and has
an open access version called New Microbes and New Infections.
In the study, participating adults were patients from the surgical/
urological departments of the Western General Hospital, in Edinburgh, in
the United Kingdom. The study consisted of four steps. First, patients
completed a survey of their demographics and opinions and utilization of
mobile phones. Second, patients were asked to give their mobile phones to
the investigators. The investigators used a moist germ-free swab/pad to
sample the phones’ keypad areas in a uniform fashion. Third, a separate
sterile swab was used to sample patients’ anterior nares (openings or passages
leading out of the nose or nasal cavity) in a uniform fashion. Fourth, both
the phone swabs and nasal swabs were inoculated and incubated in the
medical lab. These swabs were examined daily and any microorganisms
present were identiﬁed using standard laboratory procedures.
Brady, R. R., Hunt, A. C., Visvanathan, A. et al. (). “Mobile phone technology and
hospitalized patients: A cross-sectional surveillance study of bacterial colonization, and patient
opinions and behaviours,” Clinical Microbiology and Infection, (): –.
See http://medical-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/colonization.
See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_health_surveillance.

Mobile Phone Eﬀects
6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

The ﬁndings are summarized as follows: () Ninety-eight patients (.
percent) owned one mobile phone, sixteen patients (.percent) owned
two mobile phones, and four patients (.percent) owned three or more
mobile phones. Most of the patients who owned a phone brought it into
the hospital. () A majority of respondents (.percent) supported the
lifting of restrictions on inpatient use of mobile phones; .percent of
respondents supported the use of mobile phones by medical staﬀ. ()
Thirty-nine patients (.percent) felt that the lifting of restrictions
would make no diﬀerence and sixty-two (.percent) said that it would
negatively aﬀect their inpatient experience. () Seventy-two patients (.
percent) charged their phone using their own charger plugged into the
hospital ward/bedside power sockets/points. Twenty-seven (.percent)
stated that they or their relatives had charged their phone prior to admis-
sion, but three (.percent) stated that they had borrowed a fellow
patient’s charger during this inpatient stay to charge their own phone.
() Many used the phone daily, two to four times per day. About percent
regularly shared their own phones with another person outside of the
hospital and nearly percent were happy to share with other patients.
() A total of respondents (.percent) were aware that phones could
carry harmful bacteria. Fifty-two (.percent) of those presenting phones
stated that they had never cleaned their phone outside the hospital. ()
Seventeen phones (.percent) demonstrated no microbial growth, sixty-
six phones (.percent) grew one bacterial species, twelve phones (.
percent) grew two species, and seven phones (.percent) grew three or
more species. () The most common group of isolated bacteria was
coagulase-negative staphylococci, a bacterium that typically occurs in
clusters resembling grapes, normally inhabits the skin and mucous mem-
branes, and may cause disease. These bacteria commonly infect the skin,
eyes, and urinary tract, and some produce toxins responsible for septicemia
and food poisoning. () Coagulase-negative staphylococci were found on
seventy-eight mobile phones (.percent) and twelve mobile phones
(.percent) demonstrated growth of other pathogenic bacterial species
(i.e., bacteria likely to cause infection in a variety of situations, such as skin
wounds and urinary catheters).
What can we learn from this study? First, this is one of the few studies
focusing on inpatients rather than medical workers. It has a strong design
and follows standard clinical procedures to collect and examine the
samples. Second, the bacterial contamination rate is over percent,
meaning a majority of phones used by inpatients had bacteria on them,
compared to only to percent of the clinic workers’ phones. Third, the
. Empirical Studies

6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

United Kingdom lifted the restriction of using mobile phones in hospitals,
but a few risky attitudes and behaviors remain, such as sharing phones in
and outside of hospitals, sharing chargers, and hand–phone co-contamin-
ation. Lastly, we can see one type of eﬀect-focused mobile phone behavior:
British inpatients (the users) brought in their own mobile phones (the
technology) and frequently used them during their stay in hospital (the
activity), resulting in bacterial contamination from and to their mobile
phones (the eﬀect).
.
Psychological Eﬀect: Phantom Vibration Syndrome
among Medical Workers
The article we will discuss next is entitled “Phantom vibration syndrome
among medical staﬀ: A cross sectional survey.”It was written by a group
of American medical researchers: Michael Rothberg, Ashish Arora, Jodie
Hermann, Reva Kleppel, Peter St. Marie, and Paul Visintainer. It was
published in in the British Medical Journal, one of the best medical
research journals.
This study had two goals: establishing the prevalence of phantom
vibrations among medical staﬀand identifying potential risk factors asso-
ciated with experiencing phantom vibrations. A total of medical staﬀ
completed an online questionnaire via SurveyMonkey (percent of the
people invited) in , including internal medicine physicians,
medical students, nurses, nurse practitioners, translators, and medical
assistants who were in the hospital paging system. Measurements were
self-developed, consisting of seventeen questions about demographics,
device use, phantom vibrations experienced, and attempts to stop them.
The dependent variable was whether the respondent had experienced
phantom vibrations and independent variables were age, sex, occupation,
the type of device used, whether the device was used in vibration mode,
where it was worn, and how frequently it rang.
Major ﬁndings include the following: () A total of percent of
respondents
reported
having
experienced
phantom
vibrations.
()
Phantom vibrations were equally common with pagers and mobile phones
(vs. percent). () Most respondents (percent) began experiencing
phantom vibrations after carrying the device for between one month and
one year. () Most respondents (percent) experienced the phantom
Rothberg, M. B., Arora, A., Hermann, J. et al. (). “Phantom vibration syndrome among
medical staﬀ: A cross sectional survey,” British Medical Journal, : c.

Mobile Phone Eﬀects
6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

vibrations either weekly or monthly, but percent experienced them on a
daily basis. () Five factors were associated with experiencing phantom
vibrations: age, occupation, device location, hours worn per day, and how
often the device was used in vibrate mode. () Most respondents (
percent) who experienced phantom vibrations found the sensation to be
not at all or only a little bothersome. However, only percent of respond-
ents found the sensation to be bothersome or very bothersome.
What does this study tell us? First, this lends empirical support to
Valerie Kusler’s case where she experienced phantom vibration syndrome.
Second, we can develop a general picture: among medical staﬀmembers
who carry devices in their daily work, there is self-reported evidence of the
relevance of the mobile phone eﬀect of experiencing phantom vibrations.
A total of percent of the medical workers reported having experienced
phantom vibrations, and most respondents (out of , or percent)
experienced the phantom vibrations either weekly or monthly, but four-
teen respondents (percent) experienced them on a daily basis. Phantom
vibration syndrome is a real phenomenon and frequently experienced
among medical staﬀworkers. Third, we now know multiple speciﬁc details
about mobile devices and phantom vibrations, including the fact that there
were no diﬀerences in using pagers vs. mobile phones; no major diﬀerences
in vibration experience depending on how long people used their phones;
only occupation (or age), device location, and how often the device was in
vibrate mode remained signiﬁcantly associated with phantom vibrations;
most people do not feel bothered by the phantom vibrations; and many
can ﬁnd ways to stop them. In summary, this study illustrates another
interesting type of eﬀect-focused mobile phone behavior: medical
workers as mobile users (the users) frequently use their phones in vibrate
mode (the technology) in their daily work at the medical center (the
activities), resulting in the frequent experience of phantom vibration
syndrome (the eﬀect), but the majority of them do not feel bothered by
said syndrome.
.
Social Eﬀect: Crime Rate Drop in the s
The next study is a popular law article.Its title is “Mobile Phones and
Crime Deterrence: An Underappreciated Link,” and it is one of the ﬁrst
Klick, J., MacDonald, J., and Stratmann, T. (). “Mobile phones and crime deterrence: An
underappreciated link,” in Alon Harel and Keith N. Hylton (eds.), Research Handbook on the
Economics of Criminal Law. Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar, pp. –.
. Empirical Studies

6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

articles examining the relationship between the growth of mobile phone
use and the decrease of crime rate in the United States. It was cited
ﬁfteen times on Google Scholar. The three authors are American law
school professors, Klick, MacDonald, and Stratmann. It was published as
a chapter in the Research Handbook on the Economics of Criminal Law.
This study is essentially a secondary data analysis. Using the existing
data rather than collecting new data, the authors attempted to explain the
fall in crime rates in the s in the United States, a particularly popular
modern criminal phenomenon. The study is based on two theories: ()
the Becker framework, predicting that an individual will commit a crime
if the expected beneﬁts of the crime exceed the costs; and () the routine
activities theory, predicting that crime will increase if suitable targets of
crime, potential oﬀenders, and the lack of capable guardians increase.
The mobile phone data are from the Federal Communications Commis-
sion, the Bureau of Justice Statistics, and the Bureau of Economic
Analysis. The crime rate data are from the FBI’s Uniform Crime Report
between and. The independent variables were () the number
of mobile phone subscriptions (indicating how many people subscribe to
mobile network services) and () the mobile phone penetration rate in
the state population (indicating how many people own mobile phones).
The dependent variables were violent crime rate, rape rate, assault rate,
and property crime rate. The control variables were gross domestic
product (GDP), per capita spending on police, and per capita spending
on corrections. The regression analysis indicated that mobile phone
subscription and mobile phone penetration rate were signiﬁcantly but
negatively related to violent crime rate, rape rate, assault rate, and
property crime rate. The results were conﬁrmed by robust tests after
controlling for GDP, per capita spending on police, per capita spending
on corrections, and other potential biases.
What can we learn from this study? () Although the study was not able
to determine any causal eﬀects, mobile phones might play a positive and
important role in decreasing the crime rate. For example, mobile phones
can be used to report to police immediately, mobile phone cameras can
record and help identify criminals, bystanders can use mobile phones to
report their observations to police, and criminals’ phones can be used to
collect criminal evidence. () The study illustrates another type of eﬀect-
based mobile phone behavior: victims use mobile phones during a crime
and are better able to protect themselves and report to police and record
evidence. This is then associated with the decline of crime rates in property
crime, rape, assault, and violent crime.

Mobile Phone Eﬀects
6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

.
Knowledge Syntheses: From Mobile Phone Allergy to Child
Maltreatment Prevention
So far, we have discussed several everyday life scenarios and a few empirical
examples. We now move on to talk about the review of the literature. Our
goal here is to see what knowledge has been synthesized on mobile phone
eﬀects and to broaden our understanding of the complexity of mobile
phone behavior from the perspective of mobile phone eﬀects.
Compared to mobile users, mobile technologies, and mobile activities,
mobile eﬀects have been studied most extensively. Understandably, it is
what the general public and scientiﬁc researchers care about most and thus
the existing literature in this area is the largest. Two topics in particular
stand out, compared to various positive and negative mobile eﬀects with
diﬀerent dimensions (e.g., physical and cognitive ones) in diﬀerent
domains (e.g., medicine and education) at either macro- or micro-levels.
The ﬁrst is the links between mobile phone use and brain cancers. This has
produced the largest amount of research literature and drawn the widest
media attention. The second largest literature topic concerns distracted
driving while using mobile phones. These two eﬀects will be discussed in
the two upcoming chapters on mobile phone behavior in medicine and on
mobile phone behavior in daily life. This arrangement will allow this
section of knowledge synthesis to cover other topics and avoid too much
overlapping among diﬀerent chapters.
.
Various Mobile Phone Eﬀects
To access the synthesized literature on mobile phone eﬀects eﬃciently, we
might start with the Encyclopedia of Mobile Phone Behavior. The Encyclo-
pedia has extensive coverage of mobile phone eﬀects (see Table .). First,
some interesting chapters focus on negative eﬀects, such as mobile phone
addiction and mobile phone bullying, while other chapters focus on
positive eﬀects, such as eﬀects on mobile presidential elections, psycho-
social intervention eﬀects, eﬀects of supporting people with autism spec-
trum disorders, and eﬀects of preventing child maltreatment. Second,
besides the directions of mobile phone eﬀects, these chapters also present
four major types of mobile eﬀects, behavioral (e.g., eﬀects of calling while
driving on car crash risk), health (e.g., eﬀects of long-term mobile phone
use on the brain in terms of cancer), psychological (eﬀects of science
learning games on cognition), and social (eﬀects of mobile phone use on
culture).
. Knowledge Syntheses

6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

Table .The Encyclopedia Chapters on Effect-Based Mobile
Phone Behavior
Direction
Dimension
Chapter Title
Negative
Behavioral
Cell phone conversation and relative crash risk
Negative
Behavioral
Cell-phones, distracted driving, bans and fatalities
Negative
Behavioral
Cellular phones’ contribution to dangerous driving
Negative
Behavioral
Road safety and mobile phone behaviors
Negative
Behavioral
The role of mobile phones in real world motor vehicle
crashes
Negative
Behavioral
Children, risks and the mobile internet
Negative
Behavioral
Mobile phone-related behaviors and problems in Japan
Negative
Behavioral
Students hurting students: Cyberbullying as a mobile phone
behavior
Positive
Behavioral
Mobile phone: Repurposed assistive technology for
individuals with disabilities
Positive
Behavioral
Use of mobile phones to help prevent child maltreatment
Negative
Medicine
Long term mobile phone use leads to brain tumors
Negative
Medicine
Mobile phone addiction
Negative
Medicine
Mobile phones-like electromagnetic ﬁelds eﬀects on human
psychomotor performance
Negative
Medicine
Internet and mobile phone addiction
Positive
Medicine
mHealth in maternal, newborn, and child health programs
around the world
Positive
Medicine
Mobile health in emergency care
Positive
Medicine
Mobile phones for plastic surgery and burns: Current
practice
Positive
Medicine
Mobile phones in haematology
Positive
Psychological
Science learning games for mobile platforms
Positive
Psychological
Digital mobile games in education
Positive
Psychological
Mobile phone behavior in the college classroom:
Eﬀects on student learning and implications for students
and teachers
Positive
Psychological
Mobile tracking for mental health and wellbeing
Positive
Psychological
Positive technology: Using mobile phones for psychosocial
interventions
Positive
Psychological
The impact of mobile phones on teenagers’ socialization and
emancipation
Positive
Social
Mobile phone use enhances social connectedness
Positive
Social
Using mobile phones to control social interactions
Positive
Social
Mobile phone culture: The impacts of mobile phone use
Positive
Social
Mundane mobile maintenance, entrapment, and hyper-
coordination
Positive
Social
Portable social groups
Positive
Social
Social impacts of mobile phones on the life of the Chinese
people
Positive
Social
The mobile presidential election

Mobile Phone Eﬀects
6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

For example, a particularly readable and informative chapter is “Use of
mobile phones to help prevent child maltreatment,” by four researchers
from Georgia State University – Katelyn Guastaferro, Matthew Jackson,
Shannon Self-Brown, and John Lutzker – and Julie Jabaley from Craddock
Center of Georgia.The authors speciﬁed several pioneers and leaders
such as Kathy Bigelow and Judith Carta at the University of Kansas, Jenn
LeFever at the University of Notre Dame, and Julie Gazmararian at Emory
University. In particular, four mobile-phone-based prevention programs
were highlighted, including parent–child activities interview via mobile
phones, parent–child interactions via texting, national intervention for
pregnant and postpartum women via Textbaby, and home safety via
iPhones. They summarize major positive eﬀects of these programs for
child maltreatment prevention and intervention as well as various advan-
tages (e.g., less expensive than the landline phones for poor parents and less
prohibitive for parents to spend time with their children during the study).
We will not discuss these chapters in detail. Instead, we will spend more
time discussing three review articles on mobile phone allergy, mobile
phone bacterial contamination, and phantom vibration syndrome in the
following sections.
.
Consistent Mobile Phone Dermatitis
The ﬁrst review we will discuss is “Mobile phone dermatitis in children
and adults: A review of the literature.”This is a well-written, concise,
and eﬀective summary of mobile phone dermatitis, i.e., skin inﬂammation
due to mobile phone use. The authors are Clare Richardson, Carsten
Hamann, Dathan Hamann, and Jacob Thyssen, a group of medical
researchers from the United States and Demark. It was published in
in Pediatric Allergy, Immunology, and Pulmonology, a well-established
journal published by Mary Ann Liebert since , known for publishing
journals in biomedical research, and expanding its journal publications to
other areas (e.g., Cyberpsychology, Behavior and Social Networking and
Games for Health Journal).
Guastaferro, K. M., Jackson, M. C., Self-Brown, S. et al. (). “Use of mobile phones to help
prevent child maltreatment,” in Z. Yan (ed.), Encyclopedia of Mobile Phone Behavior. Hershey, PA:
Information Science Reference, pp. –.
Richardson, C., Hamann, C. R., Hamann, D., and Thyssen, J. P. (). “Mobile phone
dermatitis in children and adults: A review of the literature,” Pediatric Allergy, Immunology, and
Pulmonology, (): –.
. Knowledge Syntheses

6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

There are a few important points we can learn from this review. ()
Allergic contact dermatitis is a form of skin inﬂammation due to an allergic
response caused by contact with a substance. In general, it is relatively
common in women and children. One of the reasons is that nickel, the
most common metal cause of allergic contact dermatitis, is released from
jewelry, belt buckles, buttons, glasses, coins, keys, and recently mobile
phones, laptops, video game controllers, and technology accessories.
Women and children are often exposed to these items. () The ﬁrst two
cases of mobile phone dermatitis were reported in Italy in . () The
researchers found that there have been thirty-seven case reports and only six
research studies speciﬁcally related to mobile phone dermatitis between
and . Thus, this area of research is still limited. () The majority
of the literature is concerned with a nickel allergy, but a few have also
investigated cobalt and chromium allergies. () The allergic skin areas of
interest include the face, cheek, chin, hands, forearms, abdomen, wrists,
thighs, chest, and breasts. The parts of phones usually tested include the
phone’s front and back frames, headset, screen, menu button, power button,
metal bar, side and front buttons, keypad, ear speaker, and cover. () Similar
prevalence of mobile phone dermatitis exists between adults and children,
and between those who have expensive phones vs. those who have cheaper
ones. Those who have unusual habits (e.g., tucking the phone into a bra),
use the phone frequently for occupational use, or have a new phone are
more susceptible to mobile phone dermatitis. () This is a growing area of
research, with reported publications increasing from two cases in , to
twenty-seven cases by , and thirty-seven cases by .
We can learn a few important points from this review regarding mobile
phone allergy. First, this review oﬀers a comprehensive picture of mobile
phone dermatitis or mobile phone allergy and provides much broader
coverage than the Jenny Fry case and the empirical study by Brady and
his collaborators in discussed in the previous two sections. If Jenny
Fry knew and went to see a specialist of allergology or dermatology, she
might have been able to receive a timely and appropriate diagnosis and
treatment to avoid tragedy. Second, with the rapid growth of new mobile
phone production and the rapid increase of diverse mobile phone users,
existing symptoms might become more complicated and new symptoms
might appear. Thus, further research is needed to better understand the
complexity of mobile phone dermatitis or mobile phone allergy, especially
the mechanism between mobile phone use and contact dermatitis. As a
result, research-based education, prevention, and intervention programs
and regulations can be developed.

Mobile Phone Eﬀects
6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

.
Risky Bacterial Infections within Hospitals
The review we will discuss next is entitled “Are healthcare workers’ mobile
phones a potential source of nosocomial infections? Review of the litera-
ture.”Nosocomial infections normally refer to infections that originate
in a hospital rather than from the outside. This review synthesizes the
literature on how bacterial contamination on mobile phones of medical
staﬀmembers in hospitals might result in the spread of infection within a
hospital. It was written by a group of Turkish medical scholars, Fatma
Ulger, Ahmet Dilek, Saban Esen, Mustafa Sunbul, and Hakan Leblebi-
cioglu. It was published in in Journal of Infection in Developing
Countries, a new peer-reviewed journal established in with an impact
factor of .. Its Editor in Chief is Dr. Salvatore Rubino from the
Università degli Studi di Sassari, Italy, a medical expert on Pathogens
and publisher of over articles. There is another widely cited review
on this topic published in in a journal with a higher impact factor.
However, the article is preferable for our purposes, mainly because it
reviews thirty-nine studies published between and , whereas the
review only includes ten articles published before .
From this review, we can learn several important points. () The ﬁrst
publication was in . As of , thirty-nine studies have been published,
which forms a good empirical base to understand bacterial contamination of
mobile phones. () Many studies focused on health-care workers given the
unique importance and popularity of this group of mobile phone users. ()
Mobile phone use in the medical setting leads to other potential risks,
including noise, distraction, data safety, and patients’ privacy, in addition to
the possibility of transferring microorganisms for potential infections within
the medical environment among clinicians, patients, devices, and general
surfaces. () The review mainly used two methods to identify articles:
database search and reference list checking. The thirty-nine studies included
letters to the editor (i.e., brief reports), cohort studies, and cross-sectional
studies. () The key ﬁnding is that the prevalence of infection ranged from
to percent on all phones tested, with the most common isolated
microorganisms being staphylococcus aureus (nearly percent of all cases of
Ulger, F., Dilek, A., Esen, S. et al. (). “Are healthcare workers’ mobile phones a potential
source of nosocomial infections? Review of the literature,” Journal of Infection in Developing
Countries, (): –.
Brady, R. R. W., Verran, J., Damani, N. N., and Gibb, A. P. (). “Review of mobile
communication devices as potential reservoirs of nosocomial pathogens,” Journal of Hospital
Infection, (): –.
. Knowledge Syntheses

6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

infection). () Mobile phones are considered to be an ideal breeding site for
bacteria because: (a) they provide ideal humidity and temperature for bacteria
to thrive; (b) ﬁngers and ﬁnger tips are used for touch screens and become
good means to transfer pathogens, i.e., any disease-producing agent, especially
a virus, bacterium, or other microorganism; and (c) health-care workers can
bring them daily between home, work, and other public or private locations.
() Potential technological solutions for the contamination and infection
include hands-free earphones, antibacterial surface covers, washable phones,
and disposable phone covers.
In the previous sections, we discussed Dr. Park’s biology experiment of
growing bacteria and the empirical study of identifying bacterial contamin-
ation of patients’ mobile phones. This review oﬀers a synthesized scientiﬁc
knowledge about bacterial infection within hospitals due to mobile phone use
by medical workers. We now can have a current and broad picture of medical
research in this area. Speciﬁcally, we can see two important points from the
perspective of mobile phone behavior. First, as a special group of mobile phone
users, medical workers in hospitals not only routinely use mobile phones in
their professional work, but also often spread virus and bacteria through their
contaminated mobile phones. In other words, they have a much higher risk of
causing bacterial infection than Dr. Park’s students or allergic patients treated
in hospitals. Second, although the current prevalence of infection varies largely
(to percent), it is clear that mobile phones are an ideal breeding site for
bacterial growth, and medical workers’ mobile phones are a critical source of
bacterial infection. Thus, from the perspective of mobile phone eﬀects, mobile
phones not only concern bacterial contamination in daily settings, but most
importantly concern bacterial infection in hospital settings.
.
Debatable Phantom Vibration Syndrome
We now will discuss another short review, “Phantom vibration and
phantom ringing among mobile phone users: A systematic review of
literature.”It was written by Amrita Deb, an Indian scholar who is an
Assistant Professor in Clinical Psychology at the Indian Institute of Tech-
nology Hyderabad and has published articles on resilience. It was pub-
lished in in Wiley’s Asia-Paciﬁc Psychiatry.
This is a clear, accessible, and thoughtful review. It oﬀers several important
insights into phantom vibration syndrome. () It lists several similar terms,
Deb, A. (). “Phantom vibration and phantom ringing among mobile phone users: A systematic
review of literature,” Asia-Paciﬁc Psychiatry, (): –.

Mobile Phone Eﬀects
6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

ringxiety, phantom vibration, phantom ring, technopathology, and tinnitus.
It reviews both phantom vibration and phantom ringing rather than just
phantom vibration, a perception of feeling or hearing a mobile phone vibrat-
ing or ringing when it is not. () It identiﬁes the earliest study by Laramie in
his doctoral dissertation. () It used multiple methods to search the
literature, including database searches, reference checking, grey literature
search, and author consulting. From this, the author found twenty-nine
articles, ﬁfteen of which are newsletters, reports, or online magazine articles,
four of which are review articles, and ten of which original research articles.
Clearly, as the authors have indicated, this topic has been popular in the
media; however, the research in this area is still at an early stage. () The
majority of studies reviewed used university students as subjects and relied on
self-reported questionnaires. () The prevalence rates of phantom vibration
and phantom ringing range between and percent. () Factors related to
phantom vibration and phantom ringing include hours spent calling or
texting, ringtone or vibration type, device location, occupation, hours carried,
frequency of using vibration mode, personality, stress, and depression. ()
Most people reported that it was not bothersome or only a little bothersome.
() Causes include: (a) misinterpretation of incoming sensory signals by the
brain; (b) high expectations during a special period of time in vigilance; (c)
being on high alert, like a mother on alert for a crying baby; (d) desire for
constant social contact, or anxiety in anticipation of an incoming message;
and (e) phone dependence, addiction, or problematic use.
Although various cases like the one of Valerie Kusler have been observed in
everyday lives and various studies like the one about phantom vibration
syndrome among medical workers have been published, overall, in contrast
to the broad media exposure, this review shows that it is still premature to
identify phantom vibration syndrome as a widely accepted clinical condition
with a strong scientiﬁc research support due to two major reasons. First, the
empirical research on this topic is still limited as indicated by the review of
only ten original research articles. Second, the quality of the research is also
limited due to the currently wide use of non-experimental designs, self-report
data collection, weak measurement development, and subjective speculations.
.
Comparative Analyses: From Device Allergy
to Device Bacterial Contamination
After discussing the various mobile phone eﬀects, we might ask a broader
question: Are there any similarities and diﬀerences in the eﬀects of diﬀer-
ent technologies such as television, computers, the Internet, and mobile
. Comparative Analyses

6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

phones on human beings? In other words, what kinds of eﬀects are shared
by various computation, information, and communication technologies?
What kinds of eﬀects are unique to mobile phones? This is a good but
diﬃcult question about media eﬀects. Media eﬀects can be considered to
be the most discussed topic in technological behavior literature. There are
television eﬀects, computer eﬀects, Internet eﬀects, and now mobile phone
eﬀects. A general or philosophical discussion might only lead to an
oversimpliﬁed answer. One of the workable ways is to discuss a speciﬁc
example. Instead of comparing similar or diﬀerent eﬀects of diﬀerent
technologies, we will discuss two interesting articles that reveal shared or
unique eﬀects of diﬀerent technologies.
.
Device Contact Dermatitis
The ﬁrst comparative work is a literature review entitled “Modern elec-
tronic devices: An increasingly common cause of skin disorders in con-
sumers.”It was written by a group of Italian medical doctors, Monica
Corazza, Sara Minghetti, Alberto Maria Bertoldi, Emanuela Martina,
Annarosa Virgili, and Alessandro Borghi. The article was published in
in Dermatitis.
In this review, the authors used multiple strategies to search the existing
medical literature on various skin disorders related to three modern tech-
nologies – game consoles, PCs, and mobile phones. The major ﬁndings
speciﬁcally related to contact dermatitis or skin inﬂammation include the
following: () There are only a few clinical reports on contact dermatitis of
game devices; however, the literature on contact dermatitis of personal
computers is very extensive. For contact dermatitis of mobile phones,
clinical reports have been rapidly increasing over the last ﬁfteen years. ()
Not only major devices per se (e.g., game controllers or handsets) but also
various accessories are the source of contact dermatitis (e.g., chargers,
batteries, mice, mouse pads, keyboard, keyboard wrist rests, phone covers,
and headphones). Metallic elements (especially nickel) that are released
from these devices are the most common cause of allergic contact derma-
titis. () There are various kinds of symptoms related to allergic contact
dermatitis. For game consoles, the allergic locations are only on ﬁngers and
palms. For personal computers, laptops, or tablets, the allergic areas are
mainly on ﬁngers, palms, wrists, and forearms. But for mobile phones, the
Corazza, M., Minghetti, S., Bertoldi, A. M. et al. (). “Modern electronic devices: An
increasingly common cause of skin disorders in consumers,” Dermatitis, (): –.

Mobile Phone Eﬀects
6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

allergic locations are widely spread, from hands, forearms, breasts, lower
abdomen, faces, and ears.
For mobile phone allergy or dermatitis, we have already discussed an
everyday observation of Jenny Fry, an empirical study of a new source of
metallic allergy to mobile phones, and a review of consistent mobile phone
dermatitis. From this comparative review, we can see the following: ()
Allergies to electronic devices is not very new or very rare. Contact
dermatitis has been reported in various modern technologies, including
video game devices, PCs, tablets, and now mobile phones. () Comparing
with diﬀerent devices, contact dermatitis to mobile phones is unique due
to the rapid increase of the clinical reports and a wide variety of the allergic
areas in a human body.
.
Device Bacterial Contamination
The second comparative study is entitled “Bacterial contamination of
anaesthetists’ hands by personal mobile phone and ﬁxed phone use in
the operating theatre.”It was cited times according to Google
Scholar. The authors are ﬁve Austrian scholars, Jeske, Tiefenthaler, Hohl-
rieder, Hinterberger, and Benzer. It was published in in Anaesthesia.
In this study, a within-subjects experimental design was used to examine
whether mobile phones carry more bacteria than traditional ﬁxed phones.
The researchers recruited forty anesthetists to participate in the study.
Note that while anesthetists and anesthesiologists are both involved in
putting patients under anesthesia for various surgeries, an anesthetist is a
specialized nurse and an anesthesiologist is a specialized medical doctor.
First, these anesthetists were asked to use an alcohol-based hand rub to
disinfect their hands. Cultures were then obtained from the ﬁngers of both
cleaned hands. Second, the anesthetists used their hands to make an
approximately -minute-long phone call on their personal mobile phone.
Cultures were taken again from their hands after making the phone call.
Third, specimens were also collected from the keypad of the mobile
phone. Fourth, after hours, isolated microorganisms were identiﬁed
using multiple laboratory procedures. Likewise, the same experiment was
performed later using ﬁxed wall phones in the anteroom of the operation
room. The major results include the following: () Following the use of a
Jeske, H. C., Tiefenthaler, W., Hohlrieder, M. et al. (). “Bacterial contamination of
anaesthetists’ hands by personal mobile phone and ﬁxed phone use in the operating theatre,”
Anaesthesia, (): –.
. Comparative Analyses

6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

mobile phone or a ﬁxed wall phone, the rate of bacterial contamination of
the anesthetists’ hands increased, with thirty-eight out of forty anesthetists’
hands contaminated by mobile phones and thirty-three out of forty anes-
thetists’ hands contaminated by wall phones. () The keypad surface of the
mobile phones (thirty-six out of forty) and of the ﬁxed phones (thirty-eight
out of forty) after these phones were used contained non-human patho-
gens (e.g. a bacterium or a virus) that can cause diseases, as well as some
human pathogens.
For mobile phone bacterial contamination, we have already discussed the
case of Dr. Simon Park’s experiment, an empirical study of bacterial
contamination in patients’ mobile phones, and a review of bacterial infection
by medical staﬀ’s phones. What can we learn from this comparative study?
First, although it was one of the earliest studies of this kind, the
researchers thoughtfully chose both ﬁxed phones and mobile phones to
compare bacterial contamination. As we can imagine, television is almost
incomparable with mobile phones, except for maybe the television remote
controller; computers are almost incomparable with mobile phones, except
for computer keyboards/mice and tablet computers with touch screens;
whereas the Internet is special because it can be accessed from computers,
mobile phones, and newer models of televisions (e.g., Samsung’s smart
television). It is quite creative to compare ﬁxed telephones and mobile
phones, while there are still many diﬀerences (e.g., the mobile phones are
personal and the ﬁxed wall phones are public). In addition, the same group
of anesthetists followed the procedure twice. Thus, various individual
diﬀerences are controlled for and the results of the comparison are more
convincing.
Second, it was found that, after only minute of use, mobile phones
and ﬁxed phones are contaminated at similar rates rather than at signiﬁ-
cantly diﬀerent rates for both hands and keypads. However, a subtle but
key diﬀerence between mobile phones and ﬁxed phones is that mobile
phones are always with the anesthetists in and out of the operation room,
and are directly close to patients and close to doctors’ hands, faces, and
ears, whereas ﬁxed phones are outside of the operation room and in the
anteroom only. Thus, in the real clinical setting, the mobile phones are
much more risky for bacterial contamination and infection than the wall
phones.
Third, the study was conducted in . As of , it has been cited
times, even though the authors considered it to be a pilot study. It has
been inspiring dozens of new comparative studies examining diﬀerent
groups, diﬀerent settings, or diﬀerent hygiene strategies. These comparative

Mobile Phone Eﬀects
6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

studies have made the accurate assessment of unique eﬀects of mobile
phones such as bacterial contamination possible. For instance, the bacterial
contamination rate for diﬀerent technologies after being used could be
similar, but the high level of both mobility and personalization makes
mobile phones much more hazardous in clinical settings.
.
Complex Thinking: A Complex Double-Edged Sword
At the beginning of this chapter, we discussed Frances’ intuitive thinking
about mobile phone eﬀects. Recall that Frances covered various eﬀects
with various speciﬁc examples and stressed the core feature of mobile
phones – using them anytime and anywhere. Meanwhile, Frances focused
only on the positive eﬀects and talked mainly about her everyday experi-
ence in China. After reading the entire chapter, we can easily see that
mobile phone eﬀects are much more complex than Frances thought
intuitively. Now let us use a concept map again (see Figure .) to
summarize the major contents of the chapter and compare it with Frances’
intuitive knowledge.
First, as shown in Figure ., diﬀerent from Frances’ intuitive know-
ledge focusing only on positive eﬀects, mobile phone eﬀects concern
diﬀerent directions. Like various technologies invented by human beings,
Mobile phone
users
Mobile Phone Effects
1. Heath Effects
2.2 Negative: Simon Park 
2.2 Negative: Jenny Fry
3.1 Negative: Sources of Metallic Allergy to  
Mobile Phones
3.2 Negative: Significant Bacterial Contamination 
in Patients’ Mobile Phones 
4.2 Negative: Consistent Mobile Phone Dermatitis 
4.3 Negative: Risky bacterial Infections within 
Hospitals
2. Psychological Effects
2.3 Negative: Barack Obama (Nomophobia)  
2.3 Negative: Valerie Kusler 
3.3 Negative: Phantom Vibration   
Syndrome among Medical Workers
4.4 Debatable Phantom Vibration Syndrome 
3. Behavioral Effects
2.1 Negative: Jennifer Lawrence
2.1 Positive: Tao Liu
4. Social Effects
2.1 Negative: Jennifer Lawrence
2.4 Positive: Sit-Down Protest
2.4 Positive: Ebola Outbreak 
3.4 Positive: Crime Rate Drop in the 1990s 
Mobile phone
activities
Mobile phone
technologies
Figure .
A Summary Diagram of Eﬀect-Based Mobile Phone Behavior
. Complex Thinking

6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

a mobile phone itself as a technology does not have any positive or negative
eﬀects. However, mobile phone use or more broadly mobile phone
behavior will lead to various mobile phone eﬀects. These eﬀects have both
negative and positive sides in a wide spectrum. In other words, mobile
phone behavior is a double-edged sword that could help us or hurt us, and
thus lead to various positive and negative eﬀects. This is the most critical
point about mobile phone eﬀects. The positive eﬀects have been repeatedly
demonstrated in the cases of Tao Liu getting her belongings back, the sit-
down protest receiving live media coverage, and the use of mobile wallets
to pay health-care workers in the battle against the Ebola breakout.
Positive eﬀects were also illustrated in the study of reporting the relation-
ship between the large crime rate drop in the s and the wide use of
mobile phones in the United States. On the negative side, we have
discussed the cases of Jennifer Lawrence’s phone being hacked, Jenny
Fry’s suicide tragedy, Dr. Park’s biological experiment, Valerie Kusler’s
phantom vibration syndrome experience, and the studies and reviews of
contact dermatitis and bacterial contamination of mobile phone use.
Second, diﬀerent from Frances’ intuitive knowledge focusing only on
her own everyday experience, mobile phone eﬀects concern multiple
dimensions, such as eﬀects on people’s physical and mental health, individ-
uals’ psychological processes, users’ various behavior, and large-scale social
practices. In other words, mobile phone behavior is not only a double-
edged sword, but also a complex double-edged sword that could help us or
hurt us in various ways directly and indirectly. In this chapter, we have
discussed: () various health eﬀects of mobile phone behaviors, including
mobile phone dermatitis and allergy, and bacterial contamination and
infection; () various psychological eﬀects, including nomophobia and
phantom vibration syndrome; () behavioral eﬀects, such as the case of
Jennifer Lawrence and Tao Liu; and () social eﬀects, such as the case of
the sit-down protest, the case of the Ebola outbreak, and the study of the
large crime rate drop in the s.
The future research of mobile phone eﬀects should explore and examine
multiple important topics. First, eﬀects generally refer to causal eﬀects
based on well-controlled randomized experimental studies. However,
many of the studies we have discussed in this chapter do not have a typical
randomized experimental design, but rather follow a survey-based correl-
ational study design. This type of design is useful to describe a behavior,
but it is not suﬃcient to draw causality and determine eﬀects. Therefore,
future research needs better design as well as better measurement, data
collection, and data analysis. Second, in addition to improving research

Mobile Phone Eﬀects
6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core

quality, more research eﬀects are needed to examine both the positive and
negative eﬀects so that our understanding of mobile phone eﬀects will be
balanced and complete. Third, future research should examine various
dimensions of mobile phone eﬀects, especially cognitive eﬀects and moral
eﬀects rather than focusing on health eﬀects. Fourth, research is urgently
needed to study new issues, such as privacy, safety, and security of mobile
phone use.
. Complex Thinking

6
13:09:52, subject to the Cambridge Core


Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine
Outline
.
Intuitive Thinking: From a Young Medical Doctor
.
Everyday Observations: From Dr. Christopher Spillers to Dr. John Tickell
.
Users: Distracted Dr. Spillers
.
Technologies: UNICEF Innovation Projects
.
Activities: Monitoring Blood Sugar Levels
.
Eﬀects: Dr. John Tickell with Brain Tumors
.
Eﬀects: Million Addicts
.
Empirical Studies: From HIV-Infected Pregnant Women to Links with
Brain Cancers
.
Users: HIV-Infected Pregnant Women
.
Technologies: Mobile Phone Dispatch
.
Activities: Smoking Cessation Intervention
.
Medical Eﬀects: Sleep Disturbance
.
Medical Eﬀects: Brain Cancers
.
Knowledge Syntheses: From Exponential Growth to Potential Brain Cancers
.
Exponential Growth
.
Dominant Themes
.
Users: Older Adults’ Health Care
.
Eﬀects: School Students’ Sleep Disturbance
.
Eﬀects: Potential Brain Cancers
.
Comparative Analyses: From Television Addiction to Mobile Phone
Addiction
.
American Adults’ Television Addiction
.
British Adolescents’ Computer Game Addiction
.
British University Students’ Internet Addiction
.
American Undergraduates’ Mobile Phone Addiction
.
Complex Thinking: The Best Diamond in the Crown

7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

.
Intuitive Thinking: From A Young Medical Doctor
Around Christmas of , I heard from a good friend, who is a young
medical doctor and highly proﬁcient in using modern technologies, that he
might visit Boston soon. We had an enjoyable and festive chat. Then
I asked him: “What can people do with mobile phones in medicine or
health care? Can you write down three to ﬁve words that quickly come to
mind? I am writing a piece on mobile health and hope to hear a medical
professional’s initial responses.”
He quickly emailed me back with the following ﬁve phrases: () real-time
update; () remote control; () convenience; () database; () not high
reliability. Upon my request, he further elaborated these ﬁve phrases as
follows: () Mobile phones can update medical information such as people’s
heart rates and oxyhemoglobin saturation. () Doctors can control the data
remotely from the mobile phone and monitor the health status of patients.
() People can just stay at home and get help from doctors rather than go to
a hospital. () Mobile phones can collect a patient’s data over a long period
for possible big data analytics. However, () the health data collected
through the mobile phone is not so reliable compared to professional
examination data from the hospital and can be used for references only.
These initial responses from a young medical doctor are informative for
a few reasons. First, these responses are speciﬁc. He speciﬁed updating
medical information, controlling the data remotely, monitoring the health
status of patients, and performing possible big data analytics. As a medical
professional rather than a technical professional, it is not easy to produce
such technically speciﬁc responses. My friend is quite technically savvy.
Second, these responses are authentic, a quite typical response from a
doctor. From the perspective of a doctor, he considered using heart rates
and oxyhemoglobin saturation, monitoring the health status of patients,
patients being able to stay at home to get help from doctors, and he is
concerned that the health data collected through mobile phones are not as
reliable as professional examination data from the hospital. These
responses represent what an active medical professional with good tech-
nical experiences would consider mobile phone use in medicine. Third,
these responses are incomplete and simple. Based on the basic four-element
model to analyze mobile phone behavior, he mentioned doctors and
patients as the two types of mobile phone users and mainly focused on
the process of collecting, updating, monitoring, and managing the medical
data, but mentioned neither any speciﬁc technologies (he did mention
databases as a phrase though) nor any speciﬁc eﬀects of mobile phones.
. Intuitive Thinking: From a Young Medical Doctor

7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

In this chapter, using this intuitive knowledge as the starting point of
learning, we will use the four-element framework to further discuss mobile
phone behavior in medicine. We will brieﬂy present multiple real-life
observations, review multiple research examples in detail, oﬀer an overview
of the current knowledge in the area of mobile phone behavior in medi-
cine, and compare diﬀerent technologies in medicine. Our goals are to
expand, extend, broaden, and deepen our intuitive knowledge about
mobile phone behavior in medicine and develop a complex knowledge
about mobile phone behavior in medicine and health care. Overall, we
hope to develop a good picture of mobile phone behavior in medicine and
health care and good analytic skills of studying mobile phone behavior in
personal and professional settings.
.
Everyday Observations: From Dr. Christopher Spillers
to Dr. John Tickell
.
Users: Distracted Dr. Spillers
In April , Dr. Christopher Spillers was an anesthesiologist during a
routine heart surgery operation on Mary Roseann Milne, a -year-old
woman in Dallas, Texas. Mary died after her surgery. Her family ﬁled a
medical malpractice suit, and one of the claims was distracted doctoring
because Dr. Spillers was texting and reading an iPad during the operation
and failed to notice Milne’s dangerously low blood-oxygen levels for
or minutes.The case was set to go before a Dallas County jury
in September. However, there is no information available about how the
case ended. All we can ﬁnd out on the Internet is that Dr. Christopher
Spillers received his medical degree from the University of Texas Medical
School, has been in practice as an anesthesiologist in Dallas for more than
ten years, and currently is aﬃliated with multiple hospitals in the area,
including Baylor Regional Medical Center and Baylor University Med-
ical Center.
This case, as well as other similar cases, became headlines of multiple
major newspapers and widely discussed in both the general public and the
medical community. Of course, this type of case concerns various major
issues, including medical ethics, medical malpractice, positive and negative
See
www.dallasobserver.com/news/dallas-anesthesiologist-being-sued-over-deadly-surgery-admits-
to-texting-reading-ipad-during-procedures-.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine
7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

eﬀects of mobile phone use, and mobile phone use policy. Here, we can
analyze this case from the perspective of mobile phone users in medicine.
First, by deﬁnition, this doctor is a mobile phone user in medicine, but
clearly he is not a good mobile phone user. Doctors are a major group of
mobile phone users in medicine, but their professional ethical levels of using
mobile phones might vary widely. Many use mobile phones professionally,
whereas some like Dr. Christopher Spillers use it unprofessionally.
Second, medical professionals carry their mobile phones all the time at
work, as we can see in the hospitals and clinics, and they may be issued by
their institutions or purchased by themselves. Their mobile phones may
serve diﬀerent professional and personal purposes.
Third, besides medical doctors, there are many other mobile phone
users in medicine and health care, such as patients, families of patients,
nurses, medical students, emergency bus drivers, and medical assistants.
These diverse users will have diﬀerent kinds of complex mobile phone
behavior. In short, regardless of whether or how accurate this report was,
this case deepens our knowledge in terms of mobile phone users in
medicine. It is much more complex than we thought. This complexity
was not mentioned in the intuitive response of my good friend.
On the basis of the four-element model, the mobile phone behavior
related to Dr. Spillers can be illustrated in the following simple diagram,
with the bold text highlighting the focus:
Dr. Christopher Spillers + iPhone/iPad ! reading and texting during
heart surgery operation on Mary Roseann Milne ! Mary Roseann Milne
passed away after surgery.
In the ﬁrst major section of the book, we have discussed users,
technologies, activities, and eﬀects in four chapters. In the second major
section of the book on mobile phone behavior in medicine, business,
education, and daily life, we will apply the four-element model and use
this simple diagram as often as possible to present and analyze mobile
phone behavior.
.
Technologies: UNICEF Innovation Projects
Beginning in ,UNICEF launched a program called UNICEF Innov-
ation. With an interdisciplinary team of individuals around the world, the
program has developed a series of innovative projects in integrating mobile
technologies into health systems to improve the lives of children in
See www.unicefstories.org/tech/mhealth/.
. Everyday Observations

7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

developing countries such as Senegal, Nepal, and Paraguay. In these
developing countries, many remote villages in rural areas do not even have
electricity, but people have started using mobile phones to solve problems of
time, distance, and coordination in the delivery of health services.
For example, Patient Tracing and Results Delivery is one of such
innovative projects in integrating mobile technologies into health systems
to improve the lives of children in developing countries. It uses text
messages rather than paper to deliver early infant HIV diagnosis results
to rural and under-served communities in Zambia and Malawi and has
improved the test result turn-around time by over percent. Community
health workers also use SMS to register births and trace patients to ensure
that they receive key childhood interventions. Another example of such
projects is Health Systems Management. It used a SMS-based disease
surveillance and medicine tracking system called M-Trac. With this
system, health-care workers can use mobile phones to monitor health
service delivery performance and respond on a timely basis to health-care
needs based on real-time data. The system also integrates an anonymous
hotline and public dialog sessions to collect and show mobile-phone-based
public opinions. UNICEF Uganda and the Ministry of Health are cur-
rently rolling this out nationwide.
From the perspective of mobile phone technologies, two merits of using
mobile phones are worth noticing: () although these technologies, such as
text messaging, are quite common, they are used eﬀectively to address much
needed real-life problems in developing countries; and () from the very
beginning, the use of these technologies (e.g., M-Trac) started up with an
aim to scale up results of various projects such as Patient Tracing and
Results Delivery and Health Systems Management. This strategy makes
the use of mobile phones more eﬃcient. On the basis of the four-element
model, the mobile phone behavior related to UNICEF Innovation can be
illustrated in the following simple diagram, with the bold text highlighting
the focus:
Health-care workers and patients in Zambia, Malawi, and Uganda +
text-based mobile technologies ! monitoring, managing, delivering
community health-care systems ! improved both eﬀectiveness and eﬃ-
ciency of these health-care systems.
.
Activities: Monitoring Blood Sugar Levels
In November , National Public Radio (NPR) reported that -year-
old California teenager Blake Atkins was diagnosed with Type diabetes.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine
7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

His pediatric endocrinologist used Apple’s app programming tool called
Healthkit to monitor his blood sugar levels and share the information with
his mother. He wears a continuous glucose monitor attached to his body
and uses a tiny needle just under his skin to check his blood glucose levels
every few minutes. The monitor has a Bluetooth connection and, with
Blake’s permission, the data travel to the HealthKit data repository on his
mobile phone.
This is another interesting case. First, it concerns one mobile phone
technology, HealthKit or Health. Technically, HealthKit is simply an app
programming tool for software developers to develop apps that can interact
with Apple’s Health. Apple’s Health is a general name of Apple’s applica-
tion within iOS and iOS that functions as a dashboard of all the ﬁtness
and health data of a speciﬁc iPhone user, such as the heart rate, calories
burned, blood pressure, blood sugar, and cholesterol. Apple’s Health has
three major functions: () monitoring and analyzing health data for
medical and general ﬁtness purposes; () connecting various third-party
wearable electronic hardware (e.g., Fitbit, Qardio, and iHealth) and soft-
ware (e.g., Runmeter GPS, Sleep Cycle, and Nike+ Running); and ()
creating a Medical ID, an emergency card with important medical details
and emergency details. From Apple’s Health as an example, one may see
that, after years of development, today’s medical mobile technologies have
become some of the most advanced and most exciting areas in mobile
phone technologies.
Second, it deals with one disease, Type diabetes. According to the
American Diabetes Association,Type diabetes is a condition character-
ized by high blood glucose levels caused by a total lack of insulin. Our
body needs energy. Energy comes from a process of breaking down the
sugars and starches we eat into a simple sugar called glucose. This process
needs insulin as a hormone to get glucose from the bloodstream into the
cells of the body. Type diabetes develops most often in children and
young adults. With the help of insulin therapy and other treatments, even
young children can learn to manage their condition and live long, healthy
lives. In contrast, Type diabetes is a condition characterized by high
blood glucose levels caused by either a lack of insulin or the body’s
inability to use insulin eﬃciently. Type diabetes develops most often
in middle-aged and older adults. For both Type and Type diabetes, it is
always vital for patients to monitor their blood glucose levels so they can
See www.diabetes.org/diabetes-basics/type-/.
. Everyday Observations

7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

manage their condition and live long, healthy lives. Mobile phones can be
used as a good tool to monitor their levels.
Third, it is related to one speciﬁc medical procedure, monitoring, to
keep track of blood sugar levels, as opposed to other medical procedures,
like directly curing diabetes. There are various ways, such as monitoring,
managing, counseling, therapizing, and treating, to tackle medical issues.
Mobile phones are not prescription drugs or surgical procedures, but they
have their own unique strengths and potential in medicine and health care.
Fourth, it involves three parties of the medical community – patients,
doctors, and parents – rather than just doctors. Modern medical and
health-care systems are complex. They involve a wide variety of members
in the medical or health-care community, such as patients and their
families, doctors, nurses, medical assistants, other medical team members,
medical device producers, medical system managers, medical ﬁnance ana-
lysts, medical insurance companies, and medical attorneys. Many of them
we know, and many others we might not know, but they might all use
mobile phones.
On the basis of the four-element model, the mobile phone behavior
related to Blake Atkins can be illustrated in the following simple diagram
below, with the bold text highlighting the focus:
Blake Atkins, his pediatric endocrinologist, and his mother + Apple’s
Health ! monitoring and analyzing his blood sugar levels ! managed
his Type diabetes condition.
.
Eﬀects: Dr. John Tickell with Brain Tumors
Dr. Tickellis a well-known leading Australian doctor. He graduated from
the University of Melbourne with a degree in Medicine and later became a
general practitioner, obstetrician, and a specialist practitioner in sports
medicine. He is a successful businessman and co-created the Heritage Golf
and Residential Country Club in Victoria. He is an author and inter-
national public speaker. He has written several books, the most notable
being The Great Australian Diet and Laughter, Sex, Vegetables and Fish. He
has also appeared on television shows providing advice on how to turn
stress into success and how to live a longer, healthier life.
In , however, Dr. Tickell encountered an unexpected devastating
challenge. He was on a ﬂight from Sydney to Melbourne and suddenly had
See www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-/Would-stick-head-microwave-Doctor-believes-mobile-
gave-brain-cancer-says-use-patch-phone-reduce-radiation.html.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine
7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

a seizure. A subsequent brain scan revealed ﬁve tumors in his head; one
was the size of a golf ball. Dr. Tickell believes that radiation is a signiﬁcant
contributing factor to the increasing rate in brain tumors. He said:
“There’s a million more times radiation in the air today than there was
ﬁfty years ago – that is frightening.” He is now becoming a leading
advocate for the safer use of mobile phones, campaigning to make people
aware of the risks of radiation, and promoting a new device that might
reduce mobile phone radiation by up to percent.
We can learn several good points about eﬀect-based mobile phone
behavior from this story. First, this case concerns Dr. Tickell. He is both
a doctor, who should have more knowledge about cancers, and a cancer
survivor, who has direct personal experiences. The then--year-old doctor
said that he was certain his high mobile phone usage was a factor in his
condition and he said he fears other people are unknowingly falling into
the same trap. Although his personal testimony itself is not scientiﬁc
research, it can carry more weight and draw more public attention than
that from a non-medical person. Second, he speciﬁes multiple reasons why
mobile phone use leads to brain cancers. For example, he emphasized that
on average we might spend hours per week using mobile phones and we
use mobile phones for an increasing number of diﬀerent activities. Thus,
we are exposed to lengthy and various electromagnetic radiations involved
with mobile phones.
On the basis of the four-element model, the mobile phone behavior
related to Dr. Tickell can be illustrated in the following simple diagram,
with the bold text highlighting the focus:
Dr. John Tickell + radiation from mobile phones ! being exposed to
various lengthy radiation in his daily life ! experienced a seizure on a
ﬂight and had ﬁve tumors in his brain.
.
Eﬀects: Million Addicts
On April , ,Flurry, a mobile analytics company located in the San
Francisco area of the United States, reported that, in , the global
mobile phone addiction population was million. According to Flurry,
addiction was deﬁned as using apps at least sixty times per day, and its
estimation of the global mobile phone addiction population was based on
the usage data received from over ,apps on .billion devices
worldwide.
See http://ﬂurrymobile.tumblr.com/post//the-rise-of-the-mobile-addict.
. Everyday Observations

7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

This is another interesting case for further analysis. First, it concerns
medical eﬀects. There are various eﬀects due to mobile phone use, positive
or negative. Mobile phone addiction is a widely discussed negative eﬀect.
Second, it concerns how to estimate mobile phone addiction. Why sixty
times per day? How did Flurry access these data? Are these data valid and
reliable? Will its estimation vary in diﬀerent countries and diﬀerent times
(e.g., in Asia vs. in Africa? vs. )? Third, this is one kind of eﬀect
caused by mobile phones, but also needs to be addressed by mobile phone
behavior research to prevent, intervene, and reduce it. On the basis of the
four-element model, the mobile phone behavior related to Flurry’s estima-
tion of mobile phone addiction can be illustrated in the following simple
diagram, with the bold text highlighting the focus:
Mobile phones users in the world + .billion phones and ,
apps ! using their apps sixty times per day ! million addicted to
mobile phones in .
In summary, these real-life cases show diverse mobile phone behaviors in
medicine from the perspective of mobile users, mobile technologies, mobile
activities, and mobile eﬀects. Compared with the intuitive thoughts by the
doctor in the introduction to this chapter, these cases show a much broader
scope of mobile phone behavior in medicine rather than mainly in clinic
practice with mobile phones. However, these cases are not necessarily more
complex in depth. This is partly because the intuitive responses and the
everyday observations essentially are all anecdotal experiences rather than
scientiﬁc evidence. We need to obtain scientiﬁc evidence through scientiﬁc
research and can ﬁnd scientiﬁc evidence in the journal article literature, a
topic we will discuss in the next section.
.
Empirical Studies: From HIV-Infected Pregnant Women to
Links with Brain Cancers
.
Users: HIV-Infected Pregnant Women
The background. The ﬁrst research example we will examine is an article
entitled “An augmented SMS intervention to improve access to antenatal
CDtesting and ART initiation in HIV-infected pregnant women:
A cluster randomized trial.”This article involved various medical terms.
Dryden-Peterson, S., Bennett, K., Hughes, M. D. et al. (). “An augmented SMS intervention to
improve access to antenatal CDtesting and ART initiation in HIV-infected pregnant women:
A cluster randomized trial,” PLOS ONE, (): e.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine
7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

For many of us who do not have a medical training background, the title
itself is quite hard to understand. In order to understand the study, at least
four key terms or acronyms should be brieﬂy introduced, three relating to
medicine and one relating to technologies.
First, HIV. HIV is a short term for human immunodeﬁciency virus,
while AIDS is a short term for acquired immune deﬁciency syndrome.
HIV infection causes AIDS. Following initial infection, a person may
experience a brief period of inﬂuenza-like illness. This is typically followed
by a prolonged period without symptoms. As the infection progresses, it
increasingly interferes with the immune system, making the person much
more susceptible to common infections, as well as opportunistic infections
and tumors that do not usually aﬀect people who have working immune
systems. The late symptoms of the infection are referred to as AIDS. This
stage is often complicated by an infection of the lungs, severe weight loss,
skin lesions, or other AIDS-deﬁning conditions. HIV is transmitted pri-
marily via unprotected sexual intercourse, contaminated blood transfu-
sions, hypodermic needles, and from mother to child during pregnancy,
delivery, or breastfeeding. Common methods of HIV/AIDS prevention
include encouraging and practicing safe sex, needle-exchange programs,
and treating those who are infected. Antiretroviral treatment can slow the
course of the disease and may lead to a near-normal life expectancy.
Treatment is recommended as soon as the diagnosis is made. Without
treatment, the average survival time after infection with HIV is estimated
to be nine to eleven years. Pregnant women infected with HIV will
transmit the virus to the child during pregnancy, delivery, or breastfeeding.
Thus, early diagnosis and treatment is particularly important.
Second, CDcount. In molecular biology,CDis short for “cluster of
diﬀerentiation .” CDcells (often called T-cells or T-helper cells) are a
type of white blood cells that play a major role in protecting our body from
infection. They send signals to activate our body’s immune response when
they detect “intruders” (e.g., viruses or bacteria). Once a person is infected
with HIV, the virus begins to attack and destroy the CDcells of the
person’s immune system. HIV uses the machinery of the CDcells to
multiply and spread throughout the body. This process is called the HIV
life cycle.
Based on AIDS.gov, a CDcount is a lab test that measures the number
of CDcells in a blood sample. In people with HIV, it is the most
important laboratory indicator of how well our immune system is working
See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CD.
. Empirical Studies

7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

and the strongest predictor of HIV progression. The higher our CD
count, the better. For an uninfected healthy adult and adolescent, the CD
count ranges from to ,cells/mm. Very low CDcount indicates
that a person living with HIV has progressed to Stage infection, i.e.,
AIDS. Here, antenatal CDtesting means that a CDtest is performed
when a human embryo or fetus gestates during pregnancy, from fertiliza-
tion until birth.
Third, ART. It is a short form for antiretroviral therapy. Based on
WHO, standard ART consists of the combination of antiretroviral drugs
to maximally suppress the HIV virus and stop the progression of HIV
disease. ART also prevents onward transmission of HIV. Huge reductions
have been seen in rates of death and infections when use is made of a
potent ART regimen, particularly in the early stages of the disease. WHO
recommends ART for all people with HIV as soon as possible after
diagnosis without any restrictions of CDcounts.
Fourth, an augmented SMS intervention. The key word here is aug-
mented, while the other two terms, SMS (short message service) and
intervention, are common words that are easy to understand. Augmented
reality is a live view of a real-world environment while some of its elements
are augmented or supplemented by computer-generated sensory input
such as sound, video, graphics, or GPS data. By contrast, virtual reality
replaces the real-world environment by computer simulation.
In summary, this very long title, “An augmented SMS intervention to
improve access to antenatal CDtesting and ART initiation in HIV-
infected pregnant women: A cluster randomized trial,” simply means that
the author reports a specially designed study (a cluster randomized trial) in
which a mobile-phone-based method (an augmented SMS intervention) is
used to encourage more HIV-infected pregnant women to partake in CD
testing and ART initial treatment.
The authors and the journal. This article has eighteen authors from
twelve medical research institutes. Scott Dryden-Peterson and Shahin
Lockman, the ﬁrst and last authors, are both experts in AIDS research
and physicians of Immunology at Harvard and Infectious Diseases. They
have published on AIDS research extensively, but this article is their ﬁrst
on mobile phone health care. The article was published in in PLOS
ONE. Like Frontier and the British Medical Journal, PLOS ONE is an open
access scientiﬁc journal published by the Public Library of Science (PLOS)
since . Open access journals have two basic features – publishing
online and accessing for free. Since the s, the open access movement
has rapidly spread throughout the world. The PLOS organizers started to

Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine
7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

publish multiple open access journals, such as PLOS Biology in and
PLOS Currents in . In , PLOS ONE became the most popular in
the PLOS journal family, moved from a weekly publication schedule to a
daily one through a typical peer review process, and is gaining a reputation
of publishing high-quality articles as soon as they become ready. It is
always useful for us to check authors and journals of an article and have
an initial assessment of its credibility.
The study. The study took place in Botswana, Africa, a country among
the poorest in the world and among the hardest hit by the HIV/AIDS
epidemic (as high as one-quarter of adults aged to in had HIV/
AIDS). The study focused on one research question: Can an augmented
SMS intervention improve access to antenatal CDtesting and ART
initiation in HIV-infected pregnant women?
To answer this question, the researchers used a research design called
cluster randomized trial, a special type of clinical study that randomizes
participants based on certain groups or locations rather than typically
randomizing individual participants. The authors ﬁrst used ,mater-
nity recorders from twenty pregnancy clinics in Botswana and identiﬁed
HIV-infected women. They then randomly assigned these women in
the twenty pregnancy clinics into the intervention group and the regular
treatment group based on the locations of the clinics. The core device is an
automated SMS-based system that directly collected and wirelessly distrib-
uted CDresults to portable SMS-enabled printers located in each of the
participating antenatal clinics. The system has an enhanced feature of
alerting clinicians when testing frequency among pregnant women falls
below expected ranges or laboratory validation results are delayed.
The results indicate that the augmented SMS-based programmatic
intervention in the antenatal clinics improved neither timely CDtesting
nor ART initiation signiﬁcantly among HIV-infected pregnant women.
However, this SMS-based system did improve the speed and reduce the
cost of laboratory reporting. The mobile method now takes six instead of
sixteen days to deliver results from central laboratories to local clinics and
costs $.per result delivered instead of $.. For this scientiﬁc study,
this is a useful and practical implication for HIV-infected pregnant
women, particularly for those in resource-limited clinics in Botswana.
Comments. What we can learn about mobile phone behavior in
medicine from this study? This article broadens and deepens our know-
ledge about mobile phone behavior in medicine in several ways. First, we
can see a group of mobile phone users in medicine, all health-care workers
involved in the study (designers, researchers, clinicians, and staﬀ
. Empirical Studies

7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

members). Besides them, there is another special group of hidden mobile
phone users in this case, very vulnerable HIV-infected pregnant women in
Botswana. Although they do not directly use the augmented SMS system,
they might receive a mobile text message from that system or receive a
mobile phone call from a clinician about their testing results. HIV is
devastating in Botswana and these women can potentially beneﬁt from
mobile phone use. We can understand a little more about the complexity
of the concept of mobile phone users in medicine. Second, we can see a
special mobile phone technique, an augmented SMS system that is used in
a clinic setting. The term sounds very high-tech, but the instrument used
in the African setting is simple and straightforward. It demystiﬁes the
augmented reality to many of us. Third, we can see two special mobile
phone activities – delivering CDtesting information and managing ART
intervention initiation. Fourth, although the results were not statistically
signiﬁcant, they are still scientiﬁcally and practically signiﬁcant because
they provide empirical evidence of how scientiﬁcally eﬀective the mobile-
phone-based treatment is in the study and how economically useful the
augmented SMS system is in Botswana. Lastly, these four pieces of newly
added knowledge are more speciﬁc, complete, and complex than the
intuitive responses by the young doctor set out at the beginning of this
chapter. They are also more scientiﬁc than the ﬁve cases observed in the
everyday observations. They give us a speciﬁc, authentic, and scientiﬁc
sense of how mobile phones are used in real clinical practice, including
their strengths, weaknesses, and eﬀectiveness. On the basis of the four-
element model, the mobile phone behavior related to HIV-infected preg-
nant women in Botswana can be illustrated in the following simple
diagram, with the bold text highlighting the focus:
Health-care workers in pregnancy clinics in Botswana + the automated
SMS-based system ! directly collecting and wirelessly distributing CD
results ! helped HIV-infected pregnant women in Botswana.
.
Technologies: Mobile Phone Dispatch
Background. Now let us discuss another journal article that focuses on
medical technology-oriented mobile phone behavior. Its title is “Mobile-
phone dispatch of laypersons for CPR in out-of-hospital cardiac arrest.”
Ringh, M., Rosenqvist, M., Hollenberg, J. et al. (). “Mobile-phone dispatch of laypersons for
CPR in out-of-hospital cardiac arrest,” New England Journal of Medicine, (): –.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine
7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

Three technical concepts used in the title should be introduced in order to
understand the article.
First, mobile phone dispatch. Dispatch means to send messages to a
destination or for a purpose. The mobile phone can be used to send an
emergency dispatcher that instructs us in the proper procedures until help
arrives.
Second, cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). CPR is a lifesaving tech-
nique useful in many emergencies, including heart attack or near
drowning. It normally begins with chest compressions. When the heart
stops, a person may die within to minutes.Its main purpose is to
restore partial ﬂow of oxygenated blood to the brain and heart in order to
delay tissue death and to extend the brief window of opportunity for a
successful resuscitation without permanent brain damage.The rescuer
may also provide breaths by either exhaling into the subject’s mouth or
nose or using a device that pushes air into the subject’s lungs.
Third, cardiac arrest. This is a sudden stop in eﬀective blood circulation
due to the failure of the heart to contract. Medical personnel may refer to
an unexpected cardiac arrest as a sudden cardiac arrest. Cardiac arrest is
diﬀerent from a heart attack, where blood ﬂow to the muscle of the heart is
impaired. It is also diﬀerent from congestive heart failure, where circula-
tion is insuﬃcient but the heart is still pumping suﬃcient blood. Brain
injury is likely to happen if cardiac arrest goes untreated for more than 
minutes. For the best chance of survival and neurological recovery, imme-
diate treatment is very important. However, since cardiac arrest will cause
loss of consciousness, having someone get medical help is also very
important.
Here, the title “Mobile-phone dispatch of laypersons for CPR in out-of-
hospital cardiac arrest” simply means that this study used mobile phones to
call a layperson to perform CPR when one unexpectedly loses conscious-
ness due to a cardiac arrest outside of a hospital.
The authors and the journal. The authors are Leif Svensson and other
Karolinska Institutet researchers at several teaching hospitals and the
Center for Resuscitation Science. Karolinska Institutet is one of the world’s
leading medical universities, with about ,full-time medical students
and ,full-time employees.Since , the Nobel Assembly at
Karolinska Institutet has selected the Nobel laureates in Physiology or
See www.mayoclinic.org/ﬁrst-aid/ﬁrst-aid-cpr/basics/art-.
See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cardiopulmonary_resuscitation.
See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cardiac_arrest.
See http://ki.se/en/about/ki-in-brief.
. Empirical Studies

7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

Medicine. Leif Svensson published about articles based on the data-
base of PubMed, focusing on out-of-hospital cardiac arrest, emergency,
and various diseases. The current article is the only article he has published
related to mobile phones.
The New England Journal of Medicine (NEJM) is a medical journal
published by the Massachusetts Medical Society. It is among the most
prestigious peer-reviewed medical journals, as well as being the oldest
medical journal, in publication since . The journal usually has the
highest impact factor of the journals of internal medicine. According to the
Journal Citation Reports, NEJM had a impact factor of , the
highest among journals in general and internal medicine. By compari-
son, the second- and third-ranked journals in the category, The Lancet and
the Journal of American Medical Association, had impact factors of and
respectively, whereas Nature’s impact factor is and Science’s impact
factor is .
In short, the initial check indicates that the authors are a team of
experienced doctors and well-published researchers and the journal is
one of the best. Thus, we should have initial trust in the methods used
and results found in the article.
The study. The goal of the study is to examine whether a mobile phone
positioning system can increase the number of CPR-initiated bystanders
before the arrival of ambulance, ﬁre, and police services. They used a study
design of a blinded, randomized, controlled trial in Stockholm from April
through December . Participants were ,people, and
among them, ,initial recruits were lay volunteers and trained in
CPR. The authors developed a mobile phone positioning system that
can locate individual mobile phones geographically for the present study.
The study involved three types of persons: cardiac arrest patients, dispatch-
ers, and trained lay volunteers. When suspecting that a patient had suﬀered
a cardiac arrest, dispatchers activated the mobile phone positioning system.
Then, the location of the patient with suspected cardiac arrest was com-
pared with the current locations of trained lay volunteers. If a patient with
suspected cardiac arrest was randomly assigned to the intervention group,
then lay volunteers were located. If a volunteer was located within
meters of the patient, the volunteer was contacted automatically by
means of text messaging and computer-generated telephone calls. If a
patient was randomly assigned to the control group, then lay volunteers
See https://tools.niehs.nih.gov/srp/publications/highimpactjournals.cfm.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine
7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

who were trained in CPR were located, but no ﬁnal contact was made by
means of text messaging or telephone calls.
The main ﬁnding indicates that, among a total of cases of out-of-
hospital cardiac arrests occurring during the study, .percent of the patients
in the intervention group (of cases) received bystander-initiated CPR,
as compared with .percent of the patients in the control group (of 
cases). A signiﬁcant diﬀerence was found in the percentage of the patients who
received bystander-initiated CPR between these two groups.
Comments. This study can add to our understanding of mobile phone
behavior in medicine in multiple ways. First, the mobile phone users in this
case are both cardiac arrest suﬀerers and the CPR volunteers. These are
two special groups of users: one will receive critical help and another can
provide timely help. Second, the most salient point we can learn is about
the technology. It is just a simple text message rather than a sophisticated
app (like Apple’s HealthKit) or most new technologies (e.g., augmented
reality). However, one mobile phone message can help to save lives rather
than regular trivial daily communication. Simple mobile phone dispatch is
found to signiﬁcantly save the life of cardiac arrest patients. This can only
be possible when most people use and carry a mobile phone. Third, it is
not a clinical treatment, but rather an emergency medical communication
activity that is life-saving. Fourth, the strong scientiﬁc evidence indicates
that eﬀects of this mobile phone use are signiﬁcant. This study provides
better knowledge about mobile phone use in medicine than the young
doctor’s intuitive responses and the daily observations that we discussed
earlier. The mobile phone behavior related to the mobile phone dispatch
system used to better save lives of cardiac arrest patients can be illustrated
in the following simple diagram, with the bold text highlighting the focus:
,lay volunteers and cardiac arrest patients in Stockholm + a text-
based dispatch system ! searching and contacting lay volunteers with
CPR training for cardiac arrest patients ! signiﬁcantly more cardiac arrest
patients received timely bystander-initiated CPR.
.
Activities: Smoking Cessation Intervention
Background. The article we will discuss next is entitled “Smoking cessa-
tion support delivered via mobile phone text messaging (txtstop):
A single-blind, randomised trial.”The article has been cited times
Free, C., Knight, R., Robertson, S. et al. (). “Smoking cessation support delivered via mobile
phone text messaging (txtstop): A single-blind, randomised trial,” The Lancet, (): –.
. Empirical Studies

7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

based on Google Scholar. The authors are ten medical researchers from the
United Kingdom, New Zealand, and Australia. The ﬁrst author, Caroline
Free, is a senior lecturer at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, and has published several articles in the mobile health area. This
article was published in in The Lancet, one of the world’s oldest and
best-known general medical journals by Elsevier since , with a
impact factor of , ranked second among general medical journals
after the New England Journal of Medicine.
The study. From to , ,UK smokers (percent are
adults) participated in the study. They were randomly assigned to the
intervention group (,smokers) and control group (,smokers).
The intervention group received smoking cessation support delivered via a
mobile phone text messaging program called textstop. This program can
automatically generate text messages that consist of two types: regular
written messages to every participant in the intervention group and per-
sonalized messages to diﬀerent participants selected from a database of 
messages. These messages are either motivational ones (e.g., a text after the
quit day is: “Quick result! Carbon monoxide has now left your body!”), or
behavioral-change ones (e.g., a text message on the quit day is: “Quit day,
throw away all your fags. Today is the start of being quit forever, you can
do it!”). The intervention group received ﬁve text messages per day for the
ﬁrst ﬁve weeks and then three a week for the next twenty-six weeks. For
the control group, the participants received text messages unrelated to
quitting smoking (e.g., “Thanks for taking part! Without your input, the
study could not have gone ahead!”). After the thirty-one-week interven-
tion, participants self-reported their smoking abstinence and these self-
reported data were further veriﬁed by standard biochemical lab test results.
The major ﬁndings of the study include that: () the intervention group
using textstop doubled the quit rate at six months compared with the
control group (.vs. .percent); () no signiﬁcant heterogeneity was
found in any of the subgroups based on age or working status; and () no
adverse side eﬀects of the intervention were found in participants’ thumb
pain due to texting and traﬃc accidents due to texting on road.
Comments. From the perspective of mobile phone activities in
medicine, the study provides multiple insights. First, typically, mobile
phones are used in mental health clinics for monitoring patients, managing
cases, or enhancing communication. Clinic interventions based on mobile
phones are not common. The study we discussed above is one exception.
It really used the text messaging programs of textstop as the only interven-
tion strategy to help people quit smoking. And the authors used rigorous

Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine
7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

data collection and data analysis methods to scientiﬁcally prove this
intervention program works particularly well and thus recommended it
to be used in the real clinical settings. Texts can heal people’s souls and
cure people’s bodies! Second, the mobile phone activities involved in the
study were mainly text-based interactions between smokers and clinicians
for thirty-one weeks or nearly eight months. These text messages were sent
to participants automatically based on computing algorithms and mainly
either motivated or advised smokers how to best quit smoking and the
intervention results were very signiﬁcant. A total of ,UK smokers
used the program of textstop and achieved the intervention results suc-
cessfully. The activity-focused mobile phone behavior concerning this
study can be summarized in a simple diagram, with the highlighted focus
(in bold) on the mobile phone activity of the thirty-one-week intervention:
,smokers in UK + textstop ! receiving the thirty-one-week
intervention ! the smoking quit rate of the intervention group was
double that of the control group.
.
Medical Eﬀects: Sleep Disturbance
Background. The next article to be discussed is entitled “The association
between use of mobile phones after lights out and sleep disturbances
among Japanese adolescents: A nationwide cross-sectional survey.”It
was cited ninety-four times based on Google Scholar since being published
in . While it might not be well cited, it is one of the earliest articles
examining the eﬀect of mobile phone use on sleep. The authors are ten
public health researchers from Japan. The ﬁrst author, Takeshi Munezawa,
is an expert of sleep and has published multiple articles on sleep problems
in Japan. Sleep has been the oﬃcial publication of the Sleep Research
Society and American Academy of Sleep Medicine since , with a
impact factor of ..
The study. In the study, ,Japanese middle-school and high-
school students participated in a survey. The questionnaire used in the
survey mainly concerned these students’ lifestyle, mental health, sleep
problems, and mobile phone use. The major ﬁndings include: () over
percent of students reported using mobile phones daily; () nearly
percent of students reported making a call after lights were out and
Munezawa, T., Kaneita, Y., Osaki, Y. et al. (). “The association between use of mobile phones
after lights out and sleep disturbances among Japanese adolescents: A nationwide cross-sectional
survey,” Sleep, (): –.
. Empirical Studies

7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

about percent of students reported sending text messages after lights
were out; () percent of students reported having a shorter sleep
duration, percent reported their sleep quality was poor, percent
reported experiencing excessive daytime sleepiness, and over percent
reported having insomnia symptoms; () their phone calls and text mes-
sages after lights were out signiﬁcantly related to various forms of sleep
disturbance such as shorter sleep duration or insomnia symptoms, inde-
pendent of various covariates such as age and lifestyle and independent of
calling vs. texting; and () girls and high-school seniors are the two special
groups having a higher frequency of using mobile phones after lights were
out, experiencing more sleep problems, and showing a higher relationship
between their evening mobile phone use and their sleep disturbances.
Comments. What can we learn about mobile phone eﬀects from this
study? First, this study shows that nearly percent of Japanese youth
reported making a call after lights were out and about percent of
students reported sending text messages after lights were out. Thus, it is
not uncommon for this student population to use mobile phones during
sleeping time. Second, the study shows some evidence that these students’
mobile phone use during sleeping time is associated with various sleep
disturbances. In other words, for many young mobile phone users, mobile
phone use, either calling, texting, or gaming, might have signiﬁcant
negative eﬀects on one common but fundamental aspect of their lives,
i.e., sleep. The mobile phone behavior related to this study can be
summarized in a simple diagram, with a highlight (in bold) on the negative
eﬀect on sleep:
,Japanese middle- and high-school students + mobile phones !
calling and texting after lights were out ! experienced various forms of
sleep disturbances.
.
Medical Eﬀects: Brain Cancers
Background. When we make or receive a call with our own small-sized,
good-looking mobile phone, we may hardly think intuitively about
whether there might be any serious direct negative eﬀects on our health.
Our worry-free impression perhaps would be similar to that with a
telephone, a telegraph, a television, a CD player, a digital camera, a
computer, and many other modern technologies. However, there could
be multiple various health or even life-threatening concerns related to the
use of mobile phones, including injuries after battery explosion, burns
from overcharged or overheating phones, brain cancers, addiction,

Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine
7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

phantom vibration and ringing syndromes, germ accumulation, head-
aches, dizziness, memory loss, and sleep disturbances. Let us look at a
recent article entitled “Pooled analysis of case-control studies on malignant
brain tumours and the use of mobile and cordless phones including living
and deceased subjects,” by Lennart Hardell, Michael Carl Berg, and Kjell
Hansson Mild.The ﬁrst author, Lennart Hardell, is a Professor of
Oncology at the University Hospital in Orebro of Sweden. He is one of
the leading researchers in mobile-phone-related brain cancers and has been
publishing a series of studies examining the links between mobile phone
radiation and brain cancers for a decade. This article is one of their latest
empirical articles.
Extensive literature since the s has indicated that daily use of
mobile phones could be associated with brain cancers. The World Health
Organization’s International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) in
classiﬁed mobile phone use and other radiofrequency electromag-
netic ﬁelds as Group B, possibly carcinogenic to humans. The IARC
classiﬁcation is the most widely used system for classifying carcinogens.
Over the past thirty years, the IARC has evaluated the cancer-causing
potential of more than materials, placing them into one of the
following groups: Group : Carcinogenic to humans (e.g., coal gasiﬁ-
cation, indoor emissions from coal, engine exhaust from diesel, leather
dust, outdoor air pollution, solar radiation, x- and gamma-radiation);
Group A: Probably carcinogenic to humans (vinyl ﬂuoride, vinyl brom-
ide, manufacture of art glass, glass containers and pressed ware, occupa-
tional exposures in petroleum reﬁning); Group B: Possibly carcinogenic
to humans (e.g., carbon tetrachloride, lead, engine exhaust from gasoline,
gasoline, magnetic ﬁelds with extremely low frequency, radiofrequency
electromagnetic ﬁelds); Group : Unclassiﬁable as to carcinogenicity in
humans; and Group : Probably not carcinogenic to humans. Among 
candidates, only are classiﬁed as “carcinogenic to humans” and most
are listed as being of probable (), possible (), or unknown risk ().
The study. In this article, Hardell and his collaborators aimed to ﬁnd an
association between the use of mobile and cordless phones and malignant
brain tumors. Basically, there are two types of brain tumors: malignant
tumors composed of cancerous cells rather than non-cancerous cells, and
benign tumors composed of mainly non-cancerous cells. To achieve this
Hardell, L., Carlberg, M., and Hansson Mild, K. (). “Pooled analysis of case-control studies on
malignant brain tumours and the use of mobile and cordless phones including living and deceased
subjects,” International Journal of Oncology, (): .
. Empirical Studies

7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

goal, they used a design called case-control studies, an observational study
used widely in epidemiology.In such a design, the group of “case”
(subjects who have a disease) and the group of “control” (subjects who
do not have the disease, but are otherwise similar) are compared to
examine the potential links of a possible risk factor and a disease. One of
the most signiﬁcant examples of the case-control study was the demon-
stration of the link between tobacco smoking and lung cancer (Doll &
Hill, ).
Speciﬁcally, the case group consisted of patients with a histopathological
diagnosis (using the microscopic examination of tissues to study the
manifestations of diseases) of brain tumors during to (six-year
duration, published in , eight years later) aged to years in
multiple regions in Sweden. The authors not only consider malignant
tumors in general, but also glioma and even astrocytomas. There were
three control groups: one living control group for healthy individuals
drawn from the Swedish Population Registry, and two deceased control
groups that either had died from other types of malignant diseases, but not
brain tumors, or had died from other diseases, but not cancers. Relatives to
both cases and controls were identiﬁed through the Swedish Population
Registry at the Swedish Tax Agency. They were matched with the case
group on age, sex, and residential area. A total of ,cases and ,
controls participated in the study. These four groups, the case group and
the three control groups, were the dependent variable in the study. The
data collected about tumor localization was based on information in
medical records and all tumor types were deﬁned by using histopathology
reports and through Swedish Population Registry and Death Registry.
The independent variables were diﬀerent environmental and occupa-
tional exposures. The data were collected via a self-administered question-
naire that was sent to the living cases and controls or relatives of deceased
patients. Use of mobile and cordless phones (together called wireless
phones) was carefully assessed by the self-administered questionnaire.
The information was, if necessary, supplemented over the phone by a
trained interviewer using a structured protocol. In the study, .percent
in the case group and .percent in the control groups used mobile
phones.
Speciﬁcally, two indicators of wireless phone use were assessed: ()
latency period (between the year of ﬁrst use of a wireless phone and the
Schlesselman, J. J. and Stolley, P. D. (). Case-Control Studies: Design, Conduct, Analysis.
Oxford University Press.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine
7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

year of diagnosis), including three levels, >–years, >–years, and
>years; and () cumulative hours (calculated based on number of years
and average daily time), including three levels, –,, ,–,and
>,h to further explore the dose-response relations. The unexposed
category consisted of subjects that reported no use of mobile or cordless
phones, or exposure year before reference date. The exposed cases and
controls were divided according to phone type – analog, digital, and
cordless. The use of analog and digital phones were analyzed combined
(i.e., mobile phone) in this presentation. Results for all phone types
combined (wireless phone) are also presented. They used the uncondi-
tional logistic regression analysis with exposed status as the predictor
variable and cancer status as the dependent outcome variable to calculate
odds ratios and percent conﬁdence intervals. Adjustments were made
for a few variables such as age, gender, year of diagnosis, and vital status.
The major ﬁndings regarding mobile phone use only rather than
cordless phone use or a combination of both can be summarized as follows:
() Overall, among all those who had malignant tumors, used mobile
phones for more than one year and did not, and its odd ratio was .,
that is, the mobile phone users in general were .times more likely to
have malignant tumors than those in the matched control groups. ()
Among diﬀerent latency periods, the highest risk was in the largest latency
period of >years; mobile phone users had malignant tumors, while
non-mobile phone users had malignant tumors. Its odd ratio was .,
indicating that these mobile phone users were .times more likely to
have malignant tumors than those in the matched control groups. ()
Among diﬀerent cumulative lifetime use, the highest risk was in the
longest cumulative lifetime use of >hours; sixty-one mobile phone
users had malignant tumors, while thirty-three non-mobile phone users
had malignant tumors. Its odd ratio was ., indicating that these mobile
phone users were three times more likely to have malignant tumors than
those in the matched control groups. () Among diﬀerent age groups, the
highest risk was for the youngest group (<years old); nineteen mobile
phone users had malignant tumors, while fourteen non-mobile phone
users had malignant tumors. Its odd ratio was ., indicating that these
young mobile phone users were .times more likely to have malignant
tumors than those in the matched control groups.
Comments. This study has several strengths. First, it included both
living and deceased subjects due to cancers to expand the study’s scope.
Second, it carefully designed and executed the case-control study by
matching on multiple aspects, given the ethical challenges for experimental
. Empirical Studies

7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

studies of such a topic. Third, it covered several most common types of
malignant cancers as dependent variables. Fourth, it used survey as well as
interviews to collect the exposure data on latency periods, cumulative
hours, and types of phones used, as well as other controlled variables such
as age, sex, socio-economic status, and year of diagnosis. Fifth, the sample
size is relatively large. Sixth, data analysis was appropriate, using uncondi-
tional logistical regression with statistical control. Seventh, it included
diﬀerent wireless phone types – analog, digital, and cordless.
This study has several limitations. First, the time period of to 
is a bit early, considering the exponential growth of mobile phone use since
. Second, the case-control study leads only to a ﬁnding about associ-
ation between mobile phone use and brain cancers, but not about caus-
ation that mobile phone use causes brain cancers. Third, it should include
more factors (e.g., personality, general health) and more paths (e.g., direct
and indirect, moderation and mediation) that might exist. Fourth, it
focused on Sweden, a country where people used mobile phones very
early compared with other countries in the world. Fifth, more explanation
is needed about why and how mobile phone use leads to brain tumors.
Sixth, it did not cover contralateral (opposite sides of the head) and
ipsilateral (the same side of the head) mobile phone use in relation to
tumor localization. Seventh, it should compare the diﬀerences among the
three control groups and diﬀerent tumors more eﬀectively.
Its major contributions are to provide initial empirical evidence, show
the possibility of mobile phones being related to brain cancers due to
exposure to the phones’ electromagnetic ﬁeld radiation, and show the
complexity of mobile phone behavior. Its implication is to alert us to the
potential risk and motivate further research.
From the perspective of eﬀect-based mobile phone behavior, we can
make two observations from the above example. First, it documents a
speciﬁc type of eﬀect-based mobile phone behavior in detail: of the ,
Swedish citizens who had brain cancers, over used mobile phones on a
daily basis for years, while among the nearly ,who were healthy or did
not have brain cancers, about half of them used mobile phones. Second, it
demonstrates the complexity of eﬀect-based mobile phone behavior. We
can learn from this study that one should consider various important
aspects of: () mobile users (e.g., years, frequencies, and ages of those
using the mobile phones); () mobile phones (e.g., cordless vs. mobile,
handheld vs. hands-free, analog vs. digital; () mobile activities (e.g. heavy
use vs. non-heavy use); () mobile eﬀects (e.g., brain cancers vs. other
kinds of cancers, malignant brain tumors vs. benign tumors, contralateral

Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine
7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

vs. ipsilateral); and () mobile contexts (e.g., Sweden vs. other countries).
In short, the mobile phone behavior related to this study can be summar-
ized in a simple diagram, with a highlight (in bold) on the negative eﬀect
of brain cancers:
,mobile phone users in Sweden + mobile phones ! using mobile
phones between and ! users had malignant tumors.
.
Knowledge Syntheses: From Exponential Growth to Potential
Brain Cancers
After studying ﬁve speciﬁc examples of empirical research, many of us
might wonder what the current knowledge is in the area of mobile phone
behavior in medicine. In this section, we will discuss the scope of the
existing literature, relevant chapters of the Encyclopedia of Mobile Phone
Behavior, and several review articles in order to have an overall picture of
the current knowledge in this area.
.
Exponential Growth
Based on our review article,medical research is the largest area in the
entire ﬁeld of mobile phone behavior research, making up about one-third
of the published articles. In , at least ,articles can be found in
PubMed, by using the keywords of public health and mobile phones or
medicine and mobile phones. The general trend over the past twenty years
has been an exponential growth, with the year of being the turning
point (see Figure .). Due to the delay of entering published articles into
databases (typically around one year), the number of published journal
articles should be much higher than that in .
.
Dominant Themes
Empirical research published in journal article form is fundamental. How-
ever, it is useful to study review-based chapters of the Encyclopedia of
Mobile Phone Behavior to develop a much broader picture of mobile phone
behavior in medicine and public health. In the Encyclopedia, similar to the
dominance in the m-health literature, at least of a total of chapters
synthesize the literature of various topics in mobile phone behavior in
Yan, Z., Chen, Q., and Yu, C. (). “The science of cell phone use: Its past, present, and future,”
International Journal of Cyber Behavior, Psychology and Learning, (): –.
. Knowledge Syntheses

7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

medicine and public health. As shown in Table ., these chapters can be
grouped into four categories: medical users, medical technologies, medical
interactions, and medical eﬀects. Among them, at least twelve chapters
focus on mobile phone eﬀects as a dominant theme in the existing
literature. For instance, mobile phone users reviewed in these chapters
include medical doctors who use mobile phones in maternal, newborn,
and child health programs, medical students who use smartphones for
their medical education, and deaf or blind children who receive special
therapy with mobile phones. Mobile phone technologies covered in these
chapters include various smartphone apps used by professionals, students,
and patients for health care and mobile sensors used in assessing, monitor-
ing, tracking, and diagnosing. For mobile phone activities, these chapters
review various medical activities in emergency care, plastic surgery, blood
disease treatment, and mental health intervention. For medical phone
eﬀects, a well-studied area, various eﬀects were reviewed, such as bullying,
addiction, nomophobia, and brain tumors.
.
Users: Older Adults’ Health Care
Another general way to develop an overview of the existing literature in a
given area is to search and study published review articles, in addition to
encyclopedias and handbooks. About reviews have been published, as
indicated in the database of Web in Science. Here, we will discuss three
review articles, one on mobile users and two on mobile eﬀects.
0
50
100
150
1995 1999 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Figure .
Trend of Published Articles on Medical Mobile Phone Behavior Research

Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine
7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

The ﬁrst review we will discuss focuses on a special group of users in
medicine – mobile phone users who are years of age or older. Its title is
“Older adults and mobile phones for health: A review.”The two authors
are Jonathan Joe and George Demiris at the University of Washington.
Jonathan Joe was then a PhD candidate studying how to help older adults
with new technologies in the biomedical and health informatics program,
while George Demiris is a Professor of Biomedical and Health Informatics
and has published a series of articles on technology use among older adults.
This review was published in in the Journal of Biomedical Informatics,
an established Elsevier journal since (the original name was
Table .The Encyclopedia Chapters on Mobile Phone Behavior in
Medicine
Element
Chapter title
User
Divorced coparents’ use of communication technology
User
mHealth in maternal, newborn, and child health programs around the
world
User
Deaf adolescents’ textisms
User
Use of mobile phones by individuals with visual impairments
Technology
Healthcare applications for smartphones
Technology
Smart phone health applications
Activity
Mobile health in emergency care
Activity
Mobile phones for plastic surgery and burns: Current practice
Activity
Mobile phones in haematology
Activity
Mobile tracking for mental health and wellbeing
Activity
Use of mobile phones to help prevent child maltreatment
Eﬀect
Health eﬀects of mobile phone usage
Eﬀect
Mobile technostress
Eﬀect
Mobile technology and cyberbullying
Eﬀect
Sex, cyberbullying and the mobile phone
Eﬀect
Students hurting students: Cyberbullying as a mobile phone behavior
Eﬀect
Mobile phone addiction
Eﬀect
Nomophobia
Eﬀect
The conceptualization and assessment of problematic mobile phone use
Eﬀect
Internet and mobile phone addiction
Eﬀect
The digital drug: Understanding and treating mobile phone addiction
Eﬀect
Mobile phones-like electromagnetic ﬁelds eﬀects on human psychomotor
performance
Eﬀect
Long term mobile phone use leads to brain tumors
Joe, J. and Demiris, G. (). “Older adults and mobile phones for health: A review,” Journal of
Biomedical Informatics, (): –.
. Knowledge Syntheses

7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

Computers and Biomedical Research, which changed to the current name in
), with an impact factor of ..
In this review, the authors searched multiple databases (e.g., PubMed)
and identiﬁed twenty-one journal articles that were published between
and and met their speciﬁc inclusion/and exclusion criteria (e.g.,
utilizing a mobile phone as an intervention or emphasizing the mobile
phone’s use in health). They found that mobile phones were being used in
ten areas of health interventions with older adults: () care for diabetes as a
disease characterized by higher blood sugar levels, leading to increased
urination, weight loss, fatigue, vomiting, skin infections, and other symp-
toms (e.g., sending text-based reminders to patients for their dietary
management or blood sugar monitoring); () care for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease that is related to the lungs (e.g., providing a mobile-
phone-based exercise training program with reminders to improve
patients’ fatigue, emotions, and breathlessness); () care for dementia
and Alzheimer’s disease that leads to a long-term decrease in the ability
to think and remember (e.g., using GPS to track and locate wandering
older patients); () care for osteoarthritis – a disease usually causing
patients to experience joint pain and stiﬀness (e.g., using a mobile version
of a testing instrument to assess the level of joint pain and stiﬀness); ()
care for non-melanoma skin cancers that are most common, less aggressive,
hardly spreading to other tissues, and usually curable (e.g., using mobile
phones for clinicians to take and transmit photos of skin lesions to
dermatologists for further diagnosis); () care for accidental injury and
death due to falls (e.g., using mobile phone sensors to detect older adults’
falls and to minimize the amount of time between the fall and receiving
medical attention); () care for congestive heart failure due to a chronic
condition that aﬀects the chambers of the heart (e.g., using mobile phones
to detect and monitor early symptoms of heart failure at home to reduce
the duration of hospital stays and mortality rate); () palliative care for
relieving pain, symptoms, and stress among those who have serious and
life-threating illnesses (e.g., using mobile phones for patients to report
their symptoms regularly and for clinicians to review these symptoms
remotely on a daily basis and oﬀer self-care advice); () care for chemo-
therapy symptoms as various side eﬀects of chemotherapy treatment after
using drugs to destroy cancer cells (e.g., using mobile phones for patients
to report their adverse chemotherapy symptoms and receive help on a
timely basis); and () elderly home care (e.g., using a mobile phone
camera for older adults to record their activities of daily life in a rural
home care setting).

Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine
7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

As we can see from this review: () older adults are a special group of
mobile users; they face a wide variety of special health-care challenges,
from suﬀering from diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
dementia, and Alzheimer’s disease, to performing daily life activities; and
() mobile phones have been widely used to help these older adults in
various ways, including detecting early symptoms, managing interven-
tions, relieving pains, and helping them to live better lives. Although this
line of research overall is still at the early development stage, it shows that
mobile phone use has a unique and promising potential for older adults’
health care.
.
Eﬀects: School Students’ Sleep Disturbance
In the previous section, we discussed a survey study on associations
between mobile phone use and sleep problems of Japanese middle- and
high-school students. The review article we will discuss below provides a
much broader picture of mobile phone use and sleep problems among
school-aged children across the world. Its title is “Screen time and sleep
among school-aged children and adolescents: A systematic literature
review.”The two authors, Lauren Hale and Stanford Guan, are health
science researchers at Stony Brook University. Lauren Hale is an Associate
Professor of Family, Population and Preventive Medicine and has pub-
lished extensively on sleep health. She is also the founding editor of Sleep
Health, the journal of the National Sleep Foundation. Stanford Guan was
then a pre-medical student. The review was published in in Sleep
Medicine Reviews, a well-established Elsevier journal since . It has a
quite high impact factor of .in for a specialized journal.
The authors searched Web of Science as well as PubMed and Google
Scholar and selected sixty-seven relevant journal articles for further review.
The Munezawa article discussed above is one of them. Speciﬁcally, it
includes twenty-seven studies in European countries, fourteen studies in
the United States, seven studies in Japan, and ﬁve studies in Australia, as
well as studies in eight more countries. For the independent variables, the
authors focused on the use of four types of electronic media: televisions,
computers, video games, and mobile phones. For dependent variables, six
major types of sleeping outcomes, such as duration of sleep, delayed
bedtime, sleep onset latency, and daytime sleepiness, were examined.
Hale, L. and Guan, S. (). “Screen time and sleep among school-aged children and adolescents:
A systematic literature review,” Sleep Medicine Reviews, : –.
. Knowledge Syntheses

7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

The major ﬁndings include that: () overall, percent of the reviewed
articles show a signiﬁcant negative association between time of media use
and at least one of the sleep outcomes, indicating media use is consistently
related to sleep disturbance among school students; () sleep disturbance
varies with diﬀerent media use: using computers (percent of studies
showing signiﬁcant sleep disturbance), playing games (percent of
studies showing signiﬁcant sleep disturbance), using mobile phones (
percent of studies showing signiﬁcant sleep disturbance), watching televi-
sion (percent of studies showing signiﬁcant sleep disturbance), suggest-
ing interactive media use (e.g., playing games) leads to more sleep
disturbance than passive media use (e.g., watching television); and ()
one major problem for the existing studies is that assessment of media use
and sleep problems has largely relied on students’ own reports or some-
times parental reports. For self-reported data, school students will normally
overreport sleep time and underreport sleep problems. As a result, this
might lead to an underestimate in the relationship between media use and
sleep disturbance.
From this review, we can see clearly that sleep disturbance due to media
use is clearly a pervasive problem among school students and mobile phone
use is strongly and consistently associated with sleep disturbance. How-
ever, school students are using mobile phones like a computer, playing a
game, surﬁng on the Internet, watching television, and doing various new
things, in addition to calling or texting, thus, researchers should design
better studies to accurately assess how much mobile phone use disturbs
students’ sleep.
.
Eﬀects: Potential Brain Cancers
The literature on mobile phone use and brain cancers is particularly
extensive. About journal articles and ﬁfty review articles can be
found by searching the database of Web of Science. The three highest
cited reviews are: () “Biological eﬀects from electromagnetic ﬁeld expos-
ure and public exposure standards,” by Hardell and Sage;() “Mobile
telephones and cancer – a review of epidemiological evidence,” by Kundi,
Hardell, and other co-authors;and () “Mobile phones, mobile phone
Hardell, L. and Sage, C. (). “Biological eﬀects from electromagnetic ﬁeld exposure and public
exposure standards,” Biomedicine & Pharmacotherapy, (): –.
Kundi, M., Mild, K. H., Hardell, L., and Mattsson, M. O. (). “Mobile telephones and
cancer – a review of epidemiological evidence,” Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health, Part
B, (): –.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine
7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

base stations and cancer: A review,” by Moulder, Foster, Erdreich, and
McNamee.The last review we choose to discuss is “Systematic review
of wireless phone use and brain cancer and other head tumors.”This is
one of the most recent and most comprehensive reviews on mobile
phone use and brain cancers and was written by thirteen scholars from
nine countries across the world. The ﬁrst and corresponding author,
Michael Repacholi, was the team leader of the World Health Organiza-
tion’s Radiation and Environmental Health Program and has published
extensively on health risks from radiofrequency ﬁelds and electromag-
netic ﬁelds. The review was published in in Bioelectromagnetics, a
well-established Wiley journal with a impact factor of .. It is
the oﬃcial journal of the Bioelectromagnetics Society and publishes
studies on all aspects of the science of biological eﬀects of electromag-
netic ﬁelds.
In this review, the authors reviewed two major types of existing litera-
ture – epidemiology studies (analyzing health risks and disease conditions
in a population) and in vivo studies (studying whole living organisms,
usually animals) – in order to examine the relationship between wireless/
mobile phone use and brain cancers/other head tumors. The review has
multiple highlights for us to read and learn: () Two basic technical
features of mobile phones are that (a) the frequencies used by mobile
phones are between and ,MHz, belonging to radiofrequency (RF)
and (b) the energy power emitted by mobile phones is low-powered,
typically with its maximum speciﬁc absorption rate (SAR) in the head
between .and .watts per kilogram of weight (W/kg), compared with
the international standard SAR of W/kg. The higher the SAR of a mobile
phone, the more radiation energy emitted from the phone to heads or
brains. () For epidemiology studies, the authors identiﬁed ninety-six
papers. Among them they speciﬁcally reviewed twenty-ﬁve case-control
studies and cohort studies on four outcomes, the brain cancer (gliomas)
and three head tumors (meningioma, acoustic neuroma, and parotid grand
tumors) in detail. They did not ﬁnd overall signiﬁcant associations
between short-term (<years) mobile phone use and gliomas, menin-
gioma, acoustic neuroma, and parotid grand tumors, while there is no
Moulder, J. E., Foster, K. R., Erdreich, L. S., and McNamee, J. P. (). “Mobile phones, mobile
phone base stations and cancer: A review,” International Journal of Radiation Biology, ():
–.
Repacholi, M. H., Lerchl, A., Röösli, M. et al. (). “Systematic review of wireless phone use and
brain cancer and other head tumors,” Bioelectromagnetics, (): –.
. Knowledge Syntheses

7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

suﬃcient data on adults’ long-term use (years) or on children’s use.
() For in vivo studies, the authors identiﬁed forty-ﬁve studies and
reviewed twenty-two original studies in detail, ten on genotoxicity studies
(examining how chemical agents damage DNA that may lead to cancer)
and twelve on tumor promotion studies (examining how existing tumors
are stimulated to grow). They concluded that no strong evidence suggests
that RF exposure either breaks down DNA in brain cells or promotes brain
tumors. () While both the epidemiological studies and in vivo studies do
not show a consistent causal relationship between mobile phone use and
brain cancers and head tumors, the two major epidemiology studies, the
Interphone Study and the Hardell studies, show substantial inconsistency,
together with an insuﬃcient number of studies on long-term use and
children’s use. Thus, further studies are still needed to fully understand
potential brain cancers due to mobile phone use. At this moment, two
cautious health policy recommendations for mobile phone use are taking
adequate protective measures and limiting exposure to radiofrequency
ﬁelds.
From the review, we can learn several important insights and develop
further our understanding of the links between mobile phones and brain
cancers. First, compared with the Hardell article discussed earlier, this
review analyzes more than ﬁfty studies, including the Hardell paper
and Hardell’s other papers, and paints a much more complex picture of
whether mobile phone use leads to brain cancers. While no overall
consistent evidence has been found to suggest that mobile phone use leads
to brain cancers, large inconsistencies exist in two major studies as well as
other studies, and suﬃcient data are not still available for long-term use
and for children’s use, two issues that will become increasingly critical as
more adults and more children use mobile phones for longer periods of
time. Thus, we still have a long way to go to ﬁnd a full scientiﬁc answer.
Second, the review consistently and rigorously assesses the quality of
published studies and discusses various quality issues existing in these
studies. One major issue identiﬁed by the review is that self-report is
currently the dominant method of assessing exposure to radiation from
mobile phones. Retrospective self-reported exposure has been found to be
related to recall bias. With recall bias, for instance, people tend to substan-
tially overestimate their number of calls or time of calling. Thus, objective
data such as traﬃc records from mobile phone service companies or built-
in records with special apps in the mobile phone should be used to
signiﬁcantly improve the quality of radiation exposure estimation, espe-
cially for long-term users and young users.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine
7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

.
Comparative Analyses: From Television Addiction to Mobile
Phone Addiction
It is useful to compare human behavior in medicine across diﬀerent
technologies, including television, computer, the Internet, and mobile
phones. In the area of medicine and health care, similarities and diﬀerences
have been observed in human behavior with diﬀerent modern information
and communication technologies. For instance, there exists considerable
literature on the eﬀects of overuse of diﬀerent technologies on the muscle
system (e.g., repetitive strain injury or RSI) or vision system (computer
vision syndrome or CVS). However, it is only mobile phones that have the
extensive literature on the eﬀects on brain cancers. It is beyond the scope of
this chapter to deal with the complicated and challenging task of performing
a lengthy comprehensive study to compare behavior among television
health, computer health, e-health, and m-health. Instead, let us focus on
one behavior, addiction, across diﬀerent technologies. Recall that we have
discussed a report by Flurry estimating that million users in across
the world were addicted to mobile phones, or about a percent prevalence
rate for the world population of .billion. Now we can see a large
picture of the existing literature on addiction to diﬀerent technologies.
There exists very extensive literature on technology addiction. Table .
provides an approximate estimation of the size of the literature on addic-
tion to the four technologies, based on a preliminary search in PsycINFO
by using the keywords of television, computers, Internet, and cellular
phones, and addiction. Clearly, the smallest literature size is television
addiction and the largest size is Internet addiction. Note that: () the
literature size is diﬀerent from but related to the prevalence rate of the
addiction; () Internet addiction often includes computer addiction (e.g.,
online game addiction) and there is no clear line between these two; ()
nearly percent of computer addiction concerns computer game addic-
tion; and () the current literature size on mobile phone addiction is not
the largest given that PsycINFO started to enter the data on cellular
phones in , but research has been growing rapidly.
Technology addiction is complex. Making comparisons among the
technologies is even more complex. It is not feasible to review and compare
all the existing literature or even review the published reviews. Thus, as the
ﬁrst step, let us review four empirical journal articles, one article from each
of the four technologies (i.e., television, computer games, Internet, and
mobile phones), in order to develop a basic knowledge about addiction to
the four technologies.
. Comparative Analyses

7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

.
American Adults’ Television Addiction
The ﬁrst article is about television addiction. Robert D. McIlwraith ()
published an empirical article entitled “‘I’m addicted to television’: The
personality, imagination, and TV watching patterns of self-identiﬁed TV
addicts” in the Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media.This article is
well cited – times by other scholars based on Google Scholar. Robert
McIlwraith was an Associate Professor of Clinical Health Psychology at the
University of Manitoba at that time and published several articles on
television addiction. The Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media has
been a well-established, peer-reviewed research journal for sixty years
since .
This article presents a survey study. Participants were American
adults who visited a science museum during one summer week and
completed anonymous questionnaires in approximately minutes. Two
measures were used to assess television addiction, the Television Addiction
Scale, which was developed by Smith,and Self-Identiﬁcation as a TV
Addict, a single-item measure that asked participants to respond to the
statement “I am addicted to television” on the ﬁve-point Likert scale (from
“Strongly Disagree” to “Strongly Agree”). The major results of the study
were as follows: () .percent of the participants labeled themselves as
TV addicts; () self-identiﬁed TV addicts reported watching an average of
.hours of TV per week, while the rest of the sample reported watching
an average of .hours per week; () the participants reported reasons to
Table .Numbers of Journal Articles Published on Different Technology
Addictions
Technology Addiction
Number of Articles Published
Year of Entry
Television addiction


Computer addiction


Computer game addiction


Internet addiction


Mobile phone addiction


McIlwraith, R. D. (). “‘I’m addicted to television’: The personality, imagination, and TV
watching patterns of self-identiﬁed TV addicts,” Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, ():
–.
Smith, R. (). “Television addiction,” in J. Bryant and D. Zillmann (eds.), Perspectives on Media
Eﬀects. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, pp. –.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine
7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

watch TV, such as being distracted from unpleasant moods, having
nothing to do, having the TV on while doing other things, or playing
computers or video games; and () total scores on Smith’s TV Addiction
Scale correlated with explicitly labeling oneself a TV addict.
This study has several strengths: () it is one of the few published
empirical studies examining television addiction; () it provides an estima-
tion of the prevalence rate of television addiction of percent; and () it
describes several motivations of television addiction. However, the study
() did not describe speciﬁc symptoms of television addiction, except for
reporting nearly hours of television viewing among the addicts and ()
did not report the prevalence rate using the Smith’s scale, but indicated a
close relationship between the Smith’s scale and the one-item self-assess-
ment. In short, the study provides general empirical information about
television addiction.
.
British Adolescents’ Computer Game Addiction
The second article we will discuss is entitled “Dependence on Computer
Games by Adolescents” published in Psychological Reports in by Mark
Griﬃths and Nigel Hunt from Nottingham Trent University in the
United Kingdom.This article is also well cited – times by other
authors according to Google Scholar. The ﬁrst author, Mark Griﬃths, is a
Professor of Psychology and a highly productive researcher on game
addiction, publishing over referred articles mostly in the area of
behavioral addiction. Psychological Reports is a peer-reviewed journal on
experimental, theoretical, and speculative articles in the ﬁeld of general
psychology since . This article is Griﬃths’ early study on computer
game addiction, after which he focused on internet or online gaming.
This short six-print-page article reports a survey study where adoles-
cents at a comprehensive school in Exeter in the United Kingdom were
administered a questionnaire examining factors in the acquisition, devel-
opment, and maintenance of behaviors associated with playing computer
games at home. The measure was an eight-question survey based on the
DSM--R criteria for pathological gambling. Note that the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), published by the
American Psychiatric Association, oﬀers standard criteria for clinical diag-
nosis of mental disorders in the United States and its latest edition, the
Griﬃths, M. D. and Hunt, N. (). “Dependence on computer games by adolescents,”
Psychological Reports, (): –.
. Comparative Analyses

7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

ﬁfth edition, was published in . Eight questions to examine computer
dependence included: () salience (Do you frequently play most days?); ()
tolerance (Do you frequently play for longer periods of time?); ()
euphoria (Do you play for excitement or a “buzz”?); () chasing (Do you
play to beat your personal high score?); () relapse (Do you make repeated
eﬀorts to stop or decrease playing?); () withdrawal (Do you become
restless if you cannot play?); () conﬂict (Do you play instead of attending
to school-related activities?); and () conﬂict (Do you sacriﬁce social
activities to play?). A cut-oﬀscore of four was assumed to indicate that a
participant was dependent or addicted to computer games at the time of
the study. The major ﬁndings were as follows: () Scores on the adapted
DSM-III-R scale indicated that sixty-two players (.percent) were
currently dependent on computer games and that a further twenty-one
players (.percent) previously played at dependent levels. () The major
reasons for these adolescents to ﬁrst start playing computer games were to
impress friends, to kill time, to have a challenge, and to meet friends. The
major reasons for them to play computer games at the time of the study
were to impress friends, an inability to stop playing, to have a challenge,
and to meet friends.
This study is one of the early studies on computer game addiction. It is a
simple survey study. Its major strength is its link with the DSM and its
simple design of measurement. The weakness is that it is unclear about the
quality of the measurement. From this study, we can learn that the
estimated prevalence rate of computer addiction is about percent, close
to that of television addiction.
.
British University Students’ Internet Addiction
For Internet addiction, we chose an article entitled “Prevalence of patho-
logical internet use among university students and correlations with self-
esteem, the general health questionnaire (GHQ), and disinhibition”as
an example for our discussion. The authors are Mark Griﬃths and his two
graduate students Katie Niemz and Phil Banyard.
In this study, the authors administered an online survey among stu-
dents at Nottingham Trent University in the United Kingdom. The
instrument used in the study for determining Internet addiction is a
Niemz, K., Griﬃths, M., and Banyard, P. (). “Prevalence of pathological Internet use among
university students and correlations with self-esteem, the General Health Questionnaire (GHQ),
and disinhibition,” CyberPsychology & Behavior, (): –.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine
7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

thirteen-item questionnaire called Pathological Internet Use Scale that was
originally developed by two established researchers, Morahan-Martin and
Schumacher. Students respond to each of these items (e.g., “I have
routinely cut short on sleep to spend more time online”) in a four-point
Likert scale. The relevant major results indicate that: () out of a total of
students, (.percent) were assessed to have strong symptoms of
pathological Internet use, students (.percent) had limited symp-
toms, and students (.percent) had no symptoms; and () patho-
logical Internet use was associated with various academic, social, and
interpersonal problems among the university students.
From this study, we can learn that Internet addiction existed widely
among this group of university students (about percent of them had
strong or limited symptoms of pathological internet use), with the preva-
lence rate of percent.
.
American Undergraduates’ Mobile Phone Addiction
The last article we will discuss is entitled “A preliminary investigation into
the prevalence and prediction of problematic cell phone use” by Peter
Smetaniuk, published in the Journal of Behavioral Addictions.This article
was published in and cited twenty times based on Google Scholar.
Peter Smetaniuk is a graduate student of psychology and this is his ﬁrst and
only publication. The Journal of Behavioral Addictions is a new journal that
was founded in , but which has published multiple articles on mobile
phone addiction.
This article consists of two studies. The ﬁrst study aimed to use cell
phone addiction inventories to assess problematic cell phone use. In the
study, undergraduate students comprised primarily of psychology
majors attending San Francisco State University responded to a set of
inventories via an online survey process. Using the measure of the Adapted
Mobile Phone Use Habits, it was estimated that about percent of the
respondents had symptoms of behavioral addiction, and about per-
cent have a moderate-to-severe degree of addictive mobile phone use. The
second study aimed to test if age, depression, extraversion, emotional
stability, impulse control, and self-esteem as independent variables pre-
dicted respondents’ perceptions of problematic use. In the study, par-
ticipants with the average age of , comprised primarily of working
Smetaniuk, P. (). “A preliminary investigation into the prevalence and prediction of
problematic cell phone use,” Journal of Behavioral Addictions, (): –.
. Comparative Analyses

7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

adults, responded to a set of inventories via an online survey process. It was
found that age, depression, extraversion, and low impulse control are the
most suitable predictors for problematic use of mobile phones.
From this study, we can learn that researchers have started to develop
instruments to assess mobile phone addiction and to collect empirical data
to document mobile phone addiction. Based on this study, the prevalence
rate of mobile phone addiction is about percent among the under-
graduate students.
In summary, comparing the four empirical articles on diﬀerent types of
technology addictions that we have discussed, we can see at least one
similarity and one diﬀerence among various technology addictions. First,
it is clear that addictive behavior has been consistently observed with each
of the four technologies, from television, computer games, and the Inter-
net, to mobile phones. Second, various prevalence rates are related to
diﬀerent technology addictions, percent for television addiction, per-
cent for computer game addiction, .percent for Internet addiction,
and percent for mobile phone addiction. However, it is hard to say
which technology has higher prevalence rates or which technology is easier
for users to get addicted to due to diﬀerent populations recruited in these
studies (e.g., American adults or British adolescents) and diﬀerent instru-
ments to determine addiction (e.g., Television Addiction Scale, Pathological
Internet Use Scale, and the Adapted Mobile Phone Use Habits). Third,
although these technology addictions have been widely reported, only
online games are formally recognized and included in the new edition of
DSM-. The literature on mobile phone addiction is rapidly growing;
however, at present, mobile phone addiction is not considered a typical
clinical phenomenon.
.
Complex Thinking: The Best Diamond in the Crown
To end this chapter, we can use two words to summarize the existing
literature on mobile phone behavior in medicine: largest and best. First,
about ,journal articles have been published on mobile phone behav-
ior in medicine since . It consists of about one-third of the entire
literature of mobile phone behavior. Thus, the research in this speciﬁc area
has produced the largest amount of the literature on mobile phone behav-
ior. Second, the research on this area is not only strong in quantity, but
also outstanding in quality. Speciﬁcally, the research on mobile
technologies (e.g., development of medical apps) and mobile phone
eﬀects (e.g., eﬀects on brain cancers and sleep) has been published in the

Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine
7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

best journals in medical science, including the New England Journal of
Medicine, Lancet, and JAMA. These studies have made signiﬁcant contri-
butions to the current scientiﬁc knowledge and generated major social
impacts. In short, it is safe to say that the current knowledge about mobile
phone behavior is the best diamond in the crown of the knowledge of
mobile phone behavior.
As we might recall from the beginning of this chapter, the young doctor
revealed his intuitive knowledge about mobile phone behavior in
medicine. His focus is mainly on medical data collection and management
from the perspective of a medical doctor. While it is understandable,
however, this intuitive knowledge does not reveal the complexity of mobile
phone behavior in medicine and health care. Let us now use Figure .to
review the chapter and summarize mobile phone behavior in medicine.
First, as we can see in Figure ., mobile phone behavior in medicine is
much more rich and complex than we might initially think. Three per-
spectives concern complex understanding of mobile phone behavior in the
domain of medicine. () Each behavior in medicine concerns all four basic
elements of mobile phone behavior, users, technologies, activities, and
eﬀects, rather than one or two, as shown in the intuitive thoughts of the
young doctor. () From the perspective of each element, each of the four
elements is actually a complex system that involves diverse components and
cases in medicine rather than a simple system. For instance, through daily
observations, scientiﬁc studies, scientiﬁc reviews, and cross-domain com-
parisons, we can see that mobile phone eﬀects, even potential brain
cancers, are not simple and straightforward. () Most importantly, while
there are similarities among the basic elements in general, each element of
Mobile Phone Users 
in Medicine
2.1 Distracted Dr. Spillers 
3.1 HIV-Infected Pregnant
Women 
4.3 Older Adults’ Health Care 
Mobile Phone Effects
in Medicine
2.4 Dr. John Tickell with Brain
Tumors 
2.5 176 Million Addicts
3.4 Sleep Disturbance
3.5 Brain Cancers
4.4 School Students’ Sleep
Disturbance    
4.5 Potential Brain Cancers
5.4 Undergraduates’ Mobile Phone
Addiction
Mobile Phone Activities
in Medicine
2.3 Monitoring Blood Sugar Levels
3.3 Smoking Cessation
Intervention   
Mobile Phone Technologies 
in Medicine 
2.2 UNICEF Innovation Projects
3.2 Technologies: Mobile Phone
Dispatch 
Figure .
A Summary Diagram of Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine
. Complex Thinking: The Best Diamond in the Crown

7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core

mobile behavior in medicine is unique in its complexity – users in medi-
cine (e.g., doctors and patients), technologies in medicine (e.g., health apps
and sensors), activities in medicine (e.g., management and treatment), and
eﬀects in medicine (e.g., sleep disturbance, brain cancer, and addiction).
For instance, the mobile phone users are diverse and have complex
components such as demographic characteristics (e.g., age and gender)
and behavioral characteristics (bad, intelligence, disabled), and users in
medicine include unprofessional doctors, diabetic patients with diﬀerent
diseases, families of patients, pregnant women, addicted teenagers, and
medical staﬀ, to name a few from an almost endless list.
Second, as we can see in Figure ., future research should focus on at
least the following areas to further broaden and deepen our current
knowledge about the complexity of mobile phone behavior in medicine
and health care: () for mobile phone users in medicine, further research is
urgently needed to examine the eﬀects on health of young children (an
under-studied but crucial group); () for mobile phone technologies in
medicine, further studies should be undertaken to investigate the latest
developments and the eﬀectiveness of health apps and health sensors; () for
mobile phone activities in medicine, further studies should be undertaken
to investigate the process of therapy and treatment; and () for mobile
phone eﬀects in medicine, further studies should be undertaken to assess
the eﬀects on brain cancers using behavior data and experimental designs.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Medicine
7
13:09:54, subject to the Cambridge Core


Mobile Phone Behavior in Business
Outline
.
Intuitive Thinking: Henry’s Quick Responses
.
Daily Observations: From Entrepreneurial Women in Africa to Andrew Hoog’s
Security Testing
.
Business Users: Entrepreneurial Women in Africa
.
Business Users: Sierra Leone’s Girls in Transactional Sex
.
Business Technologies: Full Mobile Phone Services in Airplanes
.
Business Technologies: Airplanes Hacked with a Common Phone and a
Special App
.
Business Activities: Uber Operates an Innovative Taxi Business Service
.
Business Activities: Jack Ma’s Mother Cannot Get a Taxi
.
Business Eﬀects: From an Addicted Teen to a Millionaire CEO
.
Business Eﬀects: Andrew Hoog and Security Testing of Mobile Banking Apps
.
Empirical Studies: From Ugandan Women Entrepreneurs to
Pro-Smoking Apps
.
Business Users: Women Entrepreneurs in Uganda
.
Business Technologies: Mobile Credit Cards
.
Business Activities: Initial Acceptance of Mobile Banking
.
Business Eﬀects: Positive Eﬀects of Travel Apps
.
Business Eﬀects: Negative Eﬀects of Pro-Smoking Apps
.
Knowledge Syntheses: From Linear Growth to M-Payment
.
Overview: Linear Gradual Growth
.
Business Users: Mobile Commerce Adoption
.
Business Activities: Mobile Payment
.
Comparative Analyses: From Advertisement Strategies to Economic
Development Eﬀects
.
Advertisement
.
Business Growth
.
Complex Thinking: From Henry’s Quick Responses to Complex Knowledge

8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

.
Intuitive Thinking: Henry’s Quick Responses
In the winter of , I met with Henry, an old friend of mine who had
been running a successful e-learning business and at the same time was a
mobile phone lover. I asked him a quick question: What can people do with
mobile phones in business? Can you quickly write down three to ﬁve words
that come to mind? He quickly responded with four short phrases: commu-
nication; information that related to the business; business tools (planning,
scheduling meetings, sales management or client management); and ﬁnance.
What can we see from his answers? First of all, he had some broad
thoughts about mobile phone behavior in business. He sees mobile phones
as communication and information technologies, meeting the various
needs in operating and managing a business, and considers ﬁnance as
one subarea of business. His short and quick responses suggest that his
thoughts about mobile phones in business are general rather than speciﬁc
(except for business management) and simple (implicitly focusing on
positive aspects rather than both positive and negative ones). Using the
four-element model, it seems that Henry mainly focused on four general
activities of mobile business, but we do not see the speciﬁc complexity of
users, technologies, activities, and eﬀects involved in the mobile business
behavior, even though Henry has a background of being in business for
decades and has used mobile phones for years.
In this chapter, we will use this kind of general and simple thinking as
our baseline knowledge. First, we will brieﬂy introduce various cases that
can be observed in daily life about mobile phone behavior in business. We
will then present a few interesting empirical research examples of mobile
phone behavior in business, followed by an overview of the current
knowledge of mobile phone behavior in business. We will move on to
compare mobile phone business behavior with diﬀerent technologies, and
ﬁnally, end with a summary of mobile phone behavior in business and a
discussion of future research directions. After going through the intellec-
tual journey of this chapter, we should have a better understanding of the
richness and complexity of mobile phone behavior in business and develop
a complex thinking about mobile phone behavior in this area.
.
Daily Observations: From Entrepreneurial Women
in Africa to Andrew Hoog’s Security Testing
There are many daily observations about mobile phone use in business.
For instance, if you type “cases about mobile phone use in business” in

Mobile Phone Behavior in Business
8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

Google Search, you receive about ,,results in .seconds.
Examples of topics include the serious business liability associated with
employee cell phone use, increasing productivity and proﬁtability with
mobile technology, and the use of mobile phones by customers in retail
stores. Let us now examine some cases that can often be observed in daily
life, seen on TV, read in newspapers, or seen online. In this section, we will
discuss a few interesting examples.
.
Business Users: Entrepreneurial Women in Africa
Lucia Njelekele is a mother of two children in Tanzania in Africa.She is
also a brave and smart female entrepreneur who runs a poultry farm with
about ,livestock. She heavily relies on her mobile phone for multiple
daily business needs. These needs include: () to obtain real-time infor-
mation about demand for her ,livestock from one of Tanzania’s
biggest supermarkets; () to arrange transport; () to ﬁnd feed; and () to
consult her veterinarian. Recently, she planned to expand her business. She
persuaded Fanikiwa Microﬁnance, a local ﬁnance company, to provide a
loan by showing her consumption of mobile phone airtime, her mobile
data purchases, and her social network interactions in her mobile phone
records. First Access, a social enterprise that creates ﬁnancial models for
lenders such as Fanikiwa Microﬁnance, then used a credit scoring system
designed for consumers without bank accounts and evaluated the credit-
worthiness of people like Lucia whose mobile data oﬀer ﬁnancial infor-
mation. Going through these processes, ﬁnally, she got the loan.
In Africa, women are less likely than men to have home ownership
papers, land titles, bank accounts, and other oﬃcial documents. For a
woman who cannot get a bank account in Tanzania, Lucia’s mobile phone
records become the best and actually only hard evidence of her strong
ﬁnancial credibility. Thus, mobile phones are not only invaluable to
women as communication and transaction devices, but also oﬀer a trace-
able record of activities that can then be used by companies like First
Access and Fanikiwa Microﬁnance to further support and expand their
businesses.
Similar to Lucia, Rebecca Kaduru is another entrepreneurial woman in
Uganda. She started a passion fruit farm on a ﬁve-hectare plot several years
ago. Passion fruit is the edible fruit of the passion ﬂower. Early Spanish
missionaries to South America felt the appearance of the passion ﬂower
See www.ft.com/cms/s//dbﬀa-cfc-e-ad-feabde.html#axzzFAWBtmV.
. Daily Observations

8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

symbolized many Christian beliefs and thus named the fruit in honor of
the passion of Christ. Rebecca uses her mobile phone to communicate
with a network of young women between the ages of and who
are part of a local passion fruit grower organization. By providing transport
and relationship management with urban traders, she has helped hundreds
of women obtain fair market value for their hard work. With her mobile
phone, she also learned from an American development expert that her
crop’s earnings could increase by percent if she drove hours to
Kampala. Her poor neighbors used to sell their crop for whatever price the
local trader oﬀered.
These two observations of mobile phone behavior in business illustrate
how a unique group of users, female entrepreneurs in Africa, are beneﬁt-
ting from mobile phones. The mobile phone behavior involved in these
two cases can be represented in the following simple diagram, with the
bold text featuring the emphasized element (i.e., users in this case) from
the four-element model of mobile phone behavior:
Lucia Njelekele in Tanzania + mobile phones ! engaging in the
poultry farm business ! economic and social needs met.
Rebecca Kaduru in Uganda + mobile phones ! engaging in the
passion fruit farm business ! economic and social needs met.
.
Business Users: Sierra Leone’s Girls in Transactional Sex
Krystle Lai is a strategist of Africa Programs of KYNE, an international
health communications consultant ﬁrm, with a graduate training in public
health in developing countries from the London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine. Krystle speaks ﬂuent Krio, a creole language spoken in
Sierra Leone, and has worked in Sierra Leone for over ﬁve years. In January
,she completed a case study for Save the Children and the National
Secretariat for Reducing Teenage Pregnancy, two organizations in Sierra
Leone. She learned several things from talking to teenage girls who served
as informants for her study. The following are important highlights of the
study with direct quotes from the teenage girls participating in it: () As
one of the poorest nations across the world, mobile phones are important
status symbols for Sierra Leone’s teenage girls, as one girl said: “if you don’t
have a phone, you’re not part of the civilised world.” () In the nation’s
capital, Freetown, teenage girls from poor families are engaging in multiple
See http://resourcecentre.savethechildren.se/sites/default/ﬁles/documents/mobile_phones_adolescent_
girls_ﬁnal.pdf.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Business
8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

forms of sexual relationships, concurrently, in order to access cash to
purchase mobile phones, as a girl said: “Young girls are driven to seek
older, richer men who can aﬀord to buy them mobile phones.” () When
these girls do not have a mobile phone, they use a special way (e.g.,
ﬂashlights) to communicate with diﬀerent types of “papas” or “sugar
daddies” to engage in transactional sex. One girl said: “For the sugar
daddies, girls just ﬂash them. They have wives so they don’t like to be
disturbed.” () For some of these girls, having a mobile phone greatly
increased opportunities for them to ﬁnd men for prostitution, as one girl
described: “the better your phone, the easier it is to ﬁnd a man. Like if you
have a phone, it is easier because you have Facebook. Then you can chat
online. At one point, he will deﬁnitely say ‘let’s meet up’.”
From the mobile phone behavior perspective, this study of Freetown
girls is very unique for two reasons. First, when some girls in Freetown do
not have a mobile phone, they use ﬂashlights to communicate with sugar
daddies. In other words, these girls are a special type of mobile phone
users, i.e., non-mobile phone users. Although they cannot aﬀord to buy a
mobile phone yet, their purpose of engaging in transactional sex business is
to buy a mobile phone, making this case a special type of mobile phone
behavior. Generally speaking, non-mobile phone users (e.g., Russian
President Putin refused to use mobile phones; some large IT company
CEOs do not want their children to have mobile phones before high
school) are a particularly interesting phenomenon for mobile phone
behavior research. Second, when some girls in Freetown ﬁnally have a
mobile phone, they move from the transactional sex business to the
prostitution business and become sex workers. They are another special
type of mobile phone users and mobile phones become their tools for their
daily job. The above two observations are related to two special types of
mobile phone behavior in business and can be illustrated in the following
simple diagram, with the bold text highlighting the emphasized element:
Teenage girls in Freetown + ﬂashlights ! communicating with sugar
daddies ! engaged in transactional sex to earn money and buy mobile
phones.
Teenage girls in Freetown + mobile phones ! acquiring sex clients!
engaged in prostitution.
Comparing the two entrepreneurial women in Africa with the teenage
girls engaging in transactional sex or prostitution in Freetown, we can see
at least some of the complexity of mobile phone users in business. The
entrepreneurial women and transactional-sex-motivated girls are all mobile
phone users with the same gender and all already use or eventually use
. Daily Observations

8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

mobile phones as their business technologies. These two types of females,
however, are engaging in very diﬀerent business activities and resulting in
very diﬀerent business eﬀects.
.
Business Technologies: Full Mobile Phone Services in Airplanes
On May , ,Canada’s Transport Minister, Lisa Raitt, announced
that Canadian airlines are allowing passengers to use portable electronic
gadgets such as mobile phones and tablets from the time they board an
aircraft until they land, as long as they do not transmit data, thanks to new
Transport Canada rules. The changes come, in part, to align with rules
existing elsewhere, including the United States and Europe, which both
relaxed their rules last year. This exemption applies to the use of mobile
devices such as cameras, tablets, electronic games, and e-readers, from gate
to gate, as long as they are in non-transmitting mode or ﬂight mode,
during takeoﬀand landing. Customers have been asking airlines to use
their devices at all times on board an aircraft both for working and
entertainment. Now using their mobile devices, airplane passengers who
are businessmen can ﬁnish a memo, ordinary travelers can read a docu-
ment while on the plane, and parents can have their child next to them
playing Nintendo DS so the parents can have productivity time and the
freedom to choose their own activities. This observation of mobile phone
behavior in business can be illustrated in the following simple diagram,
with the bold text representing the emphasized element:
Air Canada + allow mobile phone devices ! providing new features
and services ! new good business incentives to compete with other
airlines and meet passengers’ demands.
.
Business Technologies: Airplanes Hacked with
a Common Phone and a Special App
On April , ,Hugo Teso, a German security analyst and licensed
pilot, demonstrated in a conference that he could use just an Android
phone and software he developed to remotely steal control of an airplane.
Hugo spent three years developing SIMON, a framework of malicious
code that could be used to attack and exploit airline security software, and
See www.thestar.com/business////air_travellers_can_use_electronic_devices_on_aircraft_
in_canada.html.
See www.cnn.com////tech/mobile/phone-hijack-plane/.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Business
8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

PlaneSploit, an Android app for hacking. Using a ﬂight simulator, Teso
showed oﬀthe ability to change the speed, altitude and direction of a
virtual airplane by sending radio signals to its ﬂight-management system.
People can use this system to modify almost everything related to the
navigation of the plane. He told the crowd that the tools could also be used
to do things like change what is on a pilot’s display screen or turn oﬀthe
lights in the cockpit. Teso told the crowd that he used ﬂight-management
hardware that he bought on eBay and publicly available ﬂight-simulator
software that contains at least some of the same computer coding as real
ﬂight software.
Teso is not the ﬁrst so-called “white hat” hacker to expose what appear
to be holes in air-traﬃc security. In ,at the Black Hat security
conference in Las Vegas, computer scientist Andrei Costin discussed
weaknesses he said he found in a new US air-traﬃc security system set
to roll out next year. The ﬂaws he found were not instantly catastrophic,
he said, but could be used to track private airplanes, intercept messages,
and jam communications between planes and air-traﬃc control. In ,
Chris Roberts, a well-known computer security company CEO, used the
last ﬁve years to improve aircraft security. The FBI accused him of
overwriting code on the airplane’s Thrust Management Computer while
aboard a ﬂight, successfully commanding the system to issue the “CLB” or
climb command, and causing one of the airplane engines to climb,
resulting in a lateral or sideways movement of the plane during ﬂight.
This mobile phone behavior can be illustrated in a simple diagram:
Hugo Teso + an Android phone and an app ! hacking the airplane
navigation system ! the security vulnerability of the airplane navigation
system is found.
.
Business Activities: Uber Operates an Innovative Taxi Business Service
On August , ,Chris Ciaccia, a thoughtful and visionary technol-
ogy journalist, predicted that Uber would have the chance of becoming
one of the next big household names of the twenty-ﬁrst century, just as
Apple, Google, and Facebook have. The word uber literally means super or
outstanding. Uber had its original company name called UberCab and its
See www.cnn.com////tech/web/air-traﬃc-control-security.
See www.theregister.co.uk////fbi_claims_infosec_bod_took_control_of_united_airlines_
plane_midﬂight/.
See www.nasdaq.com/article/-next-big-tech-companies-to-go-public-cm#ixzzFQRzKw.
. Daily Observations

8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

current full company name is Uber Technologies Inc. In , two San-
Francisco-based entrepreneurs, Garrett Camp and Travis Kalanick, co-
founded Uber. Its technical core idea is extremely simple: design, develop,
and use a mobile phone application that connects passengers with drivers
of vehicles for hire and ride-sharing services. Basically, a consumer with a
smartphone can submit a trip request through the Uber mobile app and
the request is then routed to Uber drivers who use their own cars. Uber’s
motto is “Everyone’s private driver.” Now, Uber is an American multi-
national online transportation network company worth approximately $
billion and ranked number in Most Innovative Companies by Fast
Company in . As of May , the service was available in over
sixty-six countries and cities worldwide. This mobile phone behavior
can be illustrated in the following diagram:
Uber + Mobile phones and Uber app ! operating a new taxi business
service ! helped more people to get a taxi.
.
Business Activities: Jack Ma’s Mother Cannot Get a Taxi
On February , ,Jack Ma or Yun Ma, a famous Chinese business
magnate and the Founder and Chairman of Alibaba Group, texted a public
message to many people. In this message, he said that his mother was
having trouble getting a taxi because she did not know how to use the
mobile taxi app, DiDi DaChe, China’s mobile taxi app equivalent to Uber.
Ironically, Jack’s Alibaba invented and operates DiDi DaChe, but Jack had
not taught his mother how to use it. DiDi DaChe requires the use of a
speciﬁc mobile phone app, and that is why his mother was unable to get a
taxi. While many elderly people own mobile phones, they do not know
how to use this app. Jack’s father said to him that he would have posted a
big complaint already if it was not his own son’s company operating the
app and too many youngsters like the app. This message has very quickly
spread in China. Many people share this concern and agree that if everyone
uses the mobile taxi app, many old people, young kids, and even inter-
national visitors would no longer be able to get a taxi easily because taxi
drivers need to take those who use a taxi app to call them ﬁrst. This mobile
phone behavior can be illustrated in the following diagram:
Jack Ma’s mom + a mobile phone and a taxi app without knowledge of
using it ! trying to get a taxi she needed ! no taxi service was received.
See http://tech.ifeng.com/batm/detail__//_.shtml.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Business
8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

.
Business Eﬀects: From an Addicted Teen to a Millionaire CEO
In April of ,Ruixu Wang, a Chinese undergraduate senior,
developed a mobile phone app called Student-Job Cat for college students
looking for part-time or summer jobs. After only two years, he now has
become the CEO of an information technology company worth billions of
dollars. Its business covers cities in China, and million students and
,company clients use it, with ,new jobs being updated
every day.
Wang has come a long way to become a successful businessman. He
grew up in a small business family and his parents do not have a higher
education. When he was in middle school, his family’s business went
bankrupt and he became addicted to the Internet. Once, he and his
brother stayed in a cyber bar for seven days, playing games for hours
per day. Soon, he became a problem teen, addicted to the Internet,
smoking, drinking, and skipping classes. However, his family supported
him and his late college experience provided him with scientiﬁc knowledge
and business networks. Thus, he was able to turn his life around and
became a Chinese version of Vincent Quigg or Grenneet Gree. This
mobile phone behavior can be illustrated in the following diagram:
A cyber-addicted teen in China + the app Student-Job Cat ! helping
college students to ﬁnd student jobs ! became a billion-dollar
entrepreneur.
.
Business Eﬀects: Andrew Hoog and Security Testing
of Mobile Banking Apps
Andrew Hoog is the CEO and co-founder of NowSecure, a Chicago-based
mobile security company. In ,he used viaForensics, a software
program for automated testing for a variety of security ﬂaws in apps, to
test six of the most popular banking apps used by banks such as Wells
Fargo, Bank of America, and the United Services Automobile Association
for potential weaknesses. Only one banking app passed the test and the
other ﬁve failed. There were multiple problems with the failed banking
apps, including non-encrypted storage of critical information in plain text
See http://baike.baidu.com/view/.htm.
See
www.techrepublic.com/blog/it-security/mobile-banking-apps-may-be-vulnerable-testing-and-
results/.
. Daily Observations

8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

on the phone and easy cracking to get usernames, passwords, and all the
customers’ ﬁnancial information in an account.
We can learn several important points from this story. First, mobile
security is a real and serious problem, especially for business sectors such as
banks, and especially as more technologies are developed (rapidly changing
technology means developers put speed ahead of security) and more user
growth is observed (this is a relatively new environment and crime follows
growth). Second, problems in apps’ mobile security are a small part of
mobile security. Generally, mobile security concerns ﬁve major areas: ()
attacks on communication systems (e.g., attacks based on SMS and MMS
or communication networks such as the GSM networks, Wi-Fi, and
Bluetooth); () attacks on vulnerabilities in software applications, such as
the web browser or operating system; () attacks on hardware vulnerabil-
ities, such as electromagnetic waveforms and juice jacking (leaking data or
installing malware through a USB charge port by utilizing malicious
charging kiosks set up in public places or hidden in normal charge
adapters); () attacks by cracking passwords; and () attacks using malware,
such as viruses and Trojans, ransomware, and spyware. The third point we
can learn from this story is that many technologies from NowSecure can be
used to detect and ﬁx the app security problems: NowSecure Forensics is a
forensics tool that allows law enforcement users to perform a series of
forensics tests on a mobile device; NowSecure Lab is a business tool that
allows an enterprise to run attacks against their mobile apps to determine
safety and privacy capabilities; NowSecure Mobile is a free mobile app for
individual users to protect their phones using iOS or Android. The mobile
phone behavior involved in this case can be illustrated in the following
simple diagram:
Andrew Hoog + NowSecure ! testing security of banking apps ! ﬁve
of the six banking apps failed the test.
In summary, from these cases, we can develop some new observations
and knowledge about mobile phone behavior in business. First, these cases
are real, speciﬁc, colorful, diverse, and complex, rather than general. They
come from real life rather than from subjective ideas and pure imagination.
Second, we can group these cases into four categories based on the four
elements of mobile phone behavior framework: business users, business
technologies, business activities, and business eﬀects. These four basic
elements are almost visible in each of the mobile phone business behaviors.
Third, these cases are anecdotal observations rather than scientiﬁc evi-
dence. Thus, some might be incomplete, some might be biased, and some
might even be very much exaggerated. In short, these real-life observations

Mobile Phone Behavior in Business
8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

can help us understand the complexity of mobile phone behavior, but
cannot replace rigorous and systematic research works, which we will
discuss in the following section.
.
Empirical Studies: From Ugandan Women Entrepreneurs to
Pro-Smoking Apps
.
Business Users: Women Entrepreneurs in Uganda
Most often, the mobile phone users in business are clients, customers, or
shoppers. In this section, we will start with a discussion of two types of users
and their mobile phone business behavior. One type comprises women
entrepreneurs in Africa. The title of the article is “Usage of mobile technol-
ogy among women entrepreneurs: A case study of Uganda.”The author is
Mary Komunte, who received a Masters of Information Technology degree
in from Makerere University in Kampala, Uganda. She is currently a
lecturer in the Information Systems and Technology Department at the
School of Computing and Engineering of Uganda Technology and Man-
agement University and a researcher undertaking PhD studies in Informatics
Technology at Makerere University. Her publications and research have
focused on comparative analysis or modeling and analysis of mobile phone
usage among women entrepreneurs in Uganda and Kenya. She speaks
English, Luganda, and Runyakitara.
The article was published in in the African Journal of Information
Systems. Based on information available online,the journal is indexed at
the International Bibliography of the Social Sciences and Cabell’s Direc-
tories. It aims at disseminating research on the transfer, diﬀusion, and
adoption of information technology within the context of Africa. It is a
peer-reviewed, online journal and the current editor is Peter Meso from
Georgia Gwinnett College of the United States. The journal was founded
with partial support from the National Science Foundation and is cur-
rently hosted at Kennesaw State University of the United States. It started
in and has published quarterly for seven years. Clearly, it is a new and
unique journal rather than a well-established general one. After the initial
check of the author and the journal, let us now examine the article.
Komunte, M. (). “Usage of mobile technology in women entrepreneurs: A case study of
Uganda,” African Journal of Information Systems, (): .
See http://digitalcommons.kennesaw.edu/ajis/about.html.
. Empirical Studies

8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

The research purpose of this mixed-methods design study was to study
mobile phone usage among women entrepreneurs in Uganda. The ﬁeld
work was carried out between April and July . The questionnaires
were administered and data were collected from women entrepreneurs
and forty focus group participants. The major ﬁndings include the
following: () The majority of women entrepreneurs (.percent) owned
micro enterprises (less than ten employees), small-scale enterprises
(between ten and ﬁfty employees) were represented by .percent of
the women, while a few (.percent) owned medium enterprises (between
and employees). () There were seven types of businesses run by
women entrepreneurs: textiles (percent), agricultural products (.
percent), beauticians (.percent), hotels and restaurants (.percent),
schools (.percent), clinics (.percent), and mobile money (.
percent), which ranked lowest because of the high capital needed to start
such a business venture. () A total of percent of the women used both
texting and calling to carry out their business transactions. The majority of
the women entrepreneurs (.percent) purchased their mobile phones
for convenience, the next most frequently cited motivation was communi-
cation purposes (percent), followed by mobility (.percent), and
aﬀordability (.percent). () These women entrepreneurs reported that
mobile phone services increased eﬃciency, productivity, and eﬀectiveness,
provided better customer service, reduced transaction costs, and encour-
aged price comparison and negotiations. () A total of .percent of
these women entrepreneurs agreed that there was a tremendous increase in
proﬁts as a result of using mobile phones. The reasons cited for the
increase in proﬁts were: quick service delivery (.percent), reduced
transport costs (percent), cheaper communication (.percent), easy
business networking (.percent), and immediacy (.percent).
Although the study involves preliminary survey research, it makes
contributions to the ﬁeld by providing empirical descriptive evidence for
what kinds of unique groups of users in Africa use mobile phones for their
business, why they use them, and what kinds of eﬀects they have had on
their business. What can we learn from this article about mobile phone
users in business? First, these women are unique mobile phone users, a
group of women entrepreneurs in Africa. Second, they mainly needed
basic mobile phone technologies to call or text rather than mobile Internet
or various speciﬁc apps. They did not demand many sophisticated tech-
nologies. Third, they engaged in various business activities using mobile
phones, from textiles and agricultural products, to beauticians and restaur-
ants. Fourth, mobile phones have substantial positive eﬀects in helping

Mobile Phone Behavior in Business
8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

their business, including speeding up service delivery, reducing transport
costs, having cheaper communication, and engaging in easy business
networking. The mobile phone behavior involved in this study can be
represented in the following simple diagram, with the bold text featuring
the emphasized element:
women entrepreneurs in Uganda + mobile phones ! engaging in
various small business ! received substantial positive eﬀects on their
business.
.
Business Technologies: Mobile Credit Cards
The next article is “NFC mobile credit card: The next frontier of mobile
payment?”NFC stands for near ﬁeld communication, a short-range
wireless communication technology. The authors are technology manage-
ment researchers from Malaysia: Garry Wei-Han Tan, Keng-Boon Ooi,
Siong-Choy Chong, and Teck-Soon Hew. The ﬁrst author, Garry Wei-
Han Tan, has published multiple articles on acceptance of m-payment, m-
TV, and m-music. The study was published in in Telematics and
Informatics, an interdisciplinary journal by Elsevier established in
with an impact factor of ., and which examines the social,
economic, political, and cultural impacts and challenges of information
and communication technologies. Since , it has been cited sixty-one
times based on Google Scholar.
In the study, the authors conducted a survey in a major bank of
Malaysia. They used a very simple sampling method: every second cus-
tomer who entered the bank was recruited to complete a survey. A total of
customers aged around to years old who own both a credit card
and a mobile phone completed the survey. The dependent variable was
intention to use mobile credit cards. The six independent variables were
divided into three groups: () technology-related variables: perceived use-
fulness of mobile credit cards (e.g., believing mobile credit cards have a
faster transaction time and do not need a signature) and perceived ease of
using mobile credit cards (e.g., believing that using mobile credit cards
does not require a lot of mental eﬀort); () psychology-related variables:
social inﬂuence (e.g., other people’s views) and innovation technology
attitude (e.g., willingness to adopt a new technology); and () ﬁnance-
related variables: perceived ﬁnancial cost (e.g., concerning mobile phone
Tan, G. W.-H., Ooi, K.-B., Chong, S.-C., and Hew, T.-S. (). “NFC mobile credit card: The
next frontier of mobile payment?” Telematics and Informatics, (): –.
. Empirical Studies

8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

bills, known and hidden transaction fees, or annual service fees) and
perceived risk (e.g., concerning potential ﬁnancial loss).
It was found that customers reported that their perceived usefulness of
mobile credit cards, perceived ease of using mobile credit cards, social
inﬂuence, and innovation technology attitude were signiﬁcantly related to
their intention to use mobile credit cards, but perceived risk and perceived
ﬁnancial cost were not. In other words, in Malaysia, young bank customers
cared about whether mobile credit cards have more technical advantages
(e.g., more useful or easier to use) than using cash or regular credit cards.
These young customers were more likely to be inﬂuenced by their families,
friends, and colleagues and willing and more likely to accept new
technologies. However, these customers in Malaysia were not concerned
about various risks and potential ﬁnancial cost.
This study helps us learn more about mobile phone behavior in
business. First, the mobile phone users in the study are unique: young
customers walking into a bank in in Malaysia, a country that has an
emerging rather than established mobile payment market. Second, mobile
phone technology covered in the study is unique: Mobile credit cards are a
contactless credit card payment method using mobile phones and the near
ﬁeld communication technology. For instance, if customers need to pay a
bill in a bank, they can wave their mobile phones over a special reader
within to centimeters of distance. The reader will collect and send
the mobile phone information to the bank system through the near ﬁeld
communication network. A wireless transaction will be completed. Mobile
credit cards diﬀer from traditional credit cards because they use mobile
phones. Thus, they are wireless and digital. Mobile credit cards diﬀer from
existing mobile payment methods such as Wireless Application protocol or
General Pocket Radio Service because they are based on a short-range
wireless technology to transfer data between two nearby devices. Thus,
they are touchless and easy to use. However, this method of choice for
mobile payment has not been widely adopted, while mobile credit cards
have been on the market since . This puzzling situation makes mobile
credit cards a good technology to study further. Third, the mobile phone
activity involved in the study is very common: adopting or accepting a
mobile credit card. Technology adoption or acceptance in general and
mobile phone adoption and acceptance is one of the most frequently
studied topics in the literature. Fourth, the mobile phone eﬀects involved
in the study are also very common: various factors contributing to early
adoption were identiﬁed. The mobile phone behavior involved in the
study can be summarized in a simple diagram:

Mobile Phone Behavior in Business
8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

young bank customers in Malaysia + mobile credit cards !
deciding whether they want to use mobile credit cards ! identiﬁed
technology-related and psychology-related factors contributed to early
adoption.
.
Business Activities: Initial Acceptance of Mobile Banking
Another article on mobile business activity is entitled “Examining multi-
dimensional trust and multi-faceted risk in initial acceptance of emerging
technologies: An empirical study of mobile banking services.”The
authors are four researchers on management information systems from
four American universities, Xin Luo, Han Li, Jie Zhang, and J. P. Shim.
The article was published in in Decision Support Systems. Since its
publication, it has been cited times based on Web of Science as a
highly cited paper and times based on Google Scholar.
The study aimed to understand how various perceived risks and per-
ceived trusts among young people inﬂuence their mobile banking accept-
ance. A total of American undergraduate students participated in a
survey study. The dependent variable used in the study is intention of
accepting mobile banking services. The eight risk-related independent
variables are: performance risk (e.g., the risk that a banking app performs
very poorly), ﬁnancial risk (e.g., the risk that a banking service has ﬁnancial
fraud), time risk (e.g., the risk of taking too long to learn a new banking
app), psychological risk (e.g., the risk of experiencing extra anxiety),
physical risk (e.g., the risk of getting brain cancers due to cell phone use
for a longer time), social risk (e.g., the risk of getting embarrassed in front
of friends), privacy risk (e.g., the risk of losing privacy after using mobile
banking apps), and overall risk. The three trust-related independent vari-
ables were: () overall trust in humankind; () general trust in mobile
banking (e.g., whether mobile banking has high-quality legal and technical
systems in place); and () speciﬁc trust in the vendor (e.g., whether a bank
respects and cares about its customers).
The major ﬁndings include the following: () Among all the eight risk-
related variables, all but physical and social risk were not signiﬁcant
indicators of perceived risk. Perceived risk signiﬁcantly and negatively
inﬂuenced participants’ intention of accepting mobile banking services.
Luo, X., Li, H., Zhang, J., and Shim, J. P. (). “Examining multi-dimensional trust and multi-
faceted risk in initial acceptance of emerging technologies: An empirical study of mobile banking
services,” Decision Support Systems, (): –.
. Empirical Studies

8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

In other words, when customers decide if they use mobile banking, they
are concerned about mobile banking in terms of its potential performance
risk, ﬁnancial risk, time risk, psychological risk, privacy risk, and overall
risk, but not about physical and social risks. () Among the three trust-
related variables, except for speciﬁc trust in a vendor, general trust in
mobile banking and overall trust in humans indirectly inﬂuence partici-
pants’ intention of accepting mobile banking services only through per-
ceived risk. In other words, between perceived risk and perceived trust,
perceived risk is the primary factor negatively related to the initial accept-
ance, and perceived trust is the secondary factor negatively related to the
initial acceptance.
From the mobile phone behavior perspective, the most useful insight
from this study is that the early acceptance of mobile banking is a speciﬁc
mobile activity and potential customers will worry about various kinds of
risk involved in mobile banking. Thus, it is critical to address these
perceived risks (i.e., potential performance risk, ﬁnancial risk, time risk,
psychological risk, privacy risk, and overall risk) to attract more mobile
phone users to use mobile banking. The mobile phone behavior involved
in this study can be represented in the following simple diagram, with the
bold text featuring the emphasized element:
undergraduate students in the United States + mobile banking !
engaging in early acceptance of mobile banking ! six perceived risks
were directly related to mobile banking acceptance.
.
Business Eﬀects: Positive Eﬀects of Travel Apps
The empirical article we examine now reveals a positive eﬀect of mobile
phone behavior in business. Its title is “The role of smartphones in
mediating the touristic experience.”The three authors are: Dan Wang
and Daniel Fesenmaier from Temple University in the United States and
Sangwon Park from the University of Surrey in the United Kingdom. It
was published in in Journal of Travel Research, the premier research
journal focusing on travel and tourism behavior, management, and devel-
opment, published by Sage. It has been the oﬃcial research publication of
the Travel and Tourism Research Association since , with an impact
factor of .. Since its publication, this article has been cited times
according to Google Scholar.
Wang, D., Park, S., and Fesenmaier, D. R. (). “The role of smartphones in mediating the
touristic experience,” Journal of Travel Research, (): –.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Business
8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

In this study, the authors creatively used custom reviews posted in the
most popular travel apps as the data to analyze the eﬀects of smart-
phones on the experience of tourists. Among a total of ,records of
custom reviews related to travel, through a three-step screening procedure,
the author identiﬁed viable storytelling reviews as the narrative data
for further content analysis. The major ﬁndings are as follows: () The
most popular travel apps serve various speciﬁc needs. These needs
belong to eleven categories, such as ﬂight information manager, destin-
ation guides, online travel agency, entertainment, food ﬁnder, and lan-
guage assistant. () The travel apps have fourteen types of positive eﬀects
on traveling experiences, such as (a) getting good value out of trips (e.g.,
the app Line guides a family visiting Disney World to attractions with the
shortest waiting lines), (b) improving eﬃciency (e.g., the app Flight Update
Pro informs tourists about ﬂight delays and terminal changes on a timely
basis), (c) making life easy (e.g., the app TripIt quickly generates a detailed
itinerary for a businessman’s complicated eleven-day trip), (d) making trips
more fun (e.g., the app Air Traﬃc Control enables travelers to hear
interesting conversations between ﬂight pilots and the ground control
team), (e) visiting more places (e.g., the app Roadside America leads
vacationers to great places they have never heard about), and (f) sharing
happiness (e.g., the app MouseWait developed an online community for
Disney World visitors to meet amazing new friends).
We can learn quite a lot from this study about various types of interesting
mobile phone behavior in the tourism business. First, there are many mobile
phone users involved in tourism: tourist providers, government oﬃcers,
involved communities, indigenous groups, and, of course, tourists with
diverse needs. Second, there are many great mobile apps for tourists on
the market. The study introduced a few from the most popular apps
such as Roadside America or TripIt. Third, there are many mobile activities
related to travel, including planning reservations, navigation, ﬁnding resting
rooms, estimating waiting time, sending travel photos to family members,
and generating online word of mouth to share experiences. Fourth, there are
many positive eﬀects of these apps on tourists physically (e.g., saving waiting
time), cognitively (e.g., inspiring vacationers with new places), socially (e.g.,
meeting new friends), and emotionally (e.g., sharing happiness). The mobile
phone behavior involved in this study can be represented in the following
simple diagram, with the bold text featuring the emphasized element:
tourists who used travel apps and posted storytelling reviews +
most popular traveling apps ! engaging in various travel activities !
had fourteen kinds of positive experiences with travel apps.
. Empirical Studies

8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

.
Business Eﬀects: Negative Eﬀects of Pro-Smoking Apps
The empirical article we will now examine is entitled “Pro-smoking apps
for smartphones: The latest vehicle for the tobacco industry?”In con-
trary to the previous study which focused on a positive eﬀect, this study
reveals a negative eﬀect of mobile apps. The authors are Nasser BinDhim,
Becky Freeman, and Lyndal Trevena, three public health researchers from
the University of Sydney in Australia. The article was published in in
Tobacco Control, a well-established journal publishing the nature and
consequences of tobacco use worldwide since , with an impact factor
of .. It has a mobile site at http://m.tobaccocontrol.bmj.com/ and
even an iPad app. The publisher is the BMJ (originally called the British
Medical Journal or BMJ Group), a well-known international health-care
publication company owned by the British Medical Association. Over the
past ﬁfty years, it has pioneered digital publication and open access.
The study was conducted in . The authors searched the Apple App
Store and Android Market to ﬁnd apps that provided explicit pro-smoking
contents (e.g., various brands of tobacco and speciﬁc locations to buy
cigarettes) and encouraged smoking behavior (e.g., smoking games). No
human subjects were involved. The major ﬁndings include the following: ()
From the initial search result of ,apps, the authors identiﬁed pro-
smoking apps. () There are six major types of pro-smoking apps, tobacco
shop apps (e.g., listing famous cigarette brands with images), smoking
simulation apps (e.g., a cartoon game where users can have game characters
smoke or pass the cigarettes to other characters), wallpaper apps (e.g.,
showing the famous brand Marlboro in D images), cigarette battery (e.g.,
using an image of burning cigarettes to indicate the battery life percentage),
smoking advocacy (e.g., promoting the freedoms of cigar enthusiasts), and
cigarette rolling demonstration (e.g., showing how to roll a cigarette in
various shapes). () In the Android Market, in one month of , about
million unique users downloaded the pro-smoking apps. Among all the
six categories of pro-smoking apps, the most popular app categories were
smoking simulation apps and tobacco shop apps.
From the perspective of mobile phone behavior in business, the ﬁndings
of this study teach us a few things. First, mobile phones can be used to
bring a negative rather than a positive eﬀect to users. This study shows that
apps were created to promote smoking, a harmful health behavior, in
BinDhim, N. F., Freeman, B., and Trevena, L. (). “Pro-smoking apps for smartphones: The
latest vehicle for the tobacco industry?” Tobacco Control, (): e–e.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Business
8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

six major categories. Second, the pro-smoking apps have a large rather
than small market. For instance, million users from around the world
downloaded these pro-smoking apps from the Android Market alone
within one month. The mobile phone behavior involved in this unique
empirical study can be represented in the following simple diagram, with
the bold text featuring the emphasized element:
million mobile users in the world + pro-smoking apps !
downloading these apps from Apple App Store and Android Market !
exposed to six types of pro-smoking experiences.
.
Knowledge Syntheses: From Linear Growth to M-Payment
.
Overview: Linear Gradual Growth
To estimate the scope of the existing literature on mobile phone behavior,
let us search three major databases: Web of Science, PsycINFO, and
Business Source Complete. An initial search on Web of Science (one of
the largest databases on social and natural sciences) with two keywords,
business and mobile phone, in combination, yields journal articles and
seven reviews. An initial search on Business Source Complete (one of the
best databases on business) using the combination of keywords mobile
phone and business yields journal articles. An initial search of the
existing literature on PsycINFO (one of the widely used databases on
behavioral science) using the combination of keywords cellular phones/
mobile device and business/commerce leads to journal articles. From
these articles, we can see the following features: () These articles cover a
wide variety of topics, such as consumer behavior, product quality, self-
eﬃcacy, privacy, travel, health, advertisement, retail, adoption, diﬀusion,
and client switch. () These articles are scattered around various outlets for
dissemination, including Computers in Human Behavior and Decision
System. Many of these journals are familiar to neither regular readers nor
those from the major business science journals such as Harvard Business
Review, Business Science Quarterly, or Business Science Quarterly Review. ()
Three to four dissertations are included, an important sign of emerging
paradigms based on Thomas Kuhn’s theory.This is because younger
generations of researchers are in training, supported by established scholars
on their dissertation committee. () Rather surprisingly, the trend of
journal article publications over time is a gradual linear growth rather than
Kuhn, T. S. (). The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions. University of Chicago Press.
. Knowledge Syntheses

8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

an exponential growth, diﬀerent from the general trend of the mobile phone
behavior literature (compare Figure .with Figure .in Chapter ). This
trend is interesting, indicating that researchers have been consistently con-
tributing to the literature of mobile phone behavior in business for the past
two decades rather than over the past few years.
After seeing some general features for the business mobile phone
behavior literature, let us take a look at the coverage of mobile phone
behavior in business in the Encyclopedia of Mobile Phone Behavior. One of
the beneﬁts of checking the Encyclopedia is to easily see how some of the
established researchers in the ﬁeld of business science have reviewed major
research achievements in mobile phone behavior. Although, like all the
publications, the Encyclopedia is not perfect, it does provide some baseline
information in this area to help us learn about the existing knowledge a bit
more eﬀectively and eﬃciently, compared to searching for the literature by
ourselves.
As shown in Table ., the Encyclopedia has a major section on mobile
phone behavior in business that consists of twelve chapters. These chapters
synthesize the literature on the four basic elements of mobile phone
behavior in business, i.e., business users, business technologies, business
activities, and business eﬀects. From these chapter titles, we can see at least
a few things. First, for business users, consumers are the users that have
been reviewed the most (e.g., the chapter on “Consumer adoption of
mobile e-WOM messages”), although business users are much more
diverse (e.g., human resource managers in the chapter on “Human
resource recruiting and selection using cellphone apps”). Second, for
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
1994 1995 1996 1998 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Figure .
The Linear Growth Trend of Journal Article Publications on Mobile Phone
Behavior in Business

Mobile Phone Behavior in Business
8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

business technologies, business apps are often examined (e.g., “Human
resource recruiting and selection using cellphone apps”). Third, for busi-
ness activities, adaptation is the most examined topic, reﬂecting on the
initial stage of adoption, use, and diﬀusion of mobile phones based on the
technology diﬀusion theory.This is consistent with the empirical articles
discussed in the previous section. Fourth, for business eﬀects, it seems that
we do not have a good coverage in the Encyclopedia on this topic as the
major focus, although every chapter has to deal with business eﬀects
directly or indirectly as an inherent element of any mobile phone behavior.
.
Business Users: Mobile Commerce Adoption
The second review article we will discuss focuses on another speciﬁc and
popular topic – how people will adopt mobile commerce. It is entitled “A
meta-analysis of mobile commerce adoption and the moderating eﬀect of
culture.”As of , it was cited ninety-ﬁve times in Google Scholar.
The authors are three Chinese scholars in information technology and
management, Liyi Zhang, Jing Zhu, and Qihua Liu. It was published in
Table .The Encyclopedia Chapters on Mobile Phone Behavior in Business
Element
Chapter Title
Users
Generation Y and mobile marketing in India
Users
Consumer adoption of mobile e-WOM messages
Technologies
Human resource recruiting and selection using cellphone apps
Technologies
Mobile coupons: Adoption and use
Technologies
Branded mobile apps: Possibilities for advertising in an emergent mobile
channel
Activities
Consumer acceptance of the mobile Internet
Activities
Empirical research methods for evaluating aﬀective satisfaction of
consumer products
Activities
Understanding mobile phone usage through a value-based approach:
Marketing implications
Activities
Generation, collection and recycling of used and end-of-life mobile
phones
Activities
Communication privacy management and mobile phone use
Activities
Sustainability of the use of mobile phones
Eﬀects
Mobile technostress
Rogers, E. M. (). Diﬀusion of Innovations. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Zhang, L., Zhu, J., and Liu, Q. (). “A meta-analysis of mobile commerce adoption and the
moderating eﬀect of culture,” Computers in Human Behavior, (): –.
. Knowledge Syntheses

8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

in Computers and Human Behavior, a well-established scholarly
Elsevier journal dedicated to examining the use of computers from a
psychological perspective since , with an impact factor of ..
This review mainly focuses on what factors will signiﬁcantly impact m-
commerce adoption. It consists of the following sections: introduction,
theoretical models, methods, results, and discussion. The highlights of the
review include the following: () Mobile commerce is a new form of
electronic commerce and refers to various business activities conducted
via wireless telecommunication technologies, such as mobile ticketing,
mobile banking, mobile marketing, and mobile transaction. () Three
major theories have been used in various studies to examine how diﬀerent
factors inﬂuence mobile commerce adoption, that is, the Technology
Acceptance Theory (focusing on individual perceptions such as attitudes),
the Theory of Planned Behavior (focusing on social perceptions such as the
perceived social norm held by other people), and the Innovation Diﬀusion
Theory (focusing on innovation features such as technical advantages).
Based on these theories, the authors developed an analytic framework to
review the literature. () A total of ﬁfty-three articles were carefully selected
for meta-analysis, including thirty-nine journal articles, eleven conference
proceeding papers, two theses, and one program report. The total sample
size from all of these articles is nearly ,. () Based on these ﬁfty-three
articles, the strongest relationship is found between individuals’ attitudes
toward m-commerce and their intention to adopt m-commerce and
between individuals’ perceived usefulness and their attitudes. () Cultural
diﬀerences exist. In Eastern culture, the perceived ease of use plays the
most important role in m-commerce adoption, whereas in Western cul-
ture, the perceived usefulness is the most vital factor.
This is a well-written and high-quality meta-analysis. It provides a big
picture of how to improve m-commerce adoption. From the perspective of
mobile phone behavior in business, we can learn two important lessons from
this meta-analysis. First, mobile phone users’ attitudes and perceptions
matter. To attract more people to use m-commerce and achieve higher
levels of m-commerce adoption, we should pay more attention to how users
will think about m-commerce rather than what technologies should be
developed. Speciﬁcally, the two most user-related factors are individuals’
attitudes toward m-commerce and its perceived usefulness, besides various
other user-related factors such as social norms and perceived cost. Second,
mobile phone users’ cultural backgrounds matter. To persuade more users to
adopt m-commerce, we should consider certain cultural diﬀerences; for uses
with the Eastern culture background, the perceived ease of use should be

Mobile Phone Behavior in Business
8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

emphasized, whereas for users with the Western culture background, the
perceived usefulness should be emphasized.
.
Business Activities: Mobile Payment
After brieﬂy discussing the Encyclopedia chapter, let us now discuss a
review article entitled “Past, present and future of mobile payments
research: A literature review.”This paper is well cited, times based
on Google Scholar. The four authors – Tomi Dahlberg, Niina Mallat, Jan
Ondrus, and Agnieszka Zmijewska – are from three European countries.
The ﬁrst author, Professor Tomi Dahlberg, has published multiple studies
on mobile payment. The article was published in in Electronic
Commerce Research and Applications, a relatively established Elsevier jour-
nal publishing e-commerce research since , with an impact factor of
..
This review consists of four major sections: framework, method, results
and discussion. In other words, the authors followed the general structure
of empirical studies to present their review work. The major points from
this review include the following: () Mobile payments are payments for
goods, services, and bills with a mobile device (such as a mobile phone,
smartphone, or personal digital assistant) by taking advantage of wireless
and other communication technologies. () Mobile devices can be used in
a variety of payment scenarios, such as payment for digital content (e.g.,
ringtones, logos, news, music, or games), tickets, parking fees, transport
fares, or to access electronic payment services to pay bills and invoices.
Payments for physical goods are also possible, both at vending and
ticketing machines, and at manned point-of-sale terminals. () A mobile
payment is carried out with a mobile payment instrument such as a mobile
credit card or mobile wallet. () Mobile payments, as all other payments,
fall broadly into two categories: payments for daily purchases and pay-
ments of bills (i.e., credited payments). For purchases, mobile payments
complement or compete with cash, checks, credit cards, and debit cards.
For bills, mobile payments typically provide access to account-based
payment instruments such as money transfers, Internet banking payments,
direct debit assignments, or electronic invoice acceptance. () In the early
s, mobile payment services became a hot topic. Hundreds of mobile
Dahlberg, T., Mallat, N., Ondrus, J., and Zmijewska, A. (). “Past, present and future of
mobile payments research: A literature review,” Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, ():
–.
. Knowledge Syntheses

8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

payment services, including access to electronic payments and Internet
banking, were introduced all over the world. Strikingly, many of these
eﬀorts failed. For example, most, if not all, of the dozens of mobile payment
services available in countries of the European Union and listed in the
database of electronic point-of-sale terminals in have been discon-
tinued. () In total, the authors identiﬁed seventy-three peer-reviewed
journal articles and conference papers that were published between
and , after searching nine databases and ﬁfteen conferences.
Among the seventy-three publications, twenty-nine are about m-payment
techniques and twenty are about m-payment consumers; among the thirty
empirical studies, ﬁfteen are qualitative and ten are quantitative. () The
authors developed and used a conceptual framework to analyze the existing
literature and predict future directions. This framework has four environ-
mental factors (technological, cultural, commercial, and legal factors) and
ﬁve business factors (competition among m-payment service providers,
consumer power, merchant power, traditional payment services, and new
e-payment services). () Most studies focus on technical factors (e.g., system
design, tools and protocols) and consumer factors (e.g., adaptation and
perception), speciﬁcally in three areas (attractiveness, risk, and anxiety).
Although this review focuses more on mobile payment services from the
business management perspective, it shows that a substantial number of
studies have examined mobile payment behavior. As a result, we can see an
overall complex picture of mobile payment and a speciﬁc synthesis of
diverse mobile payment behavior.
.
Comparative Analyses: From Advertisement Strategies
to Economic Development Eﬀects
.
Advertisement
One of the common marketing strategies is to use advertisements. Will
mobile advertisement diﬀer from newspaper advertisement, television
advertisement, and Internet advertisement? The ﬁrst comparative study
we will discuss next addresses this question. Its title is “Eﬀective advertising
on mobile phones: A literature review and presentation of results from
case studies.”As one of the most comprehensive studies on m-
Park, T., Shenoy, R., and Salvendy, G. (). “Eﬀective advertising on mobile phones: A literature
review and presentation of results from case studies,” Behaviour & Information Technology, ():
–.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Business
8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

advertisement, it was cited ninety-six times based on Google Scholar. The
authors are Taezoon Park, Rashmi Shenoy, and Gavriel Salvendy from
Purdue University. The corresponding author Gavriel Salvendy is an
eminent scholar in human factors and ergonomics. The article was pub-
lished in Behaviour & Information Technology, a well-established Taylor &
Francis journal specializing in human factors since , with an impact
factor of ..
The review consists of four main sections on mobile advertisement:
concepts, models, factors, and cases. The major points include the
following: () Advertisement is a common marketing strategy to develop
an image of products, services, and business to stimulate direct purchase.
The three generations of advertisement are (a) billboards, newspapers,
and magazines, (b) radio and TV, and (c) Internet and mobile networks.
Each of them has diﬀerent features such as mode, presentation type, and
advertisement type. () Mobile advertising includes messages (short
message service, enhanced messaging service, and multimedia messaging
service), mobile banners, ringtones, screen savers, wallpapers, and mobile
games. It can be used for promotions, event marketing, branded content
marketing, and branded customer relationship marketing. () There are
four basic models of advertisement processing (i.e., market response
model,
intermediate
eﬀect
model,
hierarchy
eﬀect
model,
and
hierarchy-free model), explaining how consumer behavior is related to
experience, cognition, and emotion. () Three types of factors inﬂuence
the eﬀects of mobile advertisement: advertisement factors (e.g., design
and content), environmental factors (e.g., exposure time and repetition),
and audience factors (e.g., experience and attitude). () Fifty-three cases
were examined, indicating that most mobile advertisement is for enter-
taining companies, targeting young populations, and involves multi-
media. () Mobile advertisement features limited space, multimedia
support, and personal involvement.
Overall, the article functions as a hybrid of theory integration, literature
review, and case studies. It does not specify the literature scope and search
strategies. However, it provides a clear picture of diﬀerences in advertise-
ment between the three generations of media. It helps us better understand
the mobile advertisement in a broad context.
.
Business Growth
The second comparative study is entitled “The economic impact of infor-
mation and communication technologies (ICTs) on microenterprises in
. Comparative Analyses

8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

the context of development.”It was written by two Michigan State
University scholars, Han Ei Chew and Mark Levy, and one scholar from
India, P. Vigneswara Ilavarasan. Mark Levy is an eminent scholar in
communication and technologies. Han Ei Chew was one of his mentees
and is now an established scholar. The three authors have published
multiple articles on the impacts of mobile phones on economic and social
development. The article we will be discussing was published in in
the Electronic Journal on Information Systems in Developing Countries, a
widely recognized journal specializing in technologies for social and eco-
nomic development. The journal has seventy-ﬁve volumes and has been
edited by David Robinson, a Professor in Cross-Cultural studies of Infor-
mation Systems at the City University of Hong Kong, since . As a
unique and strong peer-reviewed open-access e-journal (www.ejisdc.org),
the journal is becoming the foremost international forum for practitioners,
teachers, researchers, and policy makers to share their knowledge and
experience in the design, development, implementation, management,
and evaluation of information systems and technologies in developing
countries.
This empirical study examined how four information and communi-
cation technologies (landline phones, mobile phones, computers, and the
Internet), inﬂuence economic development for microenterprises (with one
to twenty employees) owned by women microentrepreneurs in Mumbai,
the commercial capital of India. A random cluster probability sampling
was used to obtain research participants. A total of women microen-
trepreneurs participated in a -minute interview conducted in . The
interview covered multiple issues about these women microentrepreneurs,
including: () business growth (e.g., their annual incomes); () technology
access (e.g., whether they had mobile phones for business); () business
formality (how formally they ran their business, e.g., whether they regis-
tered their business with the government or had business bank accounts);
() motivations to use technologies for their business (e.g., having mobile
phones to know price information on a timely basis); and () perceived
social status (e.g., receiving more respect from friends and neighbors). The
major ﬁndings include the following: () Among women microentre-
preneurs, percent were married, had on average two children, were aged
years old on average, and percent had high-school or middle-school
Chew, H. E., Ilavarasan, P. V., and Levy, M. R. (). “The economic impact of information and
communication technologies (ICTs) on microenterprises in the context of development,” Electronic
Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries, (): –.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Business
8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

educations. They typically hired six workers, most of them had been in
business for ten years, percent of them were in the sales business,
including restaurants, clothing sales, groceries, and small electronics,
percent of them were in the service business, including medical care,
taxicabs, tours, tutoring, or beauty salons, and only over percent of them
were in the manufacturing business, typically making dresses or leather
goods. () Mobile phones were the most used technologies by the women
microentrepreneurs (percent of them), whereas computers and Internet
were used only by about percent of them. () About percent of
women microentrepreneurs had a positive attitude toward mobile phones,
and felt that mobile phones could help their business survive and grow,
and could enable them to always receive important business calls. ()
Technology access and business formality were two signiﬁcant predictors
of their business growth (technology access was positively related and
business formality was negatively related), but business motivations and
perceived social status were not signiﬁcant predictors.
In the section on everyday observations, we discussed how two African
women entrepreneurs used the mobile phones for their poultry farm business
or passion fruit farm business. In the section on empirical studies, we also
discussed how mobile phones beneﬁted African women entrepreneurs.
This empirical study generates interesting comparative data from Indian
women microentrepreneurs. It provides scientiﬁc evidence that mobile
phones were the most used technologies by the women microentrepreneurs,
compared with landline phones, computers, and the Internet, and technology
access is both signiﬁcantly and positively associated with their business
growth, compared with business formality, business motivations, and per-
ceived social status. These kinds of comparative ﬁndings make it easier to see
important impacts of mobile phone use on women microentrepreneurs.
.
Complex Thinking: From Henry’s Quick Responses
to Complex Knowledge
Recall that Henry’s responses to mobile phone behavior in business were
quite simple (primarily focusing on the positive eﬀects) and quite general
(mainly mentioning four broad aspects of business activities). Starting
from that baseline knowledge, we discussed nearly ten daily observations,
ﬁve empirical studies, two reviews, and two comparative studies and have
gone through quite an interesting intellectual journey.
Let us now use Figure .and brieﬂy review the complexity of mobile
phone behavior in business. First, for business users, we discussed two
. Complex Thinking

8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

amazing entrepreneurial women in Africa who ran their farm business
successfully. We also discussed a special group of teenage girls in Freetown
in Sierra Leone engaging in transactional sex and prostitution. They are all
female mobile phone users in Africa, but are involved in two very diﬀerent
businesses – one ﬂourishing, but another devastating. We then further
discussed one empirical study about how mobile phones helped entre-
preneurial women in Uganda. In the end, we discussed an excellent meta-
analysis of ﬁfty-three empirical studies about what factors inﬂuence mobile
phones users’ adoption of mobile commerce. We have learned that users’
attitudes and cultural backgrounds play an important role. Compared with
Henry’s responses in which he hardly considered mobile users, we now
have much more sophisticated knowledge about business users – the ﬁrst
basic element in mobile phone behavior.
Second, for business technologies, we discussed two somehow contrast-
ing cases, one about airplane companies adding full mobile phone services
to compete for more clients, and another about Hugo Teso using an
Android phone and an app to hack the airplane navigation system,
showing its security vulnerability. As a modern technology, mobile phones
could either lead to increased airline business or decreased ﬂight security.
We then discussed an empirical study on how young bank customers
in Malaysia decided whether they will consider using a relatively new
technology – mobile credit cards. Compared with Henry’s responses in
which he did not mention any mobile phone technologies, we can have
more insights into the complexity of technologies in business: technologies
can lead to both positive and negative eﬀects and good technologies might
not be adopted automatically.
Mobile Phone Users 
in Business
2.1 Entrepreneurial Women in
Africa   
2.2 Sierra Leone’s Girls in
Transactional Sex       
3.1 Women Entrepreneurs in
Uganda  
4.2 Mobile Commerce Adoption 
Mobile Phone Effects
in Business
2.7 From an Addicted Teen to a 
Millionaire CEO 
2.8 Andrew Hoog and Security  
Testing of Mobile Banking Apps
3.4 Positive Effects of Travel Apps 
3.5 Negative Effects of Pro- 
Smoking Apps
5.2 Business Growth 
Mobile Phone Activities
in Business
2.5 Uber Operates an Innovative
Taxi Business Service    
2.6 Jack Ma’s Mother Cannot Get a
Taxi
3.3 Initial Acceptance of Mobile 
Banking  
4.3 Mobile Payment
5.1 Advertisement
Mobile Phone Technologies 
in Business 
2.3 Full Mobile Phone Services in 
Airplanes
2.4 Airplanes Hacked with a 
Common Phone and a Special App
3.2 Mobile Credit Cards 
Figure .
A Summary Diagram of Mobile Phone Behavior in Business

Mobile Phone Behavior in Business
8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

Third, for business activities, we discussed two somehow contrasting
cases again. One was about Uber enjoying tremendous business success
primarily based on its mobile phone apps, and another was about the
mother of the CEO of a mobile taxi company in China not being able to
get a taxi simply because she did not know how to use the taxi app. For the
same mobile taxi business, it can either help people get the taxi service or
prevent people from getting a taxi. Through an empirical study on initial
acceptance of mobile banking among American undergraduate stu-
dents, we learned that early acceptance of mobile banking itself is an
important mobile activity since it is a gateway to various other mobile
phone activities. Furthermore, this activity is inﬂuenced by potential
performance risk, ﬁnancial risk, time risk, psychological risk, privacy risk,
and overall risk in the minds of these students. We also discussed a review
article on mobile payment. The authors reviewed seventy-three peer-
reviewed journal articles and conference papers and synthesized a compre-
hensive knowledge of mobile payment as an important mobile phone
activity. Finally, from the comparative study on advertisement using
diﬀerent technologies, we can see the uniqueness and complexity of mobile
advertisement processes. From mobile taxi operations, mobile banking,
mobile payment, to mobile advertisement, we can see many more diverse
activities than Henry’s four general business management activities (plan-
ning, scheduling, sales management, and client management).
Fourth, for business eﬀects, again, we started with two somehow
contrasting cases. One was about how a young Chinese man grew up
from an addicted teen to become a billionaire CEO, and another was
about how various security problems were found in mobile banking apps
(from a negative eﬀect). The ﬁrst case shows a surprising turnaround from
a negative eﬀect (being addicted to online games) to a positive eﬀect
(developing a great company); and the second case shows another surpris-
ing turnaround from a positive eﬀect (developing mobile banking apps) to
a negative eﬀect (ﬁnding various security holes). After that, we learned
about two empirical studies on the positive eﬀects of traveling apps and
negative eﬀects of pr-smoking apps. We ended with a comparative study
of eﬀects of diﬀerent technologies on business growth, while mobile
phones stand out as the best used and best valued means for women
entrepreneurs in India. Again, we should have a much richer and more
comprehensive understanding of the complexity of eﬀects of mobile phone
behavior in business.
In short, Figure .displays an overall picture of mobile phone behavior
in business and summarizes the essential contents discussed in this chapter.
. Complex Thinking

8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core

We might be a bit surprised to see that: () ordinary people’s intuitive
responses could be so simple and general; () scientiﬁc knowledge in this
area could be so complex and speciﬁc; () although the current literature is
extensive, it is not as extensive as it is in mobile phone behavior in
medicine; and () many new or remaining questions (e.g., diversity of
business users, emerging business technologies, business activities in vari-
ous sections, and complexity of business eﬀects) need to be addressed to
better understand mobile phones in business.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Business
8
13:09:59, subject to the Cambridge Core


Mobile Phone Behavior in Education
Outline
.
Intuitive Thinking: Tom’s Quick Responses
.
Daily Observations: From Generation Text to Sexting
.
Educational Users: Generation Text and a Retired Teacher
.
Educational Technologies: A Campus App and Pokémon Go
.
Educational Activities: Texting Champion and Sexting Ring
.
Educational Eﬀects: A Learning Aid and a Student Lawsuit
.
Empirical Studies: From Generation Text to Learning Distraction
.
Educational Users: Norwegian Youths
.
Educational Technologies: Bar Code
.
Educational Activities: Learning in a Biology Class
.
Educational Eﬀects: Learning Distraction
.
Knowledge Syntheses: From Disabled Learners to Distractive Eﬀects
.
Overview: A Relatively Small Research Area
.
Educational Users: Learners with Special Needs
.
Educational Technologies: Tablets
.
Educational Activities: Mobile Learning Trends
.
Educational eﬀects: Mobile Phone Multitasking
.
Comparative Study: Media Multitasking for Youth
.
Complex Thinking: From Tom’s Responses to Complex Behavior
.
Intuitive Thinking: Tom’s Quick Responses
Tom is a well-known Chinese language professor and a good friend of
mine. I asked him during the Christmas holiday season of : What can
people do with mobile phones in education, teaching, or learning? Can
you quickly write down the ﬁrst three to ﬁve words that come to mind?
With a festive mood, he quickly replied with the following responses:
.
Study/learn foreign languages.
.
Send homework assignments to students.

9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

.
Send links to YouTube videos for foreign language study.
.
Look up Chinese characters or words I do not know or have forgotten.
Tom’s responses oﬀer a good proﬁle of him as a mobile phone user: a
university professor who loves teaching and whose expertise is studying
Chinese. From the perspective of mobile phone behavior in education, we
can learn a few interesting things. First, from the mobile user perspective,
his responses represent a typical educational user – a professor teaching and
studying Chinese at university. Second, from the mobile technology
perspective, the educational technologies involved are general and limited,
mainly concerning mobile texting, mobile video, and mobile Internet.
Third, from the mobile activity perspective, his mobile activities focus
on learning, studying, and teaching Chinese as a foreign language. Fourth,
from the mobile eﬀect perspective, he focused on positive cognitive eﬀects
on learning, studying, and teaching. In short, his responses are quite
normal and understandable based on his own professional experience.
Thus, these responses are personalized based on his own unique experience
and limited to a speciﬁc area of his profession.
However, are these responses typical of other people’s perspectives or
everyday observations? Are they consistent with current research? How
much do we know about mobile phone behavior in education? Do we
know more about mobile phone behavior in education than we know in
other domains such as medicine or business? What needs to be studied to
promote learning, teaching, instruction, schooling, and education? This
chapter is intended to address these questions. Overall, after reading this
chapter you will be able to appreciate much more the complexity of mobile
phone behavior in education.
.
Daily Observations: From Generation Text to Sexting
.
Educational Users: Generation Text and a Retired Teacher
Generation Text.Dr. Larry Rosen is a Professor of Psychology at
California State University, Dominguez Hills. He is an expert on the
psychology of digital technologies and meanwhile is a happy dad of four
children. One of his research areas is generational diﬀerences, that is,
generational characteristics, values, and beliefs that diﬀer among and
between the Baby Boomers (born around the s to s), Generation
See www.cnn.com//OPINION///rosen.texting.communication.teens/.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Education
9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

X (born around the s to s), the Net Generation (born around the
s to s), and the iGeneration (born around the s to s,
relating to the use of iPhone, iPod, or iTunes). He himself is a Baby
Boomer and has raised four children: two Generation Xers, one Net
Generation young adult, and one iGeneration teenager. He has learned
ﬁrsthand that the generations are diﬀerent in their lifestyles, attitudes, and
use of technology. On February , , he told a story on CNN about
trying to contact his youngest daughter, Kaylee, who was years old at
that time. One day, he called her and left a voicemail and sent an e-mail,
but did not get a response. He ﬁnally texted her and told her to check his
voice message on the phone and his e-mail to her. Seconds later, he
received a text from his daughter with one single letter: “K” (i.e., OK).
He said that his daughter has been sending and receiving over ,texts
per month, i.e., per day, but this is normal and she is not unusual at
all. According to Nielsen Mobile, a leading market information company,
in , the average US teen sent and received ,messages per month.
Thus, Larry Rosen called the iGeneration of his daughter Generation Text.
His daughter is a typical mobile user in education because she is a
student and uses a mobile phone. Students in elementary school, middle
school, high school, and college are the largest group of mobile phone users
in today’s education. However, on the other hand, she belongs to Gener-
ation Text rather than the Net Generation. Thus, she is a special mobile
phone user in education because she shares several unique characteristics of
her Generation Text. The mobile phone behavior observed in this case can
be illustrated in a simple diagram:
Dr. Larry Rosen’s youngest daughter Kaylee + mobile phones !
texting rather than calling very frequently in her daily life ! exempliﬁed
characteristics of Generation Text.
A retired teacher.On June , , Miriam Morgenstern, a history
and English-as-second-language teacher in Lowell High School, decided to
retire after twenty years of teaching. One of the major reasons was that she
no longer wanted to compete with mobile phone distraction at school. She
told Boston Global, a Boston-based daily newspaper, that texting, tweeting,
and Snapchatting during class time are an incredible distraction, and make
it much more diﬃcult to teach. Many in the pro-technology camp say that
students are not distracted if their teachers are engaging, a statement that
irritates Miriam Morgenstern. One day, she brought a Holocaust survivor
See
www.bostonglobe.com/lifestyle/style////cellphones-school-teaching-tool-distraction/
OzHjXyLVVIXVAEkeYTiJ/story.html.
. Daily Observations

9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

into class to talk about World War II, and noticed that one of her students
was tweeting during the talk. She asked herself if she should have told the
Holocaust survivor in advance to be a little more engaging.
Morgenstern is an atypical mobile phone user in education. We do not
know if she owns or uses a mobile phone for personal use. By a typical
deﬁnition, if she does not have a mobile phone, she might not be called a
mobile phone user. However, she certainly got extremely frustrated by the
signiﬁcant distraction from mobile phones used by her students in the
classroom, which became one of reasons why she decided to retire. Thus,
she is indirectly and closely related to her students who are heavy mobile
phone users or Generation Mobile Phones. Thus, her negative experience
with students’ mobile phone use in classrooms made her an atypical
mobile phone user, a teacher being perhaps without a mobile phone of
her own and strongly against distractive use of mobile phones by her own
students. The unique mobile phone behavior involved in this case can be
illustrated in a simple diagram:
Miriam Morgenstern in Lowell High School + mobile phones used
by her students ! experiencing signiﬁcant distraction and extreme frus-
tration by her students’ mobile phone use in class ! ended her twenty-
year teaching career in .
.
Educational Technologies: A Campus App and Pokémon Go
A campus app.In May , Shivam Parikh and Matthew Gilliland, two
undergraduates majoring in computer science, received bachelor of science
degrees from University at Albany. They spent their ﬁnal undergraduate
semester developing and creating the university’s ﬁrst oﬃcial mobile app,
giving their alma mater a unique gift ﬁt for the digital age. Many univer-
sities have special campus apps to be used for various campus services such
as textbook purchase and sports ticket sales. Most of these apps are
developed by professional for-proﬁt vendors. The University at Albany
had long needed such an app, but budget constraints did not allow for
developing it. Mr. Parikh proposed the project to the web-services depart-
ment, where he was an intern, to develop their computer skills and at the
same time serve the campus needs because students know more about
what other students might be looking for in an app. Starting in January of
, Mr. Parikh and Mr. Gilliland, two long-time schoolmates, each
See www.chronicle.com/blogs/wiredcampus/for---students-build-oﬃcial-app-for-suny-albany/
.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Education
9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

spent about hours a week on the development of the app as their senior
project. The work was based on an open-source mobile app development
framework called PhoneGap. They also studied as many as twenty-ﬁve
apps in use at other institutions. The app cost the university only about
$. Since August of , the app is available to download for free and
it functions on both Android and Apple iOS devices. After their gradu-
ation, Mr. Parikh and Mr. Gilliland will spend an additional year at
Albany studying computer science as graduate students. In the near future,
we might see a great mobile app company co-founded by these two bright
students!
This story has at least two interesting points. () Campus apps have
become a speciﬁc type of popular mobile app. These apps are serving
various university campuses and beneﬁting university students’ lives. ()
Two undergraduate students with a very limited budget can design and
develop a successful app within one semester. This was hardly imaginable
before. Traditionally, software companies like Microsoft normally might
need multiple years to develop a commercial software program such as
Microsoft Word by using a large team of hundreds of professional com-
puter programmers. The unique mobile phone behavior involved in this
case could be illustrated in two related diagrams:
Shivam Parikh and Matthew Gilliland at University at Albany + the
open-source app development tool PhoneGap ! each spending about
hours a week developing an app as their senior project ! developed the
university’s ﬁrst oﬃcial mobile app called UAlbany App.
Members of the university community + UAlbany App ! using the
app ! beneﬁted their campus lives.
Pokémon Go.On July , , a -year-old boy was catching
Pokémon with a middle-aged man on a county courthouse lawn. Two
probation oﬃcers identiﬁed the man as Randy Zuick, a -year-old
convicted child molester and registered sex oﬀender in Indiana. One
oﬃcer ran inside and asked a security oﬃcer to take Zuick into custody.
The courthouse is a landmark in the game called a pokéstop, a checkpoint
in the game that usually has cultural or historical signiﬁcance. It has been
attracting enthusiastic players like the -year-old boy since the app’s
release. Zuick was accused of fondling a child his girlfriend was babysitting
in . He later pleaded guilty to a felony charge of child molestation.
Since then, he’s been on probation and banned from interacting with
See www.nydailynews.com/news/crime/indiana-sex-oﬀender-arrested-playing-pokemon-teen-article-
..
. Daily Observations

9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

children. Now, for his new legal violation, Zuick is being held in the
county jail until a judge determines whether to revoke his probation.
This story has at least two important messages. First, Pokémon Go is
one of the best examples of what augmented reality is. As a new technol-
ogy, augmented reality has been talked about by an increasing number of
people. However, it is not very clear to us what exactly it is and how it can
really beneﬁt us. With Pokémon Go and the Pokémon phenomenon, we
can see now that augmented reality can be an extremely useful and
interesting technology for ordinary users in general and for school students
in particular. Students can learn about landmarks in their community and
walk around more by playing Pokémon Go and visiting various pokéstops.
Thus, Pokémon Go has a huge potential to become a very useful mobile
technology in education. Second, mobile games like Pokémon Go can
have various unique positive eﬀects on school-aged children (e.g., walking
outside to get more exercise, playing it in after-school programs, using it
on museum ﬁeld trips). However, it can certainly also have various
negative eﬀects for young children. As shown in the case we discussed just
now, children might play with a registered sex oﬀender or visit unsafe
places with drug dealers, people suﬀering from mental illness, or sex
oﬀenders, making them easy targets for sex oﬀenders and criminals. Thus,
the Pokémon phenomenon also generates various new concerns such as
child safety or game addiction. From the perspective of analyzing
technology-based mobile phone behavior, the users in the study are the
-year-old boy and the -year-old sex oﬀender, the technology involved
is Pokémon Go, the activity involved is playing Pokémon Go together on a
county courthouse lawn, and the eﬀect is that the boy became a potential
victim of the registered sex oﬀender. This mobile phone behavior can be
illustrated in a simple diagram:
The -year-old boy and the -year-old sex oﬀender + Pokémon Go
! playing Pokémon Go together ! the boy became a potential victim of
the sex oﬀender.
.
Educational Activities: Texting Champion and Sexting Ring
Texting championship.On August , , Austin Wierschkem, a -
year-old, handsome high-school senior from Wisconsin, won the sixth
annual US LG National Texting Competition, with a $,prize, for
the second year in a row. Even after winning the championship last year,
See http://usatoday.usatoday.com/tech/news/story/--/texting-championship//.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Education
9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

Austin worked hard to prepare for this year’s competition and sent almost
texts a day to his friends. It was observed that, as the fastest texter in
the United States, he has abnormally fast thumbs, and while he was
texting, his thumbs were ﬂying. The preliminaries started several months
ago when the competition had about ,contestants. Of these, eleven
contestants from all over the United States qualiﬁed for the ﬁnal competi-
tion and went through three rounds of texting to test their speed (spelling
out text abbreviations while blind-folded), accuracy (copying phrases
shown on the screen as fast as possible), and dexterity (texting backwards
based on jumbled words that had to be ﬁgured out by the texters). Since
LG is the sponsor of the contest, contestants all use the same type of cell
phone – an LG Optimus Zip phone with a QWERTY keyboard. Anan
Arias, , came out to see the competition ﬁnal. As an avid texter, she
sends more than texts a day and told a reporter: “Texting is part of the
new generation.” In collaboration with this year’s event, LG teamed up
with Cartoon Network’s “Stop Bullying: Speak Up” campaign to help
raise money for anti-bullying toolkits that will be sent out to middle and
high schools across the United States. LG has been sponsoring the LG
Mobile World Cup, the worldwide texting competition since . Ha
Mok-Min, aged , and Bae Yeong-Ho, aged , won the ﬁrst competi-
tion with prizes of $,. Over million people registered to compete
in the tournament.
Sexting ring.Newtown, a small, scenic town in southwestern Con-
necticut about miles from New York City, was known in as the
site of a mass shooting. Adam Lanza, aged , killed himself after killing
his mother and twenty-six people at Sandy Hook Elementary School. After
four years, the town drew national attention again. On January , ,
three students from Newtown High School were arrested and accused of
involvement in a “sexting” ring that circulated sexually explicit images and
videos of other students. Since May , these students began transmit-
ting sexually explicit images and videos via cell phone text messaging apps
such as Snapchat, Facetime, iMessage, and KiK. These sexually explicit
materials quickly spread throughout a school of roughly ,students.
The charges were brought after a six-month investigation that included
dozens of interviews with students and parents, as well as executions of
search and seizure warrants. Nationally, there are twenty states including
Connecticut with modern sexting laws, whereas thirty states are without
modern sexting laws. However, even with all the new laws, most of the
See www.cnn.com////us/connecticut-high-school-sexting-ring/.
. Daily Observations

9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

country remains far behind the fast-moving pace of teens and technology,
including sexting.
These two stories observed in daily life show two opposite sides of a
mobile phone activity, i.e., texting among high-school students. The ﬁrst
story indicates that texting is popular among youths as Generation Text,
and some of them have an extremely high level of texting skill in speed and
accuracy, and that skill can lead to winning a national or international
competition. For educators, more educational programs should be
designed to take advantage of the popularity of texting and texting com-
petitions to develop students’ cognitive development (e.g., promoting
spelling and linguistic skills) and social development (e.g., linking with
anti-bullying campaigns). The second story illustrates that sexting, an
activity of texting sexually explicit images and videos, occurs more com-
monly among youths now and leads to serious negative consequences for
school-aged victims and oﬀenders in educational settings. Thus, further
eﬀorts are needed to develop eﬀective strategies of prevention and inter-
vention to deal with sexting rings in schools.
From the perspective of analyzing activity-based mobile phone behavior,
the mobile phone behavior involved in these two cases can be illustrated in
a simple diagram:
Austin Wierschkem from a Wisconsin high school + LG Optimus Zip
phone with a QWERTY keyboard ! practicing texting by sending
about texts a day to prepare for the texting competition ! won
the sixth annual US LG National Texting Competition with $,in
prize money for the second year in a row as the fastest American texter.
Three students from Newtown High School + cell phone text messaging
apps such as Snapchat, Facetime, iMessage, and KiK ! transmitting
sexually explicit images and videos of other students in school !
arrested for their involvement in a sexting ring.
.
Educational Eﬀects: A Learning Aid and a Student Lawsuit
A learning aid.On March , , Giselle Barkley, a contributing
author of Statesmen, a student newspaper at Stony Brook University that
has informed the university for more than ﬁfty years, wrote a story
summarizing how students are using new methods of taking notes in the
classroom. Students can be seen taking a snapshot with their phones’
cameras in large lecture halls. Such digital note-taking predominantly
See www.sbstatesman.com////students-use-new-methods-of-taking-notes-in-the-classroom/.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Education
9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

occurs in science-related courses such as biology and chemistry in addition
to social science classes. For example, students sometimes take pictures of
structure diagrams on the slides or clicker questions with iPhones to refer
back to. Others take pictures of lecture slides because the lecture slides
used in class and those posted on Blackboard may diﬀer. Some students
may take pictures especially when a lecture is fast-paced. Taking pictures of
the lecture allows students to devote more time to writing down what is
being said, while pictures account for what is actually on the slide. For
other students, digital note-taking not only allows for a better quality shot,
but also the ability to take close-up images, even from the back row of a
lecture hall. In short, though traditional note-taking practices may not die
out completely, students are increasingly using a variety of technological
devices for academic purposes.
A student lawsuit.On May , , Marsha Pechman, a US District
Judge, denied a case requesting to end the -day suspension of a high-
school student, rejecting the student’s argument that this punishment
violated his First Amendment rights. The judge upheld the suspension
of the student due to his involvement in the production and YouTube
posting of a video insulting a teacher.
This case involves two key parties: one is Gregory Requa, the high-
school senior in Kentridge High School of Seattle; and another is Joyce
Mong, Requa’s English teacher. In early , a video surfaced online,
dubbed “Mongzilla,” which criticized Joyce Mong’s personal hygiene and
classroom mess. The video was recorded using a hidden video camera
secured in Mong’s English classroom. Requa denied any involvement in
creating the video, but he did acknowledge posting a link to it on his
MySpace page, and he removed it after a local television station reported
this video. School oﬃcials punished Requa by suspending him after other
students alleged that he helped to edit and post the video. However, Requa
and his attorney argued that his involvement in the video was irrelevant,
saying that the suspension of a student for criticizing a teacher is a violation
of the First Amendment. The school district then responded that the
punishment was for the classroom disruption that occurred in the produc-
tion of the video, not for his criticism. After the court debate, Judge
Marsha Pechman ruled as follows. () One student ﬁlming another
student standing behind a teacher or a student ﬁlming the buttocks of a
teacher as she bends over in the classroom constitutes a substantial
See
www.ﬁrstamendmentcenter.org/federal-judge-upholds-student%E%%s-suspension-for-
video.
. Daily Observations

9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

disruption to the work and discipline of the school. () While it is a
legitimate and important right for students to critique the performance
and competence of their teachers, it is in the public interest to have a
classroom without inappropriate behavior. () The First Amendment does
not extend its coverage to disruptive in-class activity of this nature. ()
Students’ disruptive behavior in a classroom is not allowed, but overtly
taped videos even without the teachers’ knowledge or permission could be
allowed as evidence in the legal process.
These two stories, again taking place in real-life educational settings,
show the complexity of mobile phone behavior in education in general and
the complex impacts of mobile phone technologies on education in
particular. First, these two stories involved the same mobile phone tech-
nology – the mobile phone camera. However, the ﬁrst story tells us the
positive side of the mobile camera – a new trend for a traditional learning
method of taking notes. This use is actually very common if one attends a
conference talk or professional workshop. The second story shows the
complexity of using cameras by students, involving various serious legal
issues, including teachers’ privacy, students’ First Amendment right, rights
for schools to use these tapes for discipline or promotion processes, and
public monitoring of teachers’ behavior in the classroom. Many educators,
parents, and students might not be aware of these issues.
From the perspective of analyzing eﬀect-based mobile phone behavior,
the mobile phone behavior observed in these two cases can be illustrated in
two simple diagrams:
Students at Stony Brook University + mobile camera ! taking digital
notes during the class ! helped students’ learning in various ways.
Gregory Requa from Kentridge High School of Seattle + mobile
Camera ! ﬁlming, editing, and distributing a clip named Mongzilla about
his English teacher Joyce Mong’s teaching ! Requa was suspended for
substantial classroom disruption.
To end the discussion of the eight cases presented above, we should see
now that the mobile phone behavior in education is very complex,
especially compared to Tom’s intuitive responses. Users range from a
professor of Chinese to a teenager of Generation Text to a retired teacher;
technologies range from smartphones to special apps to hot games featur-
ing augmented reality; activities range from teaching and studying to
winning text championships and sexting at school; eﬀects encompass
positive eﬀects on teaching and studying, including a positive eﬀect on
memorization, and a negative eﬀect on privacy concerning mobile camera
use in the classroom. However, these cases are just the tip of a gigantic

Mobile Phone Behavior in Education
9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

iceberg in real life: there is even more complexity regarding mobile phone
behavior in education. We will encounter endless issues, such as addiction,
bullying, policy, disabled students, gifted education, campus gunﬁre,
distraction, and First Amendment rights. However, now it is time for us
to examine the current scientiﬁc research in mobile phone behavior in
education.
.
Empirical Studies: From Generation Text to Learning
Distraction
.
Educational Users: Norwegian Youths
The next article we will discuss is “The socio-demographics of texting: An
analysis of traﬃc data,”a string computational study of mass mobile
phone data in Norway. It has been cited ﬁfty-nine times in Google
Scholar. The authors are Rich Ling, a pioneering scholar in mobile
communication, Troels Fibæk Bertel, and Pål Roe Sundsøy. It was pub-
lished in in New Media & Society.
In the study, the authors accessed and analyzed million anonymous
text exchanges provided by Telenor, a Norwegian major telecommunica-
tions company, during the fourth quarter of in Norway. Only two
demographical variables were available in the fourth quarter of from
Telenor’s anonymized billing records: age and gender of the mobile phone
users. The dependent variable was these users’ mobile phone data traﬃc
volume (e.g., MB per month). The following are the major ﬁndings:
() Among the age groups between and years old, most of the
texting traﬃc occurs between similarly aged texting partners, particularly
between same-aged teens who send and receive almost sixty times more
texts than the average texts sent by the entire society. () For text messages
from female to male, from male to female, between females only, and
between males only, most of the texting traﬃc occurs between females
only. () percent of all texts involved only about ﬁve diﬀerent texting
partners. In other words, users send the majority of their texts to a few
individuals with strong ties.
This big data study is particularly interesting for us to understand
Generation Text, a special group of mobile phone users in education.
First, diﬀerent from various survey studies relying on self-reported
Ling, R., Bertel, T. F., and Sundsøy, P. R. (). “The socio-demographics of texting: An analysis
of traﬃc data,” New Media & Society, (): –.
. Empirical Studies

9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

subjective data, this study used mass mobile phone data and analyzed the
objective patterns of mobile phone use. It conﬁrmed that school-aged
teenagers are the dominant users of texting or we can call this age group
Generation Text. Second, diﬀerent from various studies focusing on only
one age group, this study examined almost all the age groups in Norway
from ages to in in a cross-sectional comparison. Thus, the
ﬁnding that texting use peaks during adolescence in relation to all other age
groups is particularly convincing. From the perspective of analyzing user-
based mobile phone behavior, the users in the study are Norwegian
youths, the technology involved is texting technology, the activity involved
is texting to the same age and gender, and the eﬀect is that evidence for
Generation Text is generated. It can be illustrated in a simple diagram:
Norwegian youths in + mobile texting technologies ! various
texting activities among youths with the same age and gender ! the
phenomenon of Generation Text observed.
.
Educational Technologies: Bar Code
Now let us examine and discuss another article entitled “Integrating
mobile multimedia into textbooks: D barcodes.”A barcode is a method
of coding and representing data that are read by an optical machine with
almost perfect accuracy compared to the key entry method. A one-
dimensional barcode or a linear barcode was invented and used around
the s and was read by special optical scanners. A two-dimensional or
matrix barcode became widely available after the year and represents
more data per unit area and is read by smartphone cameras. In this study,
using the D barcode in a textbook, students will scan the D barcode tag
by using a mobile camera and then automatically view relevant multimedia
materials on the mobile phone screen through a textbook website. This
article was well written and published in in Computers & Education.
The authors are Celebi Uluyol and R. Kagan Agca, from the Department
of Computer Education and Instructional Technologies at Gazi University
in Turkey. The ﬁrst author has a PhD in educational technology and has
published nearly ten articles on educational technologies, but this article is
the ﬁrst one on mobile phones. He is a junior researcher, but has published
some good work.
Uluyol, C. and Agca, R. K. (). “Integrating mobile multimedia into textbooks: D barcodes,”
Computers & Education, (): –.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Education
9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

In the experimental study, the participants were Turkish under-
graduate students majoring in instructional technologies. The two depend-
ent variables were how well students can retain and transfer their
understanding of a computer science concept – the seven-layer network
model. The one independent variable concerns four experimental condi-
tions: text only (students learn by reading text only); text plus picture
(students learn by using both text and illustrative pictures); online anima-
tion plus narration (students learn through online animation along with
narration); and text plus mobile phone (students learn by reading text and
using mobile phones that were activated by the D barcode in the
textbook). The procedure included a pre-test of previous knowledge using
ﬁve Likert-scale questions, the experiment with four conditions (studying
the instructional materials for minutes), and a post-test on both
knowledge retention by using ﬁve open-ended questions and knowledge
transfer by using three open-ended questions. The major ﬁndings included
that: () retention scores were, from the lowest to the highest, Text-only,
Text-plus-picture, Computer-based, and Text-plus-mobile phone; and ()
similarly, transfer scores were, from the lowest to the highest, Text-only,
Text-plus-picture, Computer-based, and Text-plus-mobile phone. It was
concluded that a printed textbook with camera-equipped mobile devices
and D barcodes linked to supplemental information may increase the
eﬀectiveness of learning.
What can we learn about this experimental study from the mobile
phone behavior perspective? We can now use the four-element model to
analyze this mobile phone behavior in education. First, the mobile users in
the study are normal undergraduate technology-major students in
Turkey, with relatively strong knowledge about technology. However,
other kinds of normal students (e.g., undergraduates with diﬀerent majors,
students in middle or high schools, students in diﬀerent cultures), gifted
students, and students with disabilities should be studied in the future.
Second, the mobile technologies involved are textbook D barcodes used
widely for mobile phones and mobile cameras (the technical features of the
mobile phones and cameras used in the study are not reported). These
technologies are common, but we can see how these common technical
features can be creatively used in learning complex concepts of computer
science. Third, the mobile activities are reading and studying the online
instructional materials on a computer network model. However, various
other mobile learning activities in real-life classrooms such as ﬁeld trips,
team collaborations, or afternoon programs should be further explored.
Fourth, the mobile eﬀects are positive retention and transfer based on the
. Empirical Studies

9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

strong experiment evidence. However, besides the cognitive eﬀect, other
possible physical (e.g., the small mobile screen and touch screen experi-
ence), emotional (e.g., motivation and interest), and social eﬀects (e.g.,
knowledge sharing and peer support) could be included. The following
simple diagram can represent the mobile phone behavior in education
reported in the study:
Turkish undergraduates + D barcodes and mobile camera !
learning a computer science concept ! cognitive learning eﬀectiveness
increased.
.
Educational Activities: Learning in a Biology Class
The next article is “An interactive concept map approach to supporting
mobile learning activities for natural science courses,”and examines how
a mobile learning experiment can help elementary students learn biology.
A concept map is a graphic representation of the relationship among
various concepts. The authors are three scholars – Gwo-Jen Hwang, Po-
Han Wu, and Hui-Ru Ke – from three universities in Taiwan. The article
was published in in Computers & Education.
In the study, the researchers designed a true experiment to compare
both learning achievements and learning attitudes during a mobile learning
activity using computerized concept map tools in a butterﬂy ecology
garden. Thirty elementary-school students from Taiwan were randomly
assigned to an experimental group and a control group before the experi-
ment. The entire study took place in a butterﬂy garden that had a local
wireless communication network. In this location-aware mobile learning
environment, an RFID tag was placed in each target ecology area and
students used a PDA equipped with an RFID reader to guide their eﬀorts
to ﬁnd the target ecology areas. Note that: () radio-frequency identiﬁca-
tion (RFID) is a tracking system that uses intelligent barcodes (tags) to
track items in a location by using RFID readers; () personal digital
assistant (PDA), also known as a handheld PC, is a mobile device that
functions as a personal information manager; and () the local wireless
communication network in this garden functions as a WiFi network.
The procedure consisted of the following steps: Students () learned the
basic knowledge about butterﬂy ecology; () took a pre-test of their
Hwang, G.-J., Wu, P.-H., and Ke, H.-R. (). “An interactive concept map approach to
supporting mobile learning activities for natural science courses,” Computers & Education, ():
–.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Education
9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

knowledge of butterﬂy ecology and completed a questionnaire about their
attitude toward butterﬂy ecology; () observed the four growing stages of a
butterﬂy called Idea leuconoe clara (eggs, larvas, pupas, and imago) in the
garden and developed concept maps. The experimental group received
immediate assistance via the mobile learning system, but the control group
did not have mobile learning assistance; and () took a post-test of their
knowledge of butterﬂy ecology and completed the same questionnaire
about their attitude toward butterﬂy ecology. It was found that: () the
experimental group received signiﬁcantly higher scores on their concept
maps than the control group; () the experimental group signiﬁcantly
improved their attitude scores in comparison to the control group; and
() the experimental group highly valued the mobile learning system.
We can use the basic element model to analyze this study. First, the
mobile users are thirty elementary-school students for both of the groups.
Second, the mobile technologies used in the study were as follows: ﬁrst, the
wireless network in the garden, PDA, and RFID tags and readers for both
groups to observe butterﬂies and second, the mobile learning system used
by the experimental group to develop concept maps. Third, the mobile
activities in which students participated were guided natural observation
by the two groups and assisted mobile learning with a mobile learning
system. Fourth, the mobile eﬀects were that students in the experimental
group had a positive impact on their concept map work and their attitude
toward learning natural sciences. In short, the mobile behavior in
education can be presented in the following diagram:
Thirty elementary students + local network/PDA/RFID/mobile learn-
ing system ! observing butterﬂies and developing concept maps !
positive learning outcomes in both knowledge and attitude achieved.
.
Educational Eﬀects: Learning Distraction
The next article we will discuss is entitled “No A U: The relationship
between multitasking and academic performance.”This is one of the
earliest and well-cited studies (times based on Google Scholar). The
authors are Reynol Junco and Shelia Cotten, two American scholars from
Lock Haven University and University of Alabama respectively. The article
was published in in Computers & Education, a well-established Else-
vier journal that has published a series of strong studies on mobile learning.
Junco, R. and Cotten, S. R. (). “No A U: The relationship between multitasking and
academic performance,” Computers & Education, (): –.
. Empirical Studies

9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

In this study, ,American undergraduate students from one univer-
sity completed an online survey. The measure was a multitasking ques-
tionnaire with a Likert scale designed by the authors. Major independent
variables included information and communication technology usage,
frequency of multitasking, Internet skills, high-school GPA, and parental
education. The dependent variable was students’ overall grade point
averages. Hierarchical regression analysis was used for data analysis. The
major ﬁndings were as follows: () Students reported that the frequency of
texting multitasking, Facebook multitasking, and e-mail multitasking were
the highest, whereas Instant messaging was the least often used when
multitasking. () Controlling for high-school GPA, time preparing for
class, Internet skills, and demographic variables, students’ overall college
GPAs were signiﬁcantly and negatively related to reported frequency of
Facebook multitasking and texting multitasking, but not e-mail multitask-
ing, searching multitasking, and talking multitasking. It was concluded
that the type and purpose of ICT use matters in terms of the educational
impacts of multitasking.
We can use the four-element model to analyze the mobile phone
behavior demonstrated in this study. First, the mobile users are ,
American undergraduate students at one university who frequently use
technologies (e.g., they reported sending an average of ninety-seven text
messages per day). Second, the mobile technologies featured in the study
are Facebook, texting, e-mailing, or searching technologies. Third, the
mobile activities are typically Facebook multitasking, texting multitasking,
e-mail multitasking, online searching multitasking, and phone-calling
multitasking. Fourth, the mobile eﬀects are that GPA is negatively related
to Facebook multitasking and texting multitasking, but not e-mail multi-
tasking, information searching multitasking, and talking multitasking.
Again, the following diagram summarizes this mobile phone behavior:
,American undergraduate students + mobile phones ! multitask-
ing using Facebook, texting, e-mail, searching information, and calling !
GPA decreased with Facebook multitasking and texting multitasking.
.
Knowledge Syntheses: From Disabled Learners
to Distractive Eﬀects
.
Overview: A Relatively Small Research Area
After discussing multiple speciﬁc cases and empirical studies, we will exam-
ine mobile phone behavior in education from a much broader perspective,

Mobile Phone Behavior in Education
9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

by ﬁrst overviewing the scope of the existing literature, core journals, and
major topics, and then discussing four review articles in detail.
To know the current scope of the existing literature on mobile phone
behavior in education, again, let us do an initial literature search. PsycINFO
and ERIC were chosen as two primary databases related to education.
Second, the keywords cellular phones and mobile devices were entered, then
the keywords education, teaching, learning, and instruction to search the
literature. Third, over journal articles were identiﬁed by combining
the search results of cellular phones/mobile devices and education/learning/
teaching/instruction. Finally, a search among the literature review articles
found six published reviews. Compared with the existing literature on
mobile phone behavior in medicine or business, we can see that the scope
of the literature on mobile phone behavior in education is much smaller.
Major journals in this area include: () Education & Computers (publish-
ing the majority of and best studies in this area); () Computers in Human
Behavior (publishing a wide variety of topics in this area); () the Inter-
national Journal of Mobile and Blended Learning (publishing studies on
e-learning and m-learning); () the Journal of Computing Education Research
(starting to publish relevant articles in recent years); () the Journal of
Assistive Education (publishing articles on learners with disabilities); () the
British Journal of Educational Technology (publishing technology-oriented
articles); () the Australasian Journal of Educational Technology (publishing
a few but strong articles in the area); and () IEEE Transactions (sometimes
publishing emerging mobile phone technologies related to education).
Topics in mobile phone behavior in education are quite broad. The
Encyclopedia of Mobile Phone Behavior has a special section with over forty
chapters examining mobile phone behavior in education. As shown in
Table ., various topics concern mobile users in education, mobile
technologies in education, mobile phone activities in education, and
mobile eﬀects in education. Among them, nearly twenty chapters mainly
focus on mobile phone activities in education, such as learning, gaming,
texting, assessing, and bullying.
.
Educational Users: Learners with Special Needs
The ﬁrst review we will discuss is “The case for mobile devices as assistive
learning technologies: A literature review on assistive technologies.”The
McKnight, L. (). “The case for mobile devices as assistive learning technologies: A literature
review,” International Journal of Mobile Human Computer Interaction, (): –.
. Knowledge Syntheses

9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

Table .The Encyclopedia Chapters on Mobile Phone Behavior in Education
Elements
Chapter Title
Users
Children, risks and the mobile internet
Users
Exploring the use of mobile devices to support teacher education
Users
Deaf adolescents’ textisms
Users
Generation Y and mobile marketing in India
Users
Keitai and Japanese adolescents
Users
Mobile phone use by middle school students
Users
Mobile phone: Repurposed assistive technology for individuals withdisabilities
Users
The use of mobile phone technology to support people with Autism
Spectrum Disorders (ASD)
Users
Use of mobile phones by individuals with visual impairments
Technology
Educational potentials of SMS technology
Technology
Mobile games
Technology
Mobile phones and libraries/information centres
Technology
Texting: Its uses, misuses and eﬀects
Technology
Digital mobile games in education
Activity
Adolescent text messaging
Activity
Teenage sexting: Sexual expression meets mobile technology
Activity
Using smartphones in the college classroom
Activity
Harnessing mobile technology for student assessment
Activity
Microlearning and mobile learning
Activity
Mobile games and learning
Activity
Mobile learning
Activity
Mobile literacies: Learning in the mobile age
Activity
Mobile phone multitasking and learning
Activity
Mobile phone use and children’s literacy learning
Activity
Mobile seamless learning from the perspective of self-regulated learning
Activity
Mobile technology-enhanced learning
Activity
Science learning games for mobile platforms
Activity
The use of mobile phones in K-education
Activity
Using mobile phones for educational assessment
Activity
Sex, cyberbullying and the mobile phone
Activity
Textism use and language ability in children
Eﬀect
Mobile phone etiquette
Eﬀect
Use of mobile phones to help prevent child maltreatment
Eﬀect
The impact of mobile phones on teenagers’ socialization and emancipation
Eﬀect
Connecting ’round the clock: Mobile phones and adolescents’ experiences of
intimacy
Eﬀect
mHealth in maternal, newborn, and child health programs around the world
Eﬀect
Mobile phone addiction
Eﬀect
Mobile phone behavior in the college classroom: Eﬀects on student learning
and implications for students and teachers
Eﬀect
Mobile technology and cyberbullying
Eﬀect
Mobile technology and social identity
Eﬀect
Nomophobia
Eﬀect
Students hurting students: Cyberbullying as a mobile phone behavior

Mobile Phone Behavior in Education
9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

author is Lorna McKnight, from the University of Bolton in the United
Kingdom. She has published multiple articles on mobile phone design for
children and assistive learning technologies. The article was published in
in the International Journal of Mobile Human Computer Interaction, a
relatively new journal by IGI Global in publication since .
This review consists of three major sections: background overview, use
of mobile device as assistive learning technologies, and limitations of
mobile technologies. The major results of the review include the following:
() The author identiﬁed over journal articles and conference papers
based on database searches, reference follow-up, journal and conference
proceeding search, and expert consultation. The goal was to examine if
mobile technologies can be suitable assistive technologies to support
students with learning diﬃculties at diﬀerent stages of education. ()
The review discusses three important concepts: assistive technologies (the
broadest, any technology that supports people with disabilities in all
aspects of life), assistive learning technologies (focusing on technologies
that can support learners with diverse needs), and mobile-phone-based
assistive learning technologies (the narrowest, focusing on mobile or
portable technologies that can support learners with special needs). ()
Learners with special needs can beneﬁt from six aspects of mobile phone
technologies, namely: various mobile apps (e.g., speech-to-text, text-to-
speech, mind maps, audio notetaking), portable features (e.g., autistic
teenagers can carry a mobile phone and press a “panic button” to call for
social support wherever they feel most anxious), mobile sensors (e.g.,
sensors of face recognition can help autistic students to sense other people’s
emotions), touch screens (e.g., encouraging multiple autistic students to
work together by touching the screen), classroom learning tools (e.g.,
showing activities both on mobile phones and on the large classroom
screen to help students organize their activities), and regular mobile phones
(e.g., using mainstream phones that are more aﬀordable and more socially
attractive to students with visual impairments). () Several limitations
exist. For instance, assistive tools on mobile phones (e.g., voice recognition
apps such as Dragon Dictate, Google Voice typing, and Apple’s Siri)
demand more battery power; students with dyslexia need more customized
text format functions; students with cerebral palsy cannot control one
ﬁnger to touch a small menu item; and students with visual impairments
need screen readers instead of touch screens.
From the mobile phone user perspective, this review shows that stu-
dents with various disabilities are a special group of mobile users in
educational settings; mobile phones can provide various physical,
. Knowledge Syntheses

9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

cognitive, and social assistance; and using mobile phones to best serve the
diverse needs of these students is still a large challenge.
.
Educational Technologies: Tablets
The review article we will discuss next is entitled “Tablet use in schools:
A critical review of the evidence for learning outcomes,”a systematic
review of school learning eﬀects and contributing factors of tablets. In this
review, tablets (e.g., iPads) are considered to be a type of mobile technol-
ogy. The three authors are all aﬃliated with the Faculty of Education at the
University of Cambridge. Bjoern Haßler is currently a research fellow in
the Centre for Commonwealth Education and has published several
articles speciﬁcally focusing on tablet use in education. Louis Major is a
research associate studying the use of digital technology for education. Sara
Hennessy is a reader (equivalent to full professor in the United States) in
Teacher Development and Pedagogical Innovation and has published
extensively on educational uses of digital technology. The review article
was published in in the Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, a well-
established specialty journal by Wiley in publication since , with an
impact factor of .in .
In this review, the authors used manual and automated searches and
identiﬁed twenty-three studies with good methodological quality and
content relevance. The major ﬁndings include: () sixteen studies reported
positive learning outcomes, that tablet use supports learning in science,
social studies, and mathematics; ﬁve reported no diﬀerence in learning
outcomes for literacy, reading, math, and science; and two reported
negative outcomes in reading comprehension and collaboration in creativ-
ity and writing; and () factors contributing to learning outcomes included
hardware aﬀordance (high usability and good integration, easy customiza-
tion and good personalization, good touch screen use, portability), eﬀect-
ive teaching implementation, good content and instruction design, and
learning interaction.
This review has been cited only ﬁve times according to Google Scholar as
of August , not yet a highly cited review. A good review will normally
be widely cited, but it is too early to tell since it was just recently published
online in and in hard copy a few months ago in the second issue of the
journal in . However, from the perspective of technology-based mobile
Haßler, B., Major, L., and Hennessy, S. (). “Tablet use in schools: A critical review of the
evidence for learning outcomes,” Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, (): –.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Education
9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

phone behavior in education, it is particularly unique and insightful for us to
examine for a few reasons. First, the mobile users were all elementary- or
middle-school students rather than college students, the population dis-
cussed most frequently in the literature. Second, the review focused on
tablets, one mobile technology typically welcomed in schools, compared
with personal mobile phones, the use of which in classrooms has been
debated for years. It discussed extensively hardware aﬀordance issues,
including usability integration, customization and personalization, touch
screen use, and portability. Third, it analyzed pedagogical factors within the
mobile learning activities, including teaching implementation, content and
instruction design, and learning interaction. Fourth, it presents a trustable
synthesis on learning eﬀects: (a) It ﬁrst explicitly excluded motivation
studies, which is a thoughtful decision to focus more on cognitive achieve-
ments. Note that motivational outcomes (or emotional outcomes) and
social outcomes (e.g., collaborative learning) are an inherently important
part of learning outcomes based on modern learning sciences and should be
included in a comprehensive assessment of learning outcomes. (b) It
assessed the quality of studies and rated them in terms of methodological
rigor and content relevance before the review. This rigorous and auditable
approach has improved the review quality because low quality studies will
bring biases into the knowledge synthesis process and should not be
included in the review. (c) It presents a general conclusion that tablets have
mixed impacts on cognitive and social achievement.
.
Educational Activities: Mobile Learning Trends
Generally speaking, published qualitative literature reviews are a good
indicator of productive research in a given area. Published meta-analyses
and quantitative literature reviews are a particularly important indicator of
highly productive empirical research in a given area. Fortunately, in the
area of mobile phone behavior in education, several meta-analyses have
been published.Among them is “Review of trends from mobile learning
studies: A meta-analysis.”It was cited times according to Google
Scholar. The authors are a group of researchers in information manage-
ment from ﬁve universities in Taiwan: Wen-Hsiung Wu, Yen-Chun Jim
Alrasheedi, M. and Capretz, L. F. (, August). “A meta-analysis of critical success factors
aﬀecting mobile learning,” in IEEE International Conference on Teaching, Assessment and Learning
for Engineering: TALE , pp. –.
Wu, W.-H., Wu, Y.-C. J., Chen, C.-Y. et al. (). “Review of trends from mobile learning
studies: A meta-analysis,” Computers & Education, (): –.
. Knowledge Syntheses

9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

Wu, Chun-Yu Chen, Hao-Yun Kao, Che-Hung Lin, and Sih-Han
Huang. It was published in in Computers & Education.
In this review, built on two published reviews (one on articles
published between and ; another on articles published
between and ), the author searched over ten education-based
databases and seven core journals and identiﬁed articles on mobile
learning published between and . Major ﬁndings included the
following: () The articles focused on four goals: assessing eﬀectiveness of
mobile learning programs (percent), presenting new mobile learning
system designs (percent), examining aﬀective aspects (percent), and
evaluating learners’ characteristics (percent). () Five types of methods
were most often used: surveys, experiments, descriptive, observation, and
case studies. () articles (percent) reported positive learning out-
comes, sixteen (percent) did not report outcomes, six (percent)
reported neutral outcomes, and only one (.percent) reported negative
outcomes. () Mobile devices studied in the existing literature included
mobile phones (sixty-nine articles), PDAs (sixty-four articles), and iPods
(seven articles).
The title of the review indicates that it is a meta-analysis. Clearly this is an
error because no eﬀect size estimation has been used in the review. Despite
this error, we can still learn several important trends of activity-based mobile
phone behavior in education from this detailed review. First, the majority of
mobile users in the reviewed studies were college students (percent), and
other groups were elementary students (percent), middle- and high-
school students (percent), and students with disabilities (only .per-
cent). The content of mobile learning activities mainly involved languages
(thirty articles), computer sciences (twenty-three articles), environmental
studies (eighteen articles), and health sciences (eighteen articles). Second,
mobile phones and PDAs were the most often studied technologies. Third,
the main mobile activities involved were eﬀectiveness assessment and new
mobile learning system implementation for learning. Fourth, the majority
of the studies presented positive learning outcomes.
.
Educational Eﬀects: Mobile Phone Multitasking
The last review article we will discuss is “Does multitasking with mobile
phones aﬀect learning? A review.”The ﬁrst author, Quan Chen, is one of
Chen, Q. and Yan, Z. (). “Does multitasking with mobile phones aﬀect learning? A review,”
Computers in Human Behavior, : –.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Education
9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

my doctoral students at University at Albany. She has published multiple
articles on mobile phone multitasking. The article was published in
in Computers in Human Behavior.
In the review, Quan and I identiﬁed empirical articles explicitly
examining the eﬀects of mobile phone use while learning. Extending the
existing two reviews,this review focused on three speciﬁc issues in
synthesizing distractive eﬀects of mobile phone multitasking: sources of
distraction (where do distractions come from?), targets of distraction (what
activities does distraction impact?), and subjects of distraction (who is
more easily distracted?). The review indicated that: () distraction sources
include rings of mobile phones, texting, and various information and
communication technologies (e.g., Facebook use); () distraction targets
mainly include various dimensions of reading and attention (e.g., reading
speed or reading comprehension); and () distraction subjects include
diverse individuals with main characteristics such as personality, gender,
culture, and motives. The review also discussed four theories that have
been used to explain why mobile phone multitasking impairs learning:
multimedia learning theory, continuous partial attention theory, multi-
tasking continuum theory, and attention blink theory.
This review can help us better understand the multitasking eﬀect of
mobile learning. First, the multitasking eﬀect is related to diﬀerent kinds
of mobile phone users (e.g., personality plays an important role). Second,
the multitasking eﬀect is related to diﬀerent kinds of mobile phone
technology (e.g., texting vs. calling). Third, the multitasking eﬀect is
related to diﬀerent kinds of mobile phone activities (e.g., reading or
focusing). Lastly, the multitasking eﬀect is related to diﬀerent kinds of
mobile phone eﬀects (e.g., negative vs. positive ones).
.
Comparative Study: Media Multitasking for Youth
In the previous sections, we discussed an empirical study and a review
article on distracting eﬀects of mobile phone use on learning. We can see
not only the empirical evidence (decreasing GPA among nearly ,
undergraduates) and synthesized evidence (empirical articles) of
distracting eﬀects of mobile phone use, but also the complexity of this
Levine, L. E., Waite, B. M., and Bowman, L. L. (). “Mobile media use, multitasking and
distractibility,” International Journal of Cyber Behavior, Psychology and Learning, (): –; and
Carrillo, R. and Subrahmanyam, K. (). “Mobile phone multitasking and learning,” in Z. Yan
(ed.), Encyclopedia of Mobile Phone Behavior. Hershey, PA: IGI Global, pp. –.
. Comparative Study

9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

issue (e.g., this eﬀect depends on diﬀerent sources, targets, and users). Are
distracting eﬀects unique to mobile phones? Do other technologies also
cause distractive eﬀects on learning? Let us now discuss a comparative
study on distraction, entitled “The consequences of media multitasking
for youth: A review.”It is a review article comparing multitasking eﬀects
of diﬀerent media on young users. As of July , it has been cited only
ﬁve times in Google Scholar and two times in Web of Science. However,
this is largely because of its publication date (December ) rather than
its quality. It is a very well-written review and will become well-cited in
due course. The authors are a research group from the University of
Amsterdam: Winneke van der Schuur, Susanne Baumgartner, Sindy
Sumter, and Patti Valkenburg. The last author, Patti Valkenburg, is an
internationally renowned expert in communication and has published
multiple high-quality reviews. The review was published in Computers in
Human Behavior.
The review consists of three major sections, reviewing the existing
literature on eﬀects of media multitasking among youth on three aspects:
cognitive control, academic performance, and socioemotional functioning.
The major results include the following: () Media multitasking generally
consists of simultaneous media multitasking or academic media multitask-
ing. The multiple media reviewed by the authors include televisions, cell
phones, social network sites, Facebook, text messaging, laptops, and
instant messaging. () Since , a total of ﬁfty-six highly relevant
empirical studies on media multitasking have been published. To synthe-
size this existing literature, this review focused on examining various mixed
ﬁndings of media multitasking eﬀects on young populations. () About
percent of youth use multiple media simultaneously or use media while
studying. () For cognitive control, only nine studies partially support the
negative eﬀects of media multitasking on cognitive control (an ability to
select and maintain concentration). More studies support the idea that
multitasking leads to attention splitting, where some studies support the
idea that multitasking leads to attention improvement. () For academic
performance, nearly forty-ﬁve studies indicate that multitasking while
studying is negatively related to academic performance, but the eﬀect size
is small or moderate. () Several studies found that the eﬀect of media
multitasking on academic performance was dependent on the speciﬁc type
van der Schuur, W. A., Baumgartner, S. E., Sumter, S. R., and Valkenburg, P. M. (). “The
consequences of media multitasking for youth: A review,” Computers in Human Behavior, :
–.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Education
9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

of media used during academic activities. In particular, using Facebook
during academic activities was related to lower GPA and test scores. () For
socioemotional functioning, four studies indicate that media multitasking
is negatively related to emotion functioning and sleeping, but not to social
functioning.
This comparative review shows the complexity of the eﬀects of media
multitasking. First, diﬀerent conceptualizations, designs, and measure-
ments lead to mixed ﬁndings. Second, while mobile phones are one of
the modern media or modern technologies, mobile phone multitasking is
not the dominant focus of the reviewed existing studies before .
However, one complex issue is that modern mobile phones are a technol-
ogy integrating multiple media (e.g., mobile television, mobile Internet)
that has been used for multiple functions, including social networking,
Facebook checking, text messaging, and instant messaging. This is a special
challenge for empirical, theoretical, and methodological studies comparing
diﬀerent media or technologies.
.
Complex Thinking: From Tom’s Responses
to Complex Behavior
Recall that at the beginning of this chapter we discussed Tom’s quick
responses about mobile phone behavior in education. For mobile phone
users, he focused on himself as a university professor; for mobile
technologies, he considered mobile texting, mobile video, and mobile
Internet; for mobile activities, he talked about learning, studying, and
teaching Chinese; and for mobile eﬀects, he focused on positive cognitive
eﬀects on learning, studying, and teaching. After reading this chapter, we
can now see that mobile phone behavior in education is much deeper,
much broader, and much more complex than Tom’s intuitive thinking.
We can use Figure .to summarize the complexity of mobile phone
behavior in education.
First, for educational users, we discussed: () a girl of Generation Text as
a typical user, and she sends ,texts per month – Generation Text are
the new generation of students and the new generation of mobile phone
users; () a case of a teacher as an atypical mobile user, who decided to
retire as she no longer wanted to deal with mobile phone distraction; () a
study of Norwegian youths, who texted very often, most often to their
close circle with the same age and same gender; and () a review on learners
with special needs as a special group of users, who beneﬁt from mobile
phones and at the same time challenge the design of mobile phones.
. Complex Thinking

9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

Mobile phone users in education are diverse and complex rather than just
concerning regular teachers.
Second, for educational technologies, we discussed: () a case of a
campus app that was developed by two undergraduate students, showing
that a mobile app can beneﬁt the entire university campus; () a case of a
sex oﬀender who played Pokémon Go with a boy, indicating that Poké-
mon Go as a mobile game can be used to hurt innocent teenagers; () a
study of using bar codes to help students understand a concept of com-
puter science; and () a review on how students used tablets with mixed
eﬀects on their cognitive achievement. Mobile phone technologies in
education are diverse and complex rather than just concerning texting or
going online.
Third, for educational activities, we discussed: () a high-school student
who won the national texting championship in two consecutive years,
engaging in an extraordinary texting activity; () three high-school stu-
dents involved in a sexting ring, engaging in an illegal texting activity; () a
study of a biology class that used a local mobile network to develop an
eﬀective learning process; and () a review on diverse users, contents,
technologies, and outcomes of mobile learning. Mobile phone activities
in education are diverse and complex rather than just being about language
learning and teaching.
Lastly, for educational eﬀects, we discussed: () a case of how university
students beneﬁted from mobile phone use in taking digital notes during
class; () a case of how a student disturbed his English class by videotaping
his teacher and posting it online, ending up in a highly visible lawsuit; () a
Mobile Phone Users 
in Education
2.1 Generation Text 
2.1 A Retired Teacher 
3.1 Norwegian Youths 
4.2 Learners with Special Needs 
Mobile Phone Effects
in Education
2.4 A Learning Aid 
2.4 A Student Lawsuit  
3.4 Learning Distraction
4.5 Mobile Phone Multitasking
5. Media Multitasking for Youth
Mobile Phone Activities
in Education
2.3 Texting Champion
2.3 Sexting Ring
3.3 Learning in a Biology Class  
4.4 Mobile Learning Trends
Mobile Phone Technologies 
in Education
2.2 A Campus App
2.2 Pokémon Go
3.2 Bar Code
4.3 Tablets 
Figure .
A Summary Diagram of Mobile Phone Behavior in Education

Mobile Phone Behavior in Education
9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

study of nearly ,college students who reported using mobile phones
during their study and negatively impacted their grades; () a review on the
distracting eﬀects of mobile phone multitasking; and () a comparison of
media multitasking, indicating media multitasking actually impacts stu-
dents’ cognitive control, academic achievement, and socioemotional func-
tions quite diﬀerently. Mobile phone eﬀects in education are diverse and
complex rather than just being either positive or negative.
. Complex Thinking

9
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core


Mobile Phone Behavior in Daily Life
Outline
.
Intuitive Thinking: Cindy’s Quick Responses
.
Daily Observations: From a Refugee Bringing a Mobile Phone to a Husband
Witnessing the Stabbing of His Wife
.
Everyday Users: Iqbal as an Afghanistan Refugee
.
Everyday Users: A Coloradan Girl
.
Everyday Technologies: GPS Helped Police to Find Murderers
.
Everyday Technologies: WomanLog
.
Everyday Activities: Amanda Kloehr Drove to See Her Friend in Virginia
.
Everyday Activities: Walking in the Cell Phone Lane in DC
.
Everyday Eﬀects: Mobile Phone Saved Garett Kolsun
.
Everyday Eﬀects: Witnessing the Stabbing of His Wife
.
Empirical Studies: From Australian Twins to Reduced Loneliness
.
Everyday Users: Australian Twins
.
Everyday Users: Low-Income Mothers
.
Everyday Technologies: Brain–Computer Interface
.
Everyday Activities: Calling While Driving Before Car Crashes
.
Everyday Activities: Planning Everyday Family Activities
.
Everyday Activities: Dining in Restaurants
.
Everyday Eﬀects: The Negative Spillover Eﬀect
.
Everyday Eﬀects: Reduced Loneliness in Public Spaces
.
Knowledge Syntheses: From Older Users to Calling While Driving
.
Overview: A Boundless Research Area
.
Everyday Users: Older Users
.
Everyday Activities: Calling While Driving
.
Comparative Analyses: Family Functioning
.
Complex Thinking: A Common Topic but a Complex Behavior

terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

.
Intuitive Thinking: Cindy’s Quick Responses
One day, I asked Cindy, a proud mother of four children, what mobile
phones can be used for in daily life for individuals and families. I told her
to be quick and simple, and to say whatever came to mind. Her quick
responses are as follows: "As a mother of four, mobile phones () provide
me with the security that my kids can always reach me if they need me, ()
provide me with the security that if my son’s car breaks down that he will
have a phone to call for help, () make me feel that I am closer to my kids
even when I am at work because I know that they can easily call if they
need something, and () keep us connected in our crazy lives of sports,
activities, work and school. Overall, I think mobile phones provide me
with a sense of connection and security in that my kids can always contact
me no matter where I am or where they are. Nothing else really matters to
me in regards to the mobile phone. Although I would probably miss it if
I couldn’t use it for other things!”
What a great mom caring so much about her children! What can we
learn about mobile phone behavior in daily life from Cindy’s quick
responses? It is not diﬃcult to see at least four features. First, her know-
ledge about mobile phone uses in daily life was directly based on her
personal knowledge of her personal experience. It is very concrete and very
speciﬁc. Second, her responses focused on her family, especially her
children. Clearly, she considers and uses her mobile phone as a basic tool
for family communication. Third, her responses focused on security for
her children anywhere and anytime. Fourth, they focused on connections
to and coordination with her children. Furthermore, using the four-
element model, we can see more speciﬁcally that in her case, mobile phone
users were mainly her four kids and her as a mother, her mobile phone
technologies involved merely the basic calling feature, her mobile phone
activities focused on family communication, and her mobile phone eﬀects
were about security and connections among her family. Her experiences of
mobile phone behavior in daily life can be illustrated in the following
simple diagram:
Cindy and her children + calling feature ! making calls between
themselves ! security and connections were achieved in her family.
Using Cindy’s responses as the baseline, this chapter will further discuss
and analyze a few daily observations, a few research studies, a few literature
reviews, and a few comparative studies with the hope of developing a good
knowledge of mobile phone behavior in daily life and appreciating the
dynamics and complexity of mobile phone behavior in daily life. Our goal
. Intuitive Thinking: Cindy’s Quick Responses

terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

is to expand and deepen our understanding of the complexity of the
mobile phone behaviors in daily life and to motivate further eﬀective
analyses and research eﬀorts.
Sometimes it is not easy to distinguish mobile phone behavior in daily
life from that of other contexts such as medicine, business, or education.
For instance, K-mobile phone learning can be considered either in the
daily context because school is a regular daily event or in the education
context because K-is part of the education system. Another example
relates to mobile phone payment, which is a business topic, but also a daily
topic, because many people use mobile phones for payment on a regular
basis. Mental health is a medicine topic because it is a branch of medicine
in general and a daily topic because our modern daily life is often stressful.
To clarify this potential ambiguity and for the sake of simplicity and
convenience, we will look at the four aspects of mobile phone behavior:
user, technology, activity, and eﬀect. If a behavior concerns a regular rather
than a professional user, a regular rather than a professional technology, a
regular activity rather than a professional activity, or a regular eﬀect rather
than a professional eﬀect, then we will consider the behavior in a daily
context rather than in a professional context.
.
Daily Observations: From a Refugee Bringing a Mobile Phone
to a Husband Witnessing the Stabbing of His Wife
.
Everyday Users: Iqbal as an Afghanistan Refugee
In September of , thousands of refugees were heading to Europe.
Among them, Iqbal was a -year-old refugee teenage boy from Afghani-
stan.Iqbal had travelled hundreds of miles to escape his home, the
warring province of Kunduz in northern Afghanistan. He ﬂed east to Iran,
and then travelled on foot through Turkey and by boat to Lesbos. He was
unsure of where to go next. In his small brown backpack, he packed a few
items to take with him. Among them were one pair of pants, one tissue,
one pair of shoes, a pair of socks, a roll of bandages, US dollars,
Turkish lira, one smartphone, one extra old phone, and SIM cards
used in Afghanistan, Iran, and Turkey. Carrying a mobile phone with
them as a vital tool for survival or even the only lifeline is extremely
common among refugees from Afghanistan and Syria. They use their
See http://metro.co.uk////these-are-the-things-refugees-pack-when-ﬂeeing-for-their-lives-
/.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Daily Life
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

mobile phones for various purposes, such as contacting or reconnecting
with relatives and friends, taking selﬁes and using Instagram to document
their travels, sharing life-or-death information, using GPS to ﬁnd their way
safely through Europe, alerting Greek coastguards to the sinking of their
boat, searching online to reduce dangers of traﬃcking, and getting help
from non-proﬁt organizations such as Welcome to Europe to get practical
and legal advice to ﬁnd temporary shelter or a new home. This mobile
phone behavior can be illustrated in a simple diagram, with the bold text
highlighting the focus:
Afghanistan refugee Iqbal + smartphone/old phone/sim cards ! using
the phones during his escape ! Iqbal escaped from his warring hometown
and arrived in Turkey as a refugee.
.
Everyday Users: A Coloradan Girl
On March , , a -year-old Coloradan girl was arrested by the
police in Boulder County for attempting to poison her mother.The girl,
whose name was not released for reasons of protection, had an iPhone, but
it was taken away by her mother because she was using it too much. The
girl was extremely upset and decided to put bleach into her mom’s drink
twice in a week. Her mom eventually found out about the girl’s plan to kill
her. The girl was taken to a juvenile detention facility where she is being
held pending the ﬁling of charges:
A -year-old Coloradan girl + iPhone ! overuse of her phone results
in her mom taking it away ! she tried to poison her mom twice and was
arrested and taken to a juvenile detention facility.
These two cases based on daily observations involved two very diﬀerent
teenage mobile phone users. They both had similar smartphones. How-
ever, due to completely diﬀerent life situations, their mobile activities and
mobile eﬀects were completely diﬀerent. Iqbal used his phone to survive as
a refugee and the Coloradan girl overused her phone, resulting in it being
conﬁscated by her mom. Consequently, Iqbal fortunately escaped from his
home country, but the Coloradan girl ended up in a juvenile detention
facility after attempting to poison her mother. We can see that mobile
phone users in daily life can be very diﬀerent – a refugee trying to escape a
war-torn province or a pre-teen girl poisoning her mom – leading to
complex mobile phone behavior.
See www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-colorado-poison-idUSKBNMGKQ.
. Daily Observations

terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

.
Everyday Technologies: GPS Helped Police to Find Murderers
In the morning of April , , two electrical engineering graduate
students at the University of Southern California, Ming Qu and Ying Wu,
both years old, were shot dead in their parked car near the campus.
Afterward, the Los Angeles Police Department found that someone used
Wu’s missing iPhone to make calls. Using the GPS in Wu’s iPhone, the
police were able to track down its whereabouts and found one suspect
named Bryan Barnes. The police found further evidence that Barnes
allegedly talked to another suspect named Javier Bolden about this killing.
On February , , Barnes and Bolden, both years old, pleaded
guilty to the murder of the two students after their botched robbery
attempt. The mobile phone behavior diagram is as follows:
LAPD + GPS in a stolen iPhone ! ﬁnding suspects and collecting
criminal evidence ! two murderers were arrested and pleaded guilty to
the murder.
.
Everyday Technologies: WomanLog
On July , , a local court in Taiwan found a married man guilty of
having an aﬀair with a young woman, ruling that the man should be jailed
for months and pay the young woman’s family ,New Taiwan
Yuan.The key evidence that the court collected and used against the man
came from the young woman’s mobile phone. On this phone, the woman
had a special mobile application called WomanLog, a tool to keep track of
her menstrual and fertility calendar, but she also recorded each time they
slept together. The mobile phone behavior diagram is as follows:
A young Taiwanese woman + WomanLog on her mobile phone !
recording the details of her aﬀair with a married man ! the court found
the man guilty.
These two cases discussed above show the complexity of technology-
based mobile phone behavior in daily life. For the ﬁrst case, Bryan Barnes
and Javier Bolden were two special mobile phone users because they stole
an iPhone from two students. However, it was the GPS signals from the
stolen iPhone that the LAPD used to identify the suspects and gather the
criminal evidence, and the two murderers were eventually found guilty.
See http://articles.latimes.com//feb//local/la-me-usc-killings-conviction-.
See http://fashion.taiwan.cn/styleshow//t_.htm.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Daily Life
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

On a technical note, in general, GPS (Global Positioning System) is run
by the US military, but is commonly used by civilians in their everyday
lives. In particular, in order to make GPS on our cell phones work, our
phones need to have a regular GPS receiver and an active cell phone
service. We typically turn on the GPS receiver in our cell phones, then
our GPS receiver starts communicating with our cell phone service, and
ﬁnally the GPS satellite sends back our location information. Because it
uses up some cellular bandwidth, by default, most cell phone companies
turn oﬀthe GPS in the phone except for emergency calls unless we
manually turn it on, but a company can always automatically record our
locations without giving us notice and this is one of reasons why some
people are seriously concerned about privacy and security.
For the second case, the young woman as the regular mobile phone user
used the app WomanLog to record her aﬀair with a married man. It is
these records on WomanLog that became the legal evidence for the court
to make a ruling. Note that, as one of millions of apps used in daily life,
WomanLog has multiple user interface languages and dozens of speciﬁc
features such as keeping track of the menstrual cycle, ovulation and fertility
forecast, basal body temperature chart, weight tracking, mood, pregnancy
mode, and cervical mucus monitoring. All the main functions are access-
ible via the calendar. Tapping a ﬁnger on the calendar date, you can add
and edit the settings for each day. Menstruation, ovulation, and fertility
day forecast have to be understood as theoretical predictions which may
not coincide with the actual menstruation, ovulation and fertility days.
.
Everyday Activities: Amanda Kloehr Drove to See Her Friend in
Virginia
On June , , Amanda Kloehr, then a college student of years old,
drove from McGuire Air Force Base in New Jersey to Newport News in
Virginia to visit a friend.She was on Route , enjoying the summer
breeze from the North Atlantic Ocean, and approaching her trip destin-
ation. She was not speeding, she had not been drinking or taking drugs,
and she was wearing her seatbelt. She was doing nothing terribly wrong.
All she was doing, then, was driving while just brieﬂy checking her text
messages or her GPS on her cell phone, but in the few seconds she was
distracted, she did not see a tractor-trailer in the left lane waiting to make a
left turn. Immediately, her car slammed into the back of the tractor-trailer,
See www.pennlive.com/midstate/index.ssf///distracted_driving_cost_her_an.html.
. Daily Observations

terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

slid underneath the truck, and was nearly crushed ﬂat. Her leg was broken.
Her face hit a forklift in the back of the truck-trailer and the right side of
her face was basically gone. Blood was everywhere.
Fortunately, she survived this horriﬁc car accident. It took her more
than a year to learn to walk again. She lost her right eye and had more than
twenty surgeries to rebuild her smashed face. To share this real experience
and take her serious message to other young drivers, she has been giving
talks about the dangers of distracted driving in many schools and colleges
and developed a special website called AmandaReconstructed.com. She
said: “I want to tell as any people as I can so I can save as many lives as
possible.”
.
Everyday Activities: Walking in the Cell Phone Lane in DC
On July , , near the National Geographic Museum of Washington
DC, a sidewalk on the th Street Northwest was divided into two lanes.
One was labeled No Cellphones, and another was labeled Cellphones: Walk
in This Lane at Your Own Risk, designating this lane for those who walk
while using cell phones. National Geographic Channel – the National
Geographic Society’s American television channel – was making a TV
series. With the city’s permission, the TV series team marked the cell
phone lane to see how people would react. Interestingly enough, many
pedestrians stopped and smiled when seeing the cell phone lane sign. They
then brought out their mobile phones and took a picture of the lane as a
fun photo-souvenir.
This kind of social experiment of pedestrian management has also been
seen in New York City and Philadelphia in the United States and a few
cities in the world (e.g., Chongqing in China and Antwerp in Belgium).
Given that minor and major cell phone walking accidents have rapidly
increased, people are concerned about pedestrian safety. The designated
cell phone lane is one of the current strategies to deal with the pedestrian
safety issue.
The two cases we have just discussed concern activity-based mobile
phone behavior that has been very often observed in our everyday lives.
More speciﬁcally, these two cases show a unique and complex issue in
studying activity-based mobile phone behavior: mobile phone multitasking
activities – That is, people use mobile phones while simultaneously
engaging in various other activities (e.g., reading while texting, juggling
See www.yahoo.com/tech/cellphone-talkers-get-their-own-sidewalk-lane-in-d-c-.html.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Daily Life
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

while listening to music from the mobile phone, studying while searching
information online, and calling or texting while driving). However, among
all the mobile phone multitasking activities, calling or texting while driving
is both the most dangerous activity to be concerned about and the most
challenging to stop. The Amanda story represents one of hundreds of real
terrible accidents as a result of calling or texting while driving. The DC cell
phone lane case suggests that, besides distracted driving, there are still
more issues leading to various accidents due to using mobile phones while
walking or biking. For these reasons, distracted driving has been one of the
second most studied topics in mobile phone behavior research, next to
research on the possible links between brain cancer and mobile phone use.
The two diagrams illustrating the two cases of activity-based mobile phone
behavior are as follows:
Amanda Kloehr + mobile phone ! using her mobile phone while
driving ! resulted in a terrible car accident, causing her to lose the right-
hand side of her face, including her right eye.
Pedestrians in cities + mobile phones ! using their mobile phones
while walking ! a special mobile phone lane was designated for pedes-
trian safety.
.
Everyday Eﬀects: Mobile Phone Saved Garett Kolsun
On the Saturday morning of September , , Garett Kolsun, a -year-
old Canadian Border Services oﬃcer, walked alone on the street in the
small port town of Churchill, Canada.Suddenly, he saw a polar bear
running toward him. He screamed loudly for help, waved his hands, and
ran in a circle, trying to stop the bear. He ﬁnally saw a bakery and tried to
open the door. At this time, the bear was on top of Garett and put her paw
on him. He could not do anything but pull his cell phone out of his
pocket. He turned it on and the screen lit up. He thrust the cell phone into
the face of the bear, and the light distracted and scared the bear enough
that she stepped back and Kolsun had a second to run away and enter
another house. He only suﬀered scratches and superﬁcial puncture wounds
to his hip. The bears are more active at that time of year, before the ice
freezes. The local government captured the -year-old bear and, instead of
euthanizing it, decided to move it from the wild to the International Polar
Bear Conservation Centre of a local zoo. This case is illustrated in the
simple diagram below:
See www.cbc.ca/news/canada/manitoba/winnipeg-man-wards-oﬀ-polar-bear-with-cellphone-..
. Daily Observations

terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

Garett Kolsun + mobile phone light ! used it to startle and distract an
attacking polar bear ! survived the bear attack.
.
Everyday Eﬀects: Witnessing the Stabbing of His Wife
On October , , Justin Pele Poole, an American soldier stationed for
about nine months in Southwest Asia, used FaceTime, an iPhone app, to
videochat with Rachel Poole, his wife, who was in her ninth month of
pregnancy in her home in Texas.Suddenly, he saw a young man allegedly
attack Rachel from behind with a knife. Rachel recognized this man and
shouted his name several times to her husband over the iPhone. Justin
helplessly watched via the iPhone while the young man stabbed the face
and stomach of Rachel multiple times. Ultimately, Rachel Poole was
transported to University Medical Center, and was still in a critical condi-
tion when her baby, Isabella, was born after doctors performed a successful
emergency cesarean section. Her baby was born healthy. The attacker was
charged with criminal attempted capital murder.
Justin Pele Poole + FaceTime on iPhone ! chatting with his pregnant
wife ! he witnessed his wife being stabbed multiple times by a young
man who was later arrested.
These two cases presented above show the complexity of eﬀect-based
mobile phone behavior. For the ﬁrst case, the mobile user was Garett
Kolsun. He used the mobile phone light to scare the polar bear and
survived the bear attack. The phone literally saved his life, demonstrating
an unexpected, amazing life-saving eﬀect. For the second case, the mobile
phone users were Justin Pele Poole and his -month-pregnant wife Rachel
Poole. The couple used the iPhone to videochat thousands of miles away
from each other. The mobile phone allowed him to witness the process of
his wife being stabbed, demonstrating an unexpected, devastating life-
threatening eﬀect.
.
Empirical Studies: From Australian Twins to Reduced
Loneliness
As we discussed in the previous section, mobile phones are very common
in daily life; however, mobile phone behavior in daily life is more complex
than many of us might expect. Now we will move from the everyday
See www.cnn.com////justice/texas-stabbing-videochat/?hpt=zite_zite_featured.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Daily Life
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

observations to the scientiﬁc studies and further examine the complexity of
mobile phone behavior in daily life.
.
Everyday Users: Australian Twins
The next study we will discuss is entitled “The heritability and genetic
correlates of mobile phone use: A twin study of consumer behavior.”
Heritability is normally deﬁned as the proportion of phenotypic variation
that is due to variation in genetic values. The authors are Geoﬀrey Miller
from the Psychology Department at the University of New Mexico in the
United States, and Gu Zhu, Margaret Wright, Narelle Hansell, and
Nicholas G. Martin from the Department of Genetic Epidemiology at
the Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Australia. Geoﬀrey Miller
has published two articles on smartphone psychology, while his primary
research area is on sexual selection in human evolution. The article was
published in in Twin Research and Human Genetics, the oﬃcial
journal of the International Society for Twin Studies and the Human
Genetics Society of Australasia by Cambridge University Press since .
This study aimed to examine the heritability and genetic correlates of
mobile phone use. In the study, two samples of teenage twins in Australia
were recruited, with a total sample size of ,teens or twin pairs.
Whether the twins were identical (a single fertilized egg with the same
DNA) or fraternal (two fertilized eggs with diﬀerent DNA) was deter-
mined by using a commercial kit and cross-checking with blood group and
other phenotypic data. Mobile phone use between and was
measured by a ﬁve-item questionnaire. The major ﬁndings include the
following: () About percent of the twins reported making voice calls
two to four times per week and about percent of the twins sent text
messages four to ten times per day. () Using mobile phones, either
making more voice calls or sending text messages, among these twins
had more to do with heritabilities, ranging from to percent in
explained variance, than shared family environment, ranging from to
percent in explained variance. () Identical or monozygotic twins
consistently showed more similarities in using mobile phones, making
more voice calls, and sending text messages than fraternal or dizygotic
twins. The authors believe that their results have implications for: ()
assessing the risks of mobile phone use such as radiofrequency ﬁeld
Miller, G., Zhu, G., Wright, M. J. et al. (). “The heritability and genetic correlates of mobile phone
use: A twin study of consumer behavior,” Twin Research and Human Genetics, (): –.
. Empirical Studies

terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

exposure and driving accidents; () studying the adoption and use of other
emerging technologies; () understanding the genetic architecture of the
cognitive and personality traits that predict consumer behavior; and ()
challenging the common assumption that consumer behavior is shaped
entirely by culture, media, and the family environment.
This is the ﬁrst and perhaps only study examining mobile phone
behavior from the perspective of behavior genetics. We can learn a few
key points about mobile phone behavior in daily life from this study. First,
heritabilities of twins, whether they are identical or fraternal twins, might
inﬂuence their mobile phone behavior, in addition to common demo-
graphical and psychological characteristics of mobile phone users. Second,
for mobile technologies and mobile activities (using mobile phones to call
or text), no diﬀerent behavioral patterns were observed in making voice
calls vs. sending text messages among these twins. Heritabilities of twins do
not lead them to make more calls or text more messages. Third, the study
did not examine mobile eﬀects on these twins. The mobile phone behavior
diagram is as follows:
pairs of Australian teenage twins + mobile phones ! calling or
texting in daily life ! the impact of heritability on calling and texting was
observed, but no mobile eﬀects on behavioral patterns were reported.
.
Everyday Users: Low-Income Mothers
Judith Carta is a Professor of Special Education at Kansas University and
has published multiple articles on using mobile phones to enhance
parenting interventions. She and her collaborators published an article
entitled “Randomized trial of a cellular phone-enhanced home visitation
parenting intervention” and provided a good case for mobile phone
users.The article was published in in Pediatrics.
This study focused on one core research question: Does a parenting
intervention supported by family coaches or a similar intervention
enhanced by cell phones increase low-income mothers’ use of good
parenting strategies? To examine this question, the researchers designed a
randomized control trial study. They recruited low-income mothers
(being years old at ﬁrst child’s birth, having less than a high-school
diploma, receiving ﬁnancial assistance, or meeting the income eligibility
requirement for a program such as Head Start), who – together with their
Carta, J. J., Lefever, J. B., Bigelow, K. et al. (). “Randomized trial of a cellular phone-enhanced
home visitation parenting intervention,” Pediatrics, (Supplement ): S–S.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Daily Life
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

young children – were randomly assigned to three conditions: a regular
parenting intervention called Planned Activities Training (PAT); a cellular
phone-enhanced version of Planned Activities Training (CPAT); or a wait-
list control (WLC) group. The six dependent variables assessing the
intervention eﬀects included: () mothers’ correct use of the PAT strategies
(e.g., explaining activities, establishing rules and consequences, giving
choices, using positive interaction skills, ignoring minor misbehavior);
() the quality of mother–children interactions in twelve dimensions
(e.g., sensitivity, reasonable expectations); () mothers’ depression levels;
() mothers’ stress levels; () children’s adaptive and externalizing and
internalizing problem behaviors; and () children’s positive engagement
and responsiveness. They assessed both the short- and long-term interven-
tion eﬀects, at post-intervention and six months after post-intervention.
Analysis of covariance was used to assess the six intervention eﬀects,
controlling for pre-intervention measures. The study had two major ﬁnd-
ings: there were signiﬁcant intervention eﬀects () on both mothers’
parenting strategies and quality of mother–children interactions at the
two time points, with a relatively better eﬀect by the cell-phone-enhanced
intervention, and () on both children’s positive engagement and internal-
izing/externalizing behaviors, with a relatively better eﬀect by the cell-
phone-enhanced intervention.
This case shows three aspects of the complexity of mobile phone behav-
ior. First, it documents a speciﬁc mobile phone behavior, with an emphasis
on intervention eﬀects. Speciﬁcally, one-third of low-income mothers
were provided with the PAT training delivered through home visits, but also
received a cellular phone and cellular phone service. The cellular phone
enhancement mainly consisted of text messages that occurred between
mothers and family coaches. Text messages were sent twice per day, with
one message prompting mothers to use a speciﬁc PAT strategy or to engage
in positive interactions with their child, and a second text inquiring about
the mothers’ use of PAT, their implementation of a planned activity or
interactions with their child, or their child’s behavior. Text message content
was individualized for each mother and related to the focus of recent
intervention visits. This cell-phone-enhanced intervention with two text
messages per day substantially improved these mothers’ parenting strategies
and their children’s behavior. Second, instead of a simple view, it reveals the
complexity of the mobile eﬀects and thus shows the complexity of mobile
phone behavior. Intuitively and typically, one tends to think that mobile
phone eﬀects are one single eﬀect that stands alone (e.g., adolescents text
each other daily leading to one eﬀect – sustaining their friendship). This case
. Empirical Studies

terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

shows more complex eﬀects: text messages were added to the existing
human-based intervention and generated signiﬁcant eﬀects on parenting
behaviors and children’s behaviors for low-income families, both short and
long term. The mobile phone behavior related to this study can be illustrated
in the following simple diagram:
low-income mothers + mobile phones ! receiving phone-
enhanced training ! mothers’ parenting strategies, quality of mother–
children interactions, children’s positive engagement, and children’s
internalizing/externalizing behaviors improved.
.
Everyday Technologies: Brain–Computer Interface
The next study we will discuss is “A cell-phone-based brain–computer
interface for communication in daily life.”This study is uniquely inter-
esting in terms of our everyday lives because someone might encounter a
challenge in moving their hands, arms, feet, legs, or entire bodies (e.g.,
injured, disabled, or elderly) and may be unable to carry out even very
simple daily tasks (e.g., making a phone call or moving a wheelchair). It
would be very convenient for us to just use our brains to do things. The
authors Yu-Te Wang, Yijun Wang, and Tzyy-Ping Jung are a research
group from the Swartz Center for Computational Neuroscience, Institute
for Neural Computational, at the University of California, San Diego
(UCSD). Yu-Te Wang graduated with a PhD from the Department of
Computer Science and Engineering at UCSD, and is currently a research
staﬀassociate at UCSD. He has published multiple articles on cell-phone-
based wireless and mobile brain–machine interfaces. This article was
published in in the Journal of Neural Engineering, a relatively new
journal published by IOP Publishing since , with an impact factor of
.in . IOP Publishing is part of the Institute of Physics Publish-
ing (IOP), a leading scientiﬁc society promoting physics and bringing
physicists together for the beneﬁt of all with a worldwide membership of
around ,physicists from all sectors.
The goal of the study was to test the practicality of a new device that can
use a brain–computer interface to send brain signals wirelessly to a cell
phone in daily life so that the phone can perform tasks (e.g., remotely
turning oﬀa kitchen oven or turning on a home heating system without
physically moving our bodies). In the study, ten individuals participated in
Wang, Y.-T., Wang, Y., and Jung, T.-P. (). “A cell-phone-based brain–computer interface for
communication in daily life,” Journal of Neural Engineering, (): .

Mobile Phone Behavior in Daily Life
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

the experiment. The device consisted of three parts: () a computer screen
shows digital numbers from to , as well as two keys for Backspace and
Enter; () a headband functioning as an EEG brain signal acquisition unit
to detect, amplify, process, and send out brain signals; and () a mobile
phone to receive, process, and execute brain signals wirelessly through
Bluetooth. The experimental task was to ask each participant to gaze at a
ten-digit phone number and a key of Enter or Backspace on the computer
screen and assess the accuracy and eﬃciency of using human brains rather
than human ﬁngers to dial a mobile phone. The results indicated that: ()
all of the ten participants passed the phone-dialing task with their brains,
with an average accuracy of nearly percent and with an average
completion time of nearly seconds; and () the information transfer
rate of the device was close to bits per minute, which is comparable to
similar devices using high-end PCs rather than mobile phones.
This is the ﬁrst study of this kind that links human brain signals with
mobile phones. We can learn from this study that: () mobile phones can
be operated via the human brain rather than via actual human ﬁngers; ()
mobile phones as a regular technology can be linked with a regular brain–
computer interface to make a wireless, mobile, portable, convenient, and
low-cost device; () individuals with no or extremely limited motor
abilities (e.g., those with a disability or those with motor restraints) can
use this device to carry out various daily tasks (e.g., make a phone call or
move a wheelchair). The mobile phone behavior diagram is as follows:
Human brains + brain–computer interface via mobile phones !
detecting, processing, delivering brain signals to a mobile phone !
successfully carried out daily-life tasks by using mobile phones.
.
Everyday Activities: Calling While Driving Before Car Crashes
In the previous section, we discussed the Amanda Kloehr case and the DC
cell phone lane case. Now let us see some scientiﬁc evidence about the
serious dangers involved in the activity of using mobile phones while
driving. The article is called “Association between cellular-telephone calls
and motor vehicle collisions.”It is one of the classic studies on distracted
driving and has been cited ,times according to Google Scholar. The
article was published in in the New England Journal of Medicine,
widely considered the oldest and best medical journal in the world with a
Redelmeier, D. A. and Tibshirani, R. J. (). “Association between cellular-telephone calls and
motor vehicle collisions,” New England Journal of Medicine, (): –.
. Empirical Studies

terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

impact factor of .– the highest among academic journals. The
authors are two eminent Canadian scholars, Donald Redelmeier and
Robert Tibshirani. Donald Redelmeier is a Professor of Medicine at the
University of Toronto and has published extensively on major studies
related to driving accidents. Robert Tibshirani is a Professor of Health
Research and Policy and Statistics at Stanford University and has pub-
lished extensively on statistics.
The study was conducted from to in Toronto. The partici-
pants were drivers who had car accidents with major property damage
and came to the North York Collison Reporting Center during Monday to
Friday, am to pm. Drivers who had personal injuries or were involved
in criminal activities did not come to the center and thus were not
included in the study. The independent variable, use of cell phones, was
based on phone records from the cell phone companies. The dependent
variable, time of motor vehicle collision, was based on the combined
examination of participants’ statement, police reports, and emergency
service records. Case-cross-over analysis was used to compare each driver’s
cell phone use immediately before the accident (i.e., case) to the cell phone
use at the same time on various comparable days before the accident (i.e.,
cross-over) in order to ﬁnd an association between car accidents and cell
phone use. The major ﬁndings were as follows: () Cell phone use right
before a car accident was associated with .times higher risk of a car
accident than that of the same drivers when they were not using cell
phones. () The relative risk was higher for younger drivers, less experi-
enced drivers, less educated drivers, and drivers who were on high-speed
roads. () Using handheld cell phones was not safer than using hands-free
cell phones. () percent of these drivers used cell phones (e.g., calling
emergency services) immediately after the accident.
From the perspective of mobile phone behavior in daily life, this classic
study can oﬀer a few insights. First, a large group of daily mobile phone
users are drivers who use mobile phones while driving every day. Various
characteristics (e.g., age, experience, and education) are associated with
their distracted driving risks. However, distracted driving is their daily
habit, which could be very costly, even costing their lives. Second, diﬀerent
speciﬁc mobile phone technologies are involved, for instance, using fea-
tures of calling or texting and hands-free or handheld phones. Third, there
are various distractive mobile phone activities during driving, for instance,
dialing, reaching for phones, calling, texting, and checking GPS. These are
all risky activities while driving. Fourth, there are both negative and
positive eﬀects of using cell phones. Cell phone use right before a car

Mobile Phone Behavior in Daily Life
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

accident was associated with four times higher risk of a car accident, similar
to or even higher than the risk of drunk driving. On the other hand, many
drivers used their phones to call emergency services after their accidents.
The mobile phone behavior involved in the study can be illustrated in the
following simple diagram:
drivers in Toronto + mobile phones ! calling while driving right
before a car accident ! had four times higher accidental risk before their
accidents and phones used to call emergency services after their accidents.
.
Everyday Activities: Planning Everyday Family Activities
We will next discuss an article entitled “The mobile phone as a tool in
family life: Impact on planning of everyday activities and car use.”It has
been cited twenty-eight times according to Google Scholar. The author is
Randi Hjorthol, Chief Research Sociologist at the Institute of Transport
Economics of Norway, who has published multiple articles on travel
behavior and mobility. This article was published in in Transport
Reviews, a well-established Taylor & Francis journal publishing authorita-
tive and current research-based reviews since , with an impact factor
of .in .
The research goal of this study was to examine the relationships among
time norms, planning of everyday activities, use of the mobile phone, and
use of the car in families with children. The study was a survey study
conducted in with a random sample of ,parents of Norwegian
families with children years of age or younger living at home with their
parents. The major ﬁndings include the following: () percent of
parents had mobile phones and percent had connections to the Inter-
net. A total of percent of the parents reported having one car in the
household and percent reported having two. These two pieces of
background information – percentage of parents having mobile phones
(the communication tool) and percentage of parents having cars (the
transportation tool) – help us to understand how these parents organize
their children’s everyday activities. () Three everyday activities were
related to communication of planning and the frequency of daily car use:
shopping for groceries, transporting children to and from day-care or
school, and transporting children to or from friends’ houses and other
unorganized leisure activities. () In families with children, the most
Hjorthol, R. J. (). “The mobile phone as a tool in family life: Impact on planning of everyday
activities and car use,” Transport Reviews, (): –.
. Empirical Studies

terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

common shopping frequency was three to four times a week. A total of
percent of the parents indicated that their most common way to make
family car arrangements for grocery shopping was face to face; percent
of them indicated that they called with mobile phones to make shopping
arrangements, percent used mobile texting, and only percent used
landline telephones. () Over percent of the parents used cars to
accompany children to day-care or school. For the parents who used cars
multiple times a day for their children, percent called with mobile
phones (the highest percentage), percent used mobile phone SMS,
percent used face-to-face communication, and percent used landline
telephones. In contrast, for the parents who used the car for children once
a day, percent used landline telephones (the highest percentage),
percent communicated face to face, percent used mobile phones
to call, and percent used mobile phone SMS.
We can learn from this study that: () these ,parents were mobile
phone users; () they mainly used their mobile phones to call or text; ()
many of them used mobile phones to call or text their spouses for their
everyday family car usage; and () mobile phones helped them coordinate
family cars for shopping and sending kids to school. The mobile phone
behavior diagram is as follows:
,Norwegian parents + mobile phones ! planning car use !
helped them use their cars for their children’s daily activities more eﬃ-
ciently with less planning time.
.
Everyday Activities: Dining in Restaurants
The next article we will discuss is entitled “Patterns of mobile device use by
caregivers and children during meals in fast food restaurants.”The
authors are a group of medical researchers from Boston University Medical
Center. The ﬁrst author is Jenny Radesky. She is a developmental and
behavioral pediatrician at Boston Medical Center and has done multiple
studies examining how mobile devices, such as smartphones and tablets,
impact the interaction between children and caregivers and mobile phone
use by young children and caregivers. The article was published in in
Pediatrics, the oﬃcial journal of the American Academy of Pediatrics since
, with an impact factor of .in .
Radesky, J. S., Kistin, C. J., Zuckerman, B. et al. (). “Patterns of mobile device use by
caregivers and children during meals in fast food restaurants,” Pediatrics, (): e–e.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Daily Life
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

The research goal of this study was to examine how mobile phone use
aﬀects caregiver–child interactions. In this study, the researchers con-
ducted ﬁfty-ﬁve naturalistic, anonymous observations during lunch or
dinner times in fast food restaurants in Boston. Three researchers mainly
used detailed ﬁeld notes to independently observe parenting behavior and
child behavior without direct participation for to minutes. They
then used the grounded theory approach (a qualitative data analysis
method to systematically review qualitative data and detect emerging
themes) as the data analysis method to develop themes and subthemes.
The major ﬁndings were as follows: () Among ﬁfty-ﬁve caregiver–child
observations, forty involved mobile phone use. () The observed dominant
theme was that caregivers’ attention was absorbed with mobile phone use
rather than interactions with their children during the meal time. () Five
patterns of caregiver–child interactions were observed: (a) sixteen of ﬁfty-
ﬁve observations involved high degree of absorption, meaning caregivers
continuously typed text or swiped screens throughout the meal; (b) eight
observations involved a relatively high absorption, where caregivers made
mobile phone calls while maintaining some eye contact with their chil-
dren; (c) nine observations involved less absorption, where caregivers
quickly checked their phones, typed brieﬂy, or made quick calls; (d) three
observations involved caregivers’ partial attention to their phones while
holding their phones in their hand and doing other things; and (e)
eighteen observations had no mobile phone use, neither bringing out the
phone or just placing the phone on the table. () Three impacts of mobile
phone use were speciﬁed: while using the mobile phone during the meal:
(a) caregivers reduced their responsiveness to children; (b) caregivers
reduced conversation with children and children showed passiveness in
conversation; and (c) children intensiﬁed their actions to draw caregivers’
attentions and caregivers responded with discouragement.
This medical anthropological study provided rich and unique evidence
of activity-based mobile phone behavior from a very special angle, i.e.,
family mealtimes. () The mobile users are the caregivers who used or did
not use their phones during the mealtime. Their children should also be
considered mobile phone users because they directly used (e.g., co-viewing
a phone screen) and indirectly used (e.g., seeing and getting annoyed by
their parents’ mobile phone use) mobile phones. () The speciﬁc types of
mobile technologies, whether texting, swiping, calling, or even holding,
generated diﬀerent interactions. () Speciﬁc negative impacts on caregiver–
child interactions have been observed. The mobile phone behavior dia-
gram is as follows:
. Empirical Studies

terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

Fifty-ﬁve caregiver–child pairs + mobile phones ! absorption with the
phone during the meal ! negative reactions from both children and
caregiver were observed.
.
Everyday Eﬀects: The Negative Spillover Eﬀect
The next study we will discuss is entitled “Blurring boundaries? Linking
technology use, spillover, individual distress, and family satisfaction.”
The author is Noelle Chesley, an Associate Professor of Sociology at the
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, who has published multiple articles
on technology use and work–family relationships. The article was partially
based on her dissertation in . It was published in in the Journal
of Marriage and Family, a well-established Wiley journal of the National
Council on Family Relations published since , with an impact factor
of .in .
In this study, the researcher deﬁned two types of technology use –
computation-based use (using computers) and communication-based use
(using mobile phones) – and aimed to examine whether technology use
was associated with work–family overlap and eventually with personal
distress and family satisfaction. This is essentially a secondary data analysis
based on existing interview data collected twice from seven organizations
in the state of New York from to and to . Major
measures included: technology use (computer use and mobile phone use);
spillover on a two-item scale for assessing negative or positive spillover
from work to family (e.g., job problems distract you when you are at
home) or from family to work (e.g., personal problems distract you when
you are at work); psychological distress on a ﬁve-item scale; and family
satisfaction on a ﬁve-item scale. The ﬁndings included: () Regarding the
spillover from work to family, for the entire sample with both men and
women, mobile phone use over two years but not computer use over two
years was signiﬁcantly associated with negative but not positive spillover.
This eﬀect was further signiﬁcantly linked with personal distress and
family dissatisfaction. () Regarding the spillover from family to work,
only for women but not for men, mobile phone use over two years was
signiﬁcantly associated with negative but not positive spillover. This eﬀect
was signiﬁcantly linked with personal distress and family dissatisfaction.
Chesley, N. (). “Blurring boundaries? Linking technology use, spillover, individual distress,
and family satisfaction,” Journal of Marriage and Family, (): –.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Daily Life
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

From a daily-life perspective of mobile phone behavior, this study
examined a very interesting phenomenon – the spillover phenomenon. First,
for mobile phone users, the study shows gender diﬀerences in the spillover
eﬀect: women’s family demands will spill over into their workplace and
their work demands will also spill over into their family life; whereas men’s
work demands will spill over into their family life, but not the other way
around. Second, for mobile phone technologies and activities, diﬀerent
technologies have diﬀerent spillover eﬀects. In general, mobile phone use
but not computer use leads to negative work-to-family spillover. Second,
for mobile eﬀects, the study does not support the boundary theory arguing
that technology use provides a ﬂexible boundary between work and family
and thus better meets the needs for work and family. Instead, it partially
supports the spillover theory that technology use produces a permeable
work–family boundary and leads to negative but not positive spillover
outcomes from work to family for both men and women and from family
to work for women only. Technology use may be blurring work–family
boundaries with negative consequences for working people’s daily lives.
The mobile phone behavior diagram is as follows:
,New York couples + mobile phones ! using mobile phones for
work and home ! produced the negative work–family spillover eﬀect,
leading to increased personal distress and decreased family satisfaction.
.
Everyday Eﬀects: Reduced Loneliness in Public Spaces
The next article we will talk about is entitled “Change in the social life of
urban public spaces: The rise of mobile phones and women, and the
decline of aloneness over years.”The author is Keith N. Hampton
from Rutgers University in the United States. Hampton is an Associate
Professor in the Department of Communication at Rutgers University and
has published multiple articles on mobile phones and social changes. This
article was published in in Urban Studies, a journal published by Sage
since , with an impact factor of .in .
In the study, the authors compared two sets of ﬁlms, one set made thirty
years ago in to and another made recently in to , to
compare behavior and characteristics of nearly ,people in the same
four public spaces (e.g., Steps of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New
Hampton, K. N., Goulet, L. S., and Albanesius, G. (). “Change in the social life of urban
public spaces: The rise of mobile phones and women, and the decline of aloneness over years,”
Urban Studies, (): –.
. Empirical Studies

terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

York City). The goal was to examine whether Americans have become
more or less socially isolated when using public spaces. In total, there were
hours of footage. The authors sampled the ﬁlms at -second intervals,
leading to ,observation periods, and coded them based on gender,
activity (alone or in groups), mobile phone use (alone or in groups), and
other characteristics. The major ﬁndings include the following: () From
the period of to to the period of to , people staying
alone decreased and people interacting in groups increased in three of the
four public spaces where leisure and shopping were the main functions. In
other words, there is an observed general trend that now people interact
more in groups rather than staying alone. () From the period of to
to the period of to , in one public space which people
mainly used to transit from a subway station to an oﬃce tower and a
hospital, people staying alone increased and people interacting in groups
decreased. () During the years to , the majority of these
observed people did not use their mobile phones and only to percent
of them used them in all four public spaces. Among these mobile phone
users, they tended to use phones alone rather than in a group. No such
data were collected in the years to .
This study shows two surprising ﬁndings. First, it does not support the
popular perception that people are more alone in public spaces than they
were in the past. Instead, it was found that people spending time in groups
was more prevalent in than it was thirty years ago. Second, it does
not support another popular perception that mobile phone use is popular
in public, making people alone but together. It was observed that the
percentage of people using mobile phones when walking in public spaces
was quite low and people rarely used their phones in groups. One simple
diagram of the mobile phone behavior involved in the study is as follows:
Over ,American people in four public areas in to +
mobile phones ! did not use their mobile phones in four public areas
unless they were not in a group ! limited mobile phone use in public is
associated with reduced public isolation over thirty years.
.
Knowledge Syntheses: From Older Users to Calling While
Driving
.
Overview: A Boundless Research Area
In medicine, business, or education, as we discussed in the previous three
chapters, it is relatively easy to set a boundary to search the relevant

Mobile Phone Behavior in Daily Life
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

literature in a given domain. However, it is quite diﬃcult to set a boundary
for the literature on mobile phone behavior in daily life. This is because, by
design, mobile phones are generally for everyday use by ordinary people.
Thus, mobile phone behavior in daily life is essentially boundless. For the
convenience of analysis in this book, we could loosely deﬁne the literature
in this area as not being close to the areas of medicine, business, or
education. In the Encyclopedia of Mobile Phone Behavior, there are at least
forty-two chapters that examine mobile phone behavior in daily life rather
than speciﬁcally related to medicine, business, or education (see Table .).
Among these chapters, some focus on mobile users in daily life (e.g.,
church goers, divorced coparents, romantic partners, or Mexican users),
others focus on mobile technologies in daily life (e.g., mobile diary
methods, antisocial texting, or environmental geo-sensors), others focus
on mobile activities in daily life (e.g., social interactions, mobile phone
beeping, hyper-coordination, or of course calling while driving), and others
also focus on mobile eﬀects in daily life (e.g., emotional eﬀects, ethical
eﬀects, social eﬀects, and cultural eﬀects).
.
Everyday Users: Older Users
In addition to the Encyclopedia chapters, we will discuss two review articles
to further illustrate the breadth and depth of the literature in this area. The
ﬁrst review we will examine is “Mobile applications in an aging society:
Status and trends.”The authors are four engineering researchers from
Spain, Inmaculada Plazaa, Lourdes Martína, Sergio Martin, and Carlos
Medrano. It was published in in the Journal of Systems and Software, a
well-established specialist journal published by Elsevier since , with an
impact factor of .in .
This review is not easy to read mainly due to its uncommon organiza-
tion. However, it provides unique and much-needed knowledge about
elderly mobile phone users in daily life. () It is well known that people live
and work longer and healthier than ever, e.g., in Europe, the population of
age and over was about percent in and is predicted to be about
percent in . () Gerontechnology as a new research ﬁeld has emerged
to meet the needs of an aging society with information technologies. ()
Quality of life has been an important contemporary concept in the past ﬁve
decades stressing physical, mental, social, spiritual, and economic needs for
Plaza, I., Martína, L., Martin, S., and Medrano, C. (). “Mobile applications in an aging
society: Status and trends,” Journal of Systems and Software, (): –.
. Knowledge Syntheses

terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

Table .The Encyclopedia Chapters on Mobile Phone Behavior in
Daily Life
Elements
Chapter Title
Users
Mobile phones and libraries/information centres
Users
Religious use of mobile phones
Users
Divorced coparents’ use of communication technology
Users
The role of mobile phones in romantic relationships
Users
Texting and Christian practice
Users
Mobile communications in Mexico in the Latin American context
Users
Focus on text messages: A review of studies in French
Users
Mobile user behaviors in China
Users
Portable social groups
Technologies
Mobile diary methods in studying daily family life
Technologies
Text messaging as a forum for negative and antisocial communication
Technologies
The usage and applications of mobile apps
Technologies
Mobile games
Technologies
Cognitive phone for sensing human behavior
Technologies
Mobile phones as ubiquitous social and environmental geo-sensors
Activities
Using mobile phones to control social interactions
Activities
Mundane mobile maintenance, entrapment, and hyper-coordination
Activities
Mobile communication tools as morality-building devices
Activities
The impact of mobile phones on teenagers’ socialization and emancipation
Activities
Mobile phone beeping
Activities
Sustainability of the use of mobile phones
Activities
Generation, collection and recycling of used and end-of-life mobile phones
Activities
Mobile phones: News consumption, news creation, and news organization
accommodations
Activities
Cell phone conversation while driving
Activities
Teenage sexting: Sexual expression meets mobile technology
Activities
Adolescent text messaging
Eﬀects
Emoticon use in mobile communications :-)
Eﬀects
The new frontier of mobile communication ethics
Eﬀects
Dimensions of mobile phone behaviors in environmental communication
Eﬀects
Attachment to mobile phones across social contexts
Eﬀects
Mobile phone addiction
Eﬀects
Mobile technostress
Eﬀects
Mobile phone use enhances social connectedness
Eﬀects
Mobile technology and social identity
Eﬀects
Mobile phone culture: The impacts of mobile phone use
Eﬀects
Use of mobile phones to help prevent child maltreatment
Eﬀects
Connecting ’round the clock: Mobile phones and adolescents’ experiences
of intimacy
Eﬀects
Sex, cyberbullying and the mobile phone
Eﬀects
An exploration of intrusive mobile phone behavior
Eﬀects
Communication privacy management and mobile phone use
Eﬀects
Mobile phone etiquette

Mobile Phone Behavior in Daily Life
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

older people. () In contrast to the popular stereotype that older people
reject new technology or are unable to learn new technology, about
percent of to year olds and percent of year olds and older
use a mobile phone, a higher adaptation rate than that of PCs and the
Internet. They accept and adopt mobile phones very well. () There are
ﬁve major types of mobile phone needs for older people: feeling safe and
secure (e.g., need for getting help when they move around and fall down);
memory aids (e.g., need for an appointment or medication reminder);
communication (e.g., need for contacting families and friends); mobility
(e.g., need for movement freedom); and a healthier life (e.g., need for
physical and mental wellbeing). () The current mobile phones challenge
older people in multiple aspects, including buttons being too small to
press, too many menus to understand and remember, text size being too
small to read, and handsets being too small to hold. () The current
research work concerns multiple speciﬁc areas: health and home care
(e.g., DGhome, a home-care service that uses mobile phones to remind
the older users to take medicine); safety and security (e.g., using mobile
phones with GPS and compass to assist older people and their families
when the older people get lost in the outdoor environment; using SMS to
remotely monitor mobility levels of older people in their daily lives);
learning (e.g., Hermers, a product for cognitive care and cognitive training
with mobile phones); religion (e.g., religious calendars, daily audio pod-
casts, news updates, religious ringtones); social interaction (e.g., mobile
phone communications between grandparents and grandchildren); hob-
bies (e.g., games for older people like PopCap Games); and working life
(e.g., working at home as teleworkers). () Several mobile phones have
been designed speciﬁcally for older people (Auto-Mobile, Emporia) with
special features such as a much larger keypad, an SOS button for automatic
emergency calls, a ﬂashlight to help users with visual diﬃculties, a louder
volume if needed to aid hearing, and a motion sensor to detect fallen or
motionless users.
Older people might have various special needs in their daily lives. This
review shows various mobile phone behaviors in daily life among older
mobile phone users. We can learn a few important points from this review.
() Older people are not only a special user group with various special
needs, but also a heterogeneous group with diverse needs. () Mobile
phone technologies need to have various special designs to meet these
special and diverse needs. () Older people like to use mobile phones for
various activities. () Mobile phones can help older people live better,
healthier, and happier lives.
. Knowledge Syntheses

terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

.
Everyday Activities: Calling While Driving
We will now discuss a meta-analysis study entitled “A meta-analysis of the
eﬀects of cell phones on driver performance.”The four authors are all
from the University of Calgary in Canada, JeﬀCaird, Chelsea Willness,
Piers Steel, and Chip Scialfa. The ﬁrst author, JeﬀCaird, is the Director of
the Cognitive Ergonomics Research Laboratory and has published mul-
tiple articles on transportation human factors. This study was published in
in Accident Analysis & Prevention.
In this review, the authors carefully identiﬁed and selected thirty-three
relevant empirical articles published between and that explicitly
examined the eﬀects of cell phones on driver performance. The major
ﬁndings were as follows: () calling with either hands-free or handheld
mobile phones while driving signiﬁcantly slows users’ reaction times,
especially for older users; () calling with either hands-free or handheld
mobile phones while driving does not signiﬁcantly inﬂuence lane position;
() calling with either hands-free or handheld mobile phones while driving
increases the distance between two cars; () calling with either hands-free
or handheld mobile phones while driving makes the users drive cars
signiﬁcantly slower; and () the publication bias, a tendency that journals
tend to publish studies with signiﬁcant rather than insigniﬁcant results,
does not have a signiﬁcant impact on the above results.
Calling while driving perhaps is the most studied topic in mobile phone
behavior in daily life. This meta-analysis review provides a quantitative
synthesis of the existing literature, strongly suggesting that, in general,
calling with either hands-free or handheld mobile phones while driving
will reduce reaction time, increase the distance between cars, and reduce
the speed of driving cars.
.
Comparative Analyses: Family Functioning
Recall that at the beginning of this chapter, we discussed Cindy’s intuitive
understanding of mobile phone use in daily life. As a mother, understand-
ably, she focused on using mobile phones for her family. The review article
we will discuss next will tell us the research ﬁndings about how
technologies, including mobile phones, are related to family functioning.
Its title is “Family functioning and information and communication
Caird, J. K., Willness, C. R., Steel, P., and Scialfa, C. (). “A meta-analysis of the eﬀects of cell
phones on driver performance,” Accident Analysis & Prevention, (): –.

Mobile Phone Behavior in Daily Life
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

technologies: How do they relate? A literature review.”The authors are
Joana Carvalho, Rita Francisco, and Ana Relvas from two universities in
Portugal. It was published in in Computers in Human Behavior.
In this comprehensive review, the authors identiﬁed forty-ﬁve relevant
journal articles published between and and reviewed them in
two major sections: how various information and communication
technologies (ICTs) are used in families and how various ICTs impact
family functions. Some of the major results were as follows: () The
literature of ICTs initially focused on professional work and later focused
on personal and family life. () Three major theories exist: the network
theory, suggesting that ICTs change today’s family and social networks;
the uses and gratiﬁcation theory, suggesting that personal and contextual
needs determine the use of ICTs; and, ﬁnally, the domestication theory,
suggesting that new technologies change the environment, structure, and
process of interactions within families through a process of domestication.
() Face-to-face used to be a family’s main method of communication and
their Christmas card list used to be the best representation of a family’s
social network. Now, medial multitasking, media multiplexity, multi-
communication, and perpetual connectivity are common patterns. ()
The use of ICTs in families can be classiﬁed into three levels: low
technology density (e.g., using TV); medium technology density (e.g.,
multimedia and PC); and high technology density (e.g., Internet and
mobile phones). () The user of ICTs was inﬂuenced by multiple factors.
For example, in terms of diﬀerent stages of family life cycle, in the stage of
families with young children, children are key reasons for families to use
televisions, PCs, and the Internet; in the stage of families with adolescents,
“room culture” has emerged and adolescents are more often isolated in
their own rooms playing and communicating with friends via e-mails,
games, and mobile phones; in adulthood, adults tends to use e-mails and
chat to communicate and interact with extended families; in parenthood,
mothers tends to use Facebook more than fathers. Consider another
example concerning geographic distance among family members: people
will use e-mails and mobile phones more if the distance between them is
larger, whereas people will use face-to-face communication and telephones
more if they live close to each other. () Mobile phones are a major way for
modern families to keep in touch instantly, such as making plans in real
Carvalho, J., Francisco, R., and Relvas, A. P. (). “Family functioning and information and
communication technologies: How do they relate? A literature review,” Computers in Human
Behavior, : –.
. Comparative Analyses: Family Functioning

terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

time and monitoring children’s safety and calling for emergencies. Parents
normally prefer to call rather than text children, whereas children prefer to
text rather than call. () ICTs impact various aspects of family functioning,
including family communication (e.g., maintaining family bonds vs. redu-
cing actual interactions), family cohesion (e.g., sharing online activities
together vs. isolating teens from their parents), family relationships (e.g.,
playing games leading to couple conﬂicts or teenagers as a technology guru
of a family making parents uncomfortable), and family boundaries (e.g.,
having unrestricted access to outside information vs. blending the external
world with families). () ICTs qualitatively change modern family life.
However, there is no consensus about whether these changes are all
positive or negative.
We can learn more about mobile phone behavior in daily life from this
comparative review. First, mobile phones are one of the ICTs and their
functions should be considered with other ICTs rather than by themselves.
Second, mobile phones play unique roles in family functions (e.g., making
family decisions in real time). Third, it is complex to view how ICTs
including mobile phones impact family functioning in daily life, due to
multiple users, technologies, activities, and the eﬀects being involved in
multiple contexts.
.
Complex Thinking: A Common Topic but a Complex Behavior
At the beginning of this chapter, we discussed Cindy’s intuitive responses
regarding mobile phone behavior in daily life. Her responses showed four
features: her mobile phone users were mainly her four children and herself
as a mother; her mobile phone technologies involved merely the basic
calling feature; her mobile phone activities focused on family communi-
cation; and her mobile phone eﬀects were about security and connections
among her family. After reading this chapter, we can see more clearly and
easily that Cindy’s intuitive response in general is quite simple and mobile
phone behavior in our daily lives actually is very diverse and very complex.
The content of this chapter can be summarized in Figure .. Compar-
ing Cindy’s intuitive responses with the rest of the chapter, we can observe
several major diﬀerences. First, from the mobile user perspective, in daily
life, mobile users are much more complex, from refugees bringing their
mobile phones with them to the Coloradan girl who poisoned her mother,
from twins to low-income mothers, and from young children to older
users. Parents and children are important and common users in our daily
lives as mentioned by Cindy, but clearly are not the only users. Second,

Mobile Phone Behavior in Daily Life
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core

from the mobile technology perspective, mobile technologies are much
more complex, from GPS to WomanLog, from brain–computer interfaces
to text-based interventions. Calling and texting are two common technolo-
gies as indicated by Cindy, but clearly there are more and newer technolo-
gies involved. Third, for mobile activities, the most studied topic is about
using mobile phones while driving, walking, or biking. Besides that, there
are various activities involved, e.g., their use during meal times or for
planning family activities. Lastly, for mobile eﬀects in daily life, mobile
phones can have various complex eﬀects, such as positive (e.g., escaping
from a polar bear attack and reducing loneliness in public spaces), negative
(e.g., witnessing a wife being stabbed and experiencing negative spillover
consequences), and both negative and positive at the same time (e.g.,
distractive eﬀects of using mobile phones before car accidents and making
emergency calls after car accidents).
Mobile Phone Users 
in Daily Life  
2.1 Iqbal as an Afghanistan
refugee   
2.2 A Coloradan Girl   
3.1 518 Australian Twins
3.2 371 Low-Income Mothers 
4.2 Older Users  
Mobile Phone Effects
in Daily Life
2.7 Mobile Phone Saved Garett 
Kolsun
2.8 Witnessing the Stabbing of His
Wife
3.7 The Negative Spillover Effect
3.8 Reduced Loneliness in Public 
Spaces
Mobile Phone Activities
in Daily Life
2.5 Amanda Kloehr Drove to See Her
Friend in Virginia
2.6 Waking in the Cell Phone Lane 
in DC
3.4 Calling Before Crashes
3.5 Planning Everyday 
Family Activities 
3.6 Dining in Restaurants 
4.3 Calling while Driving 
Mobile Phone Technologies 
in Daily Life 
2.3 GPS Helped Police to Find 
Murderers
2.4 WomanLog 
3.3 Brain–Computer Interface
Figure .
A Summary Diagram of Mobile Phone Behavior in Daily Life
. Complex Thinking

terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.010
13:09:57, subject to the Cambridge Core


The Complexity of Mobile Phone Behavior
Outline
.
The Three Systems
.
System : Intuitive Thinking
.
System : Complex Thinking
.
The basic knowledge of the complexity of mobile phone behavior
.
The basic skill of understanding the complexity of mobile phone behavior
.
The extended knowledge of the complexity of mobile phone behavior
.
System : Intuitive Complex Thinking
.
The Three Systems
In this ﬁnal chapter, we will use three concepts, System , System , and
System , to explore the process of understanding the complexity of
mobile phone behavior and to conclude the intellectual journey we have
travelled together.
As we brieﬂy introduced in Chapter , Nobel Laureate Daniel Kahneman
uses System to symbolize people’s intuitive thinking. Based on his theory,
System operates quickly, automatically, and eﬀortlessly. People often use
their intuitive thinking, but it is associated with various cognitive biases such
as the saliency bias, conﬁrmation bias, availability bias, anchoring bias, or
halo bias. In contrast, System is another speciﬁc term used by Daniel
Kahneman to symbolize rational thinking. System operates slowly, delib-
erately, and requires eﬀort. People rely on their rational thinking to con-
struct complex thoughts, but it is associated with training, education,
learning, and practice rather than developing naturally. In this book, we
consider complex thinking to be a speciﬁc rational thinking and use it
throughout the book. In addition to System and System , Daniel
Kahneman and other researchers often discussed expert intuition in their

terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.011
13:11:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

work.It refers to the skill of certain experts to make quick and complex
judgements. For example, outstanding doctors make timely diagnosis in
the emergency room, experienced ﬁreﬁghters respond quickly in a burning
building, or a chess master recognizes complex chess patterns and makes
winning moves in a short period of time. We can call expert intuition System
since it is built on Systems and as a more advanced thinking approach.
According to Kahneman and Klein,development of expert intuition needs
adequate learning opportunities, prolonged learning practice with timely
feedback, and a highly supported learning environment.
Together, Systems , , and are helpful for us to discuss our intuitive
thinking about mobile phone behavior, to summarize the complex think-
ing about mobile phone behavior that we hope to achieve through the
book, and to highlight a ﬁnal message to end the book.
.
System : Intuitive Thinking
At the very beginning of this book, we summarized and discussed quick
responses from a group of graduate students about mobile phones, mobile
phone behavior, and mobile phone behavior research. Many students
thought that a mobile phone has two key features, calling and texting,
mobile phone behavior is mainly about sending texts, checking e-mails,
and using Facebook, and mobile phone behavior research has about
published journal articles. These responses represent these students’
intuitive thinking about mobile phones, mobile phone behavior, and mobile
phone behavior research and can be considered the outcomes of System .
In addition, in the beginning of eight chapters, we presented various quick
responses about a speciﬁc topic of mobile phone behavior from ordinary
individuals. For example, Chapter starts with the quick responses about
mobile phone users from three graduate students. Each of them focused on
one aspect of mobile phone users such as their ages or their time spent on
mobile phones, showing that their intuitive knowledge is not deep, broad, or
sophisticated. These responses can also be considered the outcomes of
System .
In short, these quick responses discussed in the book are examples of
outcomes of System . They are simple but authentic, general but
Kahneman, D. and Klein, G. (). “Conditions for intuitive expertise: A failure to disagree,”
American Psychologist, (): –; and Kahneman, D. (). Thinking, Fast and Slow. New
York: Macmillan.
Kahneman and Klein, above n. .
. System : Intuitive Thinking

terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.011
13:11:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

informative. We used these responses as the baseline knowledge to develop
our thinking about mobile phone behavior from System to System .
.
System : Complex Thinking
As presented in Chapter , we would like to achieve two goals in this book:
to understand the complexity of mobile phone behavior and to analyze the
complexity of mobile phone behavior. To achieve these two goals, we have
used a six-step learning sequence in each chapter to develop System
complex thinking about mobile phone behavior:
Intuitive Thinking ►Daily Observations ►Empirical Studies ►
Knowledge Syntheses ►Comparative Analyses ►Complex Thinking.
Now let us summarize what we have learned about mobile phones,
mobile phone behavior, and mobile phone behavior research.
.
The basic knowledge of the complexity of mobile phone behavior
Mobile phones. As discussed in Chapter , classic mobile phones do function
mainly as typical telephones for oral and written communications. However,
modern mobile phones have transformed into multi-function personal tech-
nologies, functioning as a powerful command center of information, commu-
nication, and computation technologies. As for a future mobile phone, it
might even become a powerful artiﬁcial organ of human beings.
Why, then, was the intuitive thinking about mobile phones of these
graduate students so simple when they gave their intuitive responses?
According to Kahneman’s theory, one cognitive bias, the saliency bias,
can be used to explain why mobile phones are mainly viewed as a
traditional phone rather than a multiple-functioning personal device.
The saliency bias refers to a tendency that people will judge one uncertain
object based on an analogy of a salient object in their memory.For
instance, a manager will judge a new business plan largely based on his
most successful business project. It is likely that the saliency bias makes
ordinary people consider mobile phones as traditional phones. This is
because traditional phones are the closest technology to mobile phones.
The most basic function of traditional phones is to make a phone call and
the original function of mobile phones is to make a phone call wirelessly.
Plus, linguistically, mobile phones and traditional phones share one
Kahneman, D., Lovallo, D., and Sibony, O. (). “Before you make that big decision,” Harvard
Business Review, (): –.

The Complexity of Mobile Phone Behavior
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.011
13:11:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

keyword, phones. Thus, it is not surprising that ordinary people misjudge
mobile phones based on an analogy of salient features of traditional
phones. However, using the term by renowned innovation expert Clayton
Christensen,mobile phones are a disruptive technology that unexpectedly
and signiﬁcantly revolutionized traditional phones, just like e-mail after
postal mail or digital photography after chemical photography. From the
perspective of System , mobile phones are no longer a subtype of
traditional phones, but rather multi-functional personal technologies.
However, the saliency bias might signiﬁcantly mislead ordinary people.
Mobile phone behavior. From the perspective of System , mobile
phone behavior is particularly complex. It involves complex mobile phone
users, complex mobile phone technologies, complex mobile phone activ-
ities, complex mobile phone eﬀects, and complex contexts of mobile
phone use. Just consider mobile phone users, only one basic element of
mobile phone behavior. Who are mobile phone users? This question is not
as simple as many ordinary people would expect. First, it is not easy to
deﬁne mobile phone users based on whether a person owns a mobile
phone, subscribes to a mobile service, or uses a mobile phone. Second,
there are a wide variety of mobile phone users, including bad and good
users (e.g., criminal users or addicted users), users with diverse demo-
graphic characteristics (e.g., age and gender), diverse behavioral character-
istics (e.g., personalities or disabilities), and special characteristics (e.g.,
political leaders). Third, mobile phone users can be seen in diverse con-
texts, such as users in medical, business, educational, or everyday settings.
The complexity of mobile phone users contributes to the complexity of
mobile phone behavior. The complexity of mobile phone behavior that has
been discussed throughout the book can be summarized in Figure ..
Why was the graduate students’ intuitive thinking about mobile phone
behavior merely about sending messages, checking e-mails, and using
Facebook? According to Kahneman’s theory, a cognitive bias, the avail-
ability bias, can oﬀer one explanation. The availability bias refers to the
tendency to overestimate the likelihood of events with greater availability
in memory. People tend to think or judge based on readily available
information or immediate examples that come to mind. For example,
right after an earthquake in California, survivors were more motivated to
buy property insurance. For these graduate students we discussed earlier,
what was immediately available to them was their own daily experience of
Christensen, C. (). The Innovator's Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail.
Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
. System : Complex Thinking

terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.011
13:11:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

using their own mobile phones. Because of the availability bias, when they
think about mobile phone behavior, they heavily use their personal daily
experience of using mobile phones (e.g., being a nice user, having a regular
phone, texting often, seeing good eﬀects). Thus, their intuitive thinking is
very personal and very simple, directly reﬂecting their own daily experi-
ence. However, from the perspective of System , mobile phone behavior
is extremely complex due to complex users, technologies, activities, eﬀects,
and contexts. Here, the availability bias substantially prevents ordinary
people from thinking complexly.
Mobile phone behavior research. In Chapter , we discussed the big
picture of mobile phone behavior research, indicating that the science of
mobile phone behavior has a twenty-ﬁve-year history and has accumulated
more than ,published journal articles. In the eight chapters that followed,
we discussed nearly ﬁfty empirical studies, nearly twenty review articles, nearly
ten comparative studies, and introduced nearly Encyclopedia chapters,
showing various speciﬁc examples of mobile phone behavior research.
Why is there such a large discrepancy between the students’ intuitive guess
of the number of published journal articles on mobile phone behavior (on
average articles) and the actual number of the published journal articles
(more than ,articles)? We can use Kahneman’s well-known concept, the
anchoring bias, to give an explanation. Kahneman used the anchoring eﬀect to
Mobile Phone Users
1. Basic Features 
• Ordinary and criminal users
Demographical 
characteristics
Behavior characteristics
Special characteristics
•
•
•
2. Specific Features
• Medical users
Business users
Education users
Everyday users
•
•
•
Mobile Phone Technologies
1. Basic Features 
• Diverse phones
Diverse features
Diverse software and 
hardware
Diverse accessories
Diverse networks
•
•
•
•
2. Specific Features
• Medical technologies
Business technologies
Education technologies
Everyday technologies
•
•
•
Mobile Phone Activities
1. Basic Features 
• Access
Use
Action
Reuse
•
•
•
2. Specific Features
• Medical activities
Business activities
Education activities
Everyday activities
•
•
•
Mobile Phone Effects
1. Basic Features
• Positive and negative effects
Health effects
Psychological effects
Behavioral effects
Social effects
•
•
•
•
2. Specific Features
• Medical effects
Business effects
Education effects
Everyday effects
•
•
•
Figure .
A Summary of the Complexity of Mobile Phone Behavior

The Complexity of Mobile Phone Behavior
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.011
13:11:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

name a very reliable and robust experimental ﬁnding that people often use a
particular value as a cognitive anchor to guess an unknown quantity, which
thus leads to the anchoring bias. One example he used is that a house’s list
price for sale inﬂuences how much we are willing to pay. The higher the list
price, the more valuable the house would appear to us, even if we try
deliberately to resist the anchoring eﬀect of the list price.
Mobile phone behavior research has at least three important features that
might lead to three anchoring biases. First, mobile phone behavior research in
essence is an interdisciplinary ﬁeld. Researchers from a wide variety of discip-
lines, such as medicine, business, education, politics, sociology, human
factors, psychology, and communication, have made contributions to the
ﬁeld. As a result, published articles are scattered around more than ﬁfty
diﬀerent types of journals in diﬀerent disciplines, from the New England
Journal of Medicine and Nature, to Mobile Communication and Computers in
Human Behavior. Thus, ordinary people, including general graduate and
undergraduate students, might only rely on their observations of a very small
number of published articles in their own ﬁeld (e.g., education, psychology,
business) to make a narrow-minded guess rather than a comprehensive one.
Second, although mobile phone behavior literature emerged in the early
s, over twenty-ﬁve years ago, it has experienced an exponential growth
since . Thus, ordinary people, including general graduate and under-
graduate students, might only rely on their observations of the early history of
a very small number of published articles (e.g., publications in the s
rather than publications in the s) to make an out-of-date guess rather
than a more recent one. Third, there is not a wide availability of good courses,
good books, and good TV programs oﬀering good education and training
about the entire ﬁeld of mobile phone behavior. Thus, ordinary people,
including general graduate and undergraduate students, might only rely on
their own limited daily experiences and observations, making naive guesses
rather than educated ones. However, from the perspective of System ,
mobile phone behavior research is an emerged interdisciplinary ﬁeld with a
twenty-ﬁve-year history and over ,published journal articles rather than
a small, new area with published journal articles. Here, the anchoring bias
makes ordinary people underestimate the broad scope of mobile phone
behavior research to a considerable extent.
.
The basic skill of understanding the complexity of mobile phone behavior
In addition to developing a usable knowledge of mobile phone behavior,
the second goal we want to accomplish through this book is to develop a
. System : Complex Thinking

terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.011
13:11:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

workable skill to analyze the complexity of mobile phone behavior. The
usable knowledge, as we brieﬂy reviewed in the previous section, provides a
conceptual framework, and the workable skill we will brieﬂy review in this
section will provide speciﬁc tools. Both help develop our System complex
thinking about mobile phone behavior. Here, we will focus on two basic
tools that are useful for us to either analyze or synthesize the complexity of
various types of mobile phone behavior.
The simple diagram as an analyzing tool. After introducing and
discussing the four basic elements of mobile phone behavior from Chap-
ters to , we have used a simple diagram to analyze and present various
types of mobile phone behavior from Chapters to . For instance, on the
basis of the four-element model, we used the following diagram to analyze
and present the mobile phone behavior relating to Dr. Spillers:
Dr. Christopher Spillers + iPhone/iPad ! reading and texting during
heart surgery operation on Mary Roseann Milne ! Mary Roseann Milne
passed away after surgery.
To analyze and present the mobile phone behavior relating to Dr.
Tickell, we used the following simple diagram:
Dr. John Tickell + radiation from mobile phones ! being exposed to
various forms of lengthy radiation in his daily life ! experienced a
seizure on a ﬂight and had ﬁve tumors in his brain.
This kind of simple diagram is a useful analyzing and presentation tool
for us to understand the complexity of a given mobile phone behavior for
three reasons. First, this diagram helps us to explicitly break down a speciﬁc
mobile phone behavior into four basic elements – user, technology, activ-
ities, and eﬀects – to show diﬀerent aspects of mobile phone behavior.
Second, it helps us easily highlight a speciﬁc element with the bold text (e.g.,
in the ﬁrst diagram shown above, the focus of the mobile phone behavior is
placed on “Dr. Christopher Spillers”). Third, it helps put the four basic
elements of the speciﬁc mobile phone behavior back together into a simple
ﬂowchart to show the dynamic relationship among the basic elements.
The summary diagram as a synthesizing tool. In the end of Chapters 
to , we have used a summary diagram as a useful synthesizing and
presentational tool to understand the complexity of mobile phone behav-
ior in a given area. For example, at the end of Chapter , a diagram was
used to synthesize and present the element of technologies of mobile
phone behavior. At the end of Chapter , a diagram was used to synthesize
and present the mobile phone behavior in medicine and health care.
This kind of summary diagram, as shown in Figure ., is useful for us to
understand the complexity of mobile phone behavior in a given area for three

The Complexity of Mobile Phone Behavior
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.011
13:11:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

reasons. First, this diagram helps us use keywords (i.e., both the subheading of
a speciﬁc section and the focus or emphasis of a given mobile phone behavior)
to eﬃciently organize and symbolize various examples of mobile phone
behavior from daily observations or empirical studies. For example, in the
(a)
Mobile phone
users
Mobile Phone Users
in Medicine
Mobile Phone Activities
in Medicine
Mobile Phone Effects
in Medicine
Mobile Phone Technologies
in Medicine
1. Diverse Phones
2. Diverse Features
3. Diverse Software and Hardware
4. Diverse Accessories
2.1 Signature Touch and Freedom 251
4.1 Mobile Devices: Security
2.2 Flight 93 and Ferry Sewol
3.2 Calling vs. Texting: Adolescents’ Decisions
4.2 Mobile Texting: Tositive and Negative Sides
2.3 Leo Grand and Vincent
3.1 Smartphone Apps: Users in Korea
3.3 Mobile Cameras: Injured Patients
3.5 GPS: Children’s Mobility
4.3. Mobile Apps: Healthcare Implications
Mobile phone
activities
Mobile Phone Technologies
Mobile phone
effects
(b)
4.4 Mobile Sensing: Ubiquitous and Complex
2.4 Galaxy S4 and Energous
4.5 Mobile Phone Batteries: Fire and Explosion
2.1 Distracted Dr. Spillers
2.3 Monitoring Blood Sugar Levels
2.4 Dr. John Tickell with Brain
Tumors
2.5 176 Million Addicts
3.4 Sleep Disturbance
3.5 Effect: Brain Cancers
2.2 UNICEF Innovation Projects
3.2 Technologies: Mobile Phone
Dispatch
3.3 Smoking Cessation
Intervention
2.5 Wi-Fi in Nanjin and Li-Fi in Dubai
3.4 Base Stations: Childhood Cancers
5. Diverse Networks
3.1 HIV-Infected Pregnant
Women
4.3 Older Adults’ Healthcare
4.4 Youth’s Sleep Disturbances
4.5 Potential Brain Concerns
5.4 Undergraduates’ Mobile
Phone Addiction
Figure .
Two Examples of the Summary Diagrams: (a) the Summary Diagram of
Technology-Based Mobile Phone Behavior and (b) the Summary Diagram of Mobile
Phone Behavior in Medicine
. System : Complex Thinking

terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.011
13:11:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

ﬁrst summary diagram, Signature Touch and Freedom are two of the
keywords used. These two keywords are both the subheading of a small
section discussing two very diﬀerent mobile phones and the two examples of
technology-focused mobile phone behavior. These two keywords and all the
others included in the big mobile phone technology box are organized to
systematically represent each aspect of mobile phone technology: phones,
features, software and hardware, accessories, and networks. Second, it helps us
to place these examples of various mobile phone behavior into the four major
element boxes to visually show a big picture of the complexity of mobile
phone behavior in a given area. For instance, the second diagram contains a
total of fourteen examples of various mobile phone behavior which were
placed into the four boxes to showcase the diversity of the medical users (e.g.,
distracted doctors and HIV-infected pregnant women), technologies (e.g.,
UNICEF’s large-scale innovation projects and simple mobile phone dis-
patch), activities (e.g., monitoring blood sugar levels and smoking cessation
intervention), and eﬀects (e.g., brain cancers, sleep disturbance, and mobile
addiction). This kind of diagram shows the complexity of mobile phone
behavior in medicine and motivates us to think complexly rather than
intuitively. If we continue using this summary diagram well, we will be able
to relatively easily see a landscape of mobile phone behavior research so that
we can see both the most productive areas and much-needed future research
directions.
.
The extended knowledge of the complexity of mobile phone behavior
The book, by design, is to serve as an introductory-level presentation of
mobile phone behavior. As a result, we use the four-element basic model of
mobile phone behavior to promote a basic understanding of its complex-
ity. However, various types of mobile phone behavior in the real world and
in the scientiﬁc literature are more complex than the four-element basic
model can adequately embrace. In fact, in this book, we have already
encountered some complex cases.
For instance, in Chapter , we discussed the case of the American actress
Jennifer Lawrence, whose private pictures were saved in her iCloud
account, which was then hacked, and the case of the Chinese actress Tao
Liu, whose property was stolen and then returned, suggesting that an
initial positive eﬀect might turn into a negative one (in the case of
Lawrence) and an initial negative eﬀect of mobile phone use might turn
into a positive one (in the case of Liu). In each of the two cases, diﬀerent
mobile phone behaviors (e.g., having positive and negative eﬀects) were

The Complexity of Mobile Phone Behavior
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.011
13:11:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

involved. Thus, we need to use two simple diagrams instead of one to fully
describe these mobile phone behaviors. For the case of Jennifer Lawrence,
the two diagrams are as follows:
() Jennifer Lawrence + iPhone camera ! taking her own pictures !
the pictures automatically stored in iCloud.
() Hackers + iBrute ! hacking into iCloud ! the pictures were stolen
and posted online.
For the case of Tao Liu, the two diagrams are as follows:
() Tao Liu + iPhone texting! texting friends for help after property
stolen ! news spreads rapidly.
() Friends + Weixin ! ﬁnding cues and solutions ! all the property
found within hours.
Another good example suggesting we should develop more advanced
knowledge of the complexity of mobile phone behavior is the discussion of
various comparative studies in the book. For various topics, such as
writing, sleep disturbance, bacterial contamination, addiction, advertise-
ment, multitasking, and family functions, we can easily see that mobile
phones almost always function with other technologies together rather
than separately. This makes mobile phone behavior more complex because
we need to see the forest (various technology behaviors) in order to better
understand the tree (mobile phone behavior).
For instance, it was reported that, for Japanese middle-school and high-
school students, their phone calls and text messages after lights were out
were signiﬁcantly related to various forms of sleep disturbance; percent of
them reported having a shorter sleep duration, percent reported that their
sleep quality was poor, percent reported experiencing excessive daytime
sleepiness, and over percent reported having insomnia symptoms.
However, we can develop a much better overall picture through the review
article by Lauren Hale and Stanford Guan, comparing screen time of
diﬀerent media.On the basis of twenty-seven studies in European coun-
tries, fourteen studies in the United States, seven studies in Japan, and ﬁve
studies in Australia, as well as studies in eight more countries, it was found
that, while media use is consistently related to sleep disturbance among
school students, it is interactive media use (e.g., playing games) that leads to
more sleep disturbance than passive media use (e.g., watching television).
Munezawa, T., Kaneita, Y., Osaki, Y. et al. (). “The association between use of mobile phones
after lights out and sleep disturbances among Japanese adolescents: A nationwide cross-sectional
survey,” Sleep, (): –.
Hale, L. and Guan, S. (). “Screen time and sleep among school-aged children and adolescents: a
systematic literature review,” Sleep Medicine Reviews, : –.
. System : Complex Thinking

terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.011
13:11:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

The existing literature indicates that mobile phones do disturb students’
sleep, but are not the technology that has the highest disturbing eﬀect.
To further develop a more advanced understanding of the complexity of
mobile phone behavior, we will brieﬂy introduce two advanced strategies,
structural equation modeling and dynamic system modeling, and add them
to our repertoire of analytical tools for examining the complexity of mobile
phone behavior.
Structural equation modeling. Structural equation modelingis a well-
established research method. It aims at building powerful and ﬂexible
models to examine complex empirical research questions, such as multi-
level questions (e.g., how ﬁve observed variables at the measurement level
are related to one general factor at the structure level via diﬀerent
sequences), multi-path questions (e.g., how six independent variables are
related to three dependent variables directly and indirectly), multi-group
questions (e.g., how six independent variables are related to three depend-
ent variables diﬀerently between female students and male students), and
multi-wave questions (e.g., how six independent variables are related to
three dependent variables diﬀerently over multiple months).
In this book, all of the simple diagrams and the summary diagrams have
been deliberately developed to have a strong association with structural
equation modeling so that we can easily use them in empirical studies. In
fact, these diagrams are actually the theoretical or hypothesized models in
structural equation modeling that are ready to ﬁt empirical data and obtain
the best or estimated models.
For instance, as shown in Figure .(a), the four-element basic model
can be considered a general theoretical model for structural equation
modeling. If we attempt to address a research question of how high-school
students become addicted to taking selﬁes, as shown in Figure .(b), we
can ﬁrst consider various issues related to mobile phone users (e.g., possible
sample sizes, ages, locations, school types, and personalities), mobile phone
technologies (e.g., diﬀerent cameras or diﬀerent service plans), mobile
phone activities (e.g., taking selﬁes and posting selﬁes), and mobile phone
eﬀects (e.g., addiction to selﬁes). And then, based on the literature review,
we can decide to focus on personality styles, mobile phone data plans,
frequency of taking and posting selﬁes, and degree of selﬁe addiction as four
variables (see the bold text in the ﬁgure) and estimate a hypothesized model
of how personality styles and mobile phone data plans inﬂuence high-school
students’ frequency of taking and posting selﬁes, leading to their degrees of
Bollen, K. A. (). Structural Equations with Latent Variables. New York: Wiley.

The Complexity of Mobile Phone Behavior
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.011
13:11:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

addiction. There are at least two major advantages of using structural
equation modeling: () it helps us to turn a conceptual model into an
empirical model relatively easily; and () it expands a model from a relatively
simple one (four variables are involved in our example on selﬁe addiction
here) to a very complex one (e.g., include three variables of mobile phone
users, age, gender, and service plan). In short, structural equation modeling
will be a strong tool to use for designing complex empirical studies and to
understand the complexity of mobile phone behavior.
(a)
(b)
Mobile phone
users
Mobile phone
technologies
Taking selfies
frequently with
mobile camera in
different settings
Addicted to selfies
among female
students, but not male
students
500 high school
students in New
York, 14–17 years
old, various
personality styles
Mobile phone
cameras, specific
software and
hardware to take
pictures and
post them
online, different
mobile service data
plans
Mobile phone
activities
Mobile phone
effects
Figure .
(a) The Four-Element Basic Model as a General Model for
Structural Equation Modeling and (b) the Speciﬁc Hypothesized Model for
Structural Equation Modeling
. System : Complex Thinking

terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.011
13:11:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

Dynamic system modeling. Similar to structural equation modeling,
dynamic system modeling is also a well-established research method that is
powerful and ﬂexible. However, diﬀerent from structural equation model-
ing, whose theoretical foundation is statistical theories, the theoretical
foundation of dynamic system modeling is non-linear dynamic system
theories. There exist various approaches and techniques to running
dynamic system modeling, and here we introduce one good example –
Jay Forrester’s system dynamics modeling.
Forrester is known as the founder of system dynamics. He has used
various concepts of system dynamics (e.g., feedback loops and time delays)
and a computer program called DYNAMO to successfully simulate com-
plex interactions between objects over time in various dynamic systems,
such as industrial dynamics, urban dynamics, and even world dynamics.
We can use this modeling method to gain insights into the complexity of
mobile phone behavior. For instance, the real-life situations of using
mobile phones very often involve co-constructions of diﬀerent pairs of
mobile users: callers vs. listeners, senders vs. receivers, oﬀenders and
victims, parents and children, game leaders vs. game followers, and close
friends vs. new friends. Figure .illustrates one common scenario that
two mobile users (e.g., two friends as User and User ) use two mobile
phones to send or receive text messages reciprocally so that they both
develop together over time through co-construction with each other.
Speciﬁcally, this complex model speciﬁes three functions. First, the
upper part of the model represents how a user’s (User ) development
Technology 1
Technology 2
Effect 1
Effect 2
Activity 2
Activity 1
User 1 (t2)
User 2 (t2)
User 1 (t1)
User 2 (t1)
Figure .
A Simple System Dynamics Model of Two Friends Sending or Receiving
Text Messages Reciprocally and Developing Together over Time through Co-Construction
Forrester, J. W. (). Urban Dynamics, vol. . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

The Complexity of Mobile Phone Behavior
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.011
13:11:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

occurs from Time (t) to Time (t) when the user interacts with a
mobile phone (Technology ) to form a mobile phone activity (Activity )
and generates a mobile phone eﬀect (Eﬀect ). Second, the lower part of
the model represents how another user’s (User ) development occurs
from Time (t) to Time (t) when the user interacts with a mobile
phone (Technology ) to form a mobile phone activity (Activity ) and
generates a mobile phone eﬀect (Eﬀect ). Third, User and User
interact with each other through two mobile phones (Technology
and Technology ) through co-construction. Although this model is
extremely simple from the perspective of system dynamics, it can be used
for a complex longitudinal study of complex interactions among multiple
elements through multiple links at multiple time points, which is already
much more complex than some statistical models we have often seen.
There are several major advantages of using system dynamics modeling:
() it can be used to simulate a wide variety of dynamic systems that are
extremely complex with more than hundreds of variables and connections
(e.g., the worldwide environmental change or the entire system of mobile
phone behavior); () it is particularly strong in examining complex relation-
ships among multiple elements (e.g., the positive and negative eﬀect
relationship, the circular relationship, the reciprocal causal relationship,
or the time-delayed relationship) rather than just on multiple elements;
and () it uses only a few core concepts and chooses one of many user-
friendly system dynamics programs (e.g., Vensim and JDynSim)and the
initial learning curve of learning to run system dynamics models is rather
small. In short, system dynamics modeling will be a very useful tool for us
to develop our System complex thinking and to understand the com-
plexity of mobile phone behavior.
.
System : Intuitive Complex Thinking
It is our primary goal to be able to think about and analyze the complexity
of mobile phone behavior. However, with adequate learning opportun-
ities, prolonged learning practice with timely feedback, and a highly
supported learning environment, we can even further develop our ability
of System (expert intuition or intuitive complex thinking), that is quick
and sophisticated, eﬀortless and insightful. With expert intuition, we can
understand the complexity of various kinds of existing or emerging mobile
phone behavior even faster and better. It is obviously not an easy job, but
See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_system_dynamics_software.
. System : Intuitive Complex Thinking

terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.011
13:11:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

one thing we should and can do immediately is to think of mobile phone
behavior as a double-edged sword consistently and intuitively so that it
eventually becomes second nature.
As we have seen in the intuitive responses from various people in various
chapters of the book, one of the most striking similarities is that people
often think of mobile phone behavior only from the positive perspective or
sometimes only from the negative perspective, but hardly ever from both
the positive and negative perspectives at the same time. For instance,
mobile phone users are often considered to be good or normal individuals
(e.g., always nice users, but never Boston Marathon bombers), mobile
phone technologies are often thought to be of good quality (e.g., ﬂawless
password protection features or harmless batteries), mobile phone activities
are mainly viewed as good ones (e.g., thinking often of useful m-learning,
but hardly thinking about distractive learning), and mobile phone eﬀects
are often considered to be beneﬁcial only (e.g., helping to coordinate
family activities), but sometimes to be harmful only (e.g., causing brain
cancers). Throughout this book, we deliberately collected and discussed
various examples that can help us develop a balanced thinking habit that
considers mobile phone behavior from both the positive and negative
perspectives rather than from one single perspective. If we can develop
this thinking habit into an expert intuition, then we can consistently and
intuitively consider good and bad users, poorly and well-designed tech-
nologies, constructive and destructive activities, and beneﬁcial and harmful
eﬀects.
In conclusion, looking back at our discussion from the ﬁrst chapter to
the last, it has been an interesting intellectual journey for all of us. We now
see that it is critical to transform our System intuitive thinking into our
System complex thinking; it is also useful to transform our System
complex thinking into our System intuitive complex thinking. This
way, we move from simplicity to complexity, and then to complex
simplicity. The book has now come to an end, but for us, it should not
be a ﬁnal ending point, but rather the new starting point of our intellectual
journey. Our eﬀorts of further exploration of the complexity of mobile
phone behavior will beneﬁt millions of mobile phone users across the
world, including ourselves. Please bear in mind whenever we pick up a
mobile phone: a little device, a complex world!

The Complexity of Mobile Phone Behavior
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316417584.011
13:11:00, subject to the Cambridge Core

Cambridge University Press
978-1-107-12455-4 — Mobile Phone Behavior
Zheng Yan 
Index
More Information
www.cambridge.org
© in this web service Cambridge University Press
Index
accessibility, –, , 
action, , 
activities,
complexity of, , –
family, , –, 
general, , –, –, –, 
hacking, 
in business, –, –, , ,
, , , , –
in daily life, , , , , –,
, 
in education, , , –, ,
–
in medicine, , , –, , 
older people, –, 
recycling, 
technology and, 
travel, 
usage, 
using a mobile phone while driving, –,

activity-based mobile phone behavior, 
addiction, , –
allergy, 
apps, , , , , –, –, ,
–, –
bad users, , 
behavioral characteristics, –, 
behavioral eﬀects, , 
brain cancers, , 
business, –, , , –
calling, , , , 
complex thinking, –, , , 
complexity, 
Daniel Kahneman, 
demographic characteristics, , , , –,

device bacterial contamination, 
device contact dermatitis, , 
disabled learners, 
distraction, , 
driving, , , , , 
dynamic system modeling, , 
dyslexia, 
education, –, –, , , , , ,
–, , , –, –,
–
educational activities, , , 
educational eﬀects, 
educational technologies, , , 
educational users, 
eﬀect-based mobile phone behavior, 
eﬀects,
addiction, 
complexity, , 
contamination, 
general observations, , , 
in business, –, –, , ,
–
in daily life, , , , , –,

in education, , –, 
life-saving, , 
medical, , –
of intervention, , 
on behavioral patterns, 
on drivers, , 
on health, , –, , , , 
on sleep, –, 
on travel, –
positive and negative, , , , 
psychological, 
reporting of, 
gaming, –, , –, –, –,

GPS, , , –, , , –, , ,



Cambridge University Press
978-1-107-12455-4 — Mobile Phone Behavior
Zheng Yan 
Index
More Information
www.cambridge.org
© in this web service Cambridge University Press
health eﬀects, –
health care, , , , , , –, ,
–, , , , –
human side, 
intuitive thinking, , , , , , –
learners with special needs, 
learning, , , , , –, –,
, –, –
medicine, –, –, , , , , , ,
–, , –, , –,
, , , , –
mobile banking, , –, , 
mobile commerce, , , 
mobile credit cards, –, 
mobile devices, 
mobile Internet, , 
mobile payment, –, –, 
mobile phones, , –, , , –, , –,
, , –, , –, –,
–, –, –
mobile phone school policy, 
mobile sensing, –
mobile video, , 
multi-function technology, 
multiple user, 
multitasking, , , 
negative and positive eﬀects, , 
penetration rates, , 
personal technology, , 
personalities, 
phantom vibration syndrome, , , ,

problematic users, , , 
psychological eﬀects, , , 
psychological processes, 
radiation exposure, , , , 
rational thinking, , 
reuse, , 
science of mobile phone behavior, 
screen time, 
security, –, , , –, ,
–
sexting, , , , , , , –
social eﬀects, –, 
special characteristics, , , , 
structural equation modeling, 
system, , –, –
tablets, 
technologies,
addiction, , 
and families, , , 
and economic development, –
and older people, 
in general, , 
in business, , , , , –
in daily life, , , , , , ,
, 
in education, , –, , –
in medicine, –, , , , ,
, –, 
mobile credit cards, –
mobile payments, 
security, 
technology-based mobile phone behavior, 
text-based interventions, 
texting, , , –, , , , –,
–, –, –, –,
, –, , , , –,
, 
tweeting, –, 
use, , , , , –, , –,
, , , –, –, ,
–, , , , 
user-based mobile phone behavior, 
users,
addicted, , 
attitudes towards m-commerce, 
drivers, 
in Africa, 
in business, , , , , –,
–, 
in education, –, , 
in everyday life, , –, ,
–, –, , 
in general, , , , , 
in medicine, , , , , , ,
–
multitasking, 
non-users, 
older, 
of smoking apps, –
with brain tumors, –
young, 
visual impairment, , , 

Index

