
Mobile Media Learning:
I N N O VAT I O N  A N D  I N S P I R AT I O N

Mobile Media Learning: Innovation and Inspiration
Copyright © by Christopher Holden, Seann Dikkers, John Martin, Breanne Litts, et al.
and ETC Press 2015
http://press.etc.cmu.edu/
Design Direction by Shirley Yee
ISBN: 978-1-312-98125-6
Library of Congress Control Number: 2015935860
TEXT: The text of this work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommerical-NonDerivative 2.5 License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/2.5/)
IMAGES: All images appearing in this work are property
of the respective copyright owners, 
and are not released into the Creative Commons.
The respective owners reserve all rights. 

Mobile Media Learning:
I N N O VAT I O N  A N D  I N S P I R AT I O N
E D I T E D  BY 

C H R I S TO P H E R  H O L D E N ,  S E A N N  D I K K E R S , 
J O H N  M A R T I N ,  B R E A N N E  L I T T S ,  E T  A L .

4
TA B L E  O F  C O N T E N T S
introduction
	
	1. 	
What: Innovation and Inspiration in Mobile Media Learning	
9	
	 	
Christopher Holden
	
	2.	
Why: Mobile Media Learning As 
		
Progressive Educational Technology	 	
	
	
	
15	
	 	
Christopher Holden
	
	3.	
When, Where, and How: Practical Considerations 
		
When Designing Your Own Mobile Media Learning		
	
27	
	 	
John Martin, Seann Dikkers, Breanne Litts, and Christopher Holden
mml platforms
	
	4.	
Traveler: A Digital Journal for Enhancing Learning 
		
and Retention in Field Trips	
	
	
	
	
	
45	
	 	
Lohren Deeg and Kyle Parker
	
	5.	
MIT App Inventor: Democratizing Personal Mobile Computing	
59	
	 	
Shaileen Pokress
	
	6.	
ARIS: Augmented Reality for Interactive Storytelling	 	
	
67	
	 	
Christopher Holden
connecting to Classrooms
	
	7.	
School Scene Investigators: 
		
A Collaborative AR Game for Middle School Science Inquiry	
87	
	 	
Denise Bressler
	
	8.	
Building a Student-Centered Classroom with AR	
	
	
101	
	 	
Tim Frandy
	
	9.	
Introducing an Neighborhood: 
		
Mobile as a Springboard for Exploration	
	
	
	
109	
	 	
Kim Garza and Jason Rosenblum
	
	10.	
Experimenting with Locative Media Games 
		
and Storytelling in Fine Arts	 	
	
	
	
	
123	
	 	
Fred Adam and Veronica Perales

5
CONNECTING TO COMMUNITIES
	
	11.	
“To Have Fun and Display Our Awesomeness”: 
		
Mobile Game Design and The Meaning of Life	
	
	
139	
	 	
Bob Coulter and Ross Stauder
	
	12.	
Project Exploration’s Environmental Adventurers: 
		
Amplifying Urban Youth Agency, Identity and Capacity 
		
with Mobile Technology	
	
	
	
	
	
145	
	 	
Jameela Jafri et al.
	
	13.	
Civic Engagement and Geo-Locative Media: 
		
Youth Create a Game to Discuss Political Issues	
	
	
157	
	 	
Juan Rubio
	
	14.	
Technovation Challenge: Introducing Innovation 
		
and Mobile App Development to Girls Around the World	
	
171	
	 	
Angélica Torres
CONNECTING TO Curated Spaces 
	
	15.	
Quest for the Cities of Gold	 	
	
	
	
	
199	
	 	
Gianna May
	
	16.	
ParkQuest: Mobile Media Learning as a Large Group Activity	
211	
	 	
Seann Dikkers, Ryan Rieder, and Tamala Soloman
	
	17.	
Lift Off: A DIY Addition to a Smithsonian Space	
	
	
219	
	 	
Christopher Blakesley and Jennifer McIntosh
	
	18.	
Horror at the Ridges: Engagement with an AR Horror Story		
229	
	 	
Rebecca Fisher and Seann Dikkers
Discussion 
	
	19.	
What Have We Seen, What is Missing, 
		
and What is Next for MML?	 	
	
	
	
	
245	
	 	
Christopher Holden
Closing	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
255
editors and authors biographies	
	
	
	
	
257
Acknowledgements	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
265


SECTION ONE

Introduction
1.	
What: Innovation and Inspiration in Mobile Media Learning
2.	
Why: Mobile Media Learning As Progressive Educational Technology
3.	
When, Where, and How: Practical Considerations When Designing Your 
	
Own Mobile Media Learning


9
Chapter one

What: Innovation and Inspiration 
in Mobile Media Learning
Christopher Holden
On behalf of my co-editors and our authors, thank you for joining us in our explorations of the 
space of Mobile Media Learning (MML). The bulk of this book consists of reports from the mobile 
frontier: students, educators, and researchers who have explored many educational contexts by 
inventing with mobile technologies. This is bookended by some editorial material to add context. 
The first chapter situates our book as part of a continuing conversation about MML and sets forth 
our mode of presentation, a co-edited volume of individual stories. The second chapter positions 
the study of MML within a larger historical picture, where we consider Seymour Papert’s take on 
the computer as a tool for educational self-determinism as analogy and history lesson. In the third 
chapter we descend from theoretical to practical consideration of MML, providing a short manual 
for those who wish to design their own learning projects using mobile technology. Together, this 
introductory matter gets at the what, why, where and how of MML.
As we get to the who of MML, we have grouped the contributed chapters in this book into sections. 
•	
MML Platforms - Projects showcasing software that enables regular people to act 
creatively in the name of MML.
•	
Connecting to Classrooms - Projects where the main context for MML is a 
formal educational setting such as a classroom.
•	
After Shool and in the Summer - Projects whose main setting is informal or 
semiformal learning such as a summer program.
•	
Fields of Dreams - Stories that focus on the development and use of a single exploratory 
MML design. These are all Augmented Reality games designed for public audiences.
However, this grouping is for the sake of your digestion, not an attempt at taxonomy; our authors’ 
work is relevant outside and across the boxes we have chosen to put them in. For example, we chose 
to include Traveler in the Platforms section because it is a general purpose mapping tool you can 
download in the Google Play Store right now. But the authors of that chapter also describe the app’s 
first uses in two very different field study courses. So the chapter could also easily fit in the section 

10
Connecting to Classrooms. Since it is also the story of a design that was made for a specific setting 
and the first test of that device, it would also fit in the final section, Fields of Dreams. 
A glance at our Table of Contents shows the diverse range of inspiring explorations shared within 
these chapters. The subjects cross divides between the Humanities and the Sciences, politics and 
architecture, and even honey bees. Our authors include an undergraduate, PhD students, educators 
involved in community outreach, and University technologists and professors. Their work takes 
place in classrooms, parks, museums, summer programs, an international program for girls and a 
creepy asylum. We hope that all of these stories—regardless of discipline, grade level, or context—
inspire your own explorations.
The final bookend to these stories is a brief reflection. We share a couple of the most prominent 
themes we saw or didn’t see and a few thoughts about where MML is headed next. We hope this 
next chapter is one you help write. 
A  S E R I E S  O F  B O O K S  A B O U T  M M L
Perhaps you have already read the first volume of Mobile Media Learning: Amazing Uses of Mobile 
Devices for Learning (2012). In many ways, this book is a sequel.1 If not, you can go read it right 
now, and I’ll wait here for you.2 
Done? OK good.
A couple years ago, the editors of Mobile Media Learning: Amazing Uses of Mobile Devices for 
Learning —Seann Dikkers, Bob Coulter, and John Martin—assembled several educators who were 
doing interesting work with mobile media and learning and asked them to share their stories with 
the world. The book documented forward thinking work with mobile and that MML was do-
able by normal educators, without exceptional technological skills or investment. These educators 
had found ways to begin exploring the educational spaces opened up by mobile: a loose term we 
use again here to refer to the many manifestations of handheld, networked computers and data 
collection devices (e.g. smartphones, digital cameras, GPS devices, and tablets). The voices and 
projects contained in the book from 2012 are some of the early educational forays into a world 
already transformed by mobile.3 By sharing the stories of these pioneers in mobile learning, the 
editors said, “Yes, you can try this too!”
1 Hopefully more like The Empire Strikes Back than The Matrix Reloaded.
2 Go order it here: press.etc.cmu.edu/content/mobile-media-learning, and read the free pdf while you wait for the print copy to arrive. 
3 Early is a funny word to use here. As mentioned in the last volume and again heavily referenced in this one, Klopfer and Squire 
for example have been thinking, writing, and working in this space for more than a decade. Myself and the other editors have 
been involved for quite some time as well. Yet, these do still feel like the early days of mobile because the pace at which the world is 
changing in terms of this technology has only increased.

11
The previous volume also implicitly made the claim that there is something special about the uses 
of mobile for learning that come from the ground up, through small experiments and communities 
of practice. Each chapter represented work done at a grassroots level, not unified by a field, age level, 
job description, or methodological similarity. Together those stories provided a rich snapshot of a 
few corners of the world where educators were finding ways to take mobile into their own hands 
to produce new kinds of learning opportunities. It was an early statement in a conversation we 
hope to add to here about the use of mobile for the aims of educators of all stripes, not just within 
specialized research programs. It has inspired new projects, and helped to connect others who were 
already involved with similar work. It is now time to check in, in this book, on the progress of 
MML.
“All well and fine,” you say. “Soooooooo, is this book just a few more stories?”
Yes and no.
Yes, once again we have brought together a wide array of designers and given them a chance to share 
their stories. Yes, again we want you the reader to be able to see something familiar and inspiring, 
and say “me too!” However, no, this is not merely an addendum.
The few chapters in the previous volume could hardly have overseen every possibility for the uses of 
mobile media for learning or constituted a complete representation of who was out there, doing this 
good work. That territory is vast and constantly growing. The projects described in this volume cover 
new ground and different goals, contexts, and constraints. At a minimum, the growing diversity 
of participants, approaches, and agendas you will see in this volume gives a more complete picture 
of what is out there. As a reader, it should be even easier this time to see an experiment, context, or 
idea that you can connect with.
Moreover, after putting together this round of stories and working with many more explorers whose 
stories are not yet in print, we can speak with more conviction to a theme that guided the first 
MML book. Across all these differences in context and goals, there really is something shared, the 
active interpretation of mobile technologies to enact the ideals of progressive education: learning as 
a meaning-making activity, self-determination as a goal and value, learning that is co-constructed 
among its participants, and learning that happens through making new connections. In this book, 
we reveal more of the shape of MML, in breadth and depth, than was shown or existed at the time 
of the previous effort.
This volume should also help you to check in with a conversation that is evolving in pace with 
the swift embedding of mobile technologies into all aspects of life. Two years is a long time in the 
world of mobile. Newcomers are able to cheaply and quickly produce truly fascinating work that 
would have been hard to imagine emerging into practicality from inexperience two short years ago. 
Between the two volumes then, we can see an evolution in thought and action taking place as the 
tools have themselves progressed and found their ways into more hands.

12
Finally, the best reason for more stories is quite simply that they are inspiring. All of the authors 
have invested their hearts and souls in their projects and their commitment shows. None of them 
know all the answers (neither do we), but they all see something on the horizon and are unafraid to 
follow that vision. It is a wonderful thing to see so many people embracing the opportunity to play 
an important role in the development of their own intellectual destinies. These authors have given 
us a lot to think about and make us want to do more. They will do the same for you.
W H AT  I S  M O B I L E  M E D I A  L E A R N I N G ?
I have a confession to make. The term Mobile Media Learning hasn’t always felt very clear or 
helpful to me. MML is a fine enough acronym, and certainly a good acronym is one of the keys to 
the realm, but what does MML mean? It was quite a while before I realized that it is more about 
an attitude than about anything else. So before going any further, I’d like to clear up how we think 
about MML.
For a long time, I thought about MML something like this: Okay, mobile, like mobile devices. 
Media, now I’m thinking about multimedia and all the conversations going back to the 90’s about 
multimedia in education, like the promise of the CD-ROM. And learning, well at least I think I 
know what that is. Soooooooo… MML is what we get when we put those together, right? Media 
delivered via a mobile device for the purpose of learning?
There is quite a lot of activity involving mobile and learning that satisfies this simple definition. 
However, this definition does not quite fit with the conversations about MML that I’ve been a party 
to. For example, nowhere in this book or the previous one is there a chapter about using a Learning 
Management System to administer reading quizzes online or deliver them via phones as if this were 
progress. The kind of MML we are talking about is somehow supposed to be about more than the 
usual formula: school + mobile device = learning. So, what was missing in my initial definition of 
MML? How can I do better for you than simply saying, “I know it when I see it”?4 
The  definition of MML from the first book is really very helpful, though it flew under my radar 
until I began to put together this chapter. “Mobile media learning includes the instant and ongoing 
connection of handheld devices to online information and communication for personal growth and 
increased agency within professions and communities of practice.”5 What is importantly included 
here that is missing from a more generic interpretation of MML is the bit about “increased agency.” 
This is why taking quizzes on your cell phone instead of on paper doesn’t fit. Thinking about mobile 
technologies in terms of managing persons and their doings contributes more to the bureaucracy 
of education than learning itself, and simply reproducing existing forms of instruction on a small 
4 The characterization of pornography by Supreme Court justice Potter Stewart: “I know it when I see it” (Jacobellis v. Ohio, 1964).
5 Dikkers et al, 2012, p. 21.

13
screen instead of paper also misses the point of what is really possible with mobile: going somewhere 
new, seeing something you have never seen before, sharing a deep interest, doing something you 
had no idea was even possible, telling stories in new ways, making something you care about, 
connecting new ideas, and generally taking ownership of who you are going to be through what 
you choose to do and think about. 
MML is a broad concept but it retains meaning. Despite the many purposes, contexts, contents, and 
disciplines represented by people using MML, we usually have something to talk about together. 
As a loosely confederated set of thinkers and practitioners in MML for example, one of the desires 
that is frequently expressed is to use mobile to help unpack learning from all the little boxes we 
have squeezed it into. Educators seek to free ideas that have been isolated through disciplinary 
walls and rigidly defined roles. They use MML to push back on the traditional boundaries of 
School to connect learning to the real world. In aligning with efforts like these, our commitment 
is not to mobile itself as a set of tools for improving learning as it has already been constructed 
within educational structures, but to explore how mobile enables us to make learning come alive 
in new ways. 
We are not interested in all outcomes the abstract affordances of mobile technologies provide, 
but with how individuals and groups can interpret mobile technologies to achieve a higher degree 
of self-determination in the learning they create or engage in. We are people who see the mobile 
revolution as a chance to make instances of education more about what learning should really be 
about. That’s MML.
Let us not forget too that mobile itself is a big deal. It is the fastest spreading, most thoroughly 
adopted technology in history. It has taken two previous destabilizing innovations—the computer 
and the internet—and has put them in the pockets of most everyone.6 At this moment in history, 
so many ideas are suddenly possible, or so much easier as to feel newly possible, because of mobile. 
Disregarding the influence of this context on our world and work would be careless.
To represent progress in the exploration of mobile learning, the editors felt strongly that the most 
appropriate and useful format for continuing the conversation started in the first book was to 
again have practitioners tell us their stories, and—through the mangling known as co-editing—to 
produce a plural account that still strives to make some sense of the chaos. We believe that this 
format can move forward conversations about the roles mobile media can play in learning because 
it productively and honestly addresses the following issues:
Preserve diversity. If there is one obvious finding of the innovative approaches to mobile learning 
presented here and generally, it is the way MML transcends typical divisions between age and 
experience level, subjects or disciplines, job classifications, and educational contexts such as 
6 comScore reported in May 2014, on data from March, that 166 million Americans have smartphones for example. This is a market 
penetration of over 68%, up from 54% the previous year.

14
classrooms and summer programs. Writing separate books for each learning context encountered 
through MML misrepresents both the reality of these situations and hides what is one of the 
strongest indications we are on to something more than the same old thing. It is refreshing to see 
people working together across traditional divides. Above all we seek to faithfully represent the 
diversity of participants and approaches taken.
Avoid authoritarianism. It is common for researchers to act in the capacity of an interpretive 
filter, representing alone upstream what happened on the ground among many. But it can be more 
honest, and in this case it is only a bit more trouble, to let everyone involved have their own voice. 
If all this work is about increasing the agency of those who participate, doesn’t it make sense to let 
them tell their own stories? We present the plurality that exists across MML without contorting 
these authors’ ideas to fit a pre-programmed moral, except in our editorial chapters (which we 
cannot stop you from skipping entirely). This way you can better help decide whether the central 
themes we see emerging ring true to you. Hopefully too, you will find others we have missed.
Simplicity of storytelling. Writing about learning too often hides meaning within specialist jargon. 
Myself, the other editors, and our authors have tried our best to avoid this trap, describing the 
relevant goals and approaches in each project in everyday language as much as possible. These stories 
should be accessible to those without significant technological expertise or degrees in Education.
Provide conversations. Because our main goal is to provoke further conversation, we proudly and 
straightforwardly share these stories as they are. We hope they pass a simple and honest test for 
validity, wholly appropriate for the exploratory mode of research we have witnessed and participated 
in: does anything you see here seem likely enough to have value that you might try something 
similar yourself? Can you discover enough of what was actually done to give it a go? 
As we dive into MML, it is worth reflecting on how the artifacts we produce in the name of research 
or conversation aim to represent the activity that preceded their creation. In a day and age when so 
much conversation happens outside books, we should be even more thoughtful about when, how, 
and why we put one together. We think this one was worth it, and we hope you do too.

15
Chapter TWO

Why: Mobile Media Learning As 
Progressive Educational Technology
Christopher Holden
The previous book in this series framed Mobile Media Learning (MML) by connecting the present 
and future to the past of progressive thinking about learning. John Dewey served to embody the 
perspective of someone who cares and knows a great deal about creating strong opportunities for 
deep learning and who is thrust into a world redefined by mobile technology. This perspective 
also helped to unify the diverse experiences shared in the chapters themselves. Here, rather than 
going back to the dawn of universal education during the industrial revolution, we can once again 
establish common context through an earlier technological and social revolution: the computer. 
Just as Dewey was a voice for humanity rising out of a system of education created for good but 
often doing evil, the computer has a progressive champion whose words are even more relevant 
today: Seymour Papert.
Papert is well-known for his role in the creation and promotion of many technologies to support 
learning, especially Logo and its later variants and derivatives1, but the truly progressive nature 
of his views about the learning he wished to support through technology are perhaps less 
widely remembered than they should be. I remember encountering his work under the guise of 
cosntructionism—for me then just another -ism—regarding the how of education, not realizing he 
had a lot to say about why until I read some of his work on my own. He championed software like 
Logo not to improve student performance in existing math classes, but as a way for students and 
teachers together to begin to explore a new kind of mathematical thinking that went far beyond 
math class and made explicit connections to non-mathematical parts of life. He saw this as a 
subversive act that demanded creative input from its participants to function as intended and, when 
taken seriously, might form the basis of liberating learning from the limiting perspective of School.2 
1 Logo is an educational programming language and graphical environment with a rich and interesting history. The homepage for 
the Logo Foundation has a brief history of the software and its use: http://el.media.mit.edu/logo-foundation/logo/index.html.
2 Along with Papert, I will use “School” here and in later chapters to refer to the well-earned stereotype of formal educational 
environments. Certainly not every school, or every experience within a school, is characterizable using this stereotype.

16
I would like to revisit some of the major themes in Papert’s The Children’s Machine (1993) as a 
preface to the work of our authors here. His views on technology and learning can help us better 
understand the reach and importance of the mobile explorations they have undertaken. Taking a 
brief look back in time can help us see the broader context to which we hope to contribute and help 
us possibly avoid some common missteps in our discussion and evaluation of work that makes use 
of technology to improve learning. 
T H E  C H I L D R E N ’ S  M A C H I N E
Although Papert has written significantly in many places, The Children’s Machine (1993) parallels 
most closely what we are trying to capture and speak to in the world of mobile and learning here. 
Papert begins his book with the idea of a visitor from the distant past. This visitor immediately 
recognizes the vast changes in how the modern world operates since their time, in particular how 
sciences like astronomy or medicine have greatly advanced. At the same time this visitor does not 
find himself so out of place in a modern classroom. In fact, little has changed. This hypothetical 
visitor asks, “Why, through a period when so much human activity has been revolutionized, have 
we not seen comparable change in how we help our children learn?” (p. 2).
Papert blames the conservatism of School for holding back progress in learning, especially that its 
participants are expected to fill narrow predetermined roles rather than take active roles in learning. 
He claims, 
	
School has an inherent tendency to infantilize children by placing them in 
a position of having to do as they are told, to occupy themselves with work 
dictated by someone else and that, moreover, has no intrinsic value—schoolwork 
is done only because the designer of a curriculum decided that doing the work 
would shape the doer into a desirable form. (p. 24) 
He further explains, “School does not have in its institutional mind that teachers have a creative 
role; it sees them as technicians doing a technical job, and for this the word training is perfectly 
appropriate” (p. 70). He echoes Ivan Illich’s famous condemnation of School that the main thing it 
teaches is the need to be taught (p. 140).
In sentiment then, Papert aligns with progressive educational thinkers like Dewey, Friere, Piaget, 
and Vygostsky. Papert hopes that the changes in learning the hypothetical visitor might be able 
to see would include greater agency of students and teachers in their roles; learning that is active 
and self-directed; learning that is expected to happen in evolutionary and emergent ways, instead 
of according to subject and timetable; and that what is valued as a route to knowledge might be 
expanded beyond simple individual efficacies within the narrow print literacies typically emphasized 
in School. He wants the visitor to be able to see learning that resonates with “with a respectful 
attitude toward children and a democratic social philosophy” (p. 15). To hint at what this learning 

17
could look like, he considers powerful learning moments in his own early life, as well as some he 
has seen in his work with youth and teachers, and laments that these kinds of experiences are hard 
for School to recognize or support. 
At the same time, Papert criticizes the actual actions and effects of progressive reforms to date. He 
sees the progressive education movement as fundamentally having its heart in the right place, but 
finds that its proponents too often lack the tools and conviction to initiate real change. He says, 
“Almost all experiments purporting to implement progressive education have been disappointing 
because they simply did not go far enough in making the student the subject of the process rather 
than the object” (p. 14), and “so far none of those who challenge these hallowed traditions has been 
able to loosen the hold of the educational establishment on how the children are taught” (p. 3).
Regarding conviction, Papert sees little help coming from traditional centers of leadership like 
education research, educational policy, and—in his neck of the woods—computer aided instruction. 
These are typically forces and means for assimilation that ultimately serve the system. However he 
does see rebels doing important work from within the system—yearners—who operate as “a sort of 
fifth column within School itself: Large numbers of teachers manage to create within the walls of 
their own classrooms oases of learning profoundly at odds with the education philosophy publicly 
espoused by their administrators” (p. 3).3 He believes that together these individual subversive 
efforts can one day be successful, growing and multiplying from lone voices in the darkness into 
true grassroots action.
Papert explains that change is not possible until access to powerful tools becomes commonplace: 
	
Early designers of experiments in progressive education lacked the tools 
that would allow them to create new methods in a reliable and systematic 
fashion. With very limited means at their disposal, they were forced to rely too 
heavily on the specific talents of individual teachers or a specific match with a 
particular social context. As a result, what successes they had often could not be 
generalized. (p. 14–5)
He sums up the to-date failure of progressive ideals to change learning, and his optimism in their 
eventual success, through the parable of humanity’s dream of flight. Papert tells us, 
	
My hypothetical Schoolers said that progressive education has been tried and did 
not work. I agree that it hasn’t worked very well­ but in something like the sense 
in which Leonardo da Vinci failed in his attempts to invent an airplane. Making 
an airplane in Leonardo’s time needed more than a creative manipulation of all 
that was known about aeronautics. His failure to make a workable airplane did 
3 Papert does not only count teachers among the yearners. he specifically includes administrators and parents as well. The term 
indicates an outlook on education, not a place within its hierarchy.

18
not prove him wrong in his ·assumptions about the feasibility of flying machines. 
Leonardo’s airplane had to wait for the development of some­ thing that could 
come about only through great changes in the way society managed its resources. 
The Wright Brothers could succeed where Leonardo could only dream because 
a technological infrastructure supplied materials and tools and engines and 
fuels, while a scientific culture (which developed in coevolution with this 
infrastructure) supplied ideas that drew on the peculiar capabilities of these new 
resources. Educational innovators even in the very recent past were in a situation 
analogous to Leonardo’s…When educators tried to craft an actual school based 
on these [progressive] general principles, it was as if Leonardo had tried to make 
an airplane out of oak and power it with a mule. Most practitioners who tried to 
follow the seminal thinkers in education were forced to compromise so deeply 
that the original intent was lost (p. 15–6).
For Papert, the computer is the first tool capable of enabling individual efforts at progressive change 
to actually take off. This conviction stems from his early work with computers in 1965 at MIT, long 
before they were common in the world, where he realized their capacity to do more than calculate. 
He says, “problems which had been abstract and hard to grasp became concrete and transparent” 
(p. 13). To explain further,
	
It was pure play. We were finding out what could be done with a computer, and 
anything interesting was worthwhile. Nobody yet knew enough to decree that 
some things were more serious than others. We were like infants discovering the 
world. I thought about computers and children. I was playing like a child and 
experiencing a volcanic explosion of creativity. Why couldn’t the computer give 
a child the same kind of experience? Why couldn’t a child play like me? What 
would have to be done to make this possible? (p. 33)
Learning with a computer was something automatic and authentic for him. Its ability to respond to 
and provoke his inquiry suggested that others too could use it to find new and powerful routes to 
knowledge. Of course, at the time he was one of the few people—even at MIT—to have access to 
a computer. He had to wait until 1980 for the landscape of access to change sufficiently. But when 
appropriate hardware became available and inexpensive enough, learning with computers began to 
happen outside specialist circles.
Papert is clear that access to hardware, while necessary, is not sufficient to increase agency in the 
ways he imagined. He realized that transformative as these machines can be for the few people who 
will be enticed and capable of approaching their use as such, it is software that is really capable of 
empowering the majority. Providing access to the power of the computer means making software 
that enables regular people to use the machine in creative ways. He made Logo so that teachers and 
youth could use the computer as he did in those early days.

19
Papert also mentions a third aspect—beyond hardware and software—of putting powerful tools 
into practice. He doesn’t give it a name, but I will call it inspiration. He describes 1980 as a pivotal 
year for change because enough people had read Mindstorms—Papert’s first book, an initial plea 
to get others thinking about how technology could be best used for learning—to get excited about 
what could be tried using computers and Logo. Finally, these
	
three events came together to give a powerful boost to the awareness among 
teachers that computers could be used in the spirit of progressive education. 
Mindstorms set this out in easily accessible form, inexpensive personal computers 
reached a level of performance that could support a usable version of Logo, 
and Logo software became commercially available. The result was a grassroots 
movement that generated many thousands of classroom implementations of PET 
[Progressive Educational Technology]. (p. 42)
Papert gives many specific examples of classroom implementations using Logo and Lego-Logo and 
how they convey what he sees as their promise for enacting self-directed learning. The particulars 
are not especially important to review here, but in telling these stories he also clearly lays out a set 
of connected values that characterize these creations. 
1.	 Active, self-directed learning. Students should be subjects actively directing their 
learning, not objects of instruction.
2.	 Bricolage. Doing what we can with what’s at hand is a valuable way to make new 
connections between ideas, disciplines, etc.
3.	 Cultivation. A guiding metaphor for knowledge to be added to the existing ones: 
construction and acquisition.
4.	 Concreteness. Reverse the traditional idea that intellec­tual progress consists of 
moving from the concrete to the abstract. Computers provide a new kind of 
concreteness we should value and use as a way to renew value of concreteness 
elsewhere.
5.	 Creating publicly. Making things “in the world” is especially valuable.
6.	 Informal learning. There is inherent value in informal ways of knowing, not just 
as scaffolds for formal instruction.
7.	 Time. If it is important, take your time with it.
These values transcend Logo and the early days of classroom computing. They can flesh out the 
concept of “increasing agency” for us with MML as they did for him back then. In particular, I 
think the above list of values can help us identify our authors’ creative urges and see how even little 
experiments along these lines might fit into a bigger picture of meaningful change. Although not all 
of our authors explicitly aim to overthrow oppressive forces in School—or are even working within 

20
schools—it is clear that their efforts are in the name of producing learning that is qualitatively 
different than the norm. They are all looking for new ways to connect young people’s abilities 
and interests to the world we live in. Their work will also help us directly consider the triangle of 
hardware, software, and inspiration that forms the catalyst for change in a mobile age.
T W O  D E C A D E S  A F T E R  T H E  C H I L D R E N ’ S  M A C H I N E
So if in retelling The Children’s Machine, I am in effect saying, “It’s all going to work! Just 
substitute mobile for computer. Papert says so!” you might wonder about the twenty-one years 
between that book and today, or the thirty-plus years since the supposedly pivotal moment in 
1980 when the powerful tools Logo and Mindstorms became widely available. Surely, Papert’s 
thesis has now had its chance. How much closer have we got to achieving the progressive dream?
Some look at the current state of School and think back on Papert’s moment of optimism as just 
one more failed progressive dream. After all, here we are—through several rounds of large scale 
reform including No Child Left Behind and Race to the Top and now the Common Core and huge 
efforts to purchase computers and implement curricula aware of them and the internet—and the 
net effect seems to have been to regird School as an institution mostly concerned with pre-defined, 
standardized achievements as primary goals for its participants and assured in its uniform power 
over them through those standardizing mechanisms. The computers are no longer just in the lab, 
but Computer Science is just another one of the disciplines, another subject in which our students 
seem to be constantly falling behind.
Tyack and Cuban’s book, Tinkering Toward Utopia (1995) probably contains the most well-known 
skeptical  take on the potential for technology to materially change education. Their claims in part 
echo Papert’s criticism of earlier progressive movements.4 That is, the supposed changes enabled 
by technological progress are judged to be simply too small and timid in the face of what they call 
“The Grammar of School,” while the revolutionary character of the reform becomes assimilated to 
the status quo. I don’t exactly disagree with this big picture. Yet, there are yet reasons for optimism 
that we might miss with a one sentence “State of School” report or if we simply accept Cuban and 
Tyack’s criticism as proof that new tools are an immaterial part of trying to make things better.
But why do we expect School itself, as an institution, to have been changed thus through centralized 
reform? Recall, Papert doesn’t envision change coming from the top or arriving in the form of 
centralized reform. His story begins from the stubbornness of School to change, and he already saw 
in 1993 how it works to co-opt the computer in an attempt to limit its subversive potential. School 
assimilates the computer to its ways, using the computer to aid instruction “without questioning the 
structure or the educational goals of traditional School” (p. 41). It is then no surprise that 
4 See (Papert, 1997) for his own statement of and rebuttal to Tyack and Cuban and other common criticisms of his dream for 
progressive educational technology.

21
	
School did not let itself change under the influence of the new device; it saw the 
computer through the mental lens of its own ways of thinking and doing. It is a 
characteristic of conservative systems that accommodation [change on the part 
of School in response to the transformative uses of new technologies] will come 
only when the opportunities of assimilation have been exhausted. (p. 41) 
In fact, Papert explicitly doubts the inherent capacity of central action—even reform—to be capable 
of addressing the needs of progressive education.
Just as Papert does not dismiss what progressives have ultimately aimed for, only the strength and 
fervor with which they have been able to pursue their dreams, we should be careful to dismiss his 
work or our authors’ with the trite response, “been there, done that”. One lesson to learn from this 
history should be to dissuade us from the incautious empiricism progressives often trick themselves 
into. If our reports on the use of new learning technologies limit themselves to seeing our work 
as developing instruments to be applied to the existing problems of learning, we have ceded our 
ground before the battle begins. If we are instead after whole new ways of thinking about and 
accomplishing learning, we should remain committed to that interpretation in our measurements 
and reflections as well as our production and use.
Papert saw the singularity of the computer, the strength with which it changed our sense of what 
was possible in the world, and saw an opportunity for megachange in education. He saw a chance 
to avoid the traps we have inadvertently built around learning in the process of putting together 
School. And while the three decades since Logo and computers in classrooms have not brought 
about the utopia we might wish for, today there are more and better equipped rebels than ever 
before. Thanks to the computer and now to two more technologies in the intervening years—
internet to connect those computers and mobile to put those advances your pocket—yearners like 
our authors are able to produce and collaborate together across institutional boundaries.
M O B I L E  A N D  T H E  I N T E R N E T:  T W O  N E W  T O O L S
We have so far hinted at the analogy between the twin revolutions of the computer and mobile and 
the internet in terms of their similarity. Briefly, it is worth considering some differences between the 
tools available then and now to see what it is about the internet and mobile that are specific advances 
for those of us hoping to push forward the ideals of progressive learning. There are of course many 
differences that have been discussed extensively elsewhere (e.g. Klopfer and Squire, 2008), but three 
stand out as salient for us: 1) multiplicity of software environments for digital creation, 2) speed of 
communication, and 3) overwhelming pressure from and connections to life outside School. Many 
of these are not specifically affordances of mobile, but may more properly be described as the power 
of people connected by the internet when it is in most everyone’s pocket.

22
When Papert wrote Mindstorms, Logo in classrooms and computer labs was really one of the only 
games in town when it came to large numbers of people having access to the combination of 
hardware, software, and inspiration necessary to make use of the computer to do something new. 
Papert describes Logo as not only for doing a new kind of math but for connecting multiple arenas 
of life. He’s especially proud of a collaboration between students using Logo in the name of dance. 
But we can now look at Logo and see how little of life is touched by its use compared to the 
programs and services available today. Since then, tools with obvious appeal outside the hard-
edged computer culture have proliferated greatly, their reach has been vastly extended by both the 
internet and changes to how software is bought and sold (e.g. open source, mobile apps). With the 
incorporation of multiple media forms and advanced interface design, connecting out from a very 
computer centric interface and programmer mindset has become but one of many cognitive styles 
grounding these tools and their default uses.5
The internet has done more than speed up software distribution. It has fundamentally changed the 
routes by which people can communicate and collaborate. Back in 1993, when Papert mentioned 
the thousands of educators who were exploring with Logo, we can appreciate that these points of 
light were either scattered rather diffusely through the country, largely concentrated in particular 
areas (say near MIT), or some combination of both. For those trying to do the good work away 
from a geographical center of the movement, we can appreciate how minimal and infrequent any 
contact with others nearer the center might have been. For example, my own elementary school 
teachers, Mrs. Robinson and Mrs. Jackson, were excellent teachers but somewhat disconnected 
from the technology in use at our school. When I was six, they did like many others and took us to 
the computer lab for an hour a week and moved into the background. This was my first exposure 
to computers and Logo. Could their practices have evolved further or more quickly were they more 
connected with others engaged in similar endeavors?6
So today, I take it for granted that I, sitting here in New Mexico just as geographically and maybe 
socioculturally disconnected from our authors in Wisconsin, New York, or Cambridge as my 
elementary school teachers were in the early eighties, nevertheless have many ways of thinking and 
acting together with other explorers of MML across the globe. We are truly working together, only 
many miles apart. It’s not so much that the world is flat, but deep connections can be made across 
great distances between regular people with tools that are today common.
5 Although I am as likely to think first of fancy software as the next technological idealogue, just consider what has been enabled by 
Microsoft Word, email, and the humble internet forum in the way of connecting and empowering people to follow their dreams. If 
we could more consistently realize the value of even simple tools by today’s standards for progressive learning, we’d be there already.
6 All the same, I remember Logo fondly. Those hours with it in the lab were memorable moments of creative power with computers. 
Our use bore no connection to what we did in math, but I had the freedom to play with Logo there, and enjoyed using it to make 
abstract landscapes through absurd adjustments of the turtle’s parameters. More than most of the official curricula in elementary 
school, it had a subtle but profound impact on my understanding of myself, computers, and learning that continues to evolve today.

23
By making it far easier for people to collaborate across long distances, the internet has also altered 
the ways in which grassroots action can become broader change. Initiatives no longer need to occur 
at massive scale to be viable because resources, participation, and momentum can be carried through 
those distances with so much less effort than before. To understand this change in orientation, recall 
Papert’s skepticism that central planning would be willing and able to deliver progressive education. 
In part this is a simple organizational impracticality: a hierarchical model of delivery and adoption 
has narrow bandwidth; if change comes from the top, that limits the diversity possible of what is 
delivered to the masses. It is as true with educational materials as it is for television broadcasts. Some 
diversity can be accommodated, and this is typically through the usual segmentation of School into 
disciplines, grade levels, and job descriptions: this stuff for Geometry classes, this other stuff for 
English AP, this stuff for elementary classrooms, these are the responsibilities of teachers, textbook 
authors, and so on. In this model, where change comes from the top, its implementation should be 
capable of directly influencing a great number of people (every 8th grade math teacher) to be worth 
adopting and its instrumentation should be possible within the bureaucracy (teachers don’t have 
time to write books; they have lesson planning to do). Conversely, when thousands of people can 
work together not based upon being 8th grade math teachers, but say an interest in locative data 
collection, they can organize along the lines of their shared interests, taking conversations farther, 
producing materials, and cross-pollinating without any official means to do so. The work of a few 
can more easily spread and mature without ever needing to seek the route of the tens of millions.
Finally, and where we begin to see how the promise of the computer and internet are actually 
made material with mobile, we have the incredibly fast adoption and the thoroughness with which 
mobile technology has become enmeshed with everyday life. On the one hand, access has already 
been discussed as a necessary ingredient. We suddenly live in a time of near universal adoption of 
mobile internet devices.7 This was never true with non-mobile computers and might never be. On 
the other hand, even more important than simple access are the secondary effects of widespread 
use, especially when we consider the ability of School to employ its standard tactics of assimilation.
With the computer, School defended its ways by assimilating the device, creating a new room—the 
computer lab—and a new field—the computational arts/sciences. Thus isolated, the computer’s 
possible harm was minimized. But with mobile, you cannot relegate it to a special room or a certain 
field because students are bringing their devices to School in their pockets. Because School does not 
in most cases primarily provide access to these devices, it cannot limit their transformative uses in 
the same way they did with computers.
This doesn’t mean School won’t or hasn’t tried to preclude the possibilities of mobile. Within formal 
educational environments the most common response to mobile technology remains to simply 
pretend it doesn’t exist—“Put away your phones everybody!” The strategy has been to draw a line 
7 Serious issues of access remain, but there are several orders of magnitude difference between then and now—most teens and 
adults in the US have smartphones or similarly capable pocketed devices. Adoption across the rest of the world is perhaps even more 
fantastically fast. Cell phones are connecting the world as never before.

24
between productive thinking and use of these devices—“Phones are only used for texting your 
friends and Facebook! We are here to do real work”—and hence ban the use of them because they 
distract students from learning. As a long term strategy it seems untenable because mobile device use 
is so prolific outside the classroom, and not just for chatting and gossip. Mobile is pervasively useful 
for a lot of what we do in life despite time wasted on Facebook (ignoring for the moment the cogent 
argument that there might be something important to what we do there as well). As people like our 
authors continue to develop instances of powerful learning enabled by mobile technologies, more 
and more of the public will realize that learning isn’t somehow magically exempt from the influence 
of this technology. Phones aren’t necessarily disruptive to learning, simply disruptive to the order of 
the typical School classroom. It will become more and more difficult to see School as contributing 
value to people’s lives—not merely acting as an entitled gatekeeper—if it so aggressively ignores 
such a major part of them.
M A K I N G  T H E  M O S T  O F  M O B I L E
Our—the editors’— job in putting together these stories is to share a common sense of purpose 
among them, to help you to see them for their similarities and importance. What I see in this book 
is a cross section of the sort of grassroots action Papert described emerging around Logo three 
decades ago. Our authors use these tools not to gain simple efficiencies within the existing system 
but to find new ways to organize and think about learning. This activity is made possible through 
the existence of robust software, the availability of appropriate hardware, and a cultural awareness 
that change is possible and can be effected by those on the ground floor. I hope this book can be 
a part of spreading that awareness and inspiration. Within each discipline or grade level at a single 
school, there are likely not enough of us to make a dent in the status quo, but together across these 
contexts, we start to look a bit more substantial.
This is important because as students, teachers, and researchers—participants with each other in 
relation to School—we have our own choices to make. As Papert maintains, it is the progressives 
themselves who have thus far been too timid in realizing their vision (1993, p. 14). We are too 
often willing to stay in our silos or subjugate promises for substantial change to co-option by the 
status quo by interpreting them as mere instruments of instruction. Researchers should recognize 
that meaningful change in School is about development work, not imposing new standards (p. 41). 
And what can hold teachers back is too tight a focus on what their students are supposed to learn 
while being inhibited to learn themselves (p. 72). The success or failure of mobile media learning to 
transform learning will be measured not in individual trials, but through our willingness to create 
with one another to make learning fly. 

25
R E F E R E N C E S
Klopfer, E., & Squire, K. (2008). Environmental detectives - the development of an augmented reality platform for 
environmental simulations. Education Technology Research and Development, 56, 203–228.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York: Basic Books, Inc.
Papert, S. (1993). The Children’s Machine: Rethinking school in the age of the computer. NewYork: Basic Books.
Papert, S. (1997). Why school reform is impossible. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 6(4), 417-427.
Cuban, L., & Tyack, D. (1995). Tinkering toward utopia: A century of public school reform. Nation. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.


27
Chapter THREE

When, Where, and How: 
Practical Considerations When Designing 
Your Own Mobile Media Learning
John Martin, Seann Dikkers, Breanne Litts, and Christopher Holden
It can be a daunting task to imagine integrating new media into an existing program or even 
starting from scratch: Where should I even start? What should I do in my context? What if I don’t 
have a budget for resources? What are the tradeoffs of using one design over the other? These are 
questions we and our authors also ask ourselves each and every time we start a new project. This 
chapter is designed specifically as a bit of practical help to support you as you take on the challenge 
of navigating the uncertain territory of MML.
The first piece of advice we have to offer, one that is thoroughly borne out in the chapters that 
follow, is that there are many entry points and learning goals to pursue using mobile technologies; 
there is no one right way, specific class or subject that is a better fit than any other. MML is and 
should be a place of diverse interactions and development. 
I D E N T I F Y  YO U R  L E A R N I N G  G O A L S  A N D  S T R AT E G I E S
The applicable goals for MML are broad, centered around “increasing agency” within the processes 
of learning. The list of values derived from Papert’s work in the last chapter (p. 19) should be a 
useful, though by no means complete, framework for thinking about the ways in which agency 
might be increased. There are some specific affordances of mobile that are worth paying attention to 
when conceiving how you might implement MML in your learning context. Remember, the point 
of all this is not simply to translate paper instruction to a small screen. Rather, picking up mobile 
media should be a way of enacting learning you care deeply about. Depending on whether you 
design a simple content-driven tour or your students are producing interactive content, outlining 
the bounds of your pedagogical situation in terms of goals, time, and technology will help scope 
the potential designs you can tackle.

28
One way to think about the agency leveraged in the design and use of MML is to focus on who is 
doing the creative work of making. Agency is key in making an experience authentic. If nothing 
that participants do makes a difference in the experience, then it means they are not really doing 
anything. Certainly a big step in this direction is the act of designing and enacting learning 
activities with MML rather than using what is handed down to you from someone else. There are 
many places to situate the agency you want to develop. Within an activity, participants inherently 
have less agency as consumers than as producers, but this does not mean the only way to increase 
learners’ agency is to have them constantly in the driver’s seat. Mobile media can help support 
existing high-agency designs as well as be used to develop them from scratch. 
Start by asking yourself some guiding questions to frame your design: 
Identify a Connection. Do you want players to learn about a historical event? Do you want them to 
gain data collection skills? Or do you want them to critically engage with place through producing? 
Approach design with what experiences you want participants to end up with and the objectives of 
your time. How do you want this learning time to end? How will you know if you have ended there? 
How and where is your use of mobile media relevant? What unexpected or emergent outcomes can 
you anticipate or support? Finally, what designs will lead to that ending?
Identify desired results. Should students merely remember and understand concepts? Or use your 
design to take on the roles of professionals? If so, are they actually contributing to the field, like 
with citizen science data collection type activities, or does their mimicry have other motivations, 
like being able to see the world from a new perspective? Should they apply and analyze concepts by 
reviewing and evaluating each others’ examples? Should they know more about a building or park? 
Should they have ‘met’ a historical character? Observed something in the world? Or should they 
struggle with creating artifacts to teach peers? Some results are best met with MML, some may not 
be. This is an area to look for a good match between affordances of MML to create an experience 
and what learning you’d like to see happen. 
Determine what learners are going to do and how you are going to know they have done it. 
Do you want to use mobile media to give exposure to content, or are you planning to have them 
demonstrate a higher order thinking through your design? Could learners build a presentation with 
data gathered from the field? Will they need to work together to solve a problem that exists entirely 
within the mobile media? Should they be able to tell a story? The action of learning can take a 
variety of forms. Consider the verbs your design will enable in the name of learning and how these 
verbs work across the multiple media in your design. 
R E S P E C T  W H O  YO U  A R E
It is also important to look inward. It is easy to forget that learning opportunities don’t just depend 
on theoretical frameworks but your personality and the specifics of the situations you’re working in. 

29
These more personal qualities should be seen as essential ingredients in the making of something 
new and explicitly reflected upon in the planning stages.
Specifically, start with learning about yourself, as this will influence your design decisions implicitly 
whether or not you acknowledge such explicitly. It’s important to identify a path that feels most 
authentic to you. Starting here will help you determine your own comfort levels regarding chaos 
and control—beginning afresh with new media can be intimidating. To own and leverage up front 
what you bring the table plays a large role in whether and how you continue when you confront 
challenges.
If you lean instructionist—orienting naturally to the management of the details of what students 
learn and how they learn it—you may want to begin with a didactic approach to your use of mobile 
media. Perhaps, make something for students to consume (like a tour) or directly enact (like a story) 
as opposed to setting up scenario in which the students are doing the creating. Mobile can deliver 
content and information that builds knowledge. By situating your content in the outside world 
instead of within a textbook in a classroom, you may be able to transform the learning of specific 
content and skills from an unwelcome chore into something students really connect with. 
If you lean constructivist—always looking for opportunities to give students space to bring prior 
knowledge, attitudes, and opinions into their learning—you may find it easier to begin with an 
open-ended approach. For instance, have students collect and create mobile media themselves or 
ask them to contribute choices and/or creativity framing a subject or challenge around their own 
interests. This approach can both be empowering for students and remove some of the work you 
need to put in ahead of time for the production of media. 
We mention these two leanings as a way to say that MML can accommodate many personalities, 
not to further the misconception that the two approaches are mutually exclusive. Within the 
examples in this book for example, it is common for the actual media produced or interacted with 
to be rather didactic while the learning activities the media belong to are anything but. Garza and 
Rosenblum (chapter 9) describe the rather open-ended learning scenario of a design course but 
where their use mobile media filled a specific, almost rote goal to give students a mobile-mediated 
tour of a neighborhood. 
As you look outward from yourself to your design, remember the power of empathy. Notice how 
our authors are learners too. Their design and use of MML is not only for the people on the other 
end of their designs. When we conceive of learning only as transmission of knowledge from experts 
to novices, we miss the value of empathy that allows teachers and students to share the journey. 
This also means that the most important quality to have as an educator looking to use MML is not 
expertise with the technologies, but an interest in learning.

30
P L A N  F O R  T H E  T I M E  YO U  H AV E 
Time is always short. It is an unavoidable consideration of designing a MML activity. But many 
have found it possible to manage. To begin, there are two main units of time that you should 
consider: 1) planning time—how much time do you have for design?, and 2) play time—how much 
time are students going to spend with what you create? 
If available planning time is minimal, consider shorter designs or sharing the design time with 
the learners. Regardless of the tools being used, designs get longer when they involve intricate 
or multiple interactions within software and when you are preparing and producing even non-
interactive media for consumption or use through mobile devices. AR games that are meant to be 
played by learners as exposure to content or participation in an interactive story typically require a 
lot of research, planning, design, testing, and iteration. 
Design time in these areas can be lessened if you are willing to let the experience outside the device, 
say in the observation of the world, provide the majority of the content you are exposing learners 
to; creating simpler activity types, say a simple tour or scavenger hunt instead of a fully interactive 
story; relying upon actions learners may already know how to do with their devices, say taking 
pictures and video; or even creating structural details ahead of time to be filled in by learners. 
Some of these strategies avoid time spent in planning stages by having learners doing the principal 
production of mobile media. By conducting field research—guiding players to gather data from the 
world—you can avoid the work of creating a story or digital interactions ahead of time. Another 
option is to have the learners become designers and create their own projects. 
Though learner-created designs can require much less planning time on the front end, they can 
often take significant play time to frame, guide, enact, and debrief. As with designing any learning 
activity, time constraints can pose a threat to the learning goals, so it’s important to weigh the 
tradeoffs and be realistic with what you can achieve in the time you have. For example, field research 
projects often require significantly less time designing, yet require time to debrief and build project 
work. Asking learners to spend an afternoon visiting a neighborhood (chapter 9) offers a different 
type of learning experience than taking learners on a 15-week around the world field research trip 
(chapter 4). Conversely, investing more time in a designed project can create a fairly packaged, rich, 
experience within a fixed amount of play time (chapters 15-18). 
For designs that involve outdoor activities or exploration, time management has additional features. 
It is important to consider the act of traveling to and between destinations, balancing time spent 
doing things on devices with other activities like debriefing or walking. It takes time to walk from 
one place to another, and with MML this should be part of the designed experience. Fisher and 
Dikkers (chapter 18) suggest, for example, that an outdoor AR game gets a little tiresome after the 
first hour of play, but they pushed up against this time limit wanting to cover physical distance on 

31
the ground and emotional distance in the development of their game’s story. Ultimately though, 
there are no hard and fast rules for dealing with time in MML projects.1 One advantage provided 
by mobile technology is to divide attention across time and place in ways others than those given 
by the industrial schedule followed for most organized learning experiences. MML doesn’t have to 
happen during class time. 
Iteration is our final and most important word of advice concerning time. Even though you can 
never test your ideas enough, find ways to test them early and often. Look for mention of it in our 
authors’ chapters. Every new process is easier and begins to feel natural the more familiar you are 
with it—seeing the process through a few times helps. The amount of planning that goes into the 
first version of anything is huge, and there are always so many details you cannot see until you get 
there. The second time you try something, you have the benefit of less planning time but that is 
when the bad luck seems to strike. The third time’s a charm. By then you start to know what to 
expect and have hit your stride. Plan to learn a lot from early iterations. Look for student volunteers 
to play ahead of structured times too, many students are excited to help and can provide valuable 
insights. 
P L A N  F O R  T H E  T E C H N O L O G Y  YO U  H AV E  A N D  W I L L  U S E
You have identified your learning goals and mapped those onto realistic time constraints, now 
what? Maybe you do not consider yourself a techy. Maybe you don’t have enough devices for your 
program or classroom. Good news: MML doesn’t require the newest, fanciest mobile devices, or 
any at all. Instead, the goal and main challenge of MML is to connect people to learning. 
Just as with time, the point of considering tech is not just to demand more, but to make plans in 
accordance with what you have and want to use. Consider that there are a wide variety of tools 
available to you. Some are things, some are relationships, some are ways of doing things. Since the 
focus on mobile tends to be about devices like smartphones and tablets, it is worth pointing out that 
you can get started with pencil and paper alone. 
Rich learning activities can be produced with greatly varying levels of access (Table 1) to advanced 
technologies. Incredible locative experiences have long been afforded with paper maps. Indeed 
papercraft should not be forgotten. Envelopes coded to open at various places can add authenticity 
and mystery to a locative design.2 Technology that can be found in most library storage closets (old 
cameras, audio recorders, and the like) or that which is ubiquitous among your audience (texting 
to contact learners or have them ping you) can be appropriated with intent. Even as your designs 
scale in the advanced technologies they make use of, you do not need a full classroom set of smart 
1 An exception: Hofstadter’s Law, “It always takes longer than you expect, even when you take into account Hofstadter’s Law.”
2 See Colleen Macklin and Thomas Guster’s chapter in our previous Mobile Media Learning book. 

32
devices; if some students have devices (sometimes this strategy is referred to as BYOD—bring your 
own device), you can group learners or use the devices you can provide to fill in gaps of access. Also 
a combination of advanced and simpler tools can be used together creatively (one notetaker with a 
clipboard, a photographer with a camera, and a navigator with the smartphone). Navigating your 
local landscape of access can help you find a way to make MML part of your pedagogical toolbox 
in many situations. 
Table 1. Types of technology available for MML to educators. 
Old-Tech
Low-Tech
Some-Tech
Class-Tech
Super-Tech
Notebooks
Paper maps
Envelopes + Notes
Plaques 
Simple cameras 
Simple recorders
Instant Messaging 
(i.e. Remind101)
Smart Devices (1/
group)
BYOD resources
Digital text
Classroom set of 
Smart devices 
Local WiFi 
Digital images
3G or 4G 
connections 
Battery packs
WiFi remote hubs
Digital video/
audio
That said, there are specific features of the technological landscape worth paying attention to directly. 
The two main ones are hardware and internet access. Look for their mention in the chapters that 
follow. Most of our authors have found unique and inventive ways to put together the logistical 
pieces necessary to get their ideas off the ground. As above, hardware can refer to a large category 
of things. But as you plan and look forward, we are talking about smartphones, tablets, and (for 
the moment) iPod Touches. There are two dominant software platforms: iOS and Android. While 
it is important to pay attention to this fact—apps are frequently available for only one platform 
or the other, and Taleblazer is the only design tool used by our authors available on both iOS and 
Android—too many good ideas have been halted by insisting on cross-platform compatibility as 
a credo. Pay more attention to the ecology of devices available and desirable in your situation. For 
example, if you are having students explore a neighborhood, a bulky tablet may be unwieldy and 
feel out of place. In such situations smaller devices may be a better bet, even if that means relying 
upon those owned by participants rather than those provided by a school or program. 
Finding reliable internet access that will satisfy your needs is a bit trickier, but again look for how 
our authors have addressed this issue. Check your software, your WiFi and/or cellular connections, 
and the technology your learners have. Mobile software frequently either requires internet access 
to function or to make use of the features users care most about. Many devices provided through 
schools and programs can only access the internet through WiFi, meaning they cannot in general 
access the internet out in the world. Smartphones and some tablets on the other hand can access the 
internet through their cellular connection (3G or 4G). The reason so many apps essentially require 
an internet connection is due to the assumption that most people using these apps are doing so on 
devices like these. The BYOD strategy can often be of help here, but when it comes to filling in 

33
the gaps, you can also provide access through mobile hotspots.3 These are routers that receive an 
internet signal through cellular towers, just like a smartphone, and pass it on to a handful of devices 
via WiFi. Another solution is turning on a smartphone’s hotspot capabilities. Cellular data is almost 
always metered, available through different prices, devices, and with varying reliability regionally, 
and if you are working through organizations, there may be restrictions on which services you can 
use depending on how you are allowed to pay for or be reimbursed for devices and service charges. 
Finally, if all of this is beyond you, ask your local IT support staff for help by asking, “Can these 
devices use X software at Y location?” They should be able to help and navigate solutions with you 
easily. Many of our writers did just this and were able to practically move forward with their design 
ideas. Start with what you have and plant seeds for funding what you want, but don’t let this stop 
you from starting today. Determine what you have so that you don’t spend needless time hoping 
for more technology, writing grants, or setting aside your good intentions to design. Design now. 
Iterate. Experiment. Dream bigger after you’ve done a few ‘pilot studies’ or ‘paper prototypes’. 
A  B E G I N N E R ’ S  F R A M E W O R K  F O R  M M L  A C T I V I T I E S
Certainly, we want our authors’ specific examples of subjects, activities, and methods of designing 
and engaging in MML to inspire you into action. You will see approaches and designs that are worth 
borrowing heavily from. We also offer in this chapter a framework of three styles of MML activities 
as a practical lens through which to view these various examples: See, Explore, and Design. Each of 
these styles or modes has many uses. It may be easiest to get started by following one of these three 
paths for your first design. Table 2 summarizes our discussion of these styles and indicates examples 
of them within our authors’ chapters. There is also some correlation between these styles and the 
discussions of how ARIS (chapter 6) and App Inventor (chapter 5)—software for the creation of 
mobile media used by our authors and useable by novices—are used.
See. Where you produce mobile media for learners to consume or interact with as a way to learn 
something. This mode of communication is from one (designers) to many (consumers), and because 
the content can be decided in advance, is often seen as doable without disrupting too much the 
typical classroom format. 
Explore. Where you create opportunities for learners to collect, share, discuss, organize, or report 
back on observations or acts in the outside world. Similar to many citizen science projects, students 
can gather data from the world to produce new knowledge. 
Design. Where students have a chance to design, create, and often test mobile media for others. 
Using some of the same tools that you would use to create within the categories above, learners can 
be guided, in typically open-ended design studios that last several weeks to a full semester. 
3 The most popular mobile hotspot for years has been the MiFi. Sometimes you will hear this as the generic term for a mobile hotspot.

34
Table 2. See, Explore, and Design: Three principal styles of MML 
and examples of each throughout the book.
Strategy
Explanation
Specific Examples and Create/Play Hours (C/P)
See
Instructor designs 
mobile media and 
learners use it to 
receive content and 
practice skills.
School Scene Investigators—An AR game for young people to play to learn 
science and how to work together (chapter 7).
The examples of ethnography provided to students (chapter 8).
Sample apps learners remake before jumping to their own creation 
(chapter 14).
Quest for the Cities of Gold—An AR game museum patrons interact with 
to learn history (chapter 15).
ParkQuest—An AR game event participants play to get them to explore 
the outdoors (chapter 16).
Lift Off!—An AR game to enhance the experience of patrons of an aircraft 
museum (chapter 17).
Horror on the Ridges—An AR game to make players scared (chapter 18).
Explore
Instructor designs 
a framework for 
learners to explore 
or document 
an aspect of the 
world. Learners 
use mobile to 
gather and work 
with information.
Ethnographic work via ARIS (chapter 8).
Explore East Austin—AR tour that provides a framework for 
documenting a neighborhood (chapter 9).
Traveler—An app for students to document field studies (chapter 4).
Documenting and reporting on bee behavior (chapter 12).
Students explore political issues to include in a geocaching game 
(chapter 13).
Design
Instructor creates 
opportunities for 
learning through 
design of mobile 
media and use by 
peers or others.
Almost every one of our authors and the editors as they have created 
their own projects, but specifically Bressler (chapter 7), Stauder (chapter 
11), May (chapter 15), Rieder and Soloman (chapter 16), and Fisher 
(chapter 18) because they worked on their designs as students.
Folklore based AR games (chapter 8).
Visual design projects (chapter 9).
Experimental mobile cinema (chapter 10).
Mobile game design camp (chapter 11).
Incorporating content into a geocaching game and designing and giving 
talks to the community about the game (chapter 13).
Multi-site 12-week app design program (chapter 14).

An Example of See
MML can help us see what is often invisible. In the service of See, mobile media allows for a 
particularly rich form of presentation, perhaps most easily suggested by an outdoor AR tour. 
Tours have always worked by leveraging a real physical context as a naturally motivating setting 
for content. Tours accomplished through MML can make up for some of the things that can be 

35
difficult or less than optimal about tours. The tour guide need not be present, especially useful when 
you want students to hear the insight of an expert who would be difficult to have there in the flesh 
(e.g. an art historian in the museum). Content can be delivered via multiple media formats, highly 
customized, and interactive. Interactive design that is enacted not only on the device’s screen but 
through a player’s location and actions can come alive in a way it couldn’t before mobile.
In tours and similar expressions of See, participants are situated to be somewhat passive—to listen 
or read and follow along the instructions and plan that is supplied by the guide. It is not constantly 
necessary to challenge the assumption that the students are there to master content that the teacher 
and textbook materials know already. Interacting with media in new ways can still be a way to make 
those ideas come alive and take on new, deeper meanings. 
By aiming to make a better, cheaper tour, MML can give us more opportunities to leave the 
classroom and rejoin the world. A common group experience that provides concrete experience and 
examples related to course content can be a powerful precursor to class discussion and reflection. 
If the goal is to get the students to experience a place, and physical interaction is enough to convey 
course concepts (or to provide an experience for the group to unpack later in class), then a tour can 
be created cheaply and easily.
However, the experience of being on a tour is largely composed of listening and following. Standalone 
tours can be more work to make and be less engaging for students because a rich interactive tour 
requires a great deal of polished media which requires a large budget, premade media assets, and 
skilled help to create. A tour where content is primarily delivered on screen also typically faces the 
following challenges:
•	
Mobile content can be difficult to read due to external distractions, screen glare, 
weather, etc. Too much text to read on the tour is a common design mistake.
•	
Absorbing content while walking can be dangerous and distracting. 
•	
Screen content can compete with place-based content. Instead of seeing the 
example in the world, the tour focuses the learners on what is on-screen).
A few considerations for the design of an MML tour: 
•	
Choose local places/phenomena that are worth witnessing in person (e.g. tree 
fungus, ongoing protests, architectural examples, hangouts for sub-cultures, 
etc.).
•	
Plan non-content parts of the tour (e.g. travel time) as part of the learning 
experience. Design ways for learners to digest their experiences between 
moments of delivery.
•	
The primary goal is to design the experiences you want students to have, not 
produce another container for content to be absorbed by them.

36
•	
Weather tends to turn bad at the least opportune times. Design flexibly to 
accommodate unforeseen logistical problems and expect to find new ones when 
you actually run the tour with students.
•	
Since a tour may not provide much depth of activity for students, design 
additional activities for students build on their experiences from the tour.
Regardless of how polished the tour, we suggest that you design it to make the best use of the 
world and the device. Use the screen to provide prompts for them to interact and engage in the 
environment they’re visiting. It makes little sense to bring students outside the classroom if their 
primary activity is reading or watching a screen, however bringing them to relevant places can 
enliven class content and engage learners in very powerful ways. 
An Example of Explore
Exploring with MML gains benefit from making observation collective and reflective. All you need 
to do is create a framework of interesting questions to prompt students to engage in meaningful 
exploration of the outside world. This is not new, and mobile devices are in no way necessary to 
pull it off. But they do have something to offer. The area of collection and the acts of collection are 
typically simple and self-contained. The research agenda and collection types can be determined in 
advance, making it simple for newcomers to get started. 
The verbs that we find in Explore—take photos, videos, send notes, look up—are familiar and need 
little introduction for learners because they are the same verbs smartphone users have quickly grown 
accustomed to and now take for granted. The Traveler app (chapter 4) was developed specifically to 
combine some of the existing documentation capabilities of mobile devices into a format relevant 
to field studies. Not only do mobile devices have an inherent and usually familiar ability to collect 
many kinds of data, but their contextual awareness permits the easy assignment of relevant metadata 
(from GPS coordinates of a photo to supplying keywords for categorizing data), and their ability to 
support communication through the internet can enable data to be quickly shared and worked on 
together or to be related to bodies of existing knowledge. In chapter 6 for example, Tim Frandy had 
his students learn ethnography by doing it. Their first efforts—of varying quality—were instantly 
shareable with the class. This variability of quality became useful for the students to reflect on and 
improve their practices as junior ethnographers. Others may use these same capabilities to pool 
information and debrief about what has been found out together by everyone. This is how Jameela 
Jafri et al. had their students use mobile to document bee behavior (chapter 11).
The promise of distributed data gathering, made easy with mobile, encourages us to think about 
projects along the lines of citizen science, ethnography, and journalism, where young people with 
devices are enabled through mobile devices to apprentice important professional activities and find 
important and meaningful data. But there are also some things to be careful about when Exploring 
with MML:

37
•	
Not all data is important or good data. Spending a lot of time and effort 
gathering data that turns out to be junk can be a real let down.
•	
The technology allows for simple data collection, but the automatic tools for 
interpretation are minimal so far. ARIS for example can know that a person has 
taken a photo and where, but not what of.
•	
Gathering data, as simple as it can be to do, is also on its own not always a very 
deeply engaging activity.
•	
Data collection within formal educational environments especially can quickly 
lead to tricky privacy issues. For example, the geotagged videos shared through 
the internet are not just of bees. 
A few considerations for the design of a data collection activity with MML:
•	
Know what you want to use the gathered information for ahead of time. The 
focus can be on the development of skills in addition to the value of the data 
gathered.
•	
Plan ahead for how and how far the gathered data is going to be shared. 
Implement appropriate procedures to ensure the limits of sharing are clear and 
easy to effect.
•	
Don’t just involve learners with the tedious, repetitive parts of the work. Some 
of what they do should be at the level of interpretation, analysis, and synthesis of 
the information they collect.
•	
Find ways for learners to work together, not just as autonomous units.
•	
Do your homework locating appropriate software. Because data collection is 
what mobile devices do, there are many, many options of tools that might best fit 
your particular circumstances.
An Example of Design
You learn the most when you can make something real you care about. Having learners create with 
mobile media is often the fastest route to increasing their agency in the learning process. It is also 
the messiest. 
Instances of Design will usually involve a perspective or framework of inquiry consistent with your 
themes or content as a way to make the creation of mobile media relevant to your specific learning 
context. Students can also be included in different aspects of the design process, resulting in more 
or less open-endedness in the design activity. Juan Rubio’s Race to the Whitehouse (chapter 13) had 
youth largely fill out an existing design by researching and preparing content, but Tim Frandy’s 

38
students (chapter 8) were given a rather blank slate for several weeks of the semester to develop 
their mobile media connected to folklore. Design projects allow students to gain knowledge and 
understanding of course concepts—to be able to reproduce them in their designs—at the same 
time as they develop media and design skills. 
Student-created projects are fairly simple to set up and run. There is need for production teams 
to painstakingly design and test a complicated media artifact. But you and students should be 
comfortable with a bit of chaos. To be successful, you need to trust that students are resourceful and 
smart enough to solve problems. You need to limit the complexity of projects according to students’ 
skill levels and time allotted. 
One pitfall to avoid is the “digital native” fallacy: assuming too much about the skills and experiences 
with media your students already have because they grew up with technology. Despite students’ 
typical familiarity with mobile devices and videogames, they are just as typically inexperienced 
in the production of mobile media beyond some basic activities like taking a photo or shooting a 
simple video clip. Something like an AR game is just as alien to them at first as it may have been to 
you. Having students create with mobile media seems to work especially well after they experience 
something you or others have already created. A nearby model to work from can be instructional 
and inspirational. Often learners will want to show that they can do a better job at it than you. 
Again, there is nothing about Design that requires mobile media per se. But students can more 
easily imagine something like an AR game they created having a life beyond the classroom instead 
of a paper they wrote. This doesn’t have much to do with the differences in media but how we are 
used to making use within educational contexts of student production with a specific medium. 
Students’ typical attitudes to paper writing are developed only after years of writing them only to 
be read by a teacher and only for a grade. When students think they are working on something real, 
they tend to put more time and effort in polishing it because it is something they want to share with 
their friends and family.
Student design sounds from a distance like a rich and conceptually simple way to increase agency 
in learning. “Make stuff!” just might be the progressive educational mantra of the age. But just as 
“discovery learning” for example is now disregarded especially for the lack of structure associated 
with it, we are careful here to note that facilitating student design is a complex and nuanced practice. 
It easy easy enough to fail by simply saying to your students, “Welcome. Make something cool by 
the end of the semester. That is all.” 
Some of the complexities inherent in facilitating student design owe to the complexity of the media 
and design processes itself. Another source of tension: shoehorning an open-ended process designed 
to produce diverse, emergent outcomes into educational structures that are not always tolerant 
of this. Design is messy and School eschews messes. Open-ended design can be uncomfortable 
for students used to traditional learning environments. Some of the specific challenges you 
may encounter:

39
•	
Fitting design activities in time slots and spaces set up for content acquisition.
•	
Trying to balance content acquisition, skill development, and attention to 
process in the time you spend with students, the time they spend on their work, 
and in how their work is evaluated.
•	
Developing internal motivation to create in situations where students are already 
motivated by the grade they will receive.
•	
Choosing topics for design (see chapter 14 for how Technovation Challenge has 
struggled to define good topics for their design challenges).
•	
Organizing student labor (Can people work alone? Do you choose teams?).
•	
Evaluating individuals based on group effort.
•	
Helping students to find focus and purpose in an open-ended learning 
environment.
•	
Evaluating and facilitating quality media design in avant garde formats 
(what makes a good AR game?).4
Consider ways to make the opportunity for learners to design and produce with mobile media more 
productive and less terrifying than it sometimes can be:
•	
Consider offering alternative options when it comes to format (papers, posters, 
videos, etc.) for them. In Frandy’s class (chapter 6), students were given the 
choice for their final project of creating a WordPress website, a Digital Video, 
or an MML project; about 1/3 chose each.
•	
Structure the design process itself clearly. An example: pitch the idea, share 
rough cuts multiple times with peers for feedback, and a presentation date to 
share a final version with the rest of the class. 
•	
Your students are not alone in learning how to create with mobile media. Create 
trust by sharing your struggles as a new designer in this space.
•	
Find ways to make your students’ designs capable of living outside the classroom. 
May (chapter 15) continued her design work in a class as an independent study 
and collaboration with a local museum. This can be simple too. Successful 
designs one year can be used to model design the following semester.
•	
Complex designs can be better pulled off by a well-functioning team than an 
individual. Find ways to promote cross-functional teamwork—in how you 
facilitate and evaluate—instead of having students divide up content and 
responsibilities equally.
4 Paper writing assignments again provide a good warning. The supposed mechanics of a good paper—especially minimum 
page length—have been become so prominent in how writing is evaluated that they have replaced attention to actual quality 
of communication.

40
•	
Start small when the situation cannot support larger design efforts. In chapter 
13, Juan Rubio describes involving youth in only fulfilling an existing design due 
to the project’s limited amount of time.
C O N C L U S I O N
There are many ways to make use of MML in very diverse learning contexts and content areas. 
Especially in formal learning environments, increasing learner agency with MML can often be 
described as making connections outside the classroom. This can be about seeing how content 
and ideas take on a new life out in the real world, exploring it and bringing it back in together, or 
making something that might live on outside the classroom. In the following chapters, you will see 
all these modes in play, often at the same time. The experiences our authors share should help fill 
out the skeletal framework we have laid out in this chapter and help give it meaning when it comes 
to thinking about your own work with MML.



SECTION TWO

MML Platforms
4. 	
Traveler: A Digital Journal for Enhancing Learning and Retention on Field Trips
5. 	
MIT App Inventor: Democratizing Personal Mobile Computing
6. 	
ARIS: Augmented Reality for Interactive Storytelling
This section contains chapters whose main focus is the elucidation of a software 
platform designed for MML. The chapter about Traveler also describes its first real use 
to help document architecture and planning field studies, while App Inventor and ARIS 
are used by some of our authors. Each of these three platforms is available to use by the 
general public for free. Since beginning this book, another platform used by one of our 
authors— MIT’s Taleblazer used by Coulter—has become generally available. Platforms 
like these make it possible for normal educators to make use of the ideal affordances of 
mobile media in practice. Not only do they facilitate production of media, collection of 
data, communication, etc., they are underdetermined, allowing for significant creative 
and diverse interpretation by their users. Unlike software whose use is more scripted, 
Learning Management Systems for example, these software platforms allow educators 
and learners to articulate their own ideas through MML.


45
Chapter FOUR

Traveler: A Digital Journal for Enhancing 
Learning and Retention on Field Trips
Lohren Ray Deeg 
Assistant Professor of Urban Planning, Department of Urban Planning, College of 
Architecture and Planning, Ball State University, Muncie, Indiana, USA | ldeeg@bsu.edu
Kyle Parker
Senior Software Engineer for Developing Technologies, Information Technology 
Services, Ball State University, Muncie, Indiana, USA | kyleparker@bsu.edu
The sketching trip is a time honored architectural tradition rooted in field-based observation and 
recording. To learn from great examples of the constructed environment and transmit those lessons 
to a project-based design studio, students are first asked to experience the spatial, social, and material 
dimensions and details of a place. The experiences gained by walking through cities and major sites 
are at the core of our educational approach. A dozen students enrolled in a field study follow their 
instructor around a corner and down a street, dutifully take photographs of a house designed by 
Frank Lloyd Wright, and then follow around a bend, up an avenue, and into a church yard to sketch 
a quaint and contemplative cloister. They’ll do this all day long, and, yes, they will be learning. It is 
a core foundation for formal architecture education and remains a memorable learning experience 
for generations of students. As P.D. Smith writes, “The city needs to be explored at a walking pace 
and discovered step by step. For understanding a city is, indeed, a cumulative process not unlike 
turning the pages of a book” (2012, p. 169). 
At the same time, we have seen over and over again that despite the reputation of the sketching trip 
as a learning experience, our students don’t seem to retain much of what they see when they come 
back to the classroom. After the trip, students will often have no idea where they’ve been or how 
those places were connected. By the time they are discussing the trip in class, they usually don’t 
even recall the route they took or the locations where they captured photos and made sketches. 
Something is missing. With today’s technology at our disposal, it should be easy and effortless for 
students to revisit that step-by-step journey instead of fumbling through a pile of disconnected 
photos and sketches. If technology could help assist students with recall, they might be able to make 
better use of what they had experienced in the field. 

46
While there are many mobile apps available for students to use on field study trips—Evernote, 
Dropbox, Sketchbook, My Tracks, and Google Docs, just to name a few—they lack a single 
interface to tie everything together. Luckily, Ball State University is fortunate enough to have a 
dedicated group of information technology staff able to help develop imaginative and creative 
projects to enhance the teaching and learning experiences of our students. So we set out to make 
Traveler, an Android tablet app that could help support our field studies by combining mapping 
with the collection of photos, sketches, and other media. 
During the 2012-2013 academic year, we tested Traveler with two different field study programs 
offered within the College of Architecture and Planning at Ball State University. We started with a 
small group of freshmen students visiting the Chicago region for four days and ended with a larger 
group of upper-class and graduate students on a 15-week trip around the world. The trips served 
as critical in-field and real-life assessments of the app, the use of tablets, and our future desires and 
goals to embrace a mobile-centric student lifestyle. The union of teaching methods / pedagogy 
associated with field based learning opportunities with the development of software applications 
speaks to a commitment on the part of the University to advance and embrace new media in 
teaching and learning. Traveler is an example of this initiative and commitment. 
A B O U T  T R AV E L E R
The central feature of Traveler is an ability to record and visualize the path of a student in the 
field. Of course a path is only a line on a map. Our students in environmental design traditionally 
collect a variety of media, so the app was bundled with a variety of recording tools, and Traveler’s 
real power then lies in its ability to pin, or geolocate, photos, audio notes, short videos, and even 
sketches to this path. This makes each student’s path personal and establishes the trip as a series 
of experiences of movement through time and space. As shown in Figure 1, a student’s richly 
annotated path is layered over a reference map powered by Google Maps.
Figure 1. 
A screenshot of 
Traveler in use. 
Media recording 
functions are located 
on the top row in red, 
an integrated map 
and recorded path is 
located in the lower 
right, and recorded 
media is referenced 
in the upper right 
gallery and right 
hand column.

47
Upon returning to the classroom, this annotated path becomes a powerful reference. Students can 
access the map to remind themselves of where they’ve been and what they saw. They can play back 
the pinned media through Traveler itself. Having this personalized travel journey documented gives 
students a way to engage aspects of the cultural landscape well after the field trip has concluded and 
may support rich and collaborative debriefings upon return to the classroom or studio.
Figure 2. A screenshot of Traveler in dynamic playback mode, using Google Earth.
The data collected within Traveler can also be used elsewhere, for example with Google Maps 
or Google Earth. Students can play back animations of their recorded paths in these programs, 
complete with three dimensional structures and environments. They can access their pinned 
materials there to relive the field study and recall the buildings, scenery, paths, and even people 
they saw along the way.
T R AV E L E R  T R A C K S  W I N DY  C I T Y  F I E L D  S T U D I E S
Our first test of Traveler was with 17 college freshmen on a four-day trip to Chicago. As an 
accompaniment to a studio-based environmental design course—a class that challenges students 
to invent, conceptualize, and design spaces for people—the Chicago field trip exposes students to 
several masterworks by notable designers and planners in history as well as recent trends and issues 
in architecture, landscape architecture, and urban planning. 

48
Notable historic districts, such as Hyde 
Park, Lincoln Park, and Oak Park, contain 
small details and several different residential 
typologies typical of urban living. The Loop and 
Magnificent Mile contain landmarks that are 
recognized around the world. It’s a trip Deeg—
lead author of this chapter and instructor of the 
course—has taken many times before, always 
with students armed with an array of paper 
sketchbooks, pencils, markers, and cameras. 
However, students forget or do not pick up on the 
details or general atmosphere of these Chicago 
neighborhoods. This is particularly clear when 
we ask them to design a neighborhood later in 
the semester. We wanted to know if Traveler’s 
recording and playback features could assist in 
the recall of a district’s features.
We provided each student with a project-funded Android tablet pre-loaded with Traveler. Deeg and 
the software developer met with the students to introduce the functions of the tablet and Traveler 
app before departure. The students were enthusiastic about having a single device to carry instead 
of the books, drawing tools, and cameras in past offerings and were quick to learn the ins and 
outs of using the new app. However, we noticed that in some cases the time required to navigate 
the interface and menus drowned out their ability to experience place and to hear the history and 
observations shared by the instructors. As students’ familiarity with Traveler increased, they seemed 
better able to absorb the information around them as well as to interact with the app. 
New software requires careful observation of its use and the quick fixing of problems. The decision 
to send Parker—coauthor of this chapter and lead software developer of Traveler—to travel with 
the students was a very good one. Parker made some needed changes to Traveler in the field, 
troubleshooted issues, and enhanced the app to make it easier and quicker for students to access 
some of its features. Having the software developer travel along with this initial excursion was 
critical to enhancing the app’s functionality and improved the students’ reactions to the mobile 
media platform. For example the students discovered a big problem on the very first day of the 
field-test. They found that a certain gesture with the stylus erased their sketch without prompting 
them to save their work. To suddenly and irrevocably lose their work after spending 20 minutes 
sketching was obviously a concern. The next morning, each student received an updated version of 
Traveler before heading out for the day’s tour. Having Parker there meant we were quickly able to 
address the issue and move on.
Students were able to capture many digital photographs of places along the field study route, 
often opting for a panoramic view of their surroundings (Figure 4) or to record short videos 
Figure 3. Students use Traveler in Oak Park, Illinois. 

49
of large structures, panning and tilting instinctively to capture large buildings or tree lines. 
Students responded to different spaces with specific media choices, using a still photograph for 
most situations, or panoramas when spaces were expansive. When additional sensory information 
like water and sound were prevalent, students tended to record short video clips. These deliberate 
choices in media revealed what the students were observing. Wide, expansive views lent themselves 
to a panoramic photo, much to the surprise of Deeg, who wasn’t aware that the tablet could record 
them. Observations of people moving through space over a period of time are well-represented 
by a short video or the sketched diagram with notes. As students became more comfortable with 
Traveler’s interface, they learned that different kinds of recordings supported their observation 
and interpretation of the site. Where the terrain could accommodate a large group for a period of 
time, we stopped to do more fine, detailed sketches. Overall, we were pleased with how Traveler 
performed on its first outing and that using it fit in well with our ideas about what students should 
be doing to pay attention to and document the places they visited.
Figure 4. A student’s panoramic photograph of the waterfall garden, Chicago Botanic Garden, Glencoe, Illinois. 
Photo by Taylor Sheppard.
In past field studies to Chicago, students were given time in the classroom after the field study 
to create sketches from their photographs. This work was well organized, thoughtfully laid out, 
and detailed, but because its submission was so separate from its creation, the sketches lacked 
spontaneity and even accuracy. In contrast, sketches done by this year’s field study class, often 
completed in 30 minutes or less, were more dynamic and more easily became a part of their 
continued reflection on the trip, a marked difference between working in the field and in the 
classroom in the past. These activities supported the skills we wanted the students to develop—to 
see and observe the built environment and sketch it as a form of memory and retention. We feel 
that sketching from observation richens the experience of visiting a place and has the capacity to 
inform the later sketching that we encourage as part of the design process. Therefore, to understand 
architecture, and to later design good spaces and places, students are encouraged to sketch good 
spaces and places. 

50
Figure 5. A student’s sketch of the Mrs. Thomas H. Gale house in Oak Park, Illinois. Digital sketch by Paige Story.
In general, our students liked using Traveler and the tablets during the Chicago field study. We 
surveyed them afterwards to find out how well they liked Traveler and the tablets and whether 
they aided their studies and understanding of place. About three quarters said they enjoyed using 
the tablet in general, as they were allowed to keep them for a three-month period. Almost all either 
agreed or strongly agreed with the statement “I found the Traveler app to be useful during field 
trip week in October,” which comprised their use on the four-day field trip. However, outside the 
trip—and during our sessions in the classroom—the students treated the tablet more like a novelty 
than an essential tool. On two separate occasions in the design studio course, which the field trip 
supported, Deeg asked for the tablets to be taken out and referenced. On each occasion, only two 
students out of 17 had brought the tablet to studio that day. Since the tablet was not perceived to 
be a necessary thing, our hope that the field trip information could be referenced in the studio did 
not really come to fruition. More activities that specifically integrate Traveler and the tablet will be 
necessary in the 15-week design studio timeline if we wish to do better.
T R AV E L E R  J O I N S  T H E  W O R L D  T O U R
The second test for Traveler came during a very different kind of field study, one that took 24 upper-
level and graduate students to 25 countries and 60 cities over a three-month period. The field study, 
called World Tour, is an intensive and fast-paced study of architecture, landscape architecture, 
and urban planning throughout Europe, Africa, and Asia. The diversity, complexity, and logistical 
limitations of some sites and locations and the trip’s duration encouraged us to spend significant 
time and effort to prep these students to use Traveler. Parker met with the students on several 
occasions before World Tour to explain the features and capabilities of the app and showed them 

51
how to use it flexibly. For example, we knew there would not be reliable WiFi in several locations, 
so this required the students to save and load maps ahead of time. The training sessions were also 
meant to address the infrequency of reflective use we observed in the Chicago trip by helping the 
students see how the tablet and app could be used to review and evaluate their experiences to better 
aid in their projects and coursework.
Beyond preparing students to make more consistent and flexible use of Traveler during the field 
study, these preliminary training sessions focused on how the app and tablet might integrate with 
their tourist and academic activities during their time abroad. Students wanted to explore other apps 
and how to connect to peripheral devices to contribute to their ability to use the tablets for their 
coursework. They wanted to see how to integrate this with their other photography of the locations 
on the trip. Essentially, they wanted to know if they were going to be using the tablet anyway, did 
they need to take along a laptop too? How could the tablet serve as a functional alternative? Questions 
like these are of course going to come up and present additional challenges to introducing mobile-
based curricula in classroom situations. They inform the continued development and polishing of 
our app and help us understand the flexibility of the app’s possible use across disciplines.
As with the Chicago trip, Parker came along to help, joining the group for the first two weeks of 
the tour, testing and improving the app based on observational and experiential student use and 
feedback. The learning curve experienced by both instructors and students was facilitated well by 
this inclusion. Traveling with the group fostered collaborative discussions and sharing of ideas, 
leading to a better understanding of what Traveler and the meant for the field studies. We hadn’t 
really planned it this way, but in reflection, those in-the-moment reactions and evaluations were 
critical in shaping how the app continued to evolve from its initial test with the Chicago tour 
and how we imagined positioning the app for future trips. The ability of Traveler to work across 
different devices, including smartphones and Android-enabled cameras turned out to be really 
useful and points the way forward. 
Another recurring theme that came up during the trip was students’ desire to share their experiences 
with family and friends back home. As a result, we added a new dimension to the field study—we 
came up with a way for parents, classmates, and instructors back home to follow the path of the 
World Tour students via the Internet. We quickly developed a website, and as network connectivity 
allowed, tour professor Rod Underwood uploaded his recorded paths in Traveler to the site where 
visitors could view the travels in either the Google Maps web based interface or the Google Earth 
application interface. For family and friends, this offered a unique perspective on the trip—one that 
past participants never had.  We were able to upgrade Traveler on the fly to make it easy and attractive 
for students to share their adventures and thoughts with family as the trip progressed. This did 
more than help students keep in touch with those back home. We usually think about the learning 
that happens between students and instructors during the class or trip and the dissemination that 
happens when we return as separate and unrelated activities. But learning deepens when it becomes 
something that is shared. Being able to share their experiences so immediately meant students were 
engaging more deeply with the trip while they were still on it. 

52
Students were also required to maintain personal logs or journals of the cities they visited and things 
they experienced. On a field study of such magnitude, with each participant taking thousands of 
photos, one could be forgiven for later confusing photos of Helsinki with Stockholm or sketches 
of Abu Dhabi with Dubai. With these elements pinned in place via Traveler however, it was easy 
for everyone to keep track of each location. Traveler was working just as we had hoped it would. 
All of the media collected with Traveler included time and date stamps, optional descriptions, and 
GPS coordinates associated with the path recorded from the day’s activities.  With this information 
readily available, the review and playback of each travel day included that associated media and 
provided that direct connection between where the students had traveled and the sights and places 
they had captured with Traveler.
Most cities on World Tour were one- or two-
day stops so it was crucial for the students to 
hit the ground running and be prepared for 
the immersion of places and experiences they 
would encounter. With Traveler, students 
could quickly download and save a map, 
record the path of guided tour experiences, 
orient themselves geographically to the map, 
and reference their previous day’s path. This 
assistance allowed them to concentrate on 
absorbing and recording their experiences 
without fear they’d later be unable to place the 
photos, sketches, videos, and notes in context. 
It also gave them a point of shared reference 
with the instructors (see Figure 6) both in the 
field and while traveling between locations.

R E F L E C T I O N S  F R O M  A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D
We didn’t anticipate it, but Traveler turned out to be a useful tool for those planning the trip as well 
as for the students. The instructors—and we as authors—now have instant access to over 25,000 
media items, hundreds of paths, and countless reflections all stored and waiting without having to 
take additional steps to produce this documentation. This stands in contrast to past years where 
harvesting travel media from the students required the optical scanning of slides and sketchbooks. 
Having the maps, photos, sketches, and short video clips all combined within Traveler will make 
planning World Tour 6, set for the Spring of 2016, a snap, according to the instructors. Reviewing 
the media as embedded to a path, enjoying the dynamic playback of the paths in Google Earth, 
and learning from the geographic and chronological organization of that media, whether successful 
or unsuccessful, will help them arrange the next tour and hone how they address their learning 
Figure 6. World Tour instructors collaborate with 
students using Traveler. 

53
objectives. Reacting to the types and quantity of media (or lack of) that the students recorded 
allows the instructors to evaluate the learning and synthesis that occurred in key sites. Viewing 
dynamic playback of the recorded paths might be of more assistance in making critical decisions 
for future trip planning than vague memories about how things went. Likewise, in reflecting on our 
experiment with Traveler, we were easily able to archive the media, organize it by student name, and 
quickly prepare a number of articles, papers, and presentations efficiently in comparison to previous 
years. The ability to use student-generated media for synthesis and evaluation, while not anticipated 
in the development of the app, is a cheerful outcome of the development process and an example of 
mobile app development yielding more than we intended to put in.
On the whole, the instructors were pleased with students’ use of our platform. World Tour Professor 
Rod Underwood offered one example of the critical thinking skills that can be reinforced in travel, 
with the example of a Middle Eastern market. Comparing and contrasting the phenomena such as 
a market’s physical layout, placement within a city, and observed human behavior are just a few of 
the things that can be studied across locations. Examining locations such as the Medina market in 
Fez, Morocco; the Grand Bazaar in Istanbul, Turkey; and the new central market in Abu Dhabi, 
U.A.E.; require good attention and retention to understand the significance that ties these places 
together. Further, to develop a gestalt in a student’s mind when referring to such a typology of place 
requires good notes, discussion, and synthetic ability. On reflection, it may be argued that these 
were essential learning objectives of the trip. What was interesting about Traveler was that the tablet 
and app combination was “not changing the way students learn, but adapting to how (the current 
generation of students) use mobile technology and how they learn now,” said Underwood. The app, 
he said, made the trip’s learning objectives that much more achievable in the field.
Leslie Smith, another World Tour instructor, also noted the importance of technology in helping 
students attain geographic awareness, and understand the layout of a city or cultural site. In an email 
after World Tour, he said “The Traveler app clearly provided the students with more comprehensive 
and sophisticated discoveries and conclusions throughout their study travel, as evidenced in the 
enhanced scope and depth of their required commentary and design explorations as they submitted 
frequent en-route coursework assignments throughout the semester-long global study.” The physical 
layout of a cultural site, its placement within a city, the neighborhoods around it, and its overall 
significance to the city were all revealed and enhanced by the recording of a path around and 
through it. These recorded observations assisted in providing good information for the student 
to use in the the design process later. For example, the semester long studio assignment included 
a design argument or proposal for a new or improved public space for a student’s hometown. A 
15 week tour of the world provides a certain detachment for students in reflecting on their home 
environment, and it speaks to the changes that occur in the students over the course of the tour. 
In part, the technology provided the tools necessary to design and plan strategies for improvement 
in the hometown, in both referencing significant sites, and the ability to map the hometown on a 
mobile device while traveling. 

54
For this assignment one student was tasked with using the physical layout of the Plaza de Espana 
in Seville, Spain to influence the improvement of a site in the western suburbs of Chicago, Illinois. 
He used Traveler to record and visually explain the placement and definition of public space he 
observed and recorded in Spain (see Figure 7), very different from what he had experienced in 
suburban Chicago previously. He used Traveler to help him apply the learning, recording, and 
recall of the concepts he was exposed to in Spain to his design process. It is this application of 
learned examples in design that make travel such an important and rich experience for our students, 
and the ability of students to visualize this through Traveler really did seem to help them make that 
transition. 
S T U D E N T  R E S P O N S E S  A N D  F U T U R E  S O F T WA R E  D I R E C T I O N S
The development and use of mobile media for and within field based experiences taught us 
much about the future possibilities of Traveler and tablets for this and other purposes. The two 
experimental groups varied not just in age and duration of the trip, but also in the way the students 
used the application and tablet. The Chicago group was very comfortable taking photographs and 
attempting sketches with the tablet but did not often reference the paths they traveled using Traveler. 
The World Tour group preferred their digital cameras and paper sketchbooks, but valued and used 
the recorded path and GPS navigation features with great regularity. World Tour participants also 
Figure 7. World Tour student Matt Adams references the layout of the Plaza de Espana to influence an improvement 
to a retail district in his hometown of Arlington Heights, Illinois. 

55
used the GPS and mapping features to explore 
cities in a self-directed manner after following a 
planned, guided tour on arrival. Students could 
reference where they had already traveled and 
direct their attention and paths accordingly—
as one student noted, “I never felt like I could 
get lost.”
Students have also given us many ideas about 
how to continue improving Traveler. Although 
they were pretty happy with what Traveler 
already does—75 percent of the students on 
World Tour either agreed or strongly agreed 
that they enjoyed using Traveler and about 
the same number recommend it for future 
tours as well—tech-savvy students had several 
suggestions for us. One suggestion was to link 
Traveler to other apps that provide information 
about nearby WiFi hotspots, and another noted 
a preference for a different sketching app that 
offered more advanced features, such as multiple 
layers, zooming, and a wider array of drawing 
tools. Of course one of the best reasons to make 
use of multi-functional devices like tablets is 
not having to incorporate every good feature. If 
another app has a desired functionality, we can 
simply make sure it is available in advance on the 
devices we provide. Students on both field trips 
noted that currently tablets are only marginally 
helpful in completing their other field study 
coursework, due to frequent unavailability of 
WiFi, the learning curve of the interface, the 
cost of a keyboard and other accessories, and 
access to software based productivity tools and 
applications.
Survey responses indicated a desire to link a 
wider variety of digital devices and data sources 
to Traveler, perhaps as an expression of consumer 
flexibility which this generation of students 
expects. They already have many other devices 
S I D E B A R :  AT T I T U D E S 
T O WA R D S  M O B I L E  M E D I A 
C R E AT I O N
For those who might consider using digital 
tools in a capacity similar to a field study, it 
may make sense to briefly explain attitudes 
we saw among students towards using the 
tablets to create media on our trips.
Sketching on a Tablet. Our students have 
largely grown up with drawing on paper, 
and most continue to value the tactile and 
permanent-feeling experience of drawing 
on paper as opposed to drawing on a 
screen. That said, the bundled sketching 
interface incorporated into Traveler is quite 
advanced. It mimics traditional sketching 
and painting media well, and some students 
used it with great aptitude (Figure 8). Their 
attitudes about where they liked to draw 
outweighed the technical capability of the 
tool to be used to produce quality work. 
Figure 8. World Tour student Gu Chenyuan’s 
sketch made in Traveler of the Giralda tower in 
Seville, Spain.
(con’t on next page)

56
like smartphones, digital cameras, laptops, and 
frequently store and access data “on the cloud.” 
To make tablets we hand out and Traveler feel 
more usable, they need to not only function 
but be capable of participating in this broader 
ecosystem of data and devices1. In future 
iterations of Traveler, we intend to facilitate 
linkages to high quality digital cameras, smart 
phones, personal computers, and a dedicated 
data storage cloud so that students can choose 
which device records their path in Traveler and 
not be tied to a single device. Social media is 
another ingredient of considering the future of 
Traveler within the digital ecosystem. We saw, 
but hadn’t specifically anticipated, that popular 
platforms such as Facebook, Instagram, and 
Tumblr became pipelines and storage of travel 
media outside of the Traveler platform. In the 
media backup of the tablets we performed, we 
saw that students were producing and sharing 
media with apps like Instagram (see some nice 
examples of Instagrams in Figure 9). 
We and our students have also have begun to think of the existing feature set of Traveler not as 
an end but a beginning of something bigger. Students expressed the desire for Traveler to not just 
record a path but also inform of attractions nearby. Linking or layering Traveler with other recent 
developments in location based, augmented reality software looks like an interesting way to address 
S I D E B A R
(con’t from previous page)

Tablet Photography. The camera on a 
tablet is a little bit of a different story. 
With a fixed focal length, little zoom or 
manual features, and overall rather low 
quality when compared with high-end 
digital cameras, it is no surprise students 
used the tablet minimally for photography. 
It may take a bit longer, but this too will 
likely change as the quality and quantity of 
photography on mobile devices continues 
to increase. In the meantime, it may make 
sense to find ways to include photographs 
made with other devices. 
1 This opens up an entirely different can of worms, but in reality, we should be thinking generally in terms of BYOD—making 
use of devices students bring themselves—not trying to make loaner tablets “feel” like a personal thing for the students. We think 
one thing this experience showed is that the student needs to feel a sense of ownership for the device, whether that be a tablet or a 
phone, and make it a part of their personal life, before there’s a chance of making it part of their academic life.
Figure 9. Photos uploaded to Instagram, as archived in the tablet. Photos by Sarah Schinbeckler.

57
this suggestion, creating an information rich travel experience for future field trips. For example, 
the Google app Field Trip, released in 2013 for Android and iOS, pushes notifications to users based 
on their specific patterns of behavior. The ability for other apps to crowdsource travel information 
to produce user-generated, geographically located markers, verified by databases, and potentially 
connected to historic and cultural resources, businesses, and institutions has implications for the 
mapping and sharing of places we are asking students to do. Students will have access to more than 
just one or two voices of experience with these new places. Examples of interest, like places to eat 
that are of good value to the university student, the entertainment value that centers on a style of 
music, hand crafted souvenirs, and the safest public spaces and streets to visit in the evening hours 
are just the beginning of a large body of information that a crowdsourced app could inform. 
W H Y  T R AV E L E R ?
After years of leading field studies, instructors like us who long to ignite a passion for place in our 
students and to see them develop ownership of their experiences may have become discouraged 
at the results of our labors. How can students get to the real meaning of place when they aren’t 
even paying attention to some of the most basic details in the outings we organize for them? It is 
painful to construct the perfect walking tour and find no one remembers the work they have seen 
or can even decipher the notes they wrote during the exercise. That observations in the field are not 
remembered later is disturbing on its own. More so, students need these observational details to 
support higher-level thinking about the built environment. Observational skills tied to discussions 
in the field—taking photographs, making notes, constructing diagrams, and drawing sketches—
are used to build our students’ awareness of the issues of the contemporary city, an environment 
which all of our students must be familiar as emerging design professionals.
For disillusioned instructors, Traveler may offer some hope. By increasing our ability to take the 
trip with us once it is over, and making those experiences easier to reflect on and share with others, 
it creates opportunities for efficiency in preparing for a trip, in conducting the field study, and in 
the debriefing afterward. These observed benefits, coupled with the historically observed richness of 
field studies, means that mobile technologies like Traveler deserve further exploration, integration, 
evaluation and refinement for both educators and students alike.
As educators and software developers embedded in higher education, we also see that architecture 
field studies are only one aspect of a much larger challenge to use technologies in ways that help 
students make better sense of the world they inhabit. And we are ready to rise to that challenge. 
Students are now arriving to higher education with great comfort and reliance on their mobile 
devices. We aim to integrate, not ignore, this phenomenon and shape our pedagogy around effective 
experiences. We embrace the future of mobile media in this regard as new interfaces, devices, and 
connectivity are released into the market. We look forward to expanding Traveler for many other 
situations where better geographic reference can help produce insight. By continuing to develop 

58
and find interesting ways to use apps like Traveler, we may be able to help students heighten and 
improve their geographic awareness in the classroom and beyond. We are confident that digital 
journaling is a suitable companion to lesson plans and learning objectives within design education 
and all students of the built environment. 
R E F E R E N C E S
Smith, P.D. (2012), Cities: A Guidebook for the Urban Age. Bloomsbury, New York and London.
Taylor, P. and S. Keeter. (2006) Millennials: A portrait of generation next. Pew Research Center, Washington, D.C. 
[online] Available at  http://www.pewresearch.org/millennials/teen-internet-use-graphic/ [Accessed June 2, 2013].
Roper Public Affairs and Media. (2006) Final Report: National Geographic-Roper public affairs 2006 geographic literacy 
study. National Geographic-Roper, Washington, D.C. [online] Available at http://www.nationalgeographic.com/
roper2006/pdf/FINALReport2006GeogLitsurvey.pdf [Accessed June 2, 2013], p. 6.

59
Chapter FIVE

MIT App Inventor: Democratizing 
Personal Mobile Computing
Shaileen Crawford Pokress
Director of Education, MIT App Inventor
MIT Center for Mobile Learning @ The Media Lab
MIT App Inventor is a blocks-based visual programming tool that allows anyone to design and 
build their own fully functional mobile apps. It was developed to provide transformative experiences 
to people who may not feel that they have much mastery over technology. App Inventor provides a 
low-floor, high-ceiling development environment that invites novices to engage in digital creation 
in personally meaningful and relevant ways. In short, it aims to democratize personal mobile 
computing.
Professor Hal Abelson of MIT developed App Inventor while on sabbatical at Google. He and a 
team of Google engineers launched the first version in 2009 as a project of Google Labs. Late in 
2011, with a seed grant from Google, Abelson brought the project to MIT where it is now housed 
in the new Center for Mobile Learning (CML) at the Media Lab. CML is co-directed by Abelson 
together with Mitchel Resnick, Director of the MIT Media Lab’s Lifelong Kindergarten group, the 
home of Scratch, and Eric Klopfer, Director of MIT’s Scheller Teacher Education Program, home 
of StarLogo TNG.
H O W  M I T  A P P  I N V E N T O R  W O R K S
Building an app with App Inventor begins in a web browser where a graphical Designer provides 
a drag-and-drop interface for designing the user interface (UI) of the app, and also for specifying 
the functionalities that will be used in the app. For example, if the app developer wants to make 
a drawing canvas with a button to clear that canvas, they would drag out a Canvas component 
and a Button component, as shown in Figure 1. If the developer then decides that she wants the 
app’s canvas to be cleared when the user shakes the phone, she would also add to the Designer an 

60
Accelerometer component. This is a non-visible component that doesn’t affect the UI of the app, but 
it is a piece of the app’s functionality that has to be specified in the Designer.1 
Once the app is laid out in the Designer window, the app developer continues into the Blocks 
Editor where the app’s behavior is set through the logic of programming using intuitive blocks that 
snap together like puzzle pieces. Blocks languages have existed for many years and have been used 
extensively with novices. They can reduce the frustration caused by syntax errors while providing a 
positive experience with programming. This can breed motivation for novices to continue learning 
more about programming as a means for digital creativity instead of getting hung up on the little 
things.
App Inventor’s programming blocks are organized in drawers, grouping blocks together to make 
things easier to find. For example, blocks for math and text manipulation are grouped in Math and 
Text drawers. Blocks for program control flow—like if-then-else statements—are in the Control 
drawer. Each component of the app has a corresponding drawer. So in the app example described in 
1 For more information on this app, including step-by-step instructions for how to build it, See MIT’s Beginner App Tutorial: 
Digital Doodle at http://appinventor.mit.edu/explore/ai2/beginner-videos.html.
Figure 1. App Inventor Designer Window provides a staging area for choosing elements of the user interface and 
functional components of the app.

61
Figure 1, there are drawers corresponding to the components Canvas, Button, and Accelerometer. 
Figure 2 shows the contents of the Canvas component’s drawer.
One of the key aspects of App Inventor’s development environment is that it supports live testing of 
the app as it is being built. This is especially important for beginning programmers in that it provides 
instant feedback to changes they make in their user interface and their program, as they make them. 
The power of this cannot be overstated. For example, a pair of high school students built their first 
app in less than an hour. Their app featured a ball that moves around the screen when the user flicks 
at it. Early on, the ball was getting stuck on the sides of the screen. Upon further investigation into 
the ball component’s blocks, the girls discovered a “when Ball.EdgeReached” block and another 
block “call Ball.Bounce”. After clicking these two blocks together in their program (as seen in 
Figure 3), they went back to their phone to fling the ball again This time time the ball bounced off 
the walls! This type of instant feedback is essential to lowering the frustration that plagues many 
other programming experiences for novices.
Figure 3. Blocks are readily available and 
understandable to novice programmers. App Inventor 
preserves the standard object-based programming 
constructs such as Object.Event  (when Ball1.
EdgeReached) and Object.Method (call Ball1.Bounce). 
Exposing some of the syntax of the underlying java 
program introduces novice developers to the language 
of computer science as they create.
Figure 2. The Blocks Editor showing the blocks in the Canvas Drawer. In the work area to the right we see the app’s 
program as it exists so far. Notice that the Canvas will be cleared when the Accelerometer reports that the phone is 
being shaken or when the Button is clicked.

62

H O W  M I T  A P P  I N V E N T O R  I S  U S E D
There are many great stories about App Inventor in the world, too many to share in the space here. 
Some of my favorites are the Wild Hog project in Alabama, the Tag It! app from Technovation girls 
in East Palo Alto, and the Dhaka Bus project from a student solving a major local infrastructure/
transportation problem in India.2 While App Inventor was developed primarily as an educational 
tool, it has been used by an array of individuals in scores of different settings. Our users generally 
fall into one or more of a few groups: students, teachers, hobbyists, and entrepreneurs. 
Hobbyists tend to be the same type of people who build robots or play around with technology in 
other ways. They enjoy creating and playing with technology, and App Inventor provides them a 
way to do that with mobile devices. One of the delightful projects to come out of this community 
is the arduino-driven, bluetooth-controlled dancing Android doll.3 
Figure 4. Left: An app shown live on a connected Android device using App Inventor’s real-time testing capability. 
Right: A simulated device which can be used if the developer does not have an Android phone or tablet handy. This 
Android Emulator simulates many of the features of an actual phone.
2 More stories can be found at http://appinventor.mit.edu/explore/stories.html. There are also explanatory news entries and blog 
posts at http://appinventor.mit.edu/explore/news-events.html.
3 For more information, see: http://appinventor.mit.edu/explore/stories/my-droid-robot-controlled-app-inventor.html.

63
Entrepreneurs are those who see App Inventor as a way to easily enter into the Android app market 
and make money without having to learn to program in Java. This group has mostly created games 
and utility apps for which people might pay. We are pleased to see App Inventor used in this way, 
as it goes hand in hand with our philosophy of opening doors to the world of computing to all. A 
nice example from the community of App Inventor entrepreneurs comes from a partner in Spain. 
unX is a free online platform that uses App Inventor as a way to help people who are underemployed 
in Spain to develop technical skills and to begin to think about ways to capitalize on those skills.4 
Although we are happy to have others find uses for App Inventor, we consider teachers and students 
our primary audience. App Inventor is first and foremost an academic project. We focus our efforts 
in supporting educators in their use of App Inventor, and there are many exciting projects underway 
that engage students in app building, both within and outside of school walls. Technovation 
Challenge, by Iridescent Technology, is one the of the shining examples of an organization taking the 
free platform provided by MIT and using it to promote technical innovation and entrepreneurship 
among a group of people wouldn’t otherwise have had an opportunity of this nature. Through 
Technovation, thousands of girls around the world have had empowering experiences with app-
building and business skills. The results of the project in aggregate are outstanding and in many 
individual cases, life-changing.5 
Computer Science Education in the United States is undergoing a major transformation with the 
impending release of a new Computer Science AP course, called Computer Science Principles 
(CSP). The College Board in partnership with the National Science Foundation has deputized 
several university teams to develop courses based on the new CSP framework. As part of this effort, 
Ralph Morelli of Trinity College in Hartford has been piloting a new high-school course Mobile 
Computer Science Principles entirely built around App Inventor. Initial reaction from teachers 
and students is very encouraging, and anecdotal evidence suggests that working with mobile 
devices, which are already familiar in students’ technology-saturated world, is highly engaging and 
motivating.6
Over the five years since App Inventor’s launch, many professional development courses for teachers 
have sprung up around our tool, both in likely and unlikely places. Several college faculty like Fred 
Martin at University of Massachusetts Lowell and Jeff Gray at the University of Alabama, with 
funding from Google’s CS4HS program, annually host a three-day teacher workshop based on App 
Inventor, reaching hundreds of high school educators. During the summer of 2013, a new online 
course hosted by Jennifer Rosato and Chery Takkunen at the College of St. Scholastica spread App 
Inventor even further.7
4 For more information, see: http://redunx.org.
5 See chapter 14 for more on Technovation Challenge. -Eds
6 For more information, see: http://mobile-csp.org/
7 For more information, see: http://css.edu/cs4hs  

64
In addition to these successful and far-reaching efforts, others have emerged. The MIT App Inventor 
education team has set up an extensive website which offers free resources and self-guided tutorials 
that help even the most inexperienced beginner get started building their own mobile apps. There 
is also an active user forum where developers, teachers, individual learners, and hobbyists exchange 
ideas and information.8 The MIT team, with support from the Verizon Foundation, has played a 
key role in supporting regional and national winners of the Verizon Innovative App Challenge.9 
Now in its second year, the MIT team has enlisted a team of App Inventor expert teachers, known 
as the App Inventor Training Corps, to deliver in-person training to winning schools across the 
country. Last year the in-person training was the extent of the support offered. New for 2014 will 
be a 6-week online course that is facilitated by MIT education experts. The benefit of this online 
course will eventually reach well beyond the award winners of the App Challenge as MIT will make 
the course available for free online in Spring 2014.
L O O K I N G  A H E A D :  W H AT ’ S  N E X T  F O R  M I T ’ S  A P P  I N V E N T O R
The App Inventor team has intentionally kept the tool as open ended as possible so that the audience 
and the things they create can emerge organically. Unlike some authoring tools that are specifically 
for making games or programming a simulation, a simulation, App Inventor purposefully provides 
building blocks that can be arranged for virtually any purpose or goal. The tool itself is an access 
point to all of the features in a mobile device. The building blocks of an App Inventor program are 
components like the camera, GPS, accelerometer, texting, contact lists, Near Field Communication 
(NFC) sensors, Bluetooth, the internet, local and remote data storage, and more. App Inventor lets 
a user intuitively access all of the features in a mobile device so that they can create any combination 
of functionality into their app. App Inventor opens up the black box that many people perceive a 
computer to be.
In December 2013, the team at MIT unveiled months of hard work in the form of App Inventor 
2, an entirely browser-based version of App Inventor. Formerly, the Blocks Editor part of the tool 
had to be run as a local java program on the user’s computer. With App Inventor 2, the Blocks 
Editor was entirely rewritten based on Blockly10—a web-based block programming editor—so 
that it no longer requires a local java installation. This frees up users from having to struggle with 
administrator-level support for constantly evolving java software. It has also made the Designer to 
Blocks Editor transition much more intuitive for our users. Where they used to have to go between 
the web browser for the Designer and to the local java program for the Blocks Editor, the two are now 
side-by-side in a single browser window, making it much easier to navigate between them.
8 For more information, see: http://appinventor.mit.edu
9 For more information, see: http://appchallenge.tsaweb.org/
10 Blockly is a Google project. For more information, see: https://developers.google.com/blockly/

65
Never satisfied with current accomplishments, the MIT App Inventor team has several projects on 
the horizon. In addition to constantly rolling out new components, such as the NFC component, 
the team is looking forward to one day offering an entirely Android-based solution where you can 
program in App Inventor on an Android tablet, eliminating the need for a traditional computer. 
While no launch date has been determined, this is the next major milestone for the project. In 
the meantime, MIT App Inventor continues to grow in popularity. Upon re-launch from MIT, 
App Inventor saw usage in the thousands. In February 2014 the number of unique users averaged 
40,000 per week. People come from all over the world to use our tool to help them create. 
App Inventor will continue to make it easy to for people to develop a type of digital literacy 
that many believe should be accessible to all, not just those with advanced technical knowledge. 
Installing Software Development Kits and programming in text-based programming languages are 
no longer prerequisites for app development. People everywhere, from all walks of life, can become 
empowered to create the solutions that they need or want in their daily lives.


67
Chapter SIX

ARIS: Augmented Reality for 
Interactive Storytelling 
Christopher Holden
Several of the authors in this book use the Augmented Reality (AR) game design and storytelling 
platform ARIS in their work. Rather than have them explain the basics of the tool in each chapter, 
or send you off somewhere else (e.g. Holden et al., 2014) to read about ARIS just to make sense of 
our authors’ use of it, we have chosen to describe the ins and out of this popular tool for creating 
augmented reality stories and games separately here. The editors have all used ARIS extensively, 
and—disclaimer—also have been involved with the ARIS project itself. Although we specifically 
sought submissions for this book from those not using ARIS, and the stories we share in the book 
are a clear indication that there are other games in town so to speak, we have come across a great 
number of people who have used ARIS to do some really interesting work. It is powerful, yet 
malleable and the price—free—is right.
This chapter should serve a conceptual as well as practical purpose. After all, the mobile landscape 
itself is changing quite rapidly. Details that felt practical as I write this for you will likely soon 
feel out of date as the world and software within it change. There is a lot of turnover among apps, 
platforms, and methods in mobile. It is unusual enough to see something like ARIS grow and stick 
around, and I wouldn’t want the book to feel pointless if ARIS is gone or greatly changed by the 
time you read this. 
So below, consider how the features and uses of this software do more than help you visualize the 
other ARIS experiments in this book or inspire your own use of ARIS this year. Details about ARIS 
here can inform in a concrete way perennial discussions about how a platform may function as a 
bridge between ideas and people. As other technologies come into play, we can look back at this 
time to see how ARIS looked to realize the concept of AR in a way that empowered regular people 
as explorers of new terrain, cutting across a lot of traditional boundaries like discipline, age, and 
individual educational settings in its creation and use. We can find, in this example, the questions 
that we need to find answers for in the software of the future.
The first lesson ARIS provides is the organic and collaborative nature of its development. Originally, 
it grew from a class game design by David Gagnon and Chris Blakesley in 2007, using a local art 

68
museum as a mobile game space. The following semester, Seann Dikkers joined them to develop 
a prototype design tool (that would become ARIS) in an independent study under Kurt Squire. 
Since then, ARIS has continued to evolve due to the attention and contributions of many more 
volunteers and programmers.1 ARIS has gone through many iterations, seen new funders, team 
members, and has led to the creation of a Mobile Learning Lab (MLL) at UW-Madison and been 
used by thousands of people around the globe. Gagnon et al. are at the time of my writing, near the 
release of a much revised ARIS that should welcome even more people through an increased ease 
of use and reach.
The organic way ARIS has grown and continues to develop, and its life as free, open source software, is 
not something that makes sense within most institutions. It is also a little convoluted to describe briefly 
here. But I believe it is a major reason for its resilience and usefulness. ARIS has been free to become what 
it needs to be and the result is something a lot of people love, often for very different reasons.
In the sections below, first we give a basic overview of what ARIS is and how it works. Then we 
highlight some of the more popular kinds of experiences people create using ARIS. Finally we look 
at some of the many contexts in which ARIS creations find relevance. We describe each of these 
as separate categories, but they should be read more broadly as themes. Typical projects involving 
ARIS participate in many of these areas simultaneously to a greater or lesser degree.
D E S I G N  A N D  F E AT U R E S  O F  A R I S
ARIS works by combining three pieces of software:
•	
Client - an iOS app to play games, take tours, collect data, etc.
•	
Editor - a web based, drag and drop authoring tool for making games 
and other experiences.
•	
Server - a database where the game contents are actually stored. 
The Client and Editor read from and write to the server to do what they do.
The server isn’t very important for users to think about most of the time, but there are a couple of 
factoids of general interest. First, games do not need to be published as a separate step from being 
written. Working in the Editor updates the games’ entries in the server which the Client can then 
read. For game authors, this minimizes the workflow of testing, debugging, and deploying. It 
also makes multiplayer games possible. The downside is that players need access to the internet 
to play. This complicates use, especially in scenarios without extensive WiFi and with WiFi only 
1 A more complete retelling of the history of ARIS up to 2010 can be found in David Gagnon’s UW-Madison Master’s Thesis 
(Gagnon, 2010). At the end of the chapter we mention a few further contributions to its development. For the last few years, Philip 
Dougherty has been the lead programmer of ARIS. The total list of contributors however is too numerous to list here. 

69
devices (e.g. when school based teams go outdoors or leave campus); involving work in very remote 
locations without cellular data; and where WiFi service is present but authentication is problematic. 
At the same time, ARIS users have come up with creative solutions to these problems. Some use 
portable routers like MiFi’s to provide internet connections to many devices simultaneously and 
paid for on prepaid plans, others negotiate with IT Departments to whitelist the arisgames.org 
domain on the local network. In practice, handled idiosyncratically, this complication of using 
ARIS, like the problem of getting devices in the right hands, turns out to be much more tractable 
than it would appear.
ARIS Objects
There are three basic objects to make games and stories using ARIS: plaques, items and characters. 
Each is a bit different.2 
•	
Plaques are points of information. They can include text and media. They can 
also give out and take away items to and from players. The metaphor that gives 
plaques their name is an informational plaque next to a point of interest in the 
world; a statue in a public square may have a plaque telling visitors who the 
statue is of, when it was commissioned, who the sculptor was, etc.
•	
Items are the things in the virtual world. Players can pick them up, trade them 
with other players, drop them on the map, get them from characters or have them 
taken away. Players can have more than one of an item and when the last one is 
taken from a game map it is gone.
•	
Characters are virtual people. Players interact with them via multiple-choice style 
dialogue. They can exchange items with players in each bit of conversation.
Each of these three objects acts a bit differently and can be used for things other than their basic 
metaphors might suggest. All three objects can contain various forms of media (photos, images, and 
text) or reference other media through URLs, rendering webpages in an embedded web browser.
Locations in ARIS
One of ARIS’s main functions is to coordinate media and place. Players access ARIS objects 
primarily through their locations. Originally, this was solely done with players’ physical proximity 
to GPS coordinates: In the ARIS Editor, an author creates a location for an object by dragging it out 
to a place on a Google map to which the player would be directed. While within a certain distance 
from that point, a player has access to the content at that location.
2 This description is basic and incomplete. It is accurate to guide an understanding of its use by our authors but not entirely so for 
the soon-to-be released update of ARIS you may soon be using.

70
More recently however, other methods for the ARIS Client “knowing location” have been developed, 
stretching the metaphor. An author can choose to have locations accessed via 
•	
Quick Response (QR) code (e.g. an author places a QR code for a character on 
a museum wall and a player scans the code to interact with the character), 
•	
alphanumeric string (instead of a QR code, a player enters information into 
the decoder in ARIS to interact with authored content), 
•	
directly from another ARIS object (e.g. after a conversation with a character, 
the player’s screen immediately and automatically displays a plaque), or 
•	
by the player touching a location’s icon on their on-screen map 
(i.e. Quick Travel). 
Authors no longer need to directly place locations on the map to make them available for players. 
In addition to the above player-facing generalizations of location, instead of placing objects at 
locations, an author can specify parameters and intervals of time according to which these objects 
will regularly generate for players. This is called spawning. Together, these options in the ARIS 
Editor give authors flexibility in how they make use of location of game content in ARIS. 
The ARIS Notebook
The ARIS Client, in addition to allowing the play of pre-authored AR games, has data collection 
features: the Notebook. Players can take photo, video, and text notes, and map, tag, and share them 
using the Notebook. The Notebook can interact with other parts of ARIS (e.g. a character shows up 
when you take a photo in a certain place) and players can communicate with each other about the 
notes they share using likes and comments.
Requirements
The glue that holds ARIS experiences together—what gives authors the ability to structure 
interaction beyond simply having a bunch of geolocative media present on a map—is requirements. 
Requirements drive the Interactive and the Story part of ARIS, and should be familiar as the basic 
if, then logical structures that glue together other computer programs. In ARIS, an author can for 
example ask for a player to have seen one of two possible plaques or to be carrying a blue key before 
gaining access to a character. This is also what allows individual bits of dialogue within characters 
to come together into interactive, branching conversations. 
As we mention below, requirements in ARIS lean heavily in favor of a storytelling approach as 
opposed to helping to establish a virtual world. Most of them depend on the state or history of an 
individual player rather than the state of the virtual world or non-player objects within it. Besides 
the low level of graphical capabilities in ARIS, this is the area where is ARIS is least like typical game 

71
engines. Most other platforms have worlds and 
non-player characters whose internal states help 
determine outcomes in their games.
W H AT  C A N  YO U 
M A K E  W I T H  A R I S ?
Since ARIS is used in a lot of scenarios, by people 
with different goals in mind, using different 
methods, it is not straightforward to answer 
the obvious question “What is ARIS for?”. We 
will mention some of the stories/games/tours/
experiences that people have made, and how 
the creations fit into various purposes for their 
authors and players. Whether youth are playing 
ARIS games or making them, with adults or 
their peers, in school or on their own, one of the 
most exciting aspects of this project is considering 
some of the emergent mobile activity types 
encompassed by different ARIS projects. Below, 
we present examples of the major types of ARIS 
creations we’ve seen before, within the next 
section, describing the general types of scenarios 
we’ve seen ARIS used in.
Tours
We already discussed some of the possible 
benefits 
of 
MML 
tours 
in 
Practical 
Considerations (chapter 3). Here, we can 
describe more closely the choices a specific tool 
allows you. The concept of a tour is quite simple 
across media formats: Players travel to areas of 
significance and are presented with media on 
the mobile device (text, audio, images, video) 
providing information about what is at those 
locations. To make an ARIS tour, the basic 
authoring procedure described above suffices: 
simply create objects like plaques, upload media 
assets to them, and drag them to the map. 
S I D E B A R :  TO U R S  — 
MORE THAN MEETS THE EYE
As a kind of interactive content, Tours may 
not push the envelope in terms of what is 
possible with mobile. They are nonetheless 
an important example to remember. Because 
tours are simple to understand and familiar 
to pretty much everyone, the fact that ARIS 
makes the creation of geolocative or QR 
code based tours easy signifies an accessible 
on-ramp to creating with AR and mobile 
technology. There are four significant ways 
that people can be held back from agency 
with digital tools like these, and being able 
to put together a simple tour after an hour of 
training helps with all four.
The Conceptual framework of augmented 
reality. Newcomers ask “What is AR, how 
does it relate to my other interests, and how 
do I even think about a game-like thing that 
combines media, storytelling and physical 
place?” Tours fit many areas of content and are 
a relevant activity type for many situations. 
They show off the basic forms of interaction 
made possible by ARIS and readily suggest 
types of engagement that are just a bit deeper. 
After making their first tour with ARIS, a 
newcomer may ask “What if this location 
asked a question instead of simply presenting 
information? Could my tour branch into a 
non-linear story?”
Technical experience with the ARIS Editor. 
New tools, especially those built non-
professionally on a shoestring budget, have a 
style of their own. New authors can make a 
tour as a way to trade the cognitive load of 
game authorship for time spent adjusting to 
the actual mechanics and vocabulary 
(con’t on next page)

72
Variations may include the use of contextual 
information (e.g. the player enters an address 
into the decoder) or QR codes (common in 
indoor spaces like museums where GPS doesn’t 
help much). Information can be simple media or 
simulated text-based dialogue with characters.
When many people have the means to easily 
create them, we have found that many tours 
get made that otherwise would not. The 
democratization of authorship that is possible 
with tools like ARIS means that tours that 
were once only inside a single person’s head 
or never published professionally because they 
addressed a small or marginal audience or a 
tour guide could not always be present can now 
see the light of day. Tours have been created 
to serve a wide variety of community needs, 
and even more often to provide unofficial tours 
to compete with the sanctioned ones in more 
popular locations. Just because tours are simple, 
and we have all been on deadly boring ones, 
does not mean they are not worthy of attention.
Scavenger Hunts
Like tours, Scavenger Hunts predate the 
widespread use of mobile technologies and have 
become an interesting target for mobile learning. 
ARIS is well suited for the creation of scavenger 
hunts because they are similar to tours but 
with an added element of gaminess. Scavenger 
hunts introduce competition and winning to 
the simple and often unmotivated basic tour. A 
tour focuses on the transmission of information 
while a scavenger hunt typically uses a place as 
a play space. Traditionally scavenger hunts have 
relied upon players collecting physical artifacts. 
In the mobile space this can be combined with 
collections of a more general variety, including 
snapshots, interviews, and virtual items. ARIS 
can be used to unlock certain content within a 
S I D E B A R
(con’t from previous page)
of the ARIS Editor. Just as building a tour 
may suggest deeper forms of interaction 
to a newcomer, letting a novice brush up 
against but not be overwhelmed by technical 
complexity exposes just enough of the editing 
environment to begin to make an author 
feel comfortable enough to click on some 
unfamiliar buttons and begin to dive deeper.
Access and suitability. The details of 
implementation 
also 
include 
actually 
obtaining any additional software or logins 
needed, as well as negotiating any licensing 
terms. ARIS is free and open-source in part 
to limit the difficulty of users at this juncture, 
but for open-source to mean actually usable, 
potential users need to be able to get all the 
pieces and see them running together to feel 
comfortable. Because tours are easy to get off 
the ground, rather extensive evaluation of 
ARIS can be quickly made by potential users.
Familiarity with the logistics of running 
mobile-based implementations. There 
are a lot of details between making a game 
as personal prototype and actually going on 
location with a say a group of students to use 
that game for a specific purpose. Again, it 
is better for newcomers to learn to manage 
the logistical details of devices, internet, and 
such without unnecessary complexity in the 
activity itself. Novice users are likely to be 
familiar with tours as well, and even with new 
hardware in their hands and new software to 
learn, the basic idea of getting to the next 
point and reading what’s there is transparent. 
Teachers in particular can quickly assess their 
comfort and ability to add augmented reality 
gaming to their classrooms by trying a simple 
tour out early on.

73
scavenger hunt sequentially, making progression through the uncovering of a place possible. ARIS 
can also keep track of players’ scores and other attributes through the use of items. 
Interactive Stories
If there is a classic genre emerging within the nascent field of AR gaming for learning, it is 
the interactive story. Early examples like MingFong Jan’s 2005 Mad City Mystery3 have inspired 
many. Most of the ARIS experiences created by our authors who use ARIS as well as those that 
appeared in the previous MML book are interactive stories. There is something special to the idea 
of giving players not just a sequence of content to discover, but a role to play and a narrative that 
responds directly to their participation.
The basic idea of an interactive story is rather simple. Players are given roles to play and through 
these roles they interact with virtual and/or live characters and other parts of the world in which the 
narrative takes place. There is usually some motivating context like a mystery to solve. As the story 
unfolds through time and space, the outcomes depend on choices players make.
Users have many goals in mind when they use ARIS to make interactive stories, and they include 
a wide array of educational activities. At the same time, shared interest in them stems from a basic 
desire to create something rich and meaningful for others to fall into. To take presence in place, 
awareness and observation, and media on the device, and roll them into a context where content 
takes on meaning and has consequences, and where the player has a role to play in that situation 
aims directly at creating a truly immersive experience. Many scholars have described the power 
of situating content within meaningful contexts, or the agency to be gained by having a learner 
inhabit a role and extending participation beyond listening and responding.
A simple example to illustrate the concept and purpose of interactive AR stories as course curriculum 
is Mentira.4 Mentira is a game for Spanish classes at the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque. 
The story unfolds much like a historical novel, where fact and fiction combine to set the context 
and social conditions for meaningful interaction in Spanish. While playing Mentira, learners must 
investigate clues and talk to various characters to prove they are not responsible for a murder in a 
local neighborhood. Players visit the local neighborhood where the story is set to collect additional 
clues and ultimately solve the mystery. Mentira feels like a natural fit to a Spanish class instead 
of technology that has been shoehorned in for its own sake because the goal of a Spanish class is 
to bring students into contact with Spanish in the world. It is a story told through the Spanish 
language and which takes place in a place where the language has been relevant for more than 300 
3 See (Squire & Jan, 2007) for a description of how role and story are imagined to be productive for engaging students in 
scientific inquiry.
4 For more about Mentira see my and Julie Sykes’ chapter in Mobile Media Learning: Amazing Uses of Mobile Devices for 
Learning (Holden & Sykes, 2012).

74
years. Instead of regurgitating vocabulary and grammar—the focus of much classroom instruction 
and almost all mobile games for language learning—in Mentira students use Spanish to understand 
and participate meaningfully in a situation.
Later in this book, there are several examples of interactive stories made with ARIS. Bressler has a 
multiplayer forensic mystery School Scene Investigators (chapter 7) similar to Jan’s Mad City Mystery. 
Many of the creations detailed by Adam and Perales (chapter 10) start from the basic structure of an 
interactive story. And all the designs described in the Design Challenges section of the book are also 
interactive stories: May’s Quest for the Cities of Gold; Dikkers, Rieder, and Soloman’s ParkQuest; 
Blakesley and McIntosh’s Lift Off; and Fisher and Dikkers’ Horror on the Ridges (chapters 15 
through 18). 
One reason for the popularity of the interactive story genre among ARIS users is the universal 
nature of storytelling. We share ideas with each other in the form of stories. Regardless of the 
subject, audience, or setting, stories are the oldest and most used communicative strategy we have. 
Story connects people to ideas, and ideas to places. Time, intention, action, and reflection take form 
within stories. So when thinking about AR as a technology for uniting content and place through 
interaction, interactive narratives look like a natural format.
The interactive narrative is not only a preference of users, but also a central aspect of the original 
design of ARIS. The acronym ARIS stands for Augmented Reality for Interactive Storytelling. 
Many features were specifically designed to support the creation of interactive narratives distinctly 
as a certain type of game or experience. This preference is obvious when you look at what exactly 
ARIS makes it easy for authors to do:
•	
Plaques, items, and characters are author-centric. To a large extent, 
what the player does with them is read their contents.
•	
Multiple choice based dialogue with virtual characters is a heavily 
foregrounded feature.
•	
The requirement system allows future interactions to depend on logical 
consequences of the state and history of the player more than on the current 
state of the virtual world or its contents.
Although the lines between game genres, types, or even between games and other kinds of content 
can be rather fuzzy, generally a focus on storytelling means that ARIS is not so much a platform for 
action games, geometric puzzles, or interactive simulations. Our focus on interactive storytelling 
may take us away from some of the most popular areas of commercial mobile game design, but it 
allows us to reach out to very diverse audiences, help them to connect readily to what otherwise 
might be an uncomfortable space, and create games that have immediate relevance to their own 
subjects, places, and contexts.

75
Situated Documentaries
The situated documentary is another story-based AR genre, often an interactive story with the 
added notion that the story being lived through is tightly based upon actual events at a location. 
This concept was coined by James Mathews, who created Dow Day for his high school students, 
originally on MIT’s Outdoor AR platform like Jan’s Mad City Mystery. We later ported the basic 
story from this project to ARIS to be used as a concrete demonstration of AR storytelling (figure 
1). In Dow Day players take on the role of a reporter in 1967, Madison, Wisconsin with the goal 
to interview virtual characters connected with student protests on campus regarding the Vietnam 
War. Historically, these protests culminated in a brutal conflict known as Dow Day. Participants in 
Dow Day view video and images surrounding this event in the media’s authentic locations, situating 
them within the event. 
Generally, authors of situated documentaries 
want to know whether and how combining 
physical location and documentary materials 
can result in compelling, immersive storytelling 
of real-life events. A key mechanic is being 
able to physically situate this historical media 
in relevant physical locations. In Dow Day, 
the use is similar to what one finds in the 
popular Then & Now photo books, where 
a contemporary photograph accompanies 
a historical one taken from the same place 
and in the same direction. The familiarity of 
the modern landscape helps us get into the 
historical context, noting similarities and 
differences. In a situated documentary, players 
are not given a contemporary photo to establish 
context. Instead, they are physically present 
where the original events took place and their 
senses provide the contrasting reference while 
the mobile device provides the details of the 
historical setting. Adam and Perales describe 
some of their and their students’ creations as 
documentary (chapter 10), and Owen Gottlieb 
also uses the term refer to his ARIS game, 
Jewish Time Jump.5 
Figure 1. A screenshot from the ARIS port of Mathews’ 
Dow Day. An archival photo is used to illustrate and 
situate the story in the game.
5 Jewish Time Jump was a finalist for a G4C award at the 2013 Games for Change Festival.

76
One may question whether an interactive story can ever really be considered a documentary. 
Because we imagine giving the player a role to play and decisions to make, the result is necessarily 
ahistorical, at least in part. However, many authors will make player roles generic—i.e. the reporter 
you play in Dow Day is not an actual reporter and your actions do not affect the outcome of the 
protests—invented for the story rather than actual historical figures in an effort to lighten the 
disturbance. In practice, designs like Dow Day retain a documentary feel that is distinctly different 
from historical fiction like Mentira. Watching authors face this and other boundaries demonstrates 
the vitality involved with this creative act. In AR storytelling, fiction and non-fiction are clearly not 
opposites, but the foundation for broad experimentation. The intent to help others get inside past 
historical events may indeed be enacted most efficiently by pretending to be someone who never 
lived at all.
Data Collection Activities
ARIS can also be used to set up data collection activities, typically through use of the Notebook. 
Data collection activities turn authorship around by giving the players the primary responsibility 
for telling a story. By carefully selecting the data to be collected, an engaging game mechanic can 
be created, compelling players to fill the game world with content that then can become fodder for 
further investigations. 
Possible content areas for data collection through the ARIS Notebook include anything from 
citizen science to community ethnography. An early entry in this genre, Digital Graffiti Gallery, 
is a curation activity developed by University of New Mexico undergraduate Ivan Kenarov in my 
Local Games in ABQ class. Players document graffiti on the UNM campus (figure 2). As the real 
graffiti is removed by cleaning crews, it remains in place in ARIS and can be revisited in the future. 
This collection activity serves to preserve a lasting, locative record of this ephemeral art form. Later 
in this book, Frandy has his students use the ARIS Notebook to practice ethnography (chapter 8), 
and Graza and Rosenblum’s students use it to record observations of a neighborhood in East Austin 
(chapter 9).
Figure 2. Alyssa Concha 
plays Digital Graffiti Gallery 
by photographing graffiti.

77
Data collection activities have become popular with ARIS because they require less effort at upfront 
production and also perhaps because they give players a larger role to play, themes we mentioned in 
the previous chapter. To make a data collection activity, a teacher pretty much only needs to come 
up with an idea and a name. A couple words and checkboxes in the ARIS Editor and they are ready 
to go. In contrast to a tour, which takes about an hour to learn to make and at least ten times that 
to find and prepare the content for the tour, a data collection activity takes five minutes of training 
to author and just as little time to set up from scratch. The structure of the inquiry can be largely 
provided by the existing social environment and the technology serves to house and share the 
collection among all the players. And those players, instead of simply working through a path set 
out for them by the author, become the primary producers of content. By placing students’ actions 
in the foreground, a data collection approach can quickly produce a context of productive inquiry 
among a group.
Geolocational Games
Despite our frequent use of the term games in talking about ARIS, a reader could be forgiven 
for not seeing how the above categories and examples above sound much like games at all. While 
I think the term itself is slippery6 and justifying it here is not really to the point, there are some 
features and uses of ARIS that do feel a bit more gamey. Items, because they can be collected and 
referenced in quantity, have been used to create scores, scenarios of scarcity and completeness, and 
even crafting schema. The other major ARIS element that lends itself to gaminess is spawning. The 
ability for authors to spawn locations according to parameters rather than directly placing them on 
the map can be used to create familiar scenarios to many action-based games, the difference here 
being a human body traversing space instead of an avatar. Together, these features can be used by 
authors to explore the space of geolocational games directly.
Currently the most popular geolocational game made in ARIS is Rupee Collector. Virtual rupees 
(Zelda, not India; technically plaques that hand out items) spawn on the map around a player and 
last there a short duration. If the player can run to them and pick them up before they disappear, 
they receive points that depend on the color of the rupee. Another item in the player’s inventory 
links to a webpage that references the statistics for the game. It is a leaderboard and players can 
compare their scores to all other players of Rupee Collector in the world. Although this game was 
made for its own sake, there is much interest in this kind of game mechanic for those coming to 
ARIS from the world of exergames. It seems possible that a fun geolocational game could be good 
exercise for its players.
6 Wittgenstein famously used the word game to describe the difficulty with definitions generally in his Philosophical Investigations.

78
W H O  U S E S  A R I S 
A N D  W H AT  F O R ?
In the previous section, I described the kinds 
of things one might create using ARIS. In this 
section I’d like to describe the motivations of 
that use as an almost orthogonal concept. To 
begin, ARIS is loosely but consistently linked 
with use in educational environments. Its design 
does not directly seek to address functionality 
schools are interested in for managing their 
learners—there’s no quiz template or student 
progress reports, no official distinction about 
who should be using ARIS and how—but it is 
certainly designed with learning in mind more 
than entertainment and the vast majority of 
users seem to be interested in this aspect of its 
use. There is a great variety in where and how 
ARIS is put to educational purposes too. There 
seems to be no natural limit to the content areas 
that are applicable. ARIS is used in schools, 
museums, after school programs, experiments 
for academic research, and community 
organizations. Players and authors range from 
middle schoolers to retired professors. In this 
section, we describe some of the more popular 
settings and uses for ARIS games.
AR Games as Curriculum
Garza and Rosenblum (Chapter 9) present their work in developing an AR game (close to a data 
collection scavenger hunt) for students in a design course. This, Mad City Mystery, Dow Day, and 
Mentira are examples of this once standard imagining of the use of AR for learning.7 The basic method 
is to find an existing curricular area and design and implement an AR game within it. The play of the 
AR game can help connect content to context, find ways to include content and practices unfortunately 
absent from the classroom. Sometimes an AR game can be used to actually invert the values expressed 
by instruction taking a focus on textbook content and changing it to the local context.
7 Most of the experiments run and written about by Klopfer and Squire for example use AR in this vein. See (Klopfer, 2008), 
(Klopfer & Squire, 2008), (Squire et al., 2007).
Figure 3. A screenshot from the ARIS game Rupee 
Collector. Gems spawn on the player’s map and must 
be collected before they disappear or other players 
grab them.

79
Place can make content come alive. Mentira again can be a helpful example to understand the 
general concept. Students learn Spanish in a classroom and don’t often access the language outside 
that classroom. Yet the language is worth learning because it is used so widely. Especially in places 
like Albuquerque, NM, the Spanish language is deeply wrapped up with the place and the people. 
Scarcity of opportunity to use the language is an artifact of learning it within a classroom. If you 
can bring students into the lived world of Spanish, you might be able to help them find meaning in 
their practice. This is very similar thinking to the long-standing practice of study-abroad.
Typical implementations also are characterized by features and concepts stemming from research 
into games and learning. An example of something a researcher or instructor might seek to gain 
by implementing a game in a curriculum is for students to see failure as a productive opportunity 
for learning rather than an admonishment of their abilities. In most curricular situations, failure, 
say on tests, mostly is used to tell students that they are not doing well enough. In games, failure 
is an essential part of progress. You learn to beat games by falling down pits, getting killed, simply 
losing, over and over again until you are better (or give up). By making a game that is played by part 
of a curriculum, planners hope to infect students with a more productive attitude towards failure.
Museum Exhibits and More: Indoor, Semi-formal Uses
More and more people have been using ARIS indoors to add structure and content to installations 
like museum exhibits. Since GPS does not work well indoors, these games usually work through 
the use of QR codes. Just as tours give authors a chance to tell the story of a place, ARIS games 
that sit atop museum exhibits can take the artifacts and dates and weave them into an actual story, 
providing extra meaning and context.
Examples are far ranging. The Minnesota Historical Society has produced Play the Past, the biggest 
ARIS game ever in terms of players and production effort. It is a combination exhibition space and 
ARIS game. Players play as early white settlers in Minnesota. 100,000 people are planned to play 
this game over the next 10 years.8 At the other end, an undergraduate student made a game for her 
local history museum last summer. May’s Quest for the Cities of Gold (chapter 15) layers a story over 
an existing exhibit to help the museum try to reach a younger audience. In both cases, the basic 
intent is to use ARIS to create a story that links the artifacts in the museum to one another, the 
contexts in which they take on meaning, and pull players into those worlds.
8 Play the Past won a 2014 Muse Award (Bronze) and an International Serious Games Award (Gold) for its design. Its early 
development is chronicled by Seann Dikkers in the previous volume of Mobile Media Learning (2012).

80
Student Design Studios
Probably the most common use of ARIS in classrooms and after school environments is to create 
opportunities for students to make games, an instance of student MML design as suggested in the 
previous chapter. Sometimes this is done generically, as is common with other technical design 
tools like Scratch, accompanied by similar rationales for such use fitting into existing educational 
paradigms.9 Possibly more unique to ARIS however, are the student design studios organized around 
producing games that speak to a specific context of inquiry. Mathews (2010) described using mobile 
game design as a lens for doing community research and action and has inspired many to follow his 
lead, including the editors and some authors of this book.10 Within these environments, AR game 
creation can be used as a way to interrogate the values, methods, and content of a discipline—i.e. 
if you learn a lot of content while playing a game, you would stand to learn even more by making 
a game. AR game design is considered as an example area for learning lessons from the act and 
practice of design; making ARIS games can be a way to learn about working with others to make 
something complex.
Not only are the learning opportunities presented by design deep and multifaceted, they can also 
be authentic. Within the nascent area of AR design, even inexperienced youth can come up with 
designs that can go beyond the classroom and take on life in the world. There are so many avenues 
of exploration and so many open questions that it is not hard to find new areas to contribute to. 
Finally, design studios, as with the data collection activities, do not take much preparation to enact. 
Certainly facilitating design studios successfully is no easy task, but for those who wish to take on 
the challenge, facilitation doesn’t imply close preparation; the necessities are more along the lines of 
existing interpersonal skills than prior media production or acquiring new technical skills.
Design-Based Research
Not every ARIS game made for use in the classroom has the classroom as its main theater. Instead 
many games are designed primarily as instruments of research. In its early life, ARIS was thought 
of first as a tool to support design-based research experiments. Following Anne Brown (1992) and 
others, design-based educational research is characterized by the concept of making something to 
be used within an existing learning context rather than setting up a laboratory setting specifically 
for the testing of a theory. Usually accompanying this basic intent to study learning in situ, are 
preferences for including participants as co-researchers, iteration, and a desire to read beyond the 
immediate situation in analyzing the study. There is also a hope that the instrument developed is 
not just diagnostic for research but can play some meaningful role in the learning context after 
9 See for example (Resnick, 2008) to see a description of patterns of activity emerging from informal Scratch use as useful for 
encouraging computational literacy.
10 Frandy also describes a student design studio in his folklore course, and May’s work in chapter 15 began in a class of mine 
modeled after Mathews’.

81
the study is over or be scaled for use in other contexts. Although the lines between action and 
research are often fuzzy with design based research, Bressler’s work (chapter 7), fits this paradigm 
neatly, and the artistic experiments taken on by Adams, Perales, and their students (chapter 10) 
share some features as well.
Contributions to Community Resources, Art, and Entertainment
ARIS is also used to develop AR games, tours, and data collection activities to be used generally 
by a community as a resource. We see this with Dikkers and his team in their development of 
ParkQuest (chapter 16) and Wagler and Mathews’ development of Up River (Wagler & Mathews, 
2012). There are millions of possible such designs, otherwise forever undeveloped for want of 
resources. Sometimes the design experiences organized for youth have a community resource as a 
specifically designated form of output for student work. Other times ARIS is picked up outside any 
formal context and used to make something some community needs. May’s game fits this context.
Artists interested in examining the possibilities of combining mobile media and place have likewise 
made use of ARIS (e.g Adams and Perales). Though they involve their students in the design of 
ARIS games, they see the format itself not as a tool for learning, but a tool to be learned so they can 
use it to explore the possibilities of mobile cinema. Finally, ARIS has been used totally informally, 
without any serious intent of any kind. Scavenger hunts have been made for the birthday parties 
of young children. Rupee Collector and other titles of mine have been made just for fun. Fisher 
and Dikkers’ Horror on the Ridges (chapter 18) looks to make an AR horror game succeed first as 
entertainment, with learning applications left for a later stage. The lasting fun with ARIS for me is 
that it draws attention from such diverse centers.
A R I S  I S  M O R E  T H A N  A  T O O L
What makes ARIS feel really powerful to me is the way in which it has become more than just a 
tool. The collective actions and conversations among those who use it have made it into something 
alive in a sense that is descriptive of the kinds of deep change to teaching and learning I suggested 
might be possible in the second chapter of this book. ARIS is characterized, among other qualities, 
by: 
•	
Multiple possible uses. ARIS is not derived from or towards a particular 
discipline, topic, or skill set. People who use it bring their learning contexts with 
them and an incredible diversity of activity is the result.
•	
Diverse, non-hierarchical models of participation and multiple portals through 
which people become involved. No one is in charge of how you’re supposed to 
use ARIS. You might make games, teach others to do so, use the code to make a 
different AR engine, or simply underwrite the cost of development.

82
•	
Many forms of expertise around and with ARIS can be independently developed. 
Those who have developed expertise in their work with ARIS can emerge as 
guides for others to follow, and this is across many possible contexts: within a 
school, across the internet to other ARIS users, and through academic research 
for example.
In describing ARIS above, it was impossible to do so other than through the concrete and diverse 
uses people across many educational contexts are putting ARIS to; the technical structures of ARIS 
really have little meaning outside the kinds of creations being produced and the situations from 
which users are coming. They are a big part of what ARIS has actually come to be, inseparable 
from the software itself. Indeed, the meaning and uses of ARIS were not designed in advance by its 
creators but instead have emerged and evolved through the actions and inventiveness of its users. 
The whole is more than the sum of its parts. 
Finally, we should recognize how users contribute to ARIS itself. There are too many examples to 
mention but a few should help convey this idea. I fit the well-known paradigm of the evangelist 
early adopter. I came to the platform as a simple user in 2009 before you could actually download 
the ARIS Client from the iOS App Store, but have ended up helping to design the tool, largely 
wrote the documentation (http://manual.arisgames.org), am responsible for much of the content on 
the project’s homepage, and the most active member of a discussion forum for ARIS users. Oh, and 
I’m writing this chapter about ARIS right now. ARIS has also had investors, groups like Engage, 
The MacArthur Foundation, The New Learning Institute, and The Library of Congress: Teaching 
with Primary Sources Program who saw some potential in these ideas and funded them, and others 
like the Minnesota Historical Society who have funded ARIS and used it to develop the rather large 
Play the Past game/exhibit mentioned above. Owen Gottlieb through ConverJent has managed to 
fill both of these roles in his work to produce Jewish Time Jump. The support and use of ARIS by a 
few key people and groups has provided resources and concepts that have trickled back down to all 
users. On a less obvious level, each person who makes an ARIS game and uses it or tells someone 
else about it expands what has been previously done with the platform. 
The diversity of work hinted at above and displayed by our authors is the outcome of a distributed 
conversation among many people experimenting and sharing. Seeing ARIS in this way prevents 
us from pigeonholing our efforts or the ideas of our users. We begin to understand how to think 
about tools like ARIS from a humanistic rather than instrumentalist point of view. We see ARIS as 
a community and not just a piece of software.

83
R E F E R E N C E S
Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complex 
interventions in classroom settings. The journal of the learning sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Dikkers, S. (2012). History in our hands: mobile media in museum adventures. In Mobile Media Learning (pp. 171-
184). ETC Press.
Gagnon, D. (2010). ARIS: An open source platform for developing mobile learning experiences. Unpublished Master’s 
thesis. Available at arisgames.org.
Holden, C., Gagnon, D., Litts, B., & Smith, G. (2013). ARIS: An open-source platform for widespread mobile 
augmented reality experimentation. In M. Mendes (Ed), Technology platform innovations and forthcoming trends in 
ubiquitous learning. IGI Global. 
Holden, C., & Sykes, J. (2012). Mentira: prototyping language-based locative gameplay. In Mobile Media Learning 
(pp. 111-130). ETC Press.
Klopfer, E. (2008). Augmented learning: Research and design of mobile educational games. MIT Press.
Klopfer, E., & Squire, K. (2008). Environmental Detectives—the development of an augmented reality platform for 
environmental simulations. Educational Technology Research and Development, 56(2), 203-228.
Mathews, J. M. (2010). Using a studio-based pedagogy to engage students in the design of mobile-based media. 
English Teaching: Practice & Critique, 9(1).
Resnick, M. (2008). Sowing the Seeds for a More Creative Society. Learning & Leading with Technology, 35(4), 18-22.
Squire, K., & Jan, M. (2007). Mad City Mystery: Developing scientific argumentation skills with a place-based 
augmented reality game on handheld computers. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 16(1), 5-29.
Squire, K., Jan, M., Mathews, J., Wagler, M., Martin, J., DeVane, B., & Holden, C. (2007). Wherever you go, there 
you are: Place-based augmented reality games for learning. The educational design and use of simulation computer 
games, 265-296.
Wagler, M., & Mathews, J. (2012). Up river: place, ethnography, and design in the st. louis river estuary. In Mobile 
Media Learning (pp. 39-60). ETC Press.


SECTION THREE

Connecting to Classrooms
7. 	
School Scene Investigators: 
	
A Collaborative AR Game for Middle School Science Inquiry
8. 	
Building a Student-Centered Classroom with AR
9. 	
Introducing a Neighborhood
10. 	
Experimenting with Locative Media Games and Storytelling in Fine Arts
This section collects stories from teachers, researchers, technologists, and artists using 
Mobile Media within classroom or school environments. The transformation of formal 
learning environments using MML presents unique challenges and constraints. These 
authors see their use of MML as a way to address shortcomings of method and 
pedagogy in their instructional situations, from elementary school science to folklore and 
art in higher ed. Most of the authors are also the classroom instructors in these settings, 
while Bressler is an education researcher using a class within a school as the test group 
for her design-based research, and Rosenblum’s role in their project is technically as 
IT instructional support. This section, along with the field study classes in Traveler 
(chapter 4) illustrate some of the possibilities of transforming an existing curricular space 
with MML. They describe several strategies to make MML—complex as it may seem—
within familiar constraints of time, expertise, materials, and curricular goals. 


87
Chapter SEVEN

School Scene Investigators: 
A Collaborative AR Game for Middle 
School Science Inquiry 
Denise M. Bressler, PhD
Stevens Institute of Technology
Did you ever think that you could engage and excite students by sending them to the Principal’s 
office? 
Imagine you are a middle school student. Your iPhone pops up with an alert. “Go see the Principal 
right now!” You head down the corridors, down the stairs, and arrive at the front office to find a 
quick-response code (QR code) with the word PRINCIPAL next to it. You scan it. A picture of 
your Principal appears on the screen with the text, “Hello.” You click to keep reading the onscreen 
conversation. The Principal says:
	
I just came into my office and found my drawer broken into. I had the answer 
keys in there to the test everyone is taking! You’re always causing trouble and 
I think you did it. Confess!
This is the beginning of School Scene Investigators: The Case of the Stolen Score Sheets—a forensic 
science mystery game played on iOS devices in a school environment. Students collect forensic 
evidence to prove their innocence and determine who really stole the answer sheets. As they move 
around the school, they encounter QR codes that they scan to access game-related information (see 
Figure 1). In some instances, they converse with a virtual character. At other times, scanning a code 
means discovering evidence to keep in their virtual inventory. Throughout the game, players are 
exposed to some basic elements of forensic science, like analyzing fingerprints, hair samples, and 
other trace evidence. They also work through other problems like interpreting a coded message on 
a slip of paper and determining whether characters have ulterior motives.

88
In making this game, my goals were to 1) design 
a game that supported collaborative problem 
solving; 2) create a game design that other 
educators could easily replicate and implement; 
and 3) make a game that was a fun, learning 
experience for the students. In this chapter, I 
share my game development process revealing 
what design aspects were important to me and 
how they were integrated into the game. Then, 
I explain what happened during gameplay by 
sharing observations of what the groups said 
and did. Next, I summarize my thoughts 
on what worked well and what needs to be 
improved. Ultimately, I end with my thoughts 
on the power of well-designed learning games.

B U I L D I N G  T H E  G A M E
AR games hold promise to support active learning scenarios such as collaborative problem solving. 
Popular culture has had a recent obsession with forensic science television shows that follow multi-
functional teams working together to solve mysteries. To me, there seemed a natural synergy 
between the affordances of AR games and the group dynamics of the popularized version of forensic 
teams. Since forensic science is also popular with science teachers, and had the potential to appeal to 
both boys and girls, it was a sensible choice for a middle school science mystery game. Additionally, 
no other mobile AR games focused on forensic science, especially not within the context of the 
students’ own school. 
To create a portable game that other educators could use, I wanted a technology that is relatively 
cheap and simple to implement in as many schools as possible. Most mobile augmented reality 
games take advantage of place-based information, which requires the player to use a GPS-enabled 
device. Since mobile devices with GPS are expensive and require cellular plans, I decided to use 
printable QR codes, school wi-fi access, and the free ARIS editor. Since ARIS only runs on iOS, 
usable devices included wifi-enabled models with cameras: the iPod Touch and iPad as well as 
iPhones, both with and without cellular plans.
Lastly, I thought it would intrigue students to see their school environment from a different 
viewpoint. In this case, their school would become the crime scene for a theft. I also thought it 
would add to the personal feel if the school’s Principal was the game’s Principal; he agreed and 
allowed me to use his picture in the game. Using the school as a personal context made the game not 
Figure 1. Student scanning QR code.

89
only enjoyable but also easier to implement since there was no need for chaperones, permission slips, 
or busing. Usually AR games are set outside in places relevant to their story lines, so minimizing 
attendant bureaucracy of field trips is a benefit of school-based AR games.
G A M E  D E S I G N
There is research showing that collaborative problem solving could be achieved through a 
jigsaw technique (Dunleavy, Dede, & Mitchell, 2009). Recognizing this led me to two important 
design decisions:
•	
No player would have all the information needed to solve the mystery.
•	
Not all players would have quests, or tasks within the game, at the same time.
This research also indicates that jigsawing could be achieved by organizing players into roles. For 
the player, the role functions as an in-game identity. For the jigsaw technique, each role has different 
abilities and is given a different part of the puzzle to solve. All the roles come together to form a 
collaborative team. 
Another concept I found helpful for creating my game is the theory of Flow. Flow is a positive 
psychological state that people experience when they are totally consumed by an activity. Rules of 
Play by Katie Salen and Eric Zimmerman (2004)1 explains the connection between game design 
and the components of Flow as defined by Csikszentmihalyi (1990)2. Specifically, they suggest 
giving players clear goals, a sense of control, unambiguous feedback, and a challenging activity to 
help them achieve Flow while playing. To do this, I added four additional prerequisites to my game 
design: 
•	
Reliance on the quests feature to guide players through the game with 
clear goals,
•	
A non-linear game so players had control over the order of game elements,
•	
A win state so players received feedback on successfully completing the game, and
•	
A decryption challenge which needed to be solved to unlock the final phase 
of the game

1 A great reference for game design detailed enough to provide extra insight to those with a foundation of knowledge and broad 
enough to give newbies a chance to get their feet wet.
2 As an athlete and intellectual, I have certainly experienced feelings of Flow for a long time; Csikszentmihalyi gave me the words to 
understand this complicated feeling in a tangible way.

90
G A M E  O V E R V I E W
Introduction
Before students started the game, I provided players with a brief tutorial. Since it was a mystery, I 
did not want to reveal too many specifics of the plot line. Furthermore, I trusted that the students 
would be able to figure out the technology together. The tutorial included the following software 
features along with these brief details (see Table 1 for screenshots):
Table 1. Screenshots from School Scene Investigators.
Sample Quest Screen
Sample Inventory Item
Decoder
•	
Quests provided in-game tasks. Students viewed their active quests by using the 
tab at the bottom of the screen. They were told to pay attention to the quests 
because they tell you where to go and what to do. Not every player had a quest at 
the same time. 
•	
Inventory stored virtual items. Students viewed their inventory items by selecting 
the tab at the bottom of the screen. They were told that when you select an item 
on the list you will see a picture. To read more about the item, select “Detail.”  
Items appear and disappear from your inventory throughout the game.
•	
Decoder enabled players to interact with game elements. Students used the decoder 
tab to scan QR codes. There is one point in the game when they also needed to 
type numbers; to do this, they used the text field at the top of the screen. 

91
Once the software tutorial concluded, I confirmed 
that all players knew basic iPhone navigation 
techniques such as pinching to zoom and swiping 
up and down to scroll. Finally, I explained that 
every player needed to scan every code and that 
players had to stay together as a group. 
Storyline
In School Scene Investigators, the first thing 
a player does is pick a role. A Player can be 
the social networker, techie, science whiz, 
or photographer. Based on their role, each 
player collects a unique piece of evidence 
from the crime scene as well as each suspect. 
Briefly, each player becomes an “expert” in a 
specific strand of evidence, such as blood, hair, 
fingerprints, or shoe prints (see Table 2). The 
mystery cannot be solved without all players 
communicating correctly to the group about 
their collected evidence, with the exception 
of the photographer. To allow flexibility, the 
photographer’s role was made non-integral so 
that groups of three or four could successfully 
complete the game.
Table 2. Description of roles and assignment of game information to each role.
Role
Description
Crime scene 
evidence
Evidence from 
suspects
Social 
networker
Good with people and knows 
everybody's business at school
Hair sample from drawer
Collects hair samples
Techie
Good at solving puzzles and has 
cool phone apps 
Pen (with fingerprint)
Scans suspects fingerprints 
with an “app”
Science whiz
Conducts experiments at home 
with household supplies 
Blood sample from drawer
Collects blood samples
Photographer
Carries a camera and takes pictures 
of everything
Picture of shoe print
Collects pictures of 
suspects’ shoes
S I D E B A R : 
G E T T I N G  YO U R 
O W N  G A M E  G O I N G
For those who might enjoy building a 
similar project, I’d like to offer a few 
pointers:
•	
Do your homework. Find other 
	
games that you like and model 
	
your game after your favorites.
•	
Find an engaging topic or 
	
story.  A compelling narrative is a 
	
great place to start thinking about 
	
your characters, locations, 
	
and inventory items. 
•	
Run your ideas past your 
	
target audience. I had nieces and 
	
nephews who gave feedback on 
	
my early ideas. Their input 
	
was priceless!

92
The narrative of the game is partly inspired by the time frame scheduled for implementation of this 
study: a two-week period in March when students take the state standardized test every morning 
for 3 hours. The game fits into the empty afternoons and the testing serves as the instigator of the 
plot. When students are called into the Principal’s office, they are accused of having stolen the 
answers. Players’ initial goal is to prove their collective innocence. 
After the initial accusation, the Principal agrees to let the players explore his office…the primary 
crime scene. Students open the door, spot the next code, and scan it. Players then read a description 
of the scene:
	
You have entered the Principal’s office.  In his desk, you see a drawer with a busted 
lock.  This is the drawer where the answer sheets must have been stolen from.  In 
the drawer, you find a strand of hair, blood, and a pen.  On the floor under the 
drawer, you also find a shoe print.  You decide to divide up the evidence.
Players each take a piece of evidence depending on their role.  For example, if you are the 
photographer, you take a picture of the shoe print left at the crime scene. The storyline takes you 
to the gym next where you meet John and take a picture of his shoes. The game continues to guide 
you around the school to meet and interact with other virtual characters, collecting more evidence 
along with way. Over the course of solving the mystery, the photographer ends up with a set of shoe 
prints from possible suspects that can then be compared to the print left at the crime scene. (See 
Table 3 for collected images). This is only one clue about the thief, teams need to consider all other 
trace evidence in order to prove their innocence.
Table 3. Crime scene shoe print and relevant evidence.
Jane’s  shoes
Janitor’s shoes
Above is the shoe print left at 
the crime scene. To the right 
are all the suspects’ shoes. 
Players look closely at the 
soles to determine which one 
matches the above impression. 
John’s shoes
Principal’s shoes

93
The final step in the game has players analyze all the evidence they have collected. Each player 
has several pieces of evidence to analyze by assessing their similarities and differences. Most of the 
evidence indicts one of the suspects, but there is some room for additional interpretation. Ultimately, 
the group reports back to the Principal with an allegation of who really stole the answer sheets.
G A M E  O N !  R U N N I N G  T H E  R E S E A R C H  T R I A L S
Students were recruited through science teachers who were willing to let students miss a class 
period to participate. A total of 68 students volunteered to participate in the study. There were 19 
groups of students representing eighth grade students (47.1%), seventh grade (29.4%), and sixth 
grade (23.5%). Most groups were mixed gender (n=14); however there were three boy-only and two 
girl-only groups. Since I wanted to observe every group play through the game, groups played one 
at a time. I followed every group trying to remain in the background as I took field notes. I paid 
particular attention to their collaboration.
Collaboration seemed to build over the course of the game. In the beginning, players would stand 
alone reading with minimal discussion amongst the group (see Table 4). They quickly realized that 
not everyone had a quest and they started questioning each other by saying “I didn’t get anything…
Who has a quest?” or “What’s your quest?” After reading the information provided at a location, 
I observed them asking questions, for example: “What did you get as a sample from the office?” 
Early in the game, I also saw players helping each other learn to scan codes and to use the software. 
As the game progressed, players seemed to interact more by looking at each other’s phones, sharing 
information verbally, and even sitting or standing closer together (see Table 4). After visiting the 
first or second suspect, players realized that each suspect was saying different things to each player 
as well as giving different items to each player. Students started directly interacting with each other 
to fill in gaps in their knowledge asking other group members, “What did you get?” or even showing 
fellow teammates their phones and saying, “Look what I got.” As play continued, students started 
talking out loud as they tried to make sense of the evidence, and fellow players might confirm or 
deny their thoughts. For example, one student said, “Maybe it was the Principal” and his teammate 
responded, “No. No. Wouldn’t make any sense. Look at his hair sample.” 
Table 4. Progression of physical proximity of players.
Beginning of game
Middle of game
End of game

94
In the middle of the game, players had to decode the janitor’s locker combination; it was the first 
and only time that a correct answer was required in order to continue in the game. Many teams 
struggled with the task; in fact, despite several attempts, some groups could not get into the locker 
and decided to complete other unfinished quests and come back later. Often, students worked 
through a trial and error process with different team members offering suggestions for what the 
decrypted code might be. Students could have let their difficulties defeat them, but they always 
persevered and it paid off. With shouts of “Oh yes!” and “I love this game!” players were often 
thrilled to decipher the code and unlock the locker. Since this challenging task was located mid 
game, students had experienced enough gaming enjoyment to know that it was worth persevering. 
Plus, they were getting close to figuring out the identity of the thief and breaking into the locket 
would probably reveal another clue! 
At the end of the game, a great deal of discussion and interaction occurred as students tried to 
determine the real thief (see Table 4). Once the players had collected all the possible evidence, most 
groups sorted through the details together. Here’s a sample conversation amongst a three player 
group as they start to narrow down the possible suspects:
“Well then. We have to discuss evidence.”
“What do we have?”
“Pen… blood…fingerprints.”
“So, it’s the Principal. The janitor. Or the cat” [laughter]
“Oh yeah. The janitor. Let’s check his hair.”
“Janitor AB positive and Principal AB positive. And the blood from drawer is like that.”
As groups began to narrow down the suspect list, students also referenced some of the content 
knowledge that they learned during gameplay. Here are sample comments from a group that 
showcased their adoption of specific terminology (arch, loops, and whorls) to describe fingerprints:
“That looks like an arch.”
“This kind of looks like it, look at the loops and whorls.”
Player A: “See if it matches.”  Player B: “That’s not an arch.”
Time and time again, players were trying to make sense of the information they were given by 
talking to each other; all of these interactions occurred naturally and were not prompted by direct 
instructions in the game. However, after visiting all game locations, all players received a quest 
that prompted them to discuss all the evidence with their teammates. Some groups immediately 
sat down and analyzed all the data thoroughly before reporting back to the Principal to make their 
final allegation. However, other teams did not follow the instructions. Some groups went to the 
Principal’s office first, and then when the game asked for their answer, they discussed the data and 
came to consensus before entering the answer. There were even some groups that did not come to 

95
consensus before selecting an answer. So while the game scaffolded collaborative problem solving 
using the jigsaw technique, the game design did not require students to discuss the information. 
Many students naturally and willingly discussed their evidence, but not everyone did, and those 
who did not had greater difficulties identifying the correct thief.
After groups finished gameplay, I sat and talked with them for a few minutes hoping to delve 
into the most and least enjoyable aspects of the game as well as what they learned, if anything. 
Focus group discussions revealed that students felt they learned how to work well as a team. Many 
students were truly surprised by how well they worked together. A number of students said they 
normally argue with each other in class, yet they actually worked well together during the game. 
Others indicated they were not necessarily friends but they got along fine. In one extreme case, two 
boys admitted to being arch enemies yet they both agreed they did a good job together during the 
game. In fact, the group interactions between these arch enemies were some of the best of any group 
in the sample. Since I had specifically built the game to support collaborative problem solving, it 
was encouraging to hear that the students learned about teamwork.
B R I N G I N G  I T  A L L  T O G E T H E R
Things That Worked Well
Looking back at my goals for the project, there was a lot that worked well. 
Collaborative problem solving. One of the goals of the project was to design a game that promoted 
collaborative problem solving. By dividing up the quests and giving each player a strand of evidence 
to follow, the game design seems to have supported collaborative problem solving and minimized 
the hogs and logs problem that sometimes occurs in collaborative groups. The student who might 
be inclined to take control of the situation (the hog) could not direct the group unless he or she had 
a quest. In a similar vein, the student who might be easily overpowered in a group (the log) had a 
voice and responsibility because each player followed a unique line of evidence.
Additionally, I think the game afforded students the opportunity to synthesize data in a way 
distinct from traditional classroom based activities. Unlike a worksheet activity, the students were 
not sitting in science class alone trying to answer questions out of context, rather they were moving 
about the school experiencing content in context. One player, noticing the difference in mode, 
referred to their actions in the game as “actually experimenting.” Every analysis problem, such as 
which shoe made the shoe print, gave the group deeper insight into who the thief might be. Many 
players seemed invested in solving the game problems; the scientific thinking they did in the game 
was not only different from their usual school experience but also deeply engaging.
Create a portable game. Another goal for the project was to create a game that others could 
replicate and implement. Even though the game has not yet been used elsewhere, given the hope 
of making this game portable to other school environments, it was nice to see the technology work 

96
well. It was not perfect, but it worked really, really well. Students got bumped out of the game here 
and there, or stuck on a screen, but it was never enough to be frustrating. The secret was stable 
software, reliable wireless internet, and the use of QR codes. Using QR codes instead of GPS meant 
that students did not have to rely on an imprecise signal to move them through the game and 
other educators need only to print out the codes to implement this game at their schools. If you are 
interested in setting up the game at your school, information is available at the end of this chapter. 
Create a fun, learning experience. The final goal for the project was to make a game that was a 
fun, learning experience. Student enjoyment was witnessed during gameplay; some players clearly 
articulated their enjoyment by exclaiming “This is fun stuff!” or “I love this game!” and even “This was 
awesome!” For some players, enjoyment seemed to stem from being proud of their achievements. In 
one instance, an apprehensive girl successfully scanned the first QR code and announced, “Oh! I did 
it!” In another example, one boy selected the correct thief and then proclaimed, “I am the BEAST!”
Ultimately, I believe that the players had an enjoyable experience because it was outside school 
norms, it was novel, and it incorporated strong game design principles. First, it was outside school 
norms because students were actively breaking school rules to participate in my research. Students 
were in the hallways during class doing a list of unauthorized behaviors, such as running, talking, 
and using mobile phones; it was exciting for students to transgress such familiar boundaries. Second, 
the human brain loves novelty and the experience was unlike anything they had ever done before. 
Specifically, it was unlike any prior school experience and, although players had some familiarity 
with smartphones and QR codes, no one had ever played a collaborative mobile AR game. Lastly, 
I believe the game benefited from directly incorporating knowledge of Flow and jigsaw-based 
collaboration into the design principles. The game design met the prerequisites of promoting Flow, 
which led to a positive psychological effect for participants, and dispersed information to individual 
players which led to communication and often collaboration amongst participants. 
Areas for Improvement
Even though a lot went well in this first iteration, there were some rough edges and challenges that 
have yet to be addressed.
Collaborative problem solving. Groups played one at a time so there is no way for me to confirm 
that it effectively supports collaborative problem solving during a full class implementation. Before 
teachers can use this game as a complete class activity, there are several issues that need to be 
addressed. First, QR codes are in static locations and can only be scanned by one player at a time; 
therefore, there is potential for bottlenecks. In this study, students did not mind waiting for the 2 
or 3 other group members to scan the code; however, they might have been frustrated if there was 
a bottleneck of 20 students! Second, with other groups playing simultaneously, groups more apt to 
freeload might follow the stronger teams instead of figuring out the information themselves. Lastly, 
competition might increase, and groups might rush through to finish first rather than take their 
time to read through the information and solve the problem correctly. 

97
There are several design decisions that could be incorporated to enable full classes to play 
simultaneously. First, more QR codes could be generated to create different codes depending on 
player role. In other words, when players arrive at the new location, they might see a set of 4 labeled 
codes and they scan the one that correlates to their role. Second, the early part of the game could 
offer more choices in hopes of spreading out the students to different locations throughout the 
school creating less overlap at the same locations. Finally, different versions of the game could be 
created so that each character is moved to a different location. For example, in Game A, John is at 
the gym and Jane is at the library whereas in Game B John could be at the guidance office and Jane 
could be in the music room. If groups are playing in different areas of the school, this might reduce 
the likelihood of teams following or competing with each other.
Create a portable game. Fortunately and unfortunately, the entire game takes place in the hallways 
and students are expected to talk to each other. Certainly, this is part of the fun. Yet, since the game 
does not fit the mold of school it may be difficult for others to implement. Field observations revealed 
that students talking and running in the halls can disrupt classes that are in session. In fact, during 
the early part of the two-week research trial, almost every group was stopped and reprimanded by 
teachers for running in the halls, talking in the halls, or simply being in the halls during the class 
period. The Principal quickly remedied the problem by sending a school-wide memo to briefly 
explain the research project and ask for their patience and understanding. However, this disruption 
problem will persist in other schools given the convention of school buildings and class periods. 
Rather than be discouraged by this, I am inclined to consider this as a small way to challenge the 
often stifling norms of school.
Create a fun, learning experience. Students had fun, but it is unclear what they learned. The 
game did not have content learning goals; but rather, it was a puzzle to be solved. The game gave 
players all the pieces they needed to solve the puzzle. I assumed that I had laid out the information 
so clearly that almost every group would make the correct accusation. Unexpectedly, only 60% of 
the players guessed the thief correctly on the first try. One of two scenarios is probably responsible:
1.	 Groups did not employ problem solving skills and used trial and error instead.  
2.	 The game was challenging and, despite employing their problem solving skills, 
some groups could not successfully complete the challenge. 
The first scenario was observed on occasion; groups did not make a final decision together but 
rather instructed different group members to select different thieves and see which player got the 
right answer. Ironically, it showed teamwork but was not demonstrative of the intended way to 
solve the problem. This distributed trial and error technique did not require students to synthesize 
the data collaboratively and thus students did not engage in higher-order thinking skills, namely 
the scientific practice of arguing with evidence. Luckily, the game design allowed students to revisit 
their evidence and make another guess if their first answer was incorrect. 

98
The second scenario was observed as well. Several teams narrowed the thief down to two suspects 
but could not conclude who did it; groups retained the Principal as a suspect because his shoe print 
was at the scene as well as the real thief for whom all the fingerprint, blood, and hair evidence 
matched. In the game design, the Principal’s shoe print is at the crime scene because it is his office; 
the shoe print is a red herring intended to mislead the players, since the Principal is not the thief. 
This design decision was intended to reflect real life, showing that you have to make the best case 
you can because the evidence is not always perfect. But students were confused when the answer 
was not immediately clear from the simplest reading of the available evidence. 
Ultimately, there is still more room for students to learn how to collaborate and solve problems 
together. Students were not used to this new manner of working together and relying on each other. 
Therefore, not every group solved the puzzle correctly. But collaboration is a necessary life skill. So 
even though all students did not get the right answer, they seemed to leave the game with a heightened 
sense of teamwork and an impression of what it felt like to collaborate well with others. If the players 
had a thought-provoking journey rather than arriving at the intended destination, that’s fine by me.
C O N C L U D I N G  R E M A R K S
As Jane McGonigal (2011) proclaims...we are our best selves when we are playing games3; I definitely 
saw students become the best version of themselves. As they struggled to overcome obstacles 
together, they become empowered. Working on their own was not something they were used to: 
players explained that the teacher usually tells them what to do and “you didn’t help… you weren’t 
the teacher… you didn’t tell us every step.” According to my field observations, it did not take long 
for them to start embracing their new freedom and control over their learning. Afterwards, players 
realized what the experience offered them: “It teaches you how to do things on your own.” One 
of the best examples of empowerment was a group of girls who said they felt like Charlie’s Angels 
afterwards. They even broke into the theme song from the movie: “I’m a survivor. I’m not gonna 
give up…” as they were walking back to their classroom after the game concluded. Empowerment 
arose as their in-game identities helped them to find kinship with a well-known crime fighting 
group of powerful women from popular culture.
Creating good games is a great way to empower students to learn. I saw students persevering in 
the face of challenge and learning to work together to solve a problem. The game experience also 
resonated deeply with players. After gameplay, one boy mentioned that, “If I could go back in time, 
I would. To this day. So, I could do this again.” One of the female players stated that, “if every 
single class was like this, everyday, I would want to come [to school] like for the rest of my life.” In 
playing School Scene Investigators: The Case of the Stolen Score Sheets, students became empowered 
and successfully completed challenging tasks; I am convinced that well-designed games make 
powerful learning environments. 
3 McGonigal and her magnificent book fundamentally shifted my view of games in an enjoyable, rational, and entirely visionary way.

99
R E F E R E N C E S
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience: New York: Harper and Row.
Dunleavy, M., Dede, C., & Mitchell, R. (2009). Affordances and limitations of immersive participatory augmented 
reality simulations for teaching and learning. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 18(1), 7–22.
McGonigal, J. (2011). Reality is broken: Why games make us better and how they can change the world. 
New York: The Penguin Press.
Salen, K., & Zimmerman, E. (2004). Rules of play: Game design fundamentals. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Appendix
If you would like to implement the game at our own school, please email the author Denise 
Bressler (dmbressler at gmail dot com) for the instructions and printable QR codes. The game 
is freely available in the ARIS application. 


101
Chapter EIGHT

Building a Student-Centered 
Classroom with AR 
Tim Frandy
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Service learning, team-based projects, flipped classrooms, and high impact learning have come to 
dominate the discourse of innovative pedagogies in higher education in recent years. Unfortunately, 
in an era of difficult budgets, increasing class sizes, and canonization of knowledge through 
standardized assessment, teachers face many difficulties implementing these new pedagogies in 
today’s classrooms. With the ideal classroom far removed from today’s political realities, online and 
mobile technologies offer recourse for educators to teach more effectively for increasing numbers of 
students. This was my own goal, in integrating Augmented Reality Interactive Storytelling (ARIS) 
into the course Introduction to Folklore between 2011 and 2013. I developed two separate uses of 
augmented reality technologies for the course. The first involved having students use augmented 
reality on a mobile device for the purpose of ethnographic data collection, research sharing, and 
subsequent analysis. The second involved student curation of their own ethnographic fieldwork 
into a narrative-driven, place-based game for a mobile device. In this book chapter, I will relate my 
motives for integrating these two projects into the classroom, explore the successes and shortcomings 
of each project, and examine some of the needs folklorists and other humanists have for mobile 
technologies in the coming years.
T EC H N O LO GY  A N D  CU R RI CU LU M  D ES I G N  FO R  D EEP  L E A RN I N G
Folklore is, succinctly defined, as the study of everyday life and culture. A disciplinary cousin 
to cultural anthropology and ethnology, folklore is rooted in ethnographic fieldwork and the 
documenting of cultural practices, traditions, arts and crafts, oral narratives, and much more. 
Folklore has a rich history of collaborations with communities to create public projects—like 
exhibitions, archives, films, radio programming, cultural tours, festivals, social networks—that 
address a community need or advocate for the community’s interests. 

102
In the classroom, we folklorists often ask our students to conduct fieldwork, to work in the local 
community, and to curate their research for a public audience. Folklore educators need to cultivate a 
wide set of skills with their students. Not only must students write and research well, but they must 
also learn the art of the ethnographic interview. They must learn to take compelling photographs 
and video, conduct digital editing, and create digital products for a general audience. Teaching 
such a wide array of skills to students poses great challenges to folklore educators. As I designed my 
course, I wondered what role emergent and mobile technologies could play in teaching students the 
difficult process of how to conduct fieldwork.
The challenge I faced was that many available educational technologies were seemingly designed 
to fit the top-down pedagogies of lecture-hall classrooms. However, students tend to learn the 
complex skills of photography and interviewing best through practice, through their own failures 
and successes, and not through traditional lecture-based instruction. Innovative pedagogies 
(e.g. service-learning, high-impact learning, team-based capstones, flipped classrooms, student-
centered learning, etc.) often seem at odds with the de facto approach of educational technologies. 
Conventional online course management systems have proven very useful for sharing text-based 
information and multimedia, but student interaction is conducted primarily through instructor-
initiated message boards (an online tool predating the emergence of social media) and chaotic or 
rigidly structured large-group chats. Trying to encourage students to participate in meaningful 
and thoughtful discussion online is a challenge in its own right. In my own experience, student 
participation in online fora is more dependent on graded participation than on the desire to critically 
engage with the course content. 
My interest lies in building a student-centered classroom where students want to engage with the 
materials of their own accord. To do so, I aspired to use new technologies to simulate the small-
classroom environment in which student-driven pedagogies have a track record of success. In my 
own classroom, I aim to not merely transmit information, but also to teach critical thinking, 
effective argumentation, and historical construction of the present. These skills are best acquired 
through close mentorship, through interaction in small groups, and through a classroom that acts 
as a learning-community. With conventional online teaching tools catered toward information 
transmission, I hoped I could make use of mobile technologies in a way better suited to simulating 
the small-classroom environment—conducive to my pedagogical goals—inside a large classroom.
U S I N G  A U G M E N T E D  R E A L I T Y  T O 
T E A C H  E T H N O G R A P H I C  D O C U M E N TAT I O N
Facing the challenge of familiarizing students with what good ethnographic fieldwork looks like—
and unable to take the time to personally mentor eighty students in their interviews, photography, 
and videography—I developed a mobile game using ARIS in which students could collect, discuss, 
and critique the fieldwork of their peers. The game was played early in the semester, to give students 
an introduction to conducting fieldwork, with the idea that abundant mistakes would allow for 
many teachable moments. As students played the augmented reality game on their mobile devices, 

103
they were asked to upload video, audio, and photography into the gamespace. This fieldwork would 
relate to student culture at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, a community with which all 
students would have some degree of familiarity. Viewable by other players, students populated the 
gamespace with their fieldwork, and students could “like” and comment on the fieldwork of other 
players. Finally, after the two-week documentation project was completed, I asked students to write 
a reflective essay about the fieldwork within the game. Students reflected on their own and their 
peers’ documentation, focusing specifically on which examples succeeded (and failed) and why.
The plot of this ARIS game was simple. Two Teaching Assistants and I were written as in-game 
characters who asked students to go out into the field, and to document one place, one example 
of material culture, and one oral narrative that was important to student folklife in Madison. I 
included a handful of examples of already completed activities in the game in advance of its release 
to further demonstrate our expectation.  Using ARIS’ Notebook feature, students could directly 
upload this media collected using their mobile devices’ cameras and microphones. Each of these 
Notes would be mapped accordingly within the gamespace in the location they were documented. 
Over the span of two weeks in the field, students recorded street musicians and political protesters, 
collected stories about the stresses of “move-in day” in the residence halls, documented places of 
work and play, and chronicled the murals in campus elevators created by art students. Many of 
these examples were excellent. On the other side of the spectrum, some students used scripted and 
rehearsed stories, selected stock images of places, or chose to document places that were somewhat 
uninspired. The varied quality was the expected result for the project, and was essential for the 
reflection essay which followed.
Following the period of documentation, students were asked to re-enter the game, to review the 
fieldwork of their peers, and write a reflection essay that 1) analyzes how students view and represent 
student culture in Madison as detailed in this game; and 2) evaluates what makes certain fieldwork 
successful in content and presentation, and what makes the less-successful fieldwork fall flat. 
Because students could easily differentiate amongst the quality of the Notes, the reflection essay 
helped tangibly illustrate how fieldwork succeeds in presentation and why it sometimes struggles. 
As students reviewed the game in preparation for writing their essays, comments and “likes” helped 
elevate certain Notes into prominence. Students themselves came to relative consensus over the 
quality of the Notes, which put students collectively at the center of the learning process, while 
saving me hours of mentorship time.
The early exposure to a large selection of student-created ethnographic fieldwork proved to be a 
great success for the students. Having gotten their hands dirty with interviews, photography, and 
videography, students developed a good intuition of developing fieldwork for production within the 
first month of the semester. In previous semesters, students acquired these fieldwork skills much 
more slowly, pushing essential learning toward the end of the semester as their semester projects 
came due. In turn, this jeopardized student grades, as simple and commonplace fieldwork mistakes 
were left unaddressed until the end of the term. Using the mobile game, however, allowed a student-
driven peer evaluation process to cultivate these skills early in the semester. By the end of the term, 
students were outperforming my expectations. 

104
Perhaps similar results could have been obtained through the use of online fora or courseware. 
But mobile technologies allow for a streamlined user experience from camera to archive, thereby 
eliminating cumbersome file compatibility and upload troubles. Further, the mapping of 
ethnographic data—a basic feature of the ARIS Notebook—creates a convenient and intuitive 
system for students to interact with an abundance of stored information. Peer evaluation would have 
been considerably less pleasant if students were, for instance, required to review a list of uploaded 
documents and images in a cloud-based service.
Yet, in my opinion, the greatest reason for student success is that the use of an experimental and 
unproven augmented reality mobile game helped cultivate a sense of community and teamwork 
within the class. By being forthright with my uncertain expectations about the game, I undermined 
my own authority in the classroom. The mobile game did not conform to the tried and true 
expectations that students have acclimated to with their other educational technologies. Even 
the challenge of trying something new and risky with a course allowed students to warm to the 
project with a sense of adventure and wide-open expectations. Students learned to work together to 
overcome obstacles, to seek out learning within the assignment, and to work collaboratively with 
their instructors to make sure the assignment’s expectations were met. With the game as a fabricated 
common obstacle and challenge for us all, students and instructors were cast onto the same team. 
This sense of camaraderie endured throughout the semester, and allowed students to fully participate 
in a learning community of their own design. This sense of community helped break down barriers 
to learning that are common in large lecture-hall environments. The mobile game circumvented 
the information-transfer model of education and the instructor-student hierarchy, instead putting 
student-driven content and peer-evaluation at the center of the learning process. 
Although many educational technologies are most frequently used for the mass dissemination 
of information, there is little reason why these technologies cannot be purposed for the use of 
innovative small-classroom pedagogies in large lecture-hall environments. Technologies like social 
media and mobile technologies are still untouched arenas in most university classrooms. These 
technologies have great potential to create a co-constructed virtual and situated interactive learning 
environment. The potential for an interactive augmented reality gamespace to serve as the basis for 
small-group work and peer feedback is virtually limitless.
F R O M  E X P L O R AT I O N  T O  C U R AT I O N : 
S T U D E N T  D E V E L O P E D  A R I S  G A M E S
Although conducting quality ethnographic fieldwork is a major concern for folklorists, curating it 
for a public audience is of equal importance. Representing living people to a public audience is a 
challenging process, which depends largely on conscious choices of the ethnographer. Yet learning 
to ethically represent living research subjects is an essential objective of student learning in an 
Introduction to Folklore course. Conventional term papers live within the safe zone of student 
and instructor, where the ethical responsibility of students is minimized; in term papers, students 

105
can generally represent their informants in any light, without fear of repercussions from their 
informants or their communities. Public projects require students to deliberate over a host of ethical 
concerns, an essential topic of study for anyone engaged in human subjects research. Given the 
need to cultivate technological literacy within students, and given the ease of accessibility associated 
with digital media, UW-Madison folklorists again turned to mobile technologies to teach students 
curation and presentation skills.
In 2011, I sat on a team of UW folklorists with Ruth Olson, Thomas DuBois, and Casey Schmitt to 
redesign our Introduction to Folklore course. At the heart of this redesign was a set of semester-long 
team-based digital projects. The projects would be digitally published, and be based on the students’ 
own research interests. The course’s theoretical content would subsequently emerge from student-
driven fieldwork. We arranged students into four-person teams to develop these projects based on 
their own unique ethnographic fieldwork and library research. Students could opt to present their 
project publicly as a WordPress site, as a digital documentary, or through an ARIS game—the focus 
of this section. 
Mobile technologies like ARIS are exciting tools for ethnographers. Folklorists often take interest 
in the relationships between a spaces and people, looking at the stories, objects, and experiences 
that create a sense of place out of mere space. Augmented reality is an outstanding vehicle for 
offering contextual information which illuminates what a place means to its local community. 
Particularly, since folklorists frequently work in marginalized and peripheral communities, the 
tools of augmented reality help narrate alternative histories and discourses which are otherwise 
invisible to the outside eye. Many ethnographic ARIS games have been designed as walking tours 
where players learn about a community by experiencing historical events, interacting with historical 
objects, and by communicating with virtual characters who tell about their own experiences. At 
their most effective, these games can tether compelling historic events to a contemporary place.
As a form of digital representation, ARIS offers an innovative means for ethnographers to represent 
a diversity of voices inside a single narrative. Folklorists have long contended tradition, identity, 
history, and events consist of a network of negotiated meanings which is often disagreed upon within 
seemingly stable communities. Over the past four decades folklorists have attempted to represent 
communities not as a singular entity, but rather as an amalgam of disparate yet cohabiting voices. 
Although the task of representing a panoply of voices can be challenging for both author and reader 
in traditional written essays, mobile games like ARIS are natural vehicles for representing diverse 
and divergent interests of a community. For instance, in the ARIS game Wisconsin Uprising—
designed by Carrie Roy, Thomas DuBois, and myself—the 2011 protests at the Wisconsin State 
Capitol were documented from a variety of occupational, personal, and political perspectives. Each 
character brings his or her own agenda and personality into a larger discourse that the game presents 
about the thematic topic. 
Since we began teaching Introduction to Folklore with mobile games in 2011, approximately one 
quarter of our students opted into designing mobile games for their final projects. These games 

106
assumed a wide variety of topics and thematic content, although most were centered around 
student life in Madison. Several games, for example, focused on Halloween in Madison. One, 
called Freakfest Folklore explored changes to Halloween in Madison after the city officially began 
sponsoring the event, following years of unruliness. Another game attempted to explore how one’s 
gender and costume choices affected what one’s experience was like on Halloween night. Others 
focused, in varied ways, on political activists, food cart owners, ethnic restaurants, and on the UW 
marching band.
Most students followed the narrative blueprints of earlier ethnographic games as they designed their 
own game, where a player is cast in the game as a newcomer to an event, only to be educated by a 
series of knowledgeable guides and mentors. For instance, in Mifflin Street Block Party the player 
is invited to the annual Mifflin Street Block Party only to meet characters who inform the player 
about the history of the neighborhood and the origin of the notorious block party as an anti-war 
protest during the Vietnam War. The students who designed the game combined the sights, sounds, 
and formal and informal rules of the block party with interviews they conducted with the party’s 
original activist organizers. A similar example, Bucky 101, was an ambitious student project that 
detailed the life of a student who becomes a Big 10 mascot. The game begins with auditioning, rites 
of passages, important milestones, and ends with the Bucky alum mentoring a new generation of 
newcomers. 
Some projects engaged more theoretical questions in folklore through the narrative plot of their game. 
Luck of the Irish details what St. Patrick’s Day means to different people, showing the contemporary 
holiday is a composite of the experiences of different people: whether the holiday involves wearing 
green and drinking green beer, whether it involves marching in a parade, whether it is a time for 
Irish American families to reflect on their own family and ethnic heritage, or whether it is a time 
for bartenders at the local Irish pub who have to work extra shifts. In The Cafes of Madison, the 
player is put on a quest that crafts a nuanced argument about how local coffeehouses differ from 
their corporate counterparts. The player visits three coffeehouses, each of which serve as a place for 
community to come together for purposes other than coffee (whether for political gatherings, for a 
local music venue, or for the sale of local art). As reflections of their own neighborhood and builders 
of community, these cafes serve much more than coffee and scones. Through this game, the student 
designers probed the issue of folk culture and commercial culture, trying to understand how they 
differ, and how that figures into contemporary hostilities over corporate coffee.
However, not all students chose to create a guided-game. Food Cart Trail—based on the classic 
Oregon Trail—allotted the player a budget to operate an empanada food cart in Madison. With this 
budget, the player needed to purchase appropriate amounts of foodstuffs and cleaning products for 
the cart. While operating the cart, customers requested different kinds of food and beverages, and 
if the player ran out of the requested empanada, the player needed to offer appropriate responses (a 
free drink as an apology, for instance) to ensure follow up business. Randomly, a health inspector 
would arrive, and if the owner hadn’t purchased enough cleaning supplies, the cart owner would be 
warned and then fined. If the player could successfully operate the food cart for one week without 

107
going out of business, the player would win the game. This game immersed the player into the 
occasionally frustrating world of operating a small business, and proved its point in illustrating the 
complexities of working life that exist on the inside of the food cart. 
At least within the narrative-based games, the instructors and Teaching Assistants who integrated 
ARIS into the classroom quickly came to agree that students learned more by creating mobile 
games than actually playing them. While the playing of a game could educate about an event 
or a concept, it was the design of the game that forced students to raise deep questions about 
curation of ethnographic materials and about ethical presentation of fieldwork. Like any media 
for expression, ARIS faces certain limitations. Screen size prohibits long blocks of text; images 
are limited in resolution, and excess video slows interactive game-play; the game editor makes 
the construction of complex, branching narratives difficult; and dialogue needs to be succinct for 
effective presentation. Yet these limitations of the platform forced students to think actively about 
making editorial choices in representing their ethnographic work, in a manner not dissimilar to 
crafting museum exhibitions. Whereas websites and term papers allow for a greater abundance of 
information, the realization of a genre’s own limitations helps create an awareness of the editorial 
process that occurs with any and all acts of curation and presentation. With player attention to text, 
images, and media lasting for seconds or perhaps a minute, all materials must be presented in ways 
that allow for the player to be satisfied with the game experience. Experienced folklorists contend 
that curation figures into every genre of ethnographic representation, but certain genres (like essays) 
have become so familiar to us that we often fail to see our own editorial choices. Working with 
mobile media helps students recognize their own hand in shaping the fieldwork materials into a 
polished and highly edited product.
The other great challenge students faced was the ethical challenge of transforming fieldwork into 
the games. In scholarship, folklorists highly value long and unbroken quotes, an abundance of 
contextual information, and full portraits of human subjects as complex and dynamic individuals. 
Mobile gaming, however, is a genre defined by succinctness. Folklorists must therefore venture 
into the uncomfortable territory of fictionalization and generalization of their informants. In 
an ethnographic book or journal article, folklorists certainly would not be permitted to invent a 
character, to attribute a quote to a real person who never spoke those words, or to fuse two real 
people into one fictitious character. Yet folklorists clearly filter information, and ethnographers have 
a long history of censoring or casually omitting unsavory elements from publication in order to cast 
their informants in positive lights. Designers of games faced difficult decisions about how to present 
their informants in their mobile games. Some invented characters based on their interviews; some 
used real people as characters in their games but heavily edited dialogue while still using snippets of 
quotes from their interviews. Wrestling with these ethical questions heightened student awareness 
of representing human subjects while using more conventional media.

108
C O N C L U S I O N S
Our two uses of ARIS in the Introduction to Folklore classroom show how mobile technologies and 
augmented reality can be used to create student-centered pedagogies in traditionally lecture-hall 
environments. Mobile games offer students opportunities to engage with each other in ways that 
are reminiscent of small-classroom settings. They can be an outstanding platform for community-
engaged research projects, helping students better understand the process of composition, editing, 
and curation by forcing them to work with challenging new media for their ethnographic 
presentation. And augmented reality can serve as a matrix for data exchange, peer-evaluation, and a 
student-centered classroom, which allows teachers to install small-classroom pedagogies into larger 
classroom environments. However, both projects leave much room for improvement. Mobile games 
designed in our courses are not frequently played after a semester is at its end for the purpose of 
community advocacy, and our use of a mobile game to share fieldwork resulted in an unsatisfying, 
uncurated final product. Yet in spite of these shortcomings, these two small projects offer some 
optimism for educators that new technologies can be used to advance better pedagogies and build 
a better classroom.

109
Chapter NINE

Introducing a Neighborhood: 
Mobile as a Springboard for Exploration
Kim Garza and Jason Rosenblum
Have you ever wanted to challenge students to go beyond the superficial in their course work? We 
have. As collaborators, Garza, a graphic design educator, and Rosenblum, a digital media educator 
with a background in educational technology and games research, began to re-envision the opening 
assignment for Garza’s Graphic Design III course at St. Edward’s University. Student work from a 
previous iteration didn’t meet the course’s learning objectives. Garza identified some of the issues 
inherent in the curriculum, and Rosenblum helped envision a new introductory approach that used 
mobile to solve curricular problems creatively. As a result, we designed a mobile application using 
the ARIS game platform to help students learn about the complexities of a local neighborhood in 
Austin, Texas. Immersive experiences, like those mobile offers, can help students learn about and 
tackle complex problems in authentic ways. 
T H E  C O U R S E
Graphic Design III challenges students to explore issues of urban growth and respond as creative, 
yet critical designers. In the Junior-level studio course, students learn to define their own work 
within a given set of constraints and continue to develop their design skills through two projects. 
The main constraint is a definition of place—the coursework is centered on an old, but rapidly 
changing, neighborhood in East Austin along East Cesar Chavez Street. Students focus their 
projects on a narrow strip of the neighborhood three blocks high by twenty-four blocks wide on 
the east side of Interstate 35, which historically has been a racial and economic dividing line in 
Austin. Predominately Hispanic, the designated area contains a diverse mix of small businesses, 
government services, churches, schools and residences. 
The projects should leverage the students’ on-the-ground experiences in the neighborhood: visual 
research in a place where the growing pains from population shifts, property value increases and 
loss of cultural heritage are evident. For the first project, students create a website or short film to 
explore a facet of or to dissect an issue from the neighborhood. The second project requires students 
to edit/write, design, and bind a book that further examines a student-defined theme related to the 

110
neighborhood. Most of our students have never ventured far from the St. Edward’s campus, located 
in a trendy part of South Austin, and they find themselves challenged by their experiences in this 
different setting.
T H E  C U R R I C U L A R  C H A L L E N G E : 
H O W  D O  YO U  I N T R O D U C E  A  N E I G H B O R H O O D ?
The main student objective—to generate design work based on a neighborhood—requires first that 
students experience an unfamiliar place in order to discover its complexities.  A previous iteration 
of the course did not support this goal due to at least two weaknesses: Garza focused on the design 
outcome rather than the experience, and no formal introduction to the neighborhood took place. 
The opening assignment required students to go to East Cesar Chavez, take 85+ photographs and 
sort them into categories such as color, architecture, daily life, etc. As a result, students treated the 
assignment solely as a way to gain imagery for the semester’s design projects, not as an opportunity 
to think critically about the place. While Garza encouraged students to explore the neighborhood 
further, few went back for additional visits. Instead, students developed their projects based on their 
limited experiences, resulting in concepts that were flat and superficial: “the colors are so cool,” 
“gentrification is bad,” “yay for Mexican culture,” etc. Upon reflection, Garza realized that the 
single visit only engaged students in one mode of experiencing a place and more were necessary for 
students to produce discerning, place-relevant design. The course and neighborhood needed better 
introductions. 
T H E  N E W  S E T - U P :  T H R E E  E X E R C I S E S
Semester-long projects need a strong foundation for the resulting work to be of any depth. To this 
end, Garza redesigned the introductory portion of the course. Instead of one required visit to the 
neighborhood, the next Graphic Design III students would go to the neighborhood three times in 
the first two weeks of class. Each visit would be assigned as an out-of-class exercise. The first visit 
would be a walking tour of a representative few blocks to serve as a safe entry point into an unfamiliar 
neighborhood. The second visit would be what’s known as a dérive—an exploration of an urban 
landscape that allows room for chance encounters, engagement of all the senses and discoveries off 
the beaten path. In this dérive, students would wander the neighborhood in small groups for three 
to four hours and share a story from their experience in response. The third visit would find students 
behind their cameras taking photographs that they would use in designing the subsequent projects. 
In addition to the exercises, Garza planned to hold four class sessions in the neighborhood: two 
would be to eat together at local establishments while discussing assigned readings, and two would 
be in public spaces to critique student projects. Garza believed that immersion in the neighborhood 
could lead to more thoughtful reflections of the spaces they visited.

111
T H E  WA L K I N G  T O U R :  G O I N G  M O B I L E
New curriculum, even at a small scale, requires careful consideration of its implementation. In 
this case, Garza wanted to shape the introductory exercises so that students could engage the 
neighborhood quickly. The second two exercises would be easy to create and assign: students could 
be sent out with a bit of background and some simple instructions. But the walking tour would 
require additional planning. 
The walking tour posed challenges in determining where, when and how it should be delivered. 
Where was the best entry point into the neighborhood? The walking tour needed to be easily 
accessible, safe and typical to ease students into the experience of the place. When would the 
tour happen? It needed to be between the first and second class sessions, two days apart, for the 
introductory exercises to leave enough room for the design-specific instruction around the projects. 
Adding a field trip for a guided tour the first week of classes did not seem realistic, so the walking 
tour needed to be completed asynchronously. How would the tour be delivered? One option would 
be to create a printed map that detailed all of the locations of interest and text highlighting the 
details and themes. However, students could easily feign completion of the tour unless they were 
required to bring an artifact back from the tour. A better option would be to use a mobile device 
that could deliver location-based information and allow students to capture and share data from the 
neighborhood. To Garza, the first option seemed static, boring and ignorant of mobile technology’s 
potential; the second, dynamic and exciting, but overwhelming to implement. Before jumping in, 
the mobile option needed to be checked for its ability to support the curriculum. 
To make sure the technology would serve the learning objectives, Garza went to Rosenblum, who 
at the time conducted research and development of instructional technology for St. Edward’s, 
to get another perspective on mobile’s fit for the walking tour. We discussed the tour, its place 
in the curriculum and whether mobile would deliver on the objectives and provide an engaging 
experience for the students. We agreed that an approach using mobile technology made sense. 
Through analyzing past student work, Garza recognized that the previous curriculum favored the 
design-specific objectives and left the research and critical thinking objectives more to chance. The 
new introductory exercises could allow more focus on awareness and analysis of the neighborhood. 
Mobile learning can support critical thinking and student engagement in several ways. First, 
a mobile tour can provide students with relevant information or prompts in a content-relevant 
location as a way to situate learning. Location-specific content can focus students on particular 
issues, asking them to pay more attention to detail in the spaces they occupy. Second, a mobile 
tour can leverage students’ ability to record observations on the spot and share them with one 
another, building a collective dialogue to enhance the experience of a place. In addition, a mobile 
tour can encourage student engagement as students discover new things about a neighborhood 
while walking along the path. The unknown can drive interest in paying attention and looking for 

112
what might be next. A mobile tour requires students to use their devices’ cameras, keyboards and 
microphones to actively participate in the tour, as opposed to passively reading a map. Once the 
technology proved consistent with the objectives, the resources required to develop and implement 
the mobile tour needed to be pulled together.
T H E  D E V E L O P M E N T:  P U T T I N G  I T  T O G E T H E R
Introducing cutting-edge technology into the curriculum requires resources: people with appropriate 
skill sets, the right tools and dedicated time. After our discussion, we decided to form an ad hoc 
team of professor and technologist to implement the project, calling on Rosenblum’s colleagues in 
Instructional Technology to help with the work. As a small team, we split up duties according to 
our strengths and availability. Our discussions then turned to which tools we would use to develop 
and deliver the mobile walking tour. Rosenblum recommended the ARIS mobile game platform 
for its ability to deliver on our needs; its simple interface and clear logic would allow us to quickly 
develop, test and publish the walking tour. Garza had not considered the introductory exercise as a 
game before, but others’ use of the ARIS platform to make interactive, place-based games suggested 
new possibilities for student engagement beyond what a walking tour could offer. In addition, the 
ARIS platform allowed for the game to be created in an online editor and to be played in the free 
ARIS iOS app, meaning that we could develop and run this walking tour without spending money 
on software. The third essential resource, time, needed to be allotted to various portions of the 
project. With only one month until the start of the semester, we decided to use a lightweight, rapid 
prototyping approach to design the app. This flexible approach allowed us to effectively manage 
our time identifying the type of game, writing the narrative, developing the logic and testing the 
game. Our choice of tools and design approach, combined with frequent check-ins and all-around 
positive attitudes towards the project, helped us to smoothly work together as an ad hoc team. We 
discovered that with the right people and a solid design plan, a new technology-based curriculum 
can be pulled off with limited resources. 
With the resources in place, many questions about the game’s particulars—mechanics, narrative 
and visuals—still needed to be answered. What kind of a game did we want? Once the idea of 
making a game was on the table, we excitedly envisioned a grand interactive mystery caper in the 
neighborhood. We quickly realized this was much more than we could put together in the time 
available and settled for creating a much more manageable virtual scavenger hunt. Rosenblum 
recommended that we organize the scavenger hunt in ARIS using a quest-based approach so 
that individual locations could be programmed to deliver notifications and important content. 
Rosenblum sketched the basic architecture for the tour within the app and trained the design team 
on how to build in ARIS. Together we developed a prototype design in less than two weeks, much 
more quickly than anticipated. 

113
We then turned to a more specific focus on the content of the tour. What quests would be picked 
for the scavenger hunt? Since the entire neighborhood would be too large to cover on foot, we 
mapped out an easy-access part of the neighborhood for our game’s boundaries. Garza determined 
the pairings of locations and quests by walking the area many times and filtering decisions through 
the lens of neighborhood issues and the activities that mobile enabled. For instance, standing at the 
corner of San Marcos and East 2nd, Garza looked back towards the city—the skyline is visible but 
access is completely blocked by I-35, a raised highway—and decided to call attention to boundaries 
through the use of the camera (Figure 2 and Table 1, #3). Garza wrote a narrative to engage 
students in thoughtful activities, which Rosenblum, together with the design team, then embedded 
in the game (Table 1). What would the game look like? ARIS allows the developer to upload custom 
visuals into a game, and Garza wanted to take full advantage of this feature. After all, the game 
would be played by graphic design students. Garza took photographs to use on game plaques. And 
Rosenblum’s current student worker, who happened to be one of Garza’s former students, designed 
all of the game icons and the logo. While working out details, we followed the plan but were willing 
to adjust accordingly when new opportunities presented themselves. 
Technical glitches will happen while developing technology-based curricula. The more variables 
that exist in a project, the more time it will require to test and iterate in order to minimize potential 
glitches. We used multiple technologies—mobile devices, cellular networks, open-source beta 
software (ARIS) and GPS—any of which could go wrong and render the game unusable to students. 
Near the end of development, Garza, Rosenblum and several student workers did three rounds of 
testing, where we played the scavenger hunt out in the neighborhood. We encountered differences 
in game performance depending on cell provider and iOS version, challenges reading our screens 
in harsh sunlight, user confusion based on complexities in the original narrative, faults in the 
programming logic and ARIS server errors. Some errors, such as lag due to cell phone connectivity 
were not immediately solvable. However, for other errors we attempted to isolate and debug problems 
on the spot. This process first entailed walking the neighborhood between key quest points to 
discover problems in the logic that prevent notifications from appearing properly. With a laptop 
and access to a WiFi signal, we fixed some of the logic problems and retested immediately. For the 
things we didn’t tweak on location, we reconvened on campus to solve and adjusted the logic prior 
to the next round of testing. The game became more stable with each iteration, and we successfully 
completed all the quests on the last round of testing. Explore East Cesar Chavez was ready.

114
T H E  D E TA I L S  O F  T H E  G A M E
The scavenger hunt Explore East Cesar Chavez 
runs on the ARIS app on iOS devices (Figure 
1). The game covers a one-by-two block section 
of the East Cesar Chavez neighborhood a few 
blocks east of I-35 and contains nine quests 
that map to a specific location (Table 1). Some 
quests are informational and others require 
players to engage with the environment through 
taking photos, recording sounds or posting 
notes to the game’s map. Each quest touches on 
various aspects of a community—commerce, 
neighbors, governance, boundaries, pollution, 
history, etc.—and offers a prompt for further 
consideration. Players need to complete each 
quest in order to unlock the related journal 
prompt and the next quest in the sequence 
(Figure 2). Players earn a completion badge 
upon finishing all of the quests. The journaling 
component exists independently from the game.
Figure 1. Introductory screen of the game inside of the 
ARIS app.
Figure 2: A progression of screens within Quest 3 (left to right): active quest instructions, taking a photo of 
downtown, uploading the note and completed quest prompt.

115
Table 1: Explore East Cesar Chavez quests and journal prompts.
Map Icon
#
Quest
Journal Prompt
1
You will walk two blocks in the East Cesar Chavez 
neighborhood to begin looking closely and thinking critically 
about what defines a place. Check your inventory for the 
instructions on how to complete the tour.
What preconceived notions 
did you have of East Austin 
before the walking tour?
2
Go to the SW corner of San Marcos and Cesar Chavez where 
Domy Books is located. Read the plaque. Plaque: Domy carries 
an eclectic selection of books on art, literature and culture 
in addition to housing a small gallery and two other small 
businesses on its property.
How do small businesses 
survive?
3
Cross Cesar Chavez and walk north along San Marcos. At 
San Marcos and E 2nd St, look towards downtown. In the 
notebook, select the camera icon; take a photo of downtown; 
select “use” to upload the photo; and title the note.
What is the nature of a 
boundary?
4
Walk away from downtown (west/right) down E 2nd St. As 
you walk the next block, to Medina, record the sounds of the 
neighborhood. In the notebook, select the recorder icon; begin 
recording; save; and title the note.
How do residents cope 
with noise, light and 
sound pollution in their 
neighborhood? 
5
Go to the SW corner of E 2nd St and Medina where the First 
Mexican Baptist Church is located. Read the plaque. Plaque: 
Primera Iglesia Bautiso began in 1899 and moved into this 
building in 1959. It is one of the largest Latin American 
Baptist congregations in the state.
What is the role of a church 
or community of faith in a 
neighborhood?
6
Continue walking away from downtown (east) down E 2nd 
St. Choose a residence along the north or south side of the 
street to make notes about: Is the house renovated, original, 
new? Is the yard landscaped, wild, barren? What type of fence? 
What type of driveway? What is on the front porch? Be sure to 
consult the map to make sure that the residence doesn’t already 
have a note attached to it. In the notebook, select the clipboard 
icon; type your notes; save; title the note; and add the note to 
the map with the location tool.
Can you judge a neighbor 
by the outside of his/her 
property?
7
Turn south/right on Waller and go to the NE corner of 
Waller and Cesar Chavez where Long Motors is located. 
Read the plaque. Plaque: !Si Se Puede! is one of many murals 
in the neighborhood. Long Motors, a used car dealership, 
has five Austin locations and proudly supports the Hispanic 
community.
Who is Cesar Chavez? Does 
the street that bears his 
name give identity to the 
surrounding neighborhood?

116
Table 1: Explore East Cesar Chavez quests and journal prompts.
8
Stay on the north side of Cesar Chavez and walk back toward 
downtown (west/right). Choose a business along the north or 
south side of the street to make notes about: Does the business 
cater to the neighborhood or is it simply occupying space? 
What clues did you use to make your judgment? Be sure to 
consult the map to make sure that the business doesn’t already 
have a note attached to it. In the notebook, select the clipboard 
icon; type your notes; save; title the note; and add the note to 
the map with the location tool.
What are different ways 
businesses can engage in a 
community?
9
Continue walking toward downtown (west) to the NE corner 
of Cesar Chavez and San Marcos where the bus stop is located. 
Read the plaque. Plaque: Cesar Chavez is a main thoroughfare 
into downtown. The bus stop is often crowded well beyond its 
one bench and canopy.
Where do the 17 and 21 
buses go, and how often do 
they come? How does access 
to public transportation 
shape a community?
Designing the game allowed for customized content that supported the learning objectives. Beside 
considerations about the place and the device, Garza wrote content that directly addressed the 
dissatisfaction with students’ previously shallow ideas. The quests and prompts opened students’ 
eyes to relevant community issues. In the past, students connected to the neighborhood’s churches 
as buildings to be photographed for architectural details. But the inquiry stopped at the photo. In 
the mobile scavenger hunt, Quest 5 asked students to think about the church as a participant in 
community building, not just as architecture (Table 1, #5). Previously, students had never stopped 
to ask “Who is Cesar Chavez?” even though the street, neighborhood and prominent murals bear 
his name and likeness. Quest 7 brought the question forward (Table 1, #7). Garza created the 
quests with the intention that students make a connection that they could explore more critically 
in subsequent projects. 
F I N A L  L O G I S T I C S
Even after the planning and development of a mobile game, a number of student-related logistics—
transportation, devices, network connection and support—need to be considered before running 
the game. Prior to the semester, Garza emailed the eleven Graphic Design III students to find out 
if any alternative plans would need to be made. The first logistic to be solved was transportation. 
Because our game required students to be in the neighborhood, Garza asked if those who owned 
cars would be willing to carpool. With enough affirmative answers, everyone would have a ride; the 
backup plan of public transportation did not need to be explored further. The next logistic took into 
consideration if everyone had an iOS device. Since the ARIS app, which runs Explore East Cesar 
Chavez, is only available for iOS devices, Garza asked if students owned an iPhone, iPad or iPod 
Touch. Not everyone did, and Garza arranged for these students to check out iPod Touches from 

117
the lab. The third logistic involved managing the reliability of the network connection, which varied 
based on the student’s device. The students borrowing iPod Touches would not have access to a built-
in data plan for internet access while in the neighborhood, a requirement for ARIS to function. To 
solve the connection issue, Instructional Technology ordered a MiFi router—hardware that uses a 
cellular connection to provide WiFi access for up to five devices—on the school’s mobile account 
and paid for one month of data. Students could checkout and pair the MiFi router with their 
iPod Touches during the game. The final logistic was handling support for students while playing 
the game. In response to the technical challenges during testing, Garza decided to add a printed 
map that highlighted the locations featured in the game and provided shorthand instructions for 
navigating the game’s interface (Figure 3). Albeit an ironic choice in light of the early decision to 
go mobile, the map gave students a broad overview of the tour and documentation of technical 
details yet kept the details a mystery until revealed in the game. As we handled the student logistics, 
practical resourcefulness proved essential to keeping the game on track.
Students needed an overview of the technology prior to playing the game. During the first class, 
Garza had students load the ARIS app on their iOS devices, whether personal or borrowed, and 
log into the app for the first time. Garza briefed them on the components of the game, told them 
where to park, gave them the printed map and sent them out to play, hoping that we had considered 
everything they needed for a successful experience. 
Figure 3. The printed map (left) used the same graphics as the map within the game (right). 

118
P L AY I N G  T H E  G A M E :  D I S A S T E R !
The scavenger hunt did not go according to plan. Most students went in small groups and 
experienced a range of similar issues that we uncovered—and thought we had resolved—in our 
testing and subsequent iterations. The groups had divergent experiences, and occasionally students 
within groups hit problems at different points in the game. 
Three students were not be able to play at all. The first group sent frantic emails to Garza from 
the neighborhood; they couldn’t load the game. Explore East Cesar Chavez was not visible to the 
students because of a single missed checkbox in the ARIS editor to make the game show up when 
searched for (Garza later pushed the game live, but not in time for these three). They walked around 
the neighborhood with the printed map as a reference, not knowing the specifics of the quests but 
keeping their eyes and ears open. 
The second group loaded the game and got started, but these three students were impeded by 
issues with their cellular data service. Two of them got stuck at different points in the game—at 
the photo upload and audio recording upload respectively. Because the game didn’t see they had 
collected media, the subsequent quests never unlocked, which effectively ended the game for these 
two students. They tagged along with their third group member for the rest of the game. One 
student who went alone couldn’t upload a photo and finished the walk without the context of the 
quests and completion prompts.
The third group had issues as well. One student was stopped by glitches in the ARIS app. This 
student made it further than those with provider issues. But one plaque never appeared on the 
map despite the student having completed previous quests and being within GPS range of it. One 
student used the software incorrectly. The other student in the third group did not follow the proper 
sequence of upload instructions. Because of the user error, this student was unable to unlock the 
additional quests. The third group abandoned the game and continued to walk the neighborhood 
from the printed map. 
Three students managed to complete the entire game; five if you count group members tagging 
along after their games failed. One student in the second group was able to avoid connection and 
user errors. This student shared the device with other group members; all finished the game from 
one login account. Two other students went independently to play the game, and both completed 
all of the quests. 
Out of eleven students, only five students got to the end of the game, but on three devices—not 
quite how we imagined things going, especially after all of the testing and iterations. From the 
description above, it would appear the technology got in the way of the neighborhood introduction. 

119
T H E  D E B R I E F :  A L L  I S  N O T  L O S T
When trying out technology-based approaches in the curriculum, an honest conversation about 
students’ experiences can provide useful insight into what actually happened. From the student 
emails and online time stamps of user interactions, Garza could tell that the game had not gone 
according to plan and thus began the next class with a debrief about the scavenger hunt. The 
students who finished the scavenger hunt told about what they did to complete the various quests. 
The students who ran into issues shared the details of when and where things went wrong and how 
they tried to recover. They also told about their reliance on the map after being shut out of the game; 
students were thankful they could visit other important spots even if they didn’t know the specific 
quests to complete. The narratives and feedback that students provided helped Garza pinpoint 
the connectivity issues, technical glitches and user errors that thwarted the game. Knowing what 
happened was one piece of the puzzle. 
Students perceptions of their experiences can lead to deeper conversations about the use of technology 
in mediating spaces. Though the mobile scavenger hunt was simply the method for introducing the 
neighborhood, the technology itself made a significant impact on the learning experience. Garza 
wanted to explore where the intent and reality separated and aligned. Several students, mostly 
those who didn’t finish the game, expressed concern over how much time that they were staring at 
their mobile device to read the quests, check the app’s map or troubleshoot; they felt the use of the 
device distanced them from the neighborhood and garnered stares from residents. These students 
finished the route with the printed map that provided them enough information to know the points 
of interest, but not the details or the activities required in the game. They contended that a map 
was easier to use and could easily be altered to convey the same information. Conversely a number 
of students, those who got further through or completed the game, argued that using the device 
was more normal than using a printed map, especially given the ubiquity of smart phones. These 
students claimed that using a mobile device called attention to details they would have walked past, 
especially when the device vibrated in range of new plaques or user-generated notes. They expressed 
enjoyment in the immediate feedback of a “quest completed” upon uploading a photo or pinning 
a note to the map. This guided action, use of the device’s inherent tools and on the spot reflection 
combined to create what they felt was a unique experience of the neighborhood. Garza pointed 
out some additional benefits of the mobile platform: the ability to share a dialogue around specific 
locations and to capture student quest data for review. After much back and forth, the original 
naysayers readily admitted that mobile delivery of location-specific content would be amazing, 
but only if the platform could provide a seamless experience. The conversation allowed students to 
recognize the benefits and drawbacks of mobile technology. 
A debrief can also reveal what students think they learned from an experience. Garza wanted to know 
if Explore East Cesare Chavez had met any objectives—student engagement and critical thinking—
after its seeming failure. In the conversation, students confirmed that the mobile scavenger hunt, 
novel for any class assignment, helped them quickly engage with the neighborhood in a way that 

120
was fun, safe and directed. The mystery of not knowing what to expect next motivated them to 
participate. And the shy students expressed that the planned structure and partner format gave 
them confidence to go to a new place. Regardless of completion rates, the mobile approach offered 
engagement for everyone. Students who finished got even more engagement in the neighborhood 
when uploading photos, recordings and notes to the map. On the other hand, the critical thinking 
objective needed more time to emerge. No clear evidence existed to determine which students—
those who completed the mobile scavenger hunt versus those who didn’t—could provide more 
insightful words about the neighborhood. Students shared particular moments when they realized 
something about the neighborhood in the midst of a quest. The students who didn’t finish talked 
about paying particular attention to details at the places marked on the printed map even though 
they weren’t sure of the exact quest. Both sets of students could identify some of the neighborhood’s 
issues in their own words based on their experiences combined with the journal prompts. This is a 
reminder that we must look to the outcomes to determine if the benefits of the mobile introduction 
outweighed the technical difficulties. 
T H E  O U T C O M E S :  E M E R G I N G  S U C C E S S
Evidence of met learning objectives can surface slowly in students’ work. Garza paced the 
projects across the semester in a way that would allow the first experience in the neighborhood, 
Explore East Cesar Chavez, to be a foundation upon which to build. The debrief served as one 
marker; the journal prompts, another. The subsequent two projects, the website or short film and 
the book, would ultimately determine if the revised introduction to the neighborhood enhanced 
students’ critical thinking.    
Reflective writing can help students critically process their experience. After playing the mobile 
scavenger hunt, students wrote responses to their choice of two journal prompts from the game. 
Garza set up a Blackboard course blog for students to share their writing. For those who didn’t finish 
the game or no longer had access to the ARIS app, Garza included a list of journal prompts. Their 
responses were idiosyncratic and insightful. Already students were forming an informed voice about 
the neighborhood, something rare in previous semesters’ projects. The majority of students wrote 
about their preconceived notions of the neighborhood—unsafe, poor, dodgy, nothing to offer—
and how they had been surprised by friendly residents and hip businesses. Explore East Cesar Chavez 
had given them a safe entry into the neighborhood. Several students responded to the prompt about 
boundaries (Table 1, #3); they had never stopped to think about the role I-35 played in dividing the 
city. The simple act of taking a photograph of downtown during the game and writing about the 
image made the connection evident. Students had taken photographs before based on what looked 
good in the viewfinder; they hadn’t stopped to ask what the photographs might mean about the 
neighborhood. Between the pairing of quests and prompts, the mobile scavenger hunt had delivered 
on getting students to provide thoughtful reflections.

121
The mobile scavenger hunt provided direct inspiration for further student exploration. A number 
of students used the journal prompts as a starting point for their own projects. One student project 
involved the design of a build-your-own East Austin business interactive game, which emerged 
from the small business prompt (Table 1, #8). Another project resulted in a book that featured 
illustrations of houses paired with crowd-sourced stories about the neighborhood homes—a project 
that was inspired by the “judge a neighbor” prompt (Table 1, #6). Yet another project resulted in 
a video exploration about the neighborhood’s bikeability. The final video, created with a helmet-
mounted steady-cam, began as a result of reflecting on the transportation prompt (Table 1, #9). 
Students delved deeper into the neighborhood issues raised in the game. 
Not every project linked directly to the mobile scavenger hunt, but each still exhibited a thoughtful 
approach to experiences in the neighborhood. Some projects exhibited a strong authorial voice—a 
retelling of Hispanic folk tales set in the neighborhood, using the neighborhood as a backdrop for 
a children’s adventure story and exploring how plant species serve as a metaphor for community 
dynamics. Even the students who based their design projects off of the more visual aspects of the 
neighborhood moved beyond the superficial. The visually inspired projects included a book that 
explored the history of graffiti, a short film analysis of a business based solely on its signs, and a 
practical guide for choosing color palettes based on the neighborhood’s colors. Compared with 
the prior year, the projects displayed more critical and creative thinking about the place. The new 
introduction to the neighborhood had, despite significant difficulties in the moment, satisfied our 
curricular challenge in the end.
L E S S O N S  L E A R N E D
The students met the learning objectives for the semester, but we also learned many lessons through 
our work on the mobile scavenger hunt. Explore East Cesar Chavez was an exciting first pilot of the 
ARIS game platform at St. Edward’s University. We would be remiss without reflecting on our 
experience and offering some recommendations for other mobile learning designers to consider for 
their future projects. 
During the development of a mobile-based curriculum, we recommend the following: 
•	
Lead with the learning objectives. Look at how student learning can be 
supported by the affordances of mobile and then choose the platform for 
development. Our decision to go with a mobile game in ARIS came well into the 
curriculum design process. The combination of quests and prompts in specific 
locations aided student engagement and critical thinking.  
•	
Collaborate with a diverse team. Our core team included a faculty member 
and an instructional technologist. Garza brought the knowledge of the 
curriculum and neighborhood; Rosenblum added in the knowledge and 
experience with game-based learning and mobile technology using the ARIS 
platform. The mobile scavenger hunt was shaped by the collaboration.

122
•	
Be creative with resources. To add to our core team, we asked student workers 
to help out. We followed a bring your own device (BYOD) model, and for those 
without iPhones, we used the school’s iPod Touches and MiFi card for students. 
Our actual expenses were $50 for data.
•	
Use an iterative process. Plan the design, make a prototype, test it on location 
and revise based on what didn’t work. Without this process, our project would 
have been a complete bust!  Imagine if we would have given the app to students 
without ever testing. Garza would have been blindsided, and students would 
have walked away with nothing but frustration. The revisions made the game 
(partially) playable in our time frame, and a flexible attitude let us see beyond 
our initial disappointment with the technical issues that arose.
When your mobile-based curriculum is ready for student implementation, consider the following: 
•	
Have a backup plan. For us, this meant designing the printed map as a 
supplement to the scavenger hunt. Setting student expectations or giving tips 
on app troubleshooting could also go a long way towards a successful student 
experience.   
•	
Do a trial run in class. Garza did not do this, got burned, and now heartily 
recommends students at least load the game in class to gain a basic familiarity. 
User error would have been greatly reduced by spending a few minutes using the 
app together before relying on it alone in the neighborhood.
•	
Offer technical support while in use. Again, not something we did, but an 
absolute must given the high level of user error, ARIS’s then alpha-version 
glitches and spotty mobile provider service. Know that email support won’t be 
immediate enough, as the first group of Garza’s students found out. 
•	
Go with the flow. It doesn’t have to be perfect the first time. Garza turned 
what looked like a disaster into a great teaching moment with the debriefing 
conversation. 
Most importantly, find the space—physical and curricular—where mobile integration makes sense 
and where your students can be engaged in immersive, authentic learning. While Explore East 
Cesar Chavez was not the only introduction to the neighborhood the students had, the game made 
a lasting impact on the semester. The tone was set, and students continued to observe and draw 
their own connections in subsequent design projects. Getting students out of the classroom and 
exploring a neighborhood can be an incredibly rich learning experience. Add curricular integration 
of a mobile device—where relevant information can be delivered at a particular location and by 
which students can connect, comment and create with each other and their community—and the 
experience becomes transformative. Mobile can be a springboard.

123
Chapter TEN

Experimenting with Locative Media 
Games and Storytelling in Fine Arts 
Fred Adam
Veronica Perales
Translated from Spanish by Amie Belmont
As teachers of art, we prepare our students to be artists in the 21st century while defining, along 
the way, what that might mean. This work takes place largely within our courses at the Fine Arts 
Department at the University of Murcia in Spain. Our courses make use of place, mobile technology, 
and the language of games to engage our students in new artistic modes. Some may see technology 
as something that distracts people from art, but artists are playing a key role in understanding, in a 
emotional and creative way, the potential for mobile technology in society. Specifically, this chapter 
describes our explorations with two significant affordances of the medium: (1) Geolocation—the 
ability to link place and media, and (2) distributed authorship—the common ability of many 
people to contribute to the creation of a single artifact or to remix existing content to fit their needs. 
We provide examples of student projects that model these affordances and demonstrate a merging 
of art and technology in order to begin to understand possibilities for art that intersects cinema, 
hypermedia, mobile, games, and public space. 
Much of our work builds on the concept of expanded cinema, as defined by Gene Youngblood 
in the early 1970s. He proposed the term to express his understanding that the traditional way 
of making cinema and its separation of the audience from the creator was over. Today, with this 
same understanding we use mobile technology and games, as well as other formats and genres, as 
means to ask students to approach broad themes of importance to the future of art and society. To 
expand cinema, we combine typical media formats, production, and performance. Additionally, 
we especially seek to take advantage of new formats like mobile games and the unique senses and 
aspects of the world—like public space, smell, sound, and/or energy—that these new media open 
up. We aim to create cinematic moments in the first person and first place across a variety of digital 
and analog formats.
It is important to clarify that the projects we mention here are not finished creations. We are 
interested in the process of opening minds to new ways of thinking about art with digital media 

124
and mobile. We consider these designs as ephemeral moments of creativity. They stay alive in the 
minds of students during their long and hard journey to the world of corporations and markets.
P R E PA R I N G  S T U D E N T S  F O R  H Y P E R M E D I A  A N D  T R A N S M E D I A
During their first years in the degree program, our Fine Art students generally receive an education 
that enables them to create short films. They learn how to prepare a storyboard, shoot footage, edit, 
and post-produce video making use of programs, such as Adobe Premiere and After Effects. This 
gives them a solid foundation in what it takes to later propose and create their own experimental 
media. We also familiarize our students with hypermedia and transmedia techniques framed in 
the scope of locative media. As their projects progress, we want them to understand the very large 
umbrella of audiovisual practices, sometimes mixed into a single narrative, what Robert Pratten 
calls “Transmedia Portmanteau approach”.
Transmedia means that we’re interested in multimedia (artifacts in many formats) and hypermedia, 
but also about stories that are simultaneously told across a variety of media1. Besides its current 
relevance, working in transmedia gives students who are less comfortable with modern technologies 
a chance to participate alongside their peers; we can organize heterogeneous working groups with 
students using traditional or analog media formats, and students using hypermedia, social networks 
and so on.
The creation of transmedia is complex; it especially needs good coordination between its parts. 
As Isidro Moreno says in Creatividad y discursos hipermedia (2012), the reader today wants also 
to be author (p. 39), so we need thinking in a complex but also open and dynamic way. To help 
our students to accomplish this, we ask them to create a puzzle where the different media are each 
needed to complete the whole. The puzzle format allows them to more easily grasp the notion 
of transmedia as something separate from multimedia: each piece of the puzzle is unique and 
complementary as a part of the whole. In the conception of transmedia projects, it is necessary to 
work with the narrative, taking into consideration the tools linked to each part—one part may be 
a character or a determined event. 
When students begin to create in this realm, the first phase of each project is creating a storyboard 
(Figure 1). From a pedagogical view, storyboarding provides space for introducing and discussing 
questions that affect the works’ final interpretation. The plan is more important than a mere map 
to enable execution in production. It also represents the conceptual framework that unites the 
pieces—it is analysis, a systematic study of the relations between the components. 
1 See for example Nicolas Bourriaud’s modern concept of the radicant (2009).

125
The students’ storyboards are therefore not just written scripts with x number of pages as is typical 
when planning linear narratives. A plan may contain a written script, but also include documents 
that operate as descriptors or legends for the other elements, often visually arranged like a map. The 
script should indicate, from each part of the work: 
•	
Localization, 
•	
Timing, 
•	
Characters or personalities, 
•	
Ideas referenced but not present (such as memories), and
•	
Determinants and possibilities within the content (we might think of how 
“choose your own adventure” books work).
Storyboarding begins with drawing on large sheets of paper a geographical map with the important 
information from the project. The groups, about three to six people, also create a shared blog that 
generates Smartphone-compatible web-pages. We show them how to use QR codes and overlay them 
on maps. This permits us to rapidly visualize the media without going outside and also gives us an 
idea of what the experience would be outdoors. We use mind-mapping techniques in order to visualize 
the branching of the projects prior to creating with more complex tools like ARIS (mentioned below). 
MindMeister (www.mindmeister.com) in particular allows us to generate shared-use diagrams that 
are really adapted to this purpose facilitating the interactive work. We also have techniques designed to 
help our students think about using multiple forms of perception as part of the storyboarding process. 
We use paper icons to represent sensory or perceptive organs and this helps students understand the 
degree to which senses like smell and touch are generally omitted from their initial designs.
As production progresses, it can be easy to lose sight of the major objectives of the design, to get 
lost in the details. This map helps students to remember that the individual bits of media they are 
creating are intended to play a pragmatic and functional role in the whole. 
Figure 1: A storyboarding session for the production of a transmedia project.

126
Practice with transmedia is an important perspective on the values and forms that art can involve. 
In the next three sections, we discuss areas of inquiry motivated by the possibilities of transmedia 
in a connected world that we and our students have worked in. There are three areas where versatile 
digital tools, in our case mostly ARIS, play a big role in making our ideas reality. The first of these 
is the creation of geolocative games, a particularly natural way to begin thinking about art that 
traverses formats and physical space.
G A M E S  I N  P U B L I C  S PA C E S : 
R E I M A G I N I N G  A U D I E N C E  A N D  A C T I V I T Y
Certainly, game design is not a common practice for all Fine Arts schools. Most artistic production is 
focused on the creation of more traditionally acknowledged formats of art. Paintings and sculptures 
form part of the market of Art and galleries, mobile games are artifacts that may be created and 
packaged or used, but they’re not part of this market. From the Social Art movement of the 1970’s, 
attention was given within the art world to the process as part of creation in addition to the product. 
If we can now teach game design in an Art school, it is because the past has paved the way for us to 
see art as more than what is hanging in galleries.
We spend a lot of time talking with our students about how our work may be ludic or draw 
inspiration from games and how that might be different from many perspectives on games and 
learning. We believe it’s important to see the creation of a game as more than a vehicle to deliver 
(and trivialize) content. A game, when used, should be a fundamental aspect of the work and not 
just a simple vector for content. Regarding learning designed in games, the game structure and play 
itself should become a key part of that learning. This contrasts with how the field of Serious Games 
or typical modes of gamification treat gameplay as a mode of content delivery. So when we adopt 
a game authoring platform like ARIS, it is with the notion of exploring the game-ness of what we 
can create.
Despite our strong involvement with game design and production, our students do not immediately 
jump into it. Our students in particular can be intimidated by game authoring platforms that 
require programming expertise. Instead, we wanted to quickly focus students on understanding 
what we can do as artists and building games and stories in the public space. This is why we 
have principally used ARIS for our development work (and combined ARIS with other locative 
frameworks like Notours—http://www.notours.org—for the creation of soundscapes). Software 
like this makes it possible to create interesting products quickly and simply without the time or 
expertise usually involved in software development. Even with easy-to-use creation tools, to achieve 
the best results, students approach the creation of content only after they study the possibilities 
inherent in these spaces and are trained to imagine the diversity of results—artistic actions, fiction, 
documentary, and games. 

127
When students finally begin to design their games, they try to create something that lives at the 
intersection of what the device can provide and a series of actions—often performance—in public 
spaces. In this direction, we have been inspired by many other previous works, including
•	
PacManhattan: a version of the classic game PacMan, played out by real people 
on the streets of Manhattan instead of on a screen (http://pacmanhattan.com).
•	
Gigaputt: an iOS app that converts the streets of any city into a virtual golf 
course (http://www.giganticmechanic.com/project/gigaputt/).
Games like these have the capacity to help us play with and begin to understand the convergence 
of physical and virtual realities. Some of our work aims to explore this idea further, either by using 
mobile devices to turn the world into a setting for a game, or a space for performance. As Jesper Juul 
has said, “to play (a videogame) is therefore to interact with real rules while imagining a fictional 
world” (2005, p.1).
Example 1: Microcosmos Explorer
Our first prototype for game set in public space is titled Microcosmos Explorer.
Microcosmos Explorer (Figures 2 & 3) was designed to be a mobile learning app for botany fans. We 
take advantage of a complex of themed gardens that can be situated on our campus and we present 
content through a game of clues. The narrative guide is given by a fictional character based on a 
historical figure from the 19th century, a botanist named Gastón Bonnier who inspired the creation 
of the Lousteau Museum at the campus. The principal mechanism of the game is based on the 
search for seeds that Gaston has lost and to plant them virtually in corresponding places according 
to the characteristics of the gardens. The players can see different views or photographic macro 
Figure 2: Microcosmos Explorer (2011), http://arisgames.org/featured/microcosmos-explorer/.

128
images of the plants that they can find with the help of a portable microscope for cell phones and 
then plant in the appropriate garden. Smart phones, in this case equipped with microscopes, are 
converted in assistive agents for the senses, implementing players’ perceptions of the environment, 
stimulating their senses.
On one hand, Microcosmos Explorer is a fun exercise for Biology students and those from related 
fields that puts their knowledge of Botany to the test. Exploration of the microcosm is possible 
and even desirable for the enhanced knowledge of our environment. On the other hand, this 
game generates collaboration between Botany and Art, two rather distinct disciplines. It is an 
example of how the creation of content in mobile learning can be a good opportunity to generate 
interdisciplinary collaborations and favors the rise of innovative pedagogical practices.
Example 2: Being la Baubin
In 2012 a group of students finished a prototype of a social game—Being la Babuin (Figure 4). 
This game is based on the idea of connecting actions or interventions in public space with online 
performances. The objective of the first part of the game consists of situating the player by creating 
a determined context for him or her. Specifically, it is about being a new kind of primate in the 
world of humans—another species—and getting a new point of view of the world. The main 
intent is to challenge our ingrained anthropocentric ways of seeing the world. For this purpose, 
the player is asked to find a primate mask, previously hidden in a plastic tube, that he or she will 
carry throughout the experience. Suddenly, the players find themselves in a particular situation, 
like a crowded auditorium, that becomes the background for their actions or performances as this 
primate. Who could cross a library with hundreds of students with their head covered by a mask of 
a monkey without generating a interactions with the people around? 
Figure 3: Screenshots of Microcosmos Explorer (2011), http://arisgames.org/featured/microcosmos-explorer/.

129
The game thus provokes a fracture with the established social rules, and the player tends to draw 
the attention of those that find themselves nearby. The mask, and the anonymity that the mask 
provides, offer the player certain liberty to put his creativity into play; he is not a witness, but rather 
an actor in a story in which he takes part. The narrative is not really pre-established here, but just 
contextualized with a general mission to achieve. Being in a specific place at a certain time is the 
only requirement, then the interaction with the people appears naturally and yet has been created. 
Being la Babuin pushes the limits of gaming rather far into the social fabric of urban space. The 
action in the game symbolizes the desire to “act” (to enter in action) felt by the generation born in 
the 1990s who confront the sudden violence of the economic crisis in Spain, where more half of 
the young population was unemployed. To produce artistic action, the creators of this game have 
intervened in the street landscape without degrading it.
Another interesting way in which this project became really more of a process than a defined 
story—a conspiracy among many players and authors—is how participants included signs or 
footprints from supposed actors in the fiction, specifically, traces from other primates from the same 
family or from incompatible families (lemurs). The story the students created began somewhere 
Figure 4: Being la Babuin (2012), (http://beinglababuin5videoycine.blogspot.com.es/).

130
but is probably never ending. Players used the ARIS notebook to share these invented details with 
others who were not present at the time but came later, creating another location of importance for 
the game. If ARIS integrated with social networks, then this impact could have been even greater.
The authors of Being la Baubin also involved people from the physical spaces in which the fiction 
takes place, workers in said public spaces. For example, they involved a custodian from the Main 
Library from the Espinardo Campus who gave certain information to those who asked him a key 
question. These temporary actors were active agents in the progress of the ever-changing plot. Taken 
together, this game became a concrete activist strategy that allowed its players to interact with their 
environment in new ways.
F I C T I O N  I N  U R B A N  S PA C E — R E I M A G I N I N G  C I N E M A 
I N  T H E  O P E N  W O R L D
As one of our goals is to help our students become practiced in the ways of cinema, many of our 
experiments are not really games, even when we use processes and tools familiar to game design in 
their production. However, teaching students “cinema” only from a conventional point of view (the 
movie theater) is not a very strategic option given the opportunities in the job market. It is difficult 
to find an opening in European cinematographic industry and it is even more unlikely that our 
students would be likely to end up working in Hollywood. These unattainable goals seem to be the 
direction art schools point their students to. Existing industry and formats are not the only setting 
for cinema in the 21st century, so we ask students to experiment within the developing tradition of 
expanded cinema, where our objective is to make the students perceive that it is possible to break 
standards of traditional cinema and think of innovative models of audiovisual creation outdoors 
and connected to the Internet and other forms of hypermedia. 
As the French social thinker Gilles Lipovetsky put it in the book Global Screen, “We are in an era 
of the multiplication of screens, in a world-screen in which the cinema is no more than one among 
many” (2009, p. 28). It is necessary to define alternative channels for cinema, open new perspectives 
that strongly tie cinematographic experience and social networks, and make use of new digital 
foundations of skills like reading for visualization. In looking to train our students with expanded 
cinema, we often seek to situate cinema in physical space in non-traditional ways. ARIS is still 
very useful here, even though we are not using it to make “games”, as other tools that can give our 
students easy access to re-situating media in relation to the audience. 
Reviewing the history of cinema—its methods of reading, production, and postproduction—can 
be a fantastic source of content for linking cinema to physical spaces. In other words, by paying 
attention to how some movies invent new possibilities conceptually of what can happen in a physical 
space, we can find clues for how to create cinema that goes one step further and makes those 
conceptual ideas part of a fiction that is directly embedded in reality. A good example is how we 
sought to reinterpret an aspect of Wim Winder’s film, Wings of Desire (1987). The film uses a group 

131
of angels who listen attentively to the internal voices of those living within the city and through this 
the viewer discovers their intimate thoughts; the viewer hears a multitude of otherwise inaudible 
voices while the story ambles through Berlin. 
In class, we debated possible strategies to take the film experience to the public through a real 
on-foot tour (Figure 5). We looked for ways to make the voices heard as the viewer—not the 
camera—navigates physical space, and asked our students to explore how they might repurpose 
and reimagine the angel’s abilities from the movie. To resolve this exercise proposed in class, we 
asked our students to create original content and at the same time recycle audiovisual material from 
movies, deconstructing image and sound in order to recreate elements that can be adapted to both 
the smartphone formatting and to the requirements of the storyboard. The movie is understood as 
a mine from which each plan can be analyzed and modified. 
To implement these ideas we needed to extend the possibilities of ARIS by creating the soundtrack 
of the spatial narrative. We used the tool NoTours (created by the Spanish art collective Escoitar, 
http://www.escoitar.org), a mobile authoring platform which allows us to place audio clips in 
physical space in very complex configurations. By overlaying and staggering different sounds, you 
can create a rich and diverse soundscape for someone to walk through. From our point of view, it is 
the perfect audio tool for pairing with ARIS.
Our work with the concept of realizing disembodied voices in space also displays how we approach 
mobile game creation. Before authoring the full combination of audiovisual media, we had students 
thinking of this project as exclusively sound-based, creating a one-channel soundscape that does not 
require interaction through the screen on the user’s device. The user can then amble in tranquility 
Figure 5:  Students experimenting with ARIS and NoTours.

132
with his headphones and an Android device in his pocket, a less complex target for our students to 
initially aim for. After this stage is complete, we use it as a background against which we accomplish 
further design, using ARIS to layer a narrative and actors over the initial soundscape. 
Our basic research into the combination of geolocated audio and augmented reality game design also 
encouraged us to reconstruct a scene from the Jean Renoir’s La Bête Humaine (1938) at the campus 
Les Tarongers at The University of Valencia. We analyzed elements from the urban streetscape to 
give significance to the integration of cinematographic fragments and renew their meaning in the 
context in which they are placed. La Bête Humaine is a classic, speaking about the deep and tragic 
feelings of low class workers, and we looked for a way to bring that feeling alive for the audience. In 
the center of the campus, there is an old locomotive we chose to use as an anchor our recreation of 
scenes. In a certain way the locomotive is keeping the memory of the movie alive; historical elements 
in the public space become charged from their inclusion and reference in movies, documentaries, 
and books. Each place can be a door for rediscovering the traces of the past. 
We can imagine an amazing collection of creations nurtured by the cinematographic production 
of the last century, interactive geolocalized applications accessible through mobile devices to give 
new opportunity to productions that have become forgotten or lost some meaning. It is a clear 
opportunity to assess our cinematographic heritage and to open new readings of the historic places 
selected for its positioning.
D O C U M E N TA R Y  I N  U R B A N  S PA C E  —  R E I M A G I N I N G  R E A L I T Y
Another aspect of our work is in relation to the genre of documentary filmmaking. The basic affordance 
of mobile game design for documentary purposes is to situate past narratives in relevant places through 
the use of media on the mobile device. In the majority of cases, this consists of a superimposition of 
multimedia information (digital and/or analog) in the physical space and can be interpreted in some 
way as augmented or enhanced reality. We use environmental resources to reinforce the sense of 
dialogue between physical space and virtual space that makes life feel real. One common example is 
to use physical space to stage the viewing of historical photos and film from relevant physical points 
of view, say the point of view from which the original photo was taken. 
Art on Campus (El Arte en el Campus) is a documentary made by our students and is an example of 
the mode of creation described above (Figure 6). They looked for sculptures and painted murals on 
campus with the objective of creating a guided visit that would better allow for the understanding 
of the artistic harmony of the place. They searched for connections between the works on campus 
and their historical referents. For example, there is a sculpture in one of the roundabouts, a car 
split into two flowerpots, Symbiosis, that was connected to the work Split House (1973) by Gordon 
Matta-Clark. This deep analysis by art students focused on public sculptures was then produced 
into an ARIS-based cultural tour of the campus. ARIS allows students to do more than mention 
the histories represented here—to actually create an imaginary dialogue with artists represented in 
the works such as Frida Kahlo and Salvador Dalí.

133
Femenino y Plural (Feminine and Plural) 
was one of the most outstanding projects 
from 2012–2013, and is a good example of 
how transmedia documentary design can 
come together (Figure 7). The project makes 
the audience participants in the adventures 
of a female character who discovers she is 
the heir of the Beguinas, feminine medieval 
spiritual and secular communities that existed 
independently from the ecclesiastical hierarchy 
and from men. This begins a documentary-
based fiction, as the fictitious main character 
(Beguina) encounters real information and 
characters. The work was inspired from an 
interesting entry in the blog Sociedad in the 
Spanish newspaper El País that covered the 
recent death in Belgium of the last Beguina. 
Femenino y Plural articulates this story through 
three principal and complementary parts: an 
ARIS game, a comic we find physically in our 
own tour of the city of Murcia, and a blog.
Figure 6: El Arte en el Campus (2012), 
http://geolocalizacionum.blogspot.com.es/
Figure 7: Femenino y Plural (2013), http://enfemeninoyplural.blogspot.com.es/

134
Femenino y Plural is also an example of how the students at Bellas Artes can produce transmedia 
narratives that transmit content with social purposes (in this case, values of equality especially). 
Our use of ARIS in the experience is constitutive; it conditions their way of thinking and plants 
the story. It opens an enormous field of possibilities for the creation that rouses and motivates them.
Together, these strategies help make evident the artistic and educational potential that the spatial 
contextualization of information has. It is by tying the resources around us to narratives that they 
can take on life for others. But there is an additional sense in which physically experiencing a 
documentary can take on value. Like our other educational uses of this medium, we look for the 
learning to happen through the creation of the content. We encourage students to work in two 
modes, straight documentary and fiction. This can be seen as a question of “angle”—we can be the 
cameraman or the public. We can enter into the fiction or escape from it depending on our relative 
position to the mediascape. 
It is important to understand this opportunity offers a variety of points of view that crosses the 
line between fiction and documentary, and opens a dialog between the creator and the spectator. 
We can do exactly this with locative storytelling because we are moving around in the space. We 
have students do this because, in the words of Henry Jenkins, “it becomes increasingly critical to 
help students acquire skills in understanding multiple perspectives, respecting and even embracing 
diversity of views, understanding a variety of social norms, and negotiating between conflicting 
opinions” (2009, p. 100).
C O N C L U S I O N
The technologies that permit the access and exchange of information tied to geographic positioning 
have modified our ways of thinking and constructing narratives; this is unquestionable. We are all 
potential consumers of these technologies and potential receptors for the discourses they produce. 
If we desire to possess the capacity for initiating and proposing lines of dialogue (in a broad sense), 
beyond responding in participating in those already created—often by powerful organizations—we 
have to be part of its use. Knowledge of these mechanisms is fundamental in order to understand 
the potential of the technology and the capacity for action that the user has in the system in which 
he or she is integrated. The principal objective of these experiences is to create, with adequate tools 
and formats, within the technological actuality in which live, shaping students for new forms of 
writing and narrative, forms which can be important in a near professional future. But, the control 
of these technologies, or at least the comprehension of their functions, beyond the professional 
sphere is a social question. From the point of view of artistic activism, the technology continuously 
opens spaces that can (and should) be occupied by public voices.

135
The audiovisual work we do at the Department of Fine Arts is more than individual oeuvres within 
a single genre or format; it is converted, expanded, and articulated with the real world and virtual 
reality. The integration of social networks and spatial narration permits the transcendence of 
experience, establishing new relationships between information, communication, and place. We 
are helping our students to help define new forms of fiction, or reality, or documentary, or game, 
or perhaps, all at the same time. The creation is liberated from the static screens: the movie theatre, 
television, or computer screen, to flourish in a type of experience that requires time but whose 
duration is not predefined. This mutation requires we dismiss those usual presupposed closed spaces 
where we expect to encounter stories and look to raise questions capable of stimulating new or 
forgotten forms of perceiving such as smell and touch. Advanced tools, like ARIS and NoTours, 
for the creation of prototypes that involve geolocation and interactivity permit students to confront 
the challenge of innovating with their creations; that, is to nourish their potential for success in the 
professional sphere for the creation of audiovisual and multimedia informed by these new ideas.
Our objective is to prepare our students for the challenges of the 21st century—a society with new 
modes of access to audiovisual media. They must learn to articulate information and physical space 
as has never been done before. We need to create future experts with artistic perspectives capable 
of accomplishing and transcending audiovisual creation, addressing new forms of experience and 
perception through new formats such as hypermedia and transmedia, and exploring alternative 
forms from a creative point of view. Providing these future creators with the tools and knowledge 
necessary to experiment is fundamental; it is sowing the adaptation of their forms and discourses to 
the changing society in which they have to integrate.
If you want more details about the above projects, we invite you to check the website http://www.
um.es/arisgames/. The website “Hypermedia and Transmedia Creation Lab” displays some class 
projects and other information related to pedagogy that further reveals our methodology.
R E F E R E N C E S 
Bourriaud, N. (2009). Radicante. Buenos Aires: Adriana Hidalgo Editora. 
Jenkins, H. (P.I.)(2009). Confronting the Challenges of Participatory Culture Media Education for the 21st Century. The 
John D. and Catherine Foundation Reports on Digital Media and Learning. Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Juul, J (2005). Half-Real. Videogames between Real Rules and Fictional Worlds. Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Lipovetsky, G ; Serroy, J. (2009). La Pantalla Global. Cultura mediática y cine en la era hipermoderna. Barcelona: 
Editorial Anagrama.
Moreno, I. (2012):  Narrativa Hipermedia y Transmedia. In Perales, V. (Ed.), Creatividad y Discursos Hipermedia 
(pp. 21–40).  Murcia: Editum.


SECTION FOUR

Connecting to Communities
11. 	
“To Have Fun and Display Our Awesomeness”: 
	
Mobile Game Design and The Meaning of Life
12. 	
Project Exploration’s Environmental Adventurers: 
	
Amplifying Urban Youth Agency, Identity and 
	
Capacity with Mobile Technology
13. 	
Civic Engagement and Geo-Locative Media: 
	
Youth Create a Game to Discuss Political Issues
14. 	
Technovation Challenge: Introducing Innovation 
	
and Mobile App Development to Girls Around the World
This section collects stories from teachers, researchers, technologists, and artists using 
Mobile Media largely in informal learning environments like summer and after school 
programs. These authors see their use of MML as a way to integrate passion, coming 
into the world, and accessing professional skills and habits of mind. The first three 
chapters describe small youth programs while Technovation Challenge is a franchise, 
a small program that has grown tremendously since 2010, implemented independently 
across the world. Some of the goals of youth programming tie very closely in with 
curricular goals, but others look to have a broader and more personal impact on the 
people they serve. These chapters give a concrete sense that MML is comfortable in 
helping educators do both at the same time.


139
Chapter ELEVEN

“To Have Fun and Display Our 
Awesomeness”: Mobile Game Design 
and The Meaning of Life 
Bob Coulter
Litzsinger Road Ecology Center, Missouri Botanical Garden
In The Meaning of Life, Monty Python presents an inspired spoof of schools and learning. As 
the scene opens, students are on their own in the classroom but hard at work, with one student 
carefully peeking out the door looking for the teacher. As the teacher approaches, the students 
quickly put away their work and begin the usual mischief you might expect while the teacher 
is out of the room. Like any good satire, the inversion of self-directed interest and compulsory 
education at the heart of the vignette raises provocative questions. How do traditional school 
expectations interfere with our natural curiosity and desire to learn? Conversely, what are kids 
capable of in a more supportive setting? 
To explore these issues, the Missouri Botanical Garden has been running game design camps for 
the past few years using MIT’s mobile augmented reality software (first with MITAR and now 
with TaleBlazer—see Figure 1).1  While our larger program goal as an ecology center is to leverage 
the affordances of a variety of different games and simulations to engage school groups with the 
environment, any school experience is by nature compulsory and thus somewhat constraining. We 
have found that the more open-ended, totally elective game design camps put kids in their “native 
space,” freeing them to show what they can do. 
1 As we finished putting this book together, MIT made Taleblazer available to the general public. 
Sign up at http://taleblazer.org. -Eds 

140
So how do these camps work? By design, the game camps are intended to be driven by kids’ interests 
rather than having them simply complete a set of lessons toward a pre-determined outcome. We 
want them to be active in setting and modifying their goals for their project, drawing as needed 
on the expertise of the camp staff and their peers as the work progresses. As you can imagine in 
this more collaborative, studio-like environment, a good bit of sharing ensues, with particularly 
compelling ideas starting with one kid and over time appearing in other projects. Still, a little 
orientation and scaffolding helps kids get started. Since mobile augmented reality gaming is such 
a fundamentally different paradigm for most kids, we start by getting them outside playing a 
demonstration game. Typically this introductory experience embeds several key game mechanics 
(such as navigating outdoors with the handheld, making choices, “picking up” items offered within 
the game, and managing your inventory). Later that first morning, we transition from playing to 
designing, inviting the campers to personalize the game they just played by renaming characters 
and adding their pictures to the game they just played. Within a couple of hours we have gone from 
a cool game to their cool game. Moving from player to creator has a profound impact in terms of 
supporting their personal and intellectual development. 
While the changes kids make at this stage to the game they just played are modest, it’s an essential 
first step toward design work. They can readily see how their game play experiences were created, and 
in the process come to understand how the block-based programming environment in TaleBlazer 
lets on-screen events get expressed in code. From there, they begin thinking about how to make 
their goals come to life on screen. To support this development, we challenge the kids first to make 
a simple navigation game and then to enhance it iteratively with increasing levels of complexity and 
challenge as their design skills grow. Over the course of the week, the camp becomes a mix of mini-
lessons for all of the campers, 1-1 tutorials to address specific issues, a good bit of peer collaboration, 
and a lot of fun playing, testing, and revising games. 
Figure 1. The Taleblazer web-based authoring interface.

141
A skeptic might counter with the point that yes, 
the kids had fun designing a game, but so what? 
Did they actually learn anything, or were they 
just playing? To answer that question, we need 
to be clear about what we mean by learning. 
While most schools in the United States focus 
an inordinate amount of time on testable growth 
in a narrow spectrum of academic learning, 
we’re trying to promote a more holistic view of 
education. By design, the camps (and the other 
programs we offer) integrate cognitive and non-
cognitive skills that are essential elements in 
successful living. To gain a better understanding 
of how game design camps can achieve this 
broader goal, let’s consider four dimensions of 
character development (Shields, 2011): 
•	
Moral character generally refers to 
how people interact with each other. 
Issues of kindness, consideration, 
and empathy are key here. What 
does it mean to be a good person, 
and to see the value in others?
•	
Civic character moves past the 
individual to describe ways in which 
people show their commitment 
to their community: Are they 
committed to improving the quality 
of life for others? Are they seeking to 
improve the local environment?
•	
Performance character describes how 
people approach tasks: Do they work 
hard and persevere in their efforts? 
Are they focused on doing their best, 
or just getting by? 
•	
Intellectual character describes ways in 
which people approach information 
and ideas: Do they keep an open 
mind and weigh evidence? Are they 
willing to reconsider previously held 
beliefs in light of new information?
S I D E B A R : 
P R O S  O F  C R E AT I N G 
H A N D H E L D  G A M E S
Ross Stauder
I got into designing games because Bob 
invited me to sign up for a Star Logo game 
camp three years ago. I’ve really enjoyed 
that and done some more game designs on 
my own. The second year I came back to the 
camp and along with Bob there were two 
people from MIT and they did TaleBlazer 
with us. What I really like about making 
handheld games with TaleBlazer is that you 
can have fun playing outside. The games are 
fun and easy to make. I like making them 
because it’s a lot different than making 
other kinds of computer games. The format 
in TaleBlazer is mostly setting up a story in 
sequential order, whereas in my Star Logo 
games I set the blocks and let it go. My first 
effort to make a game was at design camp.
One important thing to think about in 
TaleBlazer is giving good directions, because 
people need to know how to navigate when 
they are outdoors. Another important thing 
is making sure that everything is in sequential 
order. Otherwise the player will get messed 
up and go to things in the wrong order. 
Also, be sure the characters have some useful 
information or interaction to make the game 
interesting and exciting. In my game you had 
to fight the monsters and when you killed 
them they would drop something. As a player 
you would have to bring it to someone as proof 
you slayed him and then he or she would 
reward you. Your game should also include 
puzzles to solve to make the game harder. 

(con’t on next page)

142
We have found over the years that design 
projects have a lot of potential to build moral 
character. While many games are criticised 
in the popular press for promoting violence 
through conquest and killing, in our experience 
the kids do a good job of segregating a violent 
game environment from their personal lives. 
Phrased differently, most kids do a good job of 
being a warrior in-game while remaining kind 
and helpful in real life. In fact, we usually see 
much more positive, pro-social interaction in 
our game design camps than we do in working 
with school groups. Removed from the artificial 
competition of school grading, our young 
designers are remarkably willing to share their 
ideas and techniques. Like many gift cultures 
where recognition accrues to the most generous 
members in the community, the personal rewards 
in a game design environment are not attached to 
having the best grades. Rather, there is a benefit 
in being recognized as a capable contributor. The 
feeling of accomplishment a young designer feels 
when his peers appreciate something creative or 
innovative in his game—and perhaps even go on 
to adapt it for use in their own game—is much 
more meaningful than simply getting a top 
grade. As one of the campers put it in the title 
quote for this chapter, kids want to “Have fun 
and display our awesomeness.” For our tween-
age designers, building a feeling of personal 
capacity is critical. A collaborative design studio 
environment that recognizes personal excellence, 
an ethic of sharing, and an appreciation of the 
gifts and talents of each member is a great place 
to nurture that growth.  
Civic character has been less of a focus in the mobile game camps than it has in other design projects 
we’ve led, such as helping kids in an after-school program create StarLogo TNG simulations that 
embed ecosystem dynamics (Coulter, 2014). But, the potential in the mobile space is there. We 
expect to capitalize on it in a new initiative we are starting where young designers will develop 
mobile games to engage visitors to the Missouri Botanical Garden with local and global food issues 
and other environmental concerns. These new design projects will give kids an opportunity to 
learn about critical science issues and engage the community in a meaningful way. In terms of civic 
S I D E B A R
(con’t from previous page)

For example, in my game your path was 
different depending on which class you chose. 
Each class had locks, and to open them you 
had to solve questions using information you 
received earlier in the game. 
Being able to work with others at the camp 
and get feedback was especially helpful, 
because everyone finds different things fun 
and that’s why games turn out better when 
you work together. In my first game idea, the 
objective I came up with sounded cool but 
my friend pointed out that it wasn’t. I realized 
that it wasn’t my best idea needed work still, 
and after revision and more brainstorming, 
our game overall turned out better. Making 
handheld games is a lot different than school 
because it requires smarter thinking and 
trial and error x 17. In school you don’t get a 
second trial because when it’s done it’s done 
and that’s your grade. 
TaleBlazer was overall a great experience for 
me. I’m looking forward to more game design 
projects this summer. This time the games 
will be even more challenging and interesting 
since they will require harder thinking and 
more puzzles.

143
character development, the kids will be learning about their community as they offer a service to it. 
Beyond the design process, we’re also exploring in this new project how civic engagement in a game 
context may lead to virtuous behavior in the real world: Does being a protagonist on behalf of the 
environment in-game spur you on to taking action back home? We know kids can make choices 
not to bring their violent game persona into the real world. Can they choose to bring a virtuous one 
to life to benefit their community? 
Moving ahead, performance character is where we see some of the most important benefits of game 
design camps. Running counter to the school model of “tested, graded, and done” outcomes, the 
design studio model for our camps is based on persistence and continuous improvement within the 
week we are together and beyond. When kids participate in more than one camp, we have seen 
growing craftsmanship in designing engaging game environments. While a first-time participant 
might develop a game that relies on simple point-to-point navigation to achieve a goal, a veteran 
designer will embed complex, consequential choices for the player and show greater sophistication 
in how they leverage the design tools to create the game play they want. Imagine the difference 
between simply having to get your food once to survive and a more complex game play where you 
have to manage and monitor your character’s energy level throughout the game.
Regardless of the designer’s level of experience, there is always a sequence of making a trial version, 
testing it out, making improvements, and testing the next iteration. Inevitably some aspects of 
the game design don’t work as well as they might, and fixes are in order. As Ross—a frequent 
participant in our game camps—notes in the sidebar, game design “is a lot different than school 
because it requires smarter thinking and trial and error x 17.” While in a graded school assignment 
“good enough” might be sufficient, the internal motivation to make a game you’re proud of, and 
the external hope to “display our awesomeness” motivates persistent effort toward improvement. 
Eventually, working with the camp staff and their peers, most challenges get resolved which leads 
to a real feeling of accomplishment. In one camp, we had a normally quite reserved student get up 
and dance a jig every time he had a breakthrough. Persistence pays off, especially in an environment 
that provides authentic motivation. 
A fourth dimension of character development to consider is the extent to which a good game design 
promotes intellectual character. Instead of memorizing facts and rote procedures, mobile game 
players need to think on their feet as they navigate clues, weigh evidence, and make consequential 
choices (Gresalfi et al, 2009). Doing this well requires keeping an open mind and a willingness to 
reconsider positions based on emerging issues. Designers have an even greater challenge, as they 
chart out complex paths “behind the scenes” with multiple contingencies. For example, The Nights 
of Lore developed by three middle school students had an upgrade path players could earn that went 
from having a wooden sword to steel and perhaps even on to ‘mirthil.’ These swords of course, were 
not to be confused with other weapons in the game, such as the elvish blades that other characters 
might have. Depending on what you as the player have done before within the game, you might 
have achieved a level of success that allows you to pick up a powerful (and highly desired) mono-
bow, but only if you have defeated the baby trolls. While the specifics just described may not make 
complete sense if you are not immersed in the game environment, the important point is the level 

144
of complexity underlying the design. Listening in on the planning meetings reveals an astounding 
level of thinking among the kids as contingencies are laid out, checked for conflicts, and set at levels 
that are just challenging enough to be motivating (but not too hard). 
While some mistakenly think that game play hinders developing basic skills, my experience has 
been that kids actually develop and maintain robust skills through their efforts to design and play 
games. For example, I’ve seen kids spend much more time looking for just the right word for their 
game than they ever will for a writing assignment they don’t value. For example, one game’s design 
plan had a player’s role changed throughout the document from perpetrator to the much more 
evocative role of ‘infiltrator.’ Despite the negative stereotypes, it’s clear to anyone who works with 
kids on meaningful projects that the texting generation can still write well when they need to.
So, four dimensions of character, each nurtured in a game design environment. None of these 
examples are meant to suggest that games and game design are somehow a Holy Grail for learning. 
Rather, they provide one of many possible means for supporting kids in taking on a deeper and 
more meaningful engagement with the world they are a part of. As we become increasingly aware 
of how learning and growth is a 24/7/365 process, we need to be mindful of how the full scope of 
kids‘ experiences feeds their development. More so than highly regimented school programs, game 
design camps can provide opportunities to develop character attributes that can be applied across 
the life span. Here, the cognitive academic skills that schools have an almost exclusive focus on come 
to life through larger applications that are personally meaningful to the kids. Complementing the 
academic focus, the non-cognitive skills such as maintaining good interpersonal relations, building 
civic commitment, showing persistence, and living a life of the mind are a natural part of the work 
and not an artificial add-on. Kids learn what they live with. By combining joy and purpose—or if 
you prefer, by “having fun and displaying awesomeness”—kids can find the meaning of life. 
R E F E R E N C E S
Coulter, B. (2014). No more robots: Developing kids’ character, competence, and sense of place. New York: Peter Lang.
Gresalfi, M., Barab, S., Siyahhan, S., and Christensen, T. (2009). Virtual worlds, conceptual understanding, and me: 
designing for consequential engagement. On the Horizon 17(1), pp. 21-34. 
Shields, D. (2011). Character as the aim of education. Phi Delta Kappan, 92(8), pp. 48-53.
A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T S
Thanks to Josh Sheldon and Lisa Stump at MIT for co-leading this game design camp and for ongoing technical support.
This work was supported in part by National Science Foundation under grants #0639638, #0833663, and #1223407 
All opinions expressed here are those of the authors and not necessarily of the National Science Foundation. 

145
Chapter TWELVE

Project Exploration’s Environmental 
Adventurers: Amplifying Urban Youth 
Agency, Identity and Capacity with 
Mobile Technology
Jameela Jafri, Gabrielle H. Lyon, Stephanie Madziar, & Rebecca Tonietto
Project Exploration’s week-long summer Environmental Adventurers program immersed 
eleven Chicago Public School middle and high school students into the world of urban bees 
and biodiversity research. We employed a place-based approach to ground learning experiences 
and exploration within uniquely urban spaces. Students used mobile technology to explore the 
environment, document native bees, and engage in authentic fieldwork research and data analysis. 
Students maximized the potential of the technology in ways that forced program leaders to rethink 
the potential of mobile technology as an amplifier rather than simply an enabler.
B A C KG R O U N D : 
M O B I L E  T E C H N O L O G Y  I N  A  R E L AT I O N S H I P - B A S E D  P R O G R A M
Project Exploration is an organization dedicated to making science accessible to young people 
through personalized experiences with science and scientists. Since our inception in 1999, we have 
built relationships with more than 1500 middle and high school minority youth. We focus on 
recruiting students who are not academically successful, but who are curious and open-minded. We 
work on getting to know students for who they are, what they like and are curious about, and what 
they can do in science. Our program reflects what we most care about: creating access and equity in 
science for young people who historically have been overlooked by meaningful science education. 
Project Exploration uses structured ways of co-creating curriculum with youth: reading and writing 
together and sharing our work with the public in culminating events. Most importantly, once you’re 
in, you’re in: facilitators focus on fostering and supporting long-term relationships with students 
and most participants stay actively involved with Project Exploration for a minimum of two years; 
many participate for more than five. 

146
In the summer of 2012, we set out for the first time to include mobile technology as a major 
part of what we do with youth. In Environmental Adventurers—a week-long summer program—
Chicago Public School middle and high school students would use mobile technology to explore the 
environment, document native bees, and engage in authentic fieldwork research and data analysis1. 
When we decided to use mobile technology as part of Environmental Adventurers, we knew 
this tool would not change our core practices. We would be student-centered; youth would work 
alongside scientists to do meaningful work; students’ interests would shape their research projects; 
we would read and write together; we would host a culminating showcase for the community; 
and because Project Exploration’s program is relationship-based, we knew that when the summer 
program concluded we would work to support students to stay involved with science, and we would 
continue to stay involved on their lives. What we did not know was what the students would teach 
us about the power of mobile technology to amplify the experience. 
W H Y  E N V I R O N M E N TA L  S T U D I E S 
I N  A N  U R B A N  S E T T I N G  M AT T E R S
Environmental science has long been considered a valuable way to engage young people in their local 
habitats. Programs for urban youth are often designed to take students into natural spaces, away 
from the city. There is certainly value in introducing young people to new environments away from 
their homes. But, when natural science programming is conducted away from cities, it can suggest to 
students that urban environments do not harbor natural spaces, and that scientific research on ecology 
and the environment only takes place away from urban communities. This is particularly problematic 
for urban young people of color who are typically underrepresented in the sciences. 
In the summer of 2012, to develop a youth-centered environmental science program for Chicago 
middle and high school students, we grounded scientific fieldwork in local issues with the goal 
of facilitating a program through which youth could build a scientific identity in themselves and 
their city. As a result, we intentionally incorporated several of Chicago’s active learning spaces as 
places where environmental research can be conducted—local museums, universities, parks, and 
urban green spaces—by collaborating with key partners, such as the Chicago Park District and the 
Shedd Aquarium.  
Youth-Centered, Science Driven
The youth named the program Environmental Adventurers, a title that articulates the identity-
building and active engagement they were seeking. With input and design parameters from youth, 
staff next engaged environmental scientists to help distill a set of locally based research questions 
1 A short video about Environmental Adventurers within the context of Project Exploration’s science programming was produced in 
2012 by Free Spirit Media: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7UfI1slaBkk.

147
we could meaningfully investigate with students during a summer program. After direction from 
the youth, we identified a scientist with content expertise in the topic of environmental science to 
assist us in planning the program.
In particular, we decided to study bees due to a long-term relationship with a graduate student in 
bee ecology at Northwestern University, Rebecca (Becky) Tonietto, whom we asked to serve as the 
scientist in residence. Becky had already done considerable outreach as a guest scientist for Project 
Exploration’s gender-specific middle school program (Lyon & Jafri, 2010). Through this previous 
outreach work, Becky knew young people will quickly move beyond the initial fear of bees and 
become immersed in questions as they hone their observation skills and begin to look closely at 
the bees. Moreover, native bees were perfect animals to study to study for this program because 
they illuminate localized ecological and environmental issues and lend themselves to conversations 
about local flora and fauna, food production, and pollination.
Technology as an Enabler
To support youth in developing identities as scientists engaged in research, we knew it was 
critical for them to become familiar with the tools of the practice. Biologists and ecologists are 
increasingly using mobile technologies as data collection and data sharing instruments, as well as 
traditional technologies like water-resistant journals. We paid particular attention to enabling our 
Environmental Adventurers to use authentic, traditional and cutting-edge technologies alongside 
research scientists. The journals were simple to plan for. When we sat down with Becky to map 
out the program goals and content, we provided each participant with high-quality water-resistant 
journal for documenting location, bees collected, notes, maps, and drawings similar to those Becky 
had long used (see Figure 1).
Planning to integrate mobile technology was 
somewhat more nuanced; how would we both 
enable teens to meaningfully document their 
own learning and self-direct their research, 
but also ensure they were able to build 
technological skills and social capital through 
access to cutting-edge technology used by 
scientific researchers when researchers own use 
of mobile is still evolving? We purchased iPod 
Touches to be used by each student as a way to 
collect data, take pictures, find locations, and 
research information at each outdoor location. 
We also purchased two iPads and paid for field-
guide apps to identify local insects and plants. 
Our goal was for students to use the devices to 
document their learning through photography, 
Figure 1. A notebook of one of the Environmental 
Adventurers documenting bees in her journal. 

148
and to learn how to capture images that would enhance the collected data, such as pictures of 
plants, that couldn’t be identified in the field. We also wanted students to utilize the location-
finding features of the iPods, given that field scientists document location in their field journals. 
Finally, we wanted to integrate a citizen science App for documenting bees called BeeSpotter. 
P R A C T I C E S  A N D  O U T C O M E S
During the week-long program, youth focused on two goals:
•	
Working in lab teams, students developed a research-based question of their 
interest about the behavior of native bees in Chicago. 
•	
The youth compared the abundance of native bees in restored prairies (vs. 
ornamental gardens), both located in different spaces in Chicago.
While working alongside ecologists, students developed personal interest-driven research projects 
that examined native urban bee preferences for flower shape, color, smell, and sunny vs. shady 
areas. Youth used individual devices to collect data, record native bees in different habitats, track 
their study sites, collect bees, and take photographs of the prairie restoration natural areas within 
Chicago parks. Back in the lab, student teams used iPads to identify wildflowers and other insects 
during outdoor observation sessions (see Figure 2). 
Figure 2. Kristian and Tajj use the Audubon Wildflowers App to identify local plants they observed in the field.

149
Each lab team recorded their notes in their journals. At the end of the week, each lab team provided 
the total number of bees they collected in restored prairies vs. ornamental gardens. The data was 
pooled together to compare the abundance of native bees in the two habitats.
Throughout the week, youth engaged with a wide variety of STEM professionals and scientists, 
wrote daily reflections on their experience, and participated in team-building exercises. Towards the 
end of the week, Becky led the youth through analyses of their collected data. The youth worked 
together in groups to create visual presentations, data representations, and practice explaining 
their conclusions from their research projects. On the last day, youth presented their findings, bee 
collections, and recommendations from their research to family, friends, and Project Exploration 
staff in a lecture hall at the University of Chicago. 
A general template for the daily five-day schedule is as follows. Although the time spent on each 
of the items below may have been longer or shorter depending on the day, the following schedule 
outlines the core work of this intensive science and youth development program. 
1.	 Warm-up led by our Teaching Assistant (a former Project Exploration student). 
2.	 Introduction of science content and technology, data collection practice, 
and discussion.
3.	 Get in a van and go to a local site to place bee bowls to collect bees.
4.	 Lunch.
5.	 Return to the site to collect our bee bowls.
6.	 Drying and pinning bee specimens.
7.	 Document bees collected, in journals.
8.	 Journal, using a prompted reflection question.
9.	 Share journal reflections.
10.	 Wrap-up and share goals for the next day.
Bridging In- and Out-of-School Learning Environments
This program was designed not only to have an impact during the one week but also to extend 
into the classroom over the coming year. To do this, we included Stephanie Madziar, a Teaching 
Fellow2 and Chicago Public School science teacher, as a co-facilitator of the activities. Stephanie 
2 Stephanie’s participation was through the National Summer Learning Association Summer Pathways for Innovation teaching 
fellowship program, supported by the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. A full report about the fellowship—
including highlights of Stephanie’s fellowship with the Environmental Adventurers—can be found here: 
http://c.ymcdn.com/sites/www.summerlearning.org/resource/resmgr/publications/macarthur_policy_brief_final.pdf. 

150
worked alongside Becky to facilitate activities, hone the ways in which mobile technology was 
incorporated into the program design, and support students. Stephanie’s classroom experience 
helped us guide and evaluate the technology integration.
Stephanie also reflected on her experience in the summer program through a series of blogs for 
teachers describing her process and pedagogy. In addition, she developed content to use during 
the academic year in her own classroom. She applied her out-of-school experience to enhance her 
in-school ecology unit. As a result of the summer experience, Stephanie added activities such as 
observing the metamorphosis of a monarch butterfly, dissecting and learning the parts of a flower, 
understanding the importance of pollinators, using a microscope to diagram the parts of a honey 
bee, identifying and researching native pollinators, planting flowers in the courtyard of their school, 
and carrying out student interest-driven research projects about pollinators.  
Technology in Practice 
So how did mobile technology fit into this flow? We had some concerns about how our students 
would actually end up using these devices. Basic logistical questions came to mind first: How 
would we track the devices? What if something broke? How would we promote appropriate use? 
This turned out to be another area where Stephanie’s classroom experiences informed the summer 
program. Stephanie recommended the following:
•	
Numbering each device and assigning one to each student for the duration 
of the program;
•	
Storing devices in a single location and providing them to youth when 
needed for an activity;
•	
Developing a signed-user agreement for appropriate usage;
•	
Modeling appropriate usage of the devices; and
•	
Engaging youth the first day with exploratory activities to learn how 
to use the devices.
Students were guided to use the devices as scientists would—as instruments to document the 
natural world. Stephanie facilitated an activity on how to take quality pictures in different settings 
(see Figure 3). They took pictures of pinned insects in the lab, flowers outside, live insects (and 
themselves!). They learned to take a series of photos from multiple angles and depths when trying 
to document a flower that may be hard to identify in the field. Students also learned to make sure 
that each picture had a reference for scale so it would be helpful back in the lab, and attempted to 
identify the plant or insect of interest.

151
In addition to the convenience of portability, the iPods provided youth an opportunity to digitally 
document their personalized experiences and interest with nature. They took pictures of themselves 
with plants, their peers, holding monarch butterfly pupas collected from milkweed plants, and some 
good selfies! Students immediately appreciated the value of images in scientific documentation, and 
gained a sense of pride in work well done. One student said of the process: “the most memorable 
experience for me was taking my first picture with the iPod and having it turn out perfect and 
professional.”
Students continued to use journals and pens to document data when they returned to lab. Every 
insect collected in bee bowls was carefully counted and recorded in their journals so that they could 
answer their research questions by the end of the week. The journals were also used for taking 
notes during scientist presentations and for writing reflections to journal prompts (Figure 4). The 
experience was as much grounded in literacy as it was in mobile technology.
Figure 3. Stephanie Madziar shows Kristian and LaShay how to capture focused images of active bees.

152
U S I N G  M O B I L E  T E C H N O L O G Y:  L E S S O N S  L E A R N E D
The customizable nature of mobile technology can lead to unexpected usage and learning and an 
amplification of interests (Squire & Dikkers, 2011). We learned some things about the potential 
of digital technology in the Environmental Adventurers program that were surprising and 
unexpected. We observed what seemed to be natural progressions from unfamiliar to familiar 
use of the technology: moving from personal to professional use, expanded application from 
snapshots to stories, and student interest shifting from disengaged to engaged. 
From Personal to Professional
Nearly all program participants had their own smart phones, and we anticipated there might be 
some digital competition between personal handheld devices and the iPod Touches being provided. 
The usage contracts were intended to help preempt digital friction by asking youth to put away their 
personal devices and focus on using the technology provided in the program. Surprisingly, youth 
informed us they preferred using the iPod Touch to their personal smart phones. One student told 
Figure 4. Tavon and Ariel document bees observed at the Shedd Aquarium on data sheets.  

153
us her phone, with all of the text messages and social networking status updates, would have been 
a “distraction to her work.” Consistently, the students said they liked using digital technology for 
learning and that having a separate device provided in the program facilitated this opportunity. As 
one student put it, “I think the biggest way that it [mobile technology] enhanced the experience 
in other areas is that it gave all of us participants ways to capture moments to look back on and to 
share it with others, in general, or the broader audience. “ 
From Snapshots to Stories
By focusing mainly on still image photography in our preparation of the students—we had dedicated 
time in the program to learn about taking good pictures for research purposes—we were placing 
inadvertent limitations to the creative techniques we imagined youth could utilize in the program. 
Our incapacity to imagine other uses did not however stop the students from thinking creatively 
with their tools outside the bounds we had set. One such progression of use we saw was their 
near immediate incorporation of video to document bee behavior and a readiness to incorporate 
these videos into their final presentations. Most of the bee videos made by students involved them 
following a bee as it moved from flower to flower. Some students got remarkably close to bees, and 
proudly showed their videos to their peers back at the lab. Youth immediately leveraged the media-
making features to produce videos about bees despite not having any help from us (Figure 5). 
Figure 5. Ariel, Tavon, and Becky Tonietto capture videos of bee behavior and movement.

154
The use of video as a vehicle to document bees was a progression of student learning and engagement, 
amplified and facilitated only by the integration of iPod Touches in the program (vs. a stand alone 
camera). We realized that we could have approached media making practices more broadly from 
the beginning, showing students not only good images taken by scientists, but videos as well. 
When youth showcased their videos in their final presentations, they not only self-identified as 
students engaged in research, but also as scientists and documentarians of animal behavior. The 
context sensitivity of the devices afforded youth the ability to gather data unique to their location, 
themselves, their time, and their interests (Klopfer & Squire, 2008). For example, one of the 
students told us proudly, 
	
Using the video on the iPod made it seem more official. Going around collecting 
bees was important and I know it hadn’t been done before in Chicago. But just 
having it be recorded and documented, made it seem official since a big part of 
science is getting stuff documented. 
The multiplicity of capacities of the technologies enabled youth to develop multiple identities: they 
were not just Environmental Adventurers (ecologists and animal behaviorists in the making), but 
also documentarians of that adventure (historians, videographers, storytellers). 
From Misperception to Awareness
During the Environmental Adventurers program we witnessed ways in which highly engaged youth 
were sometimes perceived as disengaged. Engagement actually came easily to our students when 
reading and writing were in context of authentic and purposeful activity—in this case documenting 
bees in Chicago. Reading and writing are critical skills in science, and serve as gatekeepers to pursuing 
STEM. All Project Exploration programs intentionally incorporate reading and writing on a daily 
basis, particularly because our youth are from populations traditionally underrepresented in science 
and often come from public schools with low literacy rates. As part of the general logic, we anticipated 
that youth would use the digital devices as note taking and self-support tools while in the field but—
once again—did not imagine their use beyond these simple activities. 
Students quickly progressed beyond these expectations and took initiative to use the note-taking 
features of their devices much more broadly, set reminders for themselves, and document their field site 
locations. During lectures, chaperones noticed the youth frequently interacting with their devices and 
assumed the worst. For example, some visiting scientists perceived students as “not paying attention” 
during presentations; other adults made assumptions that students were playing rather than learning. 
However further observation and communication with students allowed mentors to see that the youth 
were adding to the activity with new applications of their mobile devices rather than being off-task. 
We learned that the assumption that a young person looking down and using his/her smart phone 
is off-task—rather than amplifying or learning material—is stereotyping behavior incorrectly and 
requires professional training for adults to be able to see more nuanced differences in the use of mobile 

155
technologies. Students can, of course, get off track, but in Environmental Adventurers they were more 
often adding material and information to the conversation. We just needed to learn how to see this.
C O N C L U S I O N
The practice of doing science is embedded in the social capital of its language, behavior, and 
tools. Young people who are the least likely to get involved in science—students of color and 
girls especially—often do not have access to the social capital needed to pursue STEM. Doing 
real science, alongside professional scientists, and using the actual tools of science helps build 
relationships, social capital, and ultimately, an identity in science. 
In designing the Environmental Adventurers program, we anticipated mobile technology would 
be a useful addition because of its authenticity—field researchers use cutting edge technology in 
the field to document biodiversity and collect data—and its familiarity—students already have 
experience with mobile technology for listening to music, checking social media, and playing 
games. However, the unexpected ways in which the mobile devices were maximized by the students 
have forced us to further consider the potential of technology to highlight our participants’ sense of 
agency, interest, and capacities. For those integrating mobile technology for the first time into youth 
programs, we hope that our experience and reflections demonstrate how both learning and student 
voice can be amplified by their use of mobile devices. 
We suggest that personal technologies in 
learning contexts naturally cultivate professional 
practice, support storytelling with a variety 
of media, and encourage engaged student 
learners. From a sociological perspective, the 
use of mobile technology in a formal learning 
setting amplified the potential for youth to 
see themselves as scientists. Environmental 
Adventures participants used the iPod Touch 
as a science tool (Figure 6). They also reminded 
us that access requires not only a mission-
driven approach to change, it requires that we 
stay open to possibilities—most especially the 
possibilities youth can create for themselves. As 
a larger digitally adept community of educators 
and facilitators, we are still learning how to 
navigate the potential of devices for amplifying 
youth agency, identity, and capacity. It is 
critical to engage youth in these conversations, 
and listen and watch carefully to what they say 
and do. 
Figure 6. LaShay learns how to be use her iPod Touch 
on the first day of the program to photograph flowers 
and insects in an outside environment. 

156
R E F E R E N C E S
Klopfer, E. & Squire, K. (2008) Environmental detectives – the development of an augmented reality platform for 
environmental simulations. Educational Technology Research and Development 56(2): 203–228.
Lyon, G & Jafri, J. (2010). Project Exploration’s Sisters4Science: Involving urban girls of color in science out-of-
school. Afterschool Matters, 11, 15-23.
Squire, K. & Dikkers, S. (2011) Amplifications of learning: Use of mobile media devices among youth. Convergence: 
The International Journal of Research into New Media Technologies, 18(4). 445-464.
A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T S
The authors would like to acknowledge youth participants: Tavon B., Ariel D., Shelby G., Nailah H., Tajj H., LaShay 
H., Kaylyn M., Jordan P., Michelle V., Morgan W., and Kristian W. The authors would also like to acknowledge the 
guest scientists and partners, including Kelly Ksiazek, Hannah King, Jason Steger, Liza Fischel, Dr. Emily Minor, David 
Lowenstein, Peggy Espada, Hive Chicago, National Summer Learning Association, Shedd Aquarium, Chicago Park 
District, and Free Spirit Media. Special thanks to our teaching assistant, Jasmine Fleming. Environmental Adventurers 
program was made possible with support from the National Summer Learning Association and the Hive Chicago 
Learning Network. Project Exploration partnered with Northwestern University and the Chicago Botanic Garden. 

157
Chapter THIRTEEN

Civic Engagement and Geo-Locative 
Media: Youth Create a Game to 
Discuss Political Issues
Juan Rubio
Recently, I found myself in charge of a project to foster civic engagement among youth through 
geocaching. Race to the White House was an initiative of the New York City-based non-profit youth 
development organization Global Kids’ Online Leadership Program designed to teach youth about 
leadership, citizenship, global issues, and activism. The objective of the project was to combine 
geocaching—a global outdoor treasure hunting game—with presidential politics. A group of 
high school students would use technology, digital media, and game concepts, increase their 
understanding of the political process, do research, write content for the web, and practice public 
speaking and event planning. I was also interested in using location-based game design to help 
them gain awareness of how technology might be used to begin conversations with their peers and 
the public in general about social issues that mattered to them. 
Did Race to the White House achieve those goals? Did we manage to create an experience during 
which youth gained game design knowledge and become civically engaged? Did the youth who 
participated in the program leave with new skills? In this chapter I will discuss some of my 
observations in designing and implementing the program so that other program managers and 
educators may benefit from the experience as they think of using mobile technology and a platform 
such as geocaching in their programs.
B A C KG R O U N D :  G L O B A L  K I D S ,  G A M E S ,  A N D  P L A C E
Games are not a new topic for Global Kids. Over the years, the Online Leadership Program has 
used a game-based learning approach to teach youth about leadership, citizenship, global issues, 
and activism. Lately, that effort has focused on the use of location-based platforms for youth to 
create their own personal narratives, learn game design concepts, and explore their communities 
while at the same time developing computational thinking skills. When I joined Global Kids, 
one of my first projects involved the development of a location-based project with youth in the 

158
Bronx using a geo-locative game platform. We used SCVNGR in a series of workshops for middle 
schoolers to create a geo-locative game that contained a narrative about the local history of their 
neighborhood. After some experience with that platform, I came to realize that the tool was not 
the best to achieve our goals due to its difficulty of use as a design tool and its focus primarily on 
supporting commerce. I also spent some time using ARIS with kids, and felt that ARIS had a 
more user-friendly interface and was geared towards use in educational programs. Given Global 
Kids’ and my personal experience and interest in combining geo-location and rich educational 
content with our mission to engage youth in civics, using geocaching—a well known platform—
was a natural progression. Unlike other more niche platforms, there is a large global community 
of geocachers creating content on a worldwide scale. This provided some of the appeal to pilot a 
program that would involve game based learning, be youth driven, and be able to be integrated with 
civic engagement. 
Geocaching is an outdoor activity in which players participate in a digital scavenger hunt using 
mobile devices to find artifacts (caches) that have been hidden by other game players. The caches 
are created by players using receptacles that vary in size from large tupperware containers to small 
capsules the size of a coin. In addition to hiding and finding individually made caches, geocachers 
can purchase and use small metal plaques called travel bugs. Each travel bug can be registered by 
its owner on the website geocaching.com and has a unique number used to track its location. As the 
travel bugs are moved by other players around the world from cache to cache, they can be tracked 
by their owner: on the website their exact locations and trajectories can be seen on a map. 
With the premise of geocaching and travel bugs in mind, Global Kids outlined Race to the White 
House as a two week activity involving the creation and play of a game that involved using geocaching 
to move travel bugs to discuss issues that were important to the students. The primary role of the 
students would be to fill in some details to complete the design of the game and integrate political 
issues they most cared about. Although I did not establish the original concept and basic parameters 
of the project, it was my main purpose to create from this outline a program that would develop 
in youth a deep understanding of the political process, introduce them to design concepts, prepare 
them to plan events, and take a leadership role in presenting about their project to their peers and 
the general public.
I began those two weeks in the summer of 2012 by meeting a group of high school students at 
the Grand Army Plaza Central Branch of the Brooklyn Public Library to discuss past presidential 
campaigns. I was interested from the outset in making sure the kids would decide on issues that 
were personally important to them and for that purpose a review of campaigns from the last few 
elections was necessary. Flash forward two weeks: this group of students had finished a prototype 
game, had it played by members of the community, and held two public meetings, one to discuss 
the results of their game, and another to teach the public about geocaching and other technologies. 

159
M A K I N G  D E C I S I O N S  B A S E D  O N  T I M E  C O N S T R A I N T S
The major challenge in implementing this program was the small amount of time we had to develop 
and complete it. Race to the White House, scheduled for only two weeks in the summer, was designed 
to bring together kids from high schools across New York City to work collaboratively and learn 
the technology around geocaching. In addition, they were to learn research skills and become 
better informed about the political process. All of these skills were embedded within the context of 
designing and developing a location-based game. And again, this was to happen in just two weeks.
Since the program was conceived from the start with a major time restriction, many aspects of the 
game design had to be decided in advance. In particular, the students would not be involved in the 
entire game design process—the actual mechanics of the game were already decided by program 
facilitators. We determined that kids would place travel bugs in caches around New York City and 
create the webpages corresponding to those travel bugs. On those webpages, players would be asked 
to move the travel bugs they found in student-placed caches closer or further away from the White 
House (towards or away from Washington DC) based on whether or not the player thought that 
a particular topic should be discussed in the upcoming presidential election. Students themselves 
would be asked to provide input on the issues attached to each travel bug and to write white papers 
about these issues to inform the players of their points of view and justifications.
Ideally, we would have the youth not only suggest content for a game like this but to be very 
involved in the game’s design or maybe make multiple games together in small groups. However, 
designing a game, from ideation to prototyping, testing and changing the game based on feedback 
requires a significant amount of time and we had only two weeks to complete the project. These 
limitations led us to focus less on the design of the game and more on the actual implementation 
of that design. This left less opportunity for the students to engage in the design process. But it did 
allow us to spend time giving the youth an understanding of political participation and discussions 
about social issues within the context of media creation and game design plus teach them the 
technological skills to become effective playtesters and game developers for their game (Figure 1).

160
P R E L I M I N A R I E S : 
F R O M  PA S T  P R E S I D E N T I A L  C A M PA I G N S  T O  G E O C A C H I N G
The program started in a Brooklyn library with a presentation of campaign ads such as the iconic 
Lyndon B. Johnson “Flower Girl” TV ad which captured the imminent threat of nuclear disaster 
during the height of the cold war. Other political ads were also featured from the presidential 
campaigns of Bill Clinton, George W. Bush, and Barack Obama. This review gave the students an 
introduction to political issues from a historical perspective and gave them a framework to start 
their discussions. The campaign materials also offered insights about several issues discussed and 
debated during presidential elections such as welfare, campaign reform, and the economy. 
Starting the program with a review of past political campaigns proved to be effective. Since the 
political campaigns that I decided to show were recent—the oldest campaign reviewed was the 
Lyndon B. Johnson “Flower Girl” TV spot—the students were able to relate to them. They were 
familiar with the issues presented in the ads. In addition, they were familiar with the presidents in 
the campaign ads, most of them still alive. After reviewing their political campaigns, the students 
engaged in a lively discussion about the use of media, the issues themselves, and the effectiveness of 
the arguments presented. 
Figure 1. Participants from Race to the White House try to decipher the location of a geocache in Central Park prior 
to find it and place a travel bug attached to a political issue of their choice.

161
Once they examined political issues, they were ready to learn about geocaching. Here, some of our 
connections came into play. Race to the White House was part of an initiative that included several 
partnering organizations: the Brooklyn Public Library, the Mozilla Hive NYC Learning Network, 
and the National Summer Learning Association. A teaching fellow from the National Summer 
Learning Association was responsible for facilitating some of the workshops and introduced the 
students to the inner workings of Global Positioning System (GPS), something we would have been 
hard pressed to do alone. 
Going in depth with the students about GPS beyond what they technically needed to finish the game 
was about more than fitting in a lesson about technology. Because the part of the program included 
a peer education component, it was important for the students to fully understand the technology 
that was at the core of the geocaching platform. Preparing them to have a good understanding of 
the technology gave them the confidence to later explain concepts related to the game.
G E N E R AT I N G  A N D  D I S C U S S I N G 
T H E  T O P I C S ,  M A K I N G  T H E  G A M E
Once the students understood the mechanics of the game, the platform to use, and the overall theme 
of the program, they worked in groups to select topics significant to them for inclusion in the game. 
It is important to note that much liberty was given to them in selecting these issues. It was the goal 
of the program to have their voices come through and to include issues that were culturally relevant 
to them. To help them select the topics, they were introduced to research techniques and resources by 
staff from the Brooklyn Public Library—once again we made use of our partners in the community 
and program. After group discussions about their research, they decided to include the following 
issues: Medical Marijuana, College Tuition, Net Neutrality and Gun Control (Figure 2). Here are 
some of the things that our students said about why they selected their issues to be part of the game:
Net Neutrality. “We chose it as a group, because of SOPA and all the stuff that was going on, and 
it related to us and because of censorship. We decided it as a group and thought that was something 
that affected us. Because we are in the internet every time and all the time, if the internet was going 
to become controlled, we wouldn’t be able to get the information all the time.” 
Legalization of Medical Marijuana. “It was not really a topic I liked but since this was a group 
activity even if you didn’t like the topic I had to go with what other people thought it was important. 
I believe the main reason they wanted to do this issue was because of the benefits to people who 
are sick. Medical Marijuana could mask the symptoms they are experiencing, and it’s a way to help 
cope with the illness. It was not a choice with some link to personal stories but more general, like 
what they heard and how it could help.” 
Gun Control. “ Because we felt that the gun laws in different areas are very different, and that they 
are not equal creating different rates of crime, some areas have high crime rates and others low crime 
rates. It was a group decision to choose that issue. We wanted to bring attention to changing certain 

162
laws to prevent crime rates. Personally, I cared about the issue because I saw kids in my neighborhood 
of East New York being caught in that lifestyle, a violent lifestyle revolving around guns.”
During the program, students became aware of the importance of being involved in the political 
process and how government officials can influence policy with a direct impact on the issues they 
were discussing. We invited a speaker from Common Cause—an advocacy organization founded 
as a vehicle for citizens to make their voices heard in the political process and to hold their elected 
leaders accountable to the public interest1—who clearly explained to students how citizens can get 
involved in the political process and shape policies by advocating for their causes at their local, 
state, and national level. Another factor that motivated their involvement in the political process 
was the fact that they cared deeply about the issues selected. This gave them more ownership over 
the program, and their investment in publishing the content for their game was higher than if the 
adults in the program would have influenced the decision on what issues to include. 
With their researched topics in hand, students filled out the basic game template with an explanation 
about their topic and instructions on how to play the game. Once the travel bugs were attached to 
Figure 2. Students from Race to the White House brainstorm issues to include in their game, and do research to write 
entries on geocaching.com.
1 for more information about Common Cause visit http://commoncause.org.

163
a webpage, and the instructions for how and 
why players should move the travel bugs were 
created on geocaching.com, students moved 
outside to find geocaches in the parks around 
New York City to place the travel bugs. They 
found caches around parks in the city: Central 
Park in Manhattan, Prospect Park in Brooklyn, 
and Marine Park in Queens. During this part of 
the process, I noticed that the students became 
more invested in the program, working in 
groups and helping each other as they looked for 
caches to plant the travel bugs. They also spoke 
about leaving something behind, something 
tactile, something they had created. One of the 
students spoke about how he liked the idea of 
leaving something to be remembered for. “My 
legacy,” he kept repeating as he deposited the 
travel bugs in the caches. Even though their 
game was simple, it was complete, and the 
students had already come a long way. 
E N G A G I N G  T H E  P U B L I C 
A final step in our two week program went 
beyond giving our kids a chance to try these 
ideas out among themselves. We also gave them 
an opportunity to create media in the game to 
directly involve the public in a conversation 
about the issues considered. First, as part of the 
game development process, students created 
webpages attached to each travel bug on the 
geocaching.com website. Each webpage had a 
short introduction about themselves and the 
program. They included general information 
about the issue, and explained why they 
thought it was important to them. The sidebar 
provides one example, the webpage linked to 
the travel bug written by a group of students 
from Race to the White House on the issue of 
College Tuition.
S I D E B A R :  T R AV E L  B U G 
W E B PA G E  F O R  T H E  I S S U E 
O F  C O L L E G E  T U I T I O N
Current GOAL
This travel bug was placed by us, young 
people in Global Kids, Inc. and the 
Brooklyn Public Library in the summer 
of 2012. We placed a total of 48 bugs 
all over Queens, Manhattan and 
Brooklyn associated with topics we feel 
are important to society and should be 
discussed in the 2012 Presidential Election 
campaigns. This travel bug is racing 
against the other travel bugs. If you want 
to get your and our point across, will you 
help it run the race? 
About this Item
The issue for this travel bug is: 
College Tuition
The issue for this travel bus is the high 
cost of college tuition. The term “college 
tuition” refers to fees which students have to 
pay to attend collage in the United States. 

The high price of college tuition is a major 
problem people are facing today. In order 
to pay for these high tuition costs students 
are forced to take out student loans which 
put these students in debt. Student loans 
for college tuitions have become one of 
the top debts faced by Americans today, 
rivaling credit card and car loan debt. 
(con’t on next page)

164
Another aspect of the program that asked 
students to collect their thoughts for outside 
audiences was time spent planning and 
producing public events. Students collaborated 
to produce two public meetings as a part of 
Race to the White House: one to release the game 
at the end of the program and another one to 
present the results of the game on November 
4th, 2012, the day of the presidential election. 
During these gatherings and as part of the 
planning, students learned about producing an 
event, creating presentations, assigning roles, 
and speaking effectively to a public audience. 
At the first event, students talked about their 
experiences and what they learned during the 
program (Figure 3). They also trained those 
attending, including other youth, on the use of 
geocaching and took a group of 25 participants 
to find geocaches in Prospect Park. 
In the second event, participants from the 
Race to the White House, came together again 
to present to the public the results of their 
games, and how and where the travel bugs had 
moved. Since the event took place the day of 
the presidential election, students spoke about 
their program but also discussed how their 
experience during the two weeks in the summer 
had influenced their outlook on the political 
process. They answered questions from their 
peers about the game they developed, they 
showed how the travel bugs had moved (Figure 
4) and how the public had participated in the 
discussion by leaving comments on geocaching.
com as they played the game. 
S I D E B A R
(con’t from previous page)
When collage tuition is so high it 
discourages newcomers to not apply to 
college in the first place because in their 
mind they will think going to college 
will create debt for them in the future. If 
they are discouraged to go to college, they 
wouldn’t be able to better their education 
as well as get a better job. If you graduate 
in debt, you’ll have to pay your loans back. 
If the debts are large, then you are forced to 
take jobs just to pay off the debt. 
We chose this topic because it’s a realistic 
problem that we’ll face soon. Most of us 
are starting college in the fall so raising the 
college tuition is not going to help us one 
bit. Along with tuition, we’ll have to pay for 
books, room and board and also food to eat.

165
Figure 4. Map showing the distance and route that the travel bugs had moved after players from geocaching.com 
moved them following the instructions from the youth participants.
Figure 3. Before taking other youth to play the Race to the White House game, students talk about the program and 
explain the geocaching platform.

166
L E A R N I N G,  T E C H N O L O G Y,  A N D  P L A C E
The work conducted during Race to the White House successfully engaged youth in civic activities 
using mobile media, allowing them to think critically about political issues. It provided them with 
an opportunity to create content based on research about issues they found relevant and worth 
discussing with their peers. Creating a public virtual treasure hunt and selecting political issues 
that were important to them, the youth participated in a discussion and conversation with the 
community who visited the geocaches. They opened up this space for political conversations while 
applying design concepts to decide how the game could be more effective. Additionally, as they 
moved from looking for caches to planting the travel bugs (Figure 5), young people were learning 
how to negotiate group dynamics and collaboration: Who was in charge of reading the map? Who 
was leading the way to the cache? Who was logging the trackable to the site?
The program also provided young people with an opportunity to use technology as a means to 
explore spaces that otherwise would be of no interest to them. Consider for example one of the 
participants in the program, a young woman who has lived all her life in New York City, but had 
never visited Central Park. Geocaching provided an opportunity for her to visit and explore a new 
space. She writes:
Figure 5. Youth find a cache and deposit a travel bug as part of the game Race to the White House.

167
	
In this program, I have visited Central Park and Marine Park for the first time. 
My experience in Central Park was awesome. It was cool to see all the different 
things that were going on in the park such as people renting bikes and riding 
around, horses pulling carriages, etc. It was beautiful and I would go back if I 
can. Marine Park was nice. It wasn’t as entertaining as Central Park but it was 
nice and spacious.
This young woman’s experiences point towards our ultimate intent: combining politics, technology, 
and place. With Race to the White House, we are re-examining the traditional model of teaching 
technology to young people. Rather than having youth gaze at computer screens, typing frantically 
at a keyboard and clicking mice, Race to the White House has asked students to mediate public spaces 
with the use of mobile technology and game play. It presented them with a new way to see their 
surroundings, using augmented reality to help them discover new facts about space and landmarks. 
One of the caches they found, for example, was placed in a large house near the library that was 
built by someone associated with the chewing gum industry in the 1800’s. It was through the 
exploration of the space and the geocaching game, that students were able to learn the importance 
of that industry at that time in the United States. 
New approaches to designing learning experiences include as a principle that students “become 
actively engaged in exploring, experimenting, and expressing themselves” (Resnick, N.D.). These 
new forms of engagement should consider the potential of programs that work with students in 
nontraditional settings and create environments for learning beyond the classroom and into public 
areas. Race to the White House exemplifies this form of learning by asking students to explore their 
surroundings and discover new places while mediating the space with the use of mobile technology. 
C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  F U T U R E  I T E R AT I O N S
While the program was successful overall, there are some challenges to address in future iterations 
of the program or in other similar endeavors. First, since the program took place over a two-week 
period with several field trips around New York City, attention should be given to the number of 
locations students visit during the duration of the program. Another challenge that comes from the 
short duration of the program is how to balance the development of research, writing, reading, and 
technology skills for strong educational outcomes with the implementation of the game. Because 
we needed to work towards a final event and to have a working game to release to the public on 
schedule, students were pressured to finish their research and writing in a short period of time. 
Future implementations of the program might consider creating groups of students with specialized 
roles. Some would work on the research and writing, while others work on finding the geocaches 
and planting the travel bugs. The groups then could rotate to allow all participants to benefit from 
all the learning opportunities offered in the program.

168
Moving to future iterations of Race to the White House, I would think of ways to connect civic 
engagement more directly with the game’s design. Although the game was successful in engaging 
the students and making them think about civic life, politics and the government, I would have liked 
to have more participation from the public in general and the geocaching community in a richer 
conversation about the issues presented by the kids on the pages they created on the geocaching 
website. Because moving travel bugs is a practice that is only physical in nature—you find the travel 
bug and then you move it to another geocache—the game’s design did not require players to take 
part in as much conversation as I had hoped. New iterations of the program could consider using a 
mechanic to create richer interactions between youth and those playing the game. 
A strong part of the game’s design I would like to see someone build upon is the visualization of the 
trajectories of the travel bugs. Even today our travel bugs for Race to the White House keep moving 
around the world. One of them traveled to Germany from New York and continues moving to this 
day. Creating a game that fuses the mechanic of moving or planting artifacts with exchanging ideas 
online could make the program stronger.
O U T C O M E S 
I had for some time been interested in designing a program that would use technology and game 
play to increase civic awareness. Race to the White House presented the ideal platform to integrate 
all of these aspects while developing in the participants media creation and other skills such as 
group collaboration, writing, designing and playtesting a game. There were several core takeaways 
for the youth participants of the program. They became more knowledgeable about how mobile 
technology can be used for meaningful learning experiences, they found new ways to collaborate 
and create consensus about issues that were important to their lives, they learned how to use digital 
tools for research, and wrote coherent instructions to explain the game and the issues they selected. 
Technology was used to facilitate exploration of physical space while at the same time help youth 
contribute to the political discussions around the upcoming presidential election. They also became 
familiar with event planning, working together to put a final presentation to release the game, and 
then—on the day of the presidential election—an event to show the results of the game. In the 
process, they also practiced public speaking skills and presented their ideas and game concepts to 
an audience of their peers and the general public. 
Countering the trope that technology promotes isolation and antisocial behavior in teens, programs 
such as Race to the White House tap into the potential of technology to promote meaningful 
interactions that bring people together. Youth can create content to encourage communities to 
connect. We have the potential to develop agency in youth to create content that reaches larger 
audiences and ask the public to take an active role in what the youth create.

169
R E F E R E N C E
Resnick, M. (N.D.). Learning by Designing. Accessed from http://pubs.media.mit.edu/pubs/papers/design-v6.pdf


171
Chapter FOURTEEN

Technovation Challenge: 
Introducing Innovation and Mobile App 
Development to Girls Around the World
Angélica Torres
New York-based photographer Zana Briski supplied children living in the red light district of 
Calcutta, India with cameras to teach them about photography. Observing their community 
through new eyes, they aspired to a future that transcended the invisible boundaries of their 
environment. The resulting Academy Award-winning documentary Born into Brothels features 
photographs and stories that share a world few people outside of their community had seen. Our 
program, Technovation Challenge, has a similar aim: we equip girls with mobile phones to open 
their eyes to the possibilities of technology and entrepreneurship, and bring their vision to the world. 
In this chapter we describe the evolution of Technovation Challenge and what we have learned 
about engaging middle and high school girls in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics 
(STEM) through running the world’s largest and longest-running technology competition for girls.
W H AT  I S  T E C H N O VAT I O N  C H A L L E N G E ?
In Technovation Challenge1, teams of girls identify a problem, create an app to solve it, code the app, 
create a business plan to launch the app in the market, and pitch their plan to experts—all in 12 weeks. 
Technovation Challenge’s applied, project-based computer science and entrepreneurship curriculum 
reinforces the digital representation of information, algorithmic thinking and programming, and 
the societal impact of information and information technology. It connects girls with a network 
of professional women in business and technology while reinforcing life skills such as problem 
identification, designing and testing solutions, team collaboration, and communication to different 
audiences. Teams compete for $10k in seed funding to take their app to market. Between 2010-2013, 
approximately 1400 Technovation Challenge girls built 278 apps.
1 Technovation Challenge is a program of Iridescent. Tara Chklovski founded Iridescent in 2006 with a mission to use STEM to 
inspire curiosity, creativity, and persistence in the pursuit of knowledge. Since its launch, Iridescent has helped more than 18,000 
underserved families through mentorship and hands-on programs, with a team of more than 700 engineers and scientists.

172
W H Y  R U N  T E C H N O VAT I O N  C H A L L E N G E ?
	
“Because women account for one-half of a country’s potential talent base, a nation’s 
competitiveness in the long term depends significantly on whether and how it 
educates and utilizes its women.” (Hausmann, Tyson, & Zahidi, 2012, p.31)
Technovation Challenge helps close the gender gap in computer science by teaching girls how to 
code and how to become successful entrepreneurs. Despite growing demand for employment in 
computing fields and pervasive social media, youth and particularly girls are not pursuing training 
in computer science in the United States. The Bureau of Labor Statistics expects more than 750,000 
new computer specialist jobs by 2018 (Lacey & Wright, 2009); meanwhile, of the 3,000 students 
who took the Advanced Placement (AP) Computer Science exam in 2011, only 21% were girls 
(UCLA IDEA, 2012). By inspiring women to pursue computer science careers, we can bolster the 
workforce necessary to fill these jobs while also ensuring gender equity and the representation of 
various perspectives among the creators of new technologies and businesses. 
Girls are avid internet users, but as Jane Margolis, author of Stuck in the Shallow End: Education, 
Race and Computing explains, “They’re using it for communication, and that does not translate over 
to who is learning the computational thinking so they can create with technology” (Hing, 2012, 
p.1). But sparking interest is not enough; girls associate negative attributes to technology and face 
a computing experience and skills gap compared to boys (Teague & Clark, 1996). Many women 
enter programs enthusiastic about being a computer science major, but their interest erodes shortly 
thereafter (Sevo, 2009).
Girls need a long and strong base of support to imagine, invent, and engineer in the context of 
technology. Such a support base of positive experiences can propel them through a computer science 
undergraduate program. Our program provides powerful experiences to girls, allowing them to: 1) 
see themselves as leaders and inventors of technology; and 2) pursue STEM career trajectories in 
greater numbers.
P R O G R A M  H I S T O R Y  A N D  S C A L E  U P
Technovation Challenge started small and has grown large over the last few years. Rather than 
limit our influence to local audiences or those in proximity to large players in associated fields, we 
have found ways to expand our program to new audiences worldwide. By taking a brief look at our 
history, readers may get a sense of what it means to enact and support a new idea growing from a 
local experiment to a broad practice.  

173
Small Beginnings: 2010
Anu Tewary, Ph.D., inspired by Startup Weekend2, founded Technovation Challenge. Iridescent 
piloted the program in March, 2010 with 45 high school girls. Girls from different schools came 
together at the Google campus in Mountain View, California to form teams and attend two-hour 
classes twice a week for nine weeks. In addition to space, Google provided free mobile phones for 
the teams to use. 
Technovation Challenge students use App Inventor3, a software development platform created by 
Professor Hal Abelson from the MIT Center for Mobile Learning, to create mobile apps. App 
Inventor aims to empower people with no previous programming experience to design mobile 
phone apps. It is easy to start, inspires increasingly complex projects that build on each other, and 
embraces different interests and learning styles4.
Twenty-five professional women from technology companies including Google and LinkedIn 
mentored teams throughout the program. Teams developed 10 mobile phone apps and pitched their 
business plans to judges at a final event at Microsoft. Good outcomes and a mention in the media 
(Rusli, 2010) convinced us that the program was worth repeating; the summer after the program, 
12 Technovation Challenge participants interned at technology startups. Based on the success of 
the initial pilot, the Office of Naval Research awarded Iridescent a $2.4 million grant to implement 
Technovation Challenge in Silicon Valley, Los Angeles, and New York City.
Six Locations: 2011
In 2011, Technovation Challenge served 232 girls while expanding to six locations: Google in 
Mountain View, New York, and San Francisco; LinkedIn in Mountain View; the Berkeley Wireless 
Research Center; and the Iridescent Science Studio in Los Angeles. The program included 64 
mentors who worked with the instructors at each site to walk the girls through the nine-week 
curriculum for two hours, twice a week. The program added 56 teaching assistants (TAs), college 
undergraduate and graduate majors in computer science, who were paid a stipend to provide 
additional support with coding. Teams created and pitched 55 apps.
2 Startup Weekend (http://startupweekend.org/) offers weekend workshops all over the world; individuals get together to share 
ideas, form teams, and launch startup companies.
3 See Chapter 5 in this book for more about MIT’s App Inventor. - Eds
4 App Inventor is used by universities such as MIT, the University of San Francisco, and Wellesley College, as well as other youth-
oriented app development programs such as Apps for Good (http://www.appsforgood.org/).

174
500+ Participants: 2012
In 2012, Technovation Challenge allowed for leaders to emerge and organize participation 
themselves. As a result, 509 girls created and pitched 98 apps in Boston, New York City, Los 
Angeles, and the San Francisco Bay Area. We added an additional week to the curriculum (10 
weeks total) to give teams longer to prepare deliverables. While TAs no longer received a stipend, 
they were encouraged to participate as volunteers. We added teachers, who were paid a small stipend 
to recruit teams at their schools and chaperone them to a technology company site. In addition to 
meeting at technology companies once a week for two hours, teams met at their school site with 
TAs to work on their deliverables approximately two additional hours a week.
Going Global: 2013
Moving the curriculum online allowed Technovation Challenge to go global in 2013, engaging 575 
girls from 25 U.S. states and countries. The 12-week curriculum was hosted as a course on Mozilla’s 
Peer to Peer University (P2PU). Finalists in 2013 included teams from Brazil, Nigeria, and the 
United Kingdom. We added two more weeks to the curriculum to allow extra time for teams to 
code their apps and polish their business plans (12 weeks total). 
Through the first four seasons, we reached 1361 
girls who created 278 apps (Figure 1). Winning 
apps included MASH in 2010, I.O.U. in 2011, 
StudiCafe in 2012, and Arrive in 2013. 
Teams can now materialize anywhere in 
the world where girls can get together with 
a computer, internet, and a mobile phone, 
reflecting our changing ideas about how to 
engage girls who need the program the most. 
In our model for 2010–2012, girls traveled 
to technology companies such as Google, 
LinkedIn, Twitter, and Microsoft, where they 
worked in teams with mentors for a couple 
of hours each week over a period of 9 or 10 
weeks. The technology company format was 
convenient for mentors who could participate at 
their home company and attractive to teachers 
who wanted to take their students to technology 
companies, but proved a challenging model to 
scale. Potential participants exceeded available 
spots and some girls had long commutes that 
Figure 1. Technovation Challenge Scale Up 2010-2013, 
1400 Girls Around the World.

175
affected program attendance and retention. Migrating our curriculum online in 2013 allowed 
teachers and youth directors at individual school and after-school sites to recruit girls and directly 
lead the program without a Technovation Challenge-provided instructor. Furthermore, relocating 
teams from technology campus settings to everyday settings brings the added benefit of fostering 
an everyday programming culture among girls. As part of the new scale-up and sustainable online 
model, teachers do not receive stipends to run teams. Some of the teachers who participated in 2012 
continued the program in 2013; however, other teachers felt that the program should compensate 
them and opted out of the 2013 season.
Kicking Off Technovation Challenge: Hack Day
To meet our goal of empowering girls, Technovation Challenge begins with Hack Day, a boot 
camp where participants learn basic programming skills. Hack Days are one of the most successful 
components of the program. For most girls, the Hack Day is the first time that they see other girls 
coding and the first time they program their own app. While girls may be intimidated by boys their 
age who have more experience hacking at other events, the girls-only atmosphere of Hack Days 
levels the playing field. Girls seem to feel more comfortable taking risks when they do not have the 
option of letting a boy take over the activity.
Hack Days are full-day events hosted at schools, universities, technology companies, or community 
organizations in which girls acquire the basics of working with App Inventor. App Inventor is free 
and uses a visual programming language where code is organized into blocks. It is an ideal coding 
language for beginners because it is a visual, rather than textual, interface that teaches programming 
concepts in an intuitive and straightforward way. All instructions, PowerPoint presentations, and 
handouts for the Hack Day are available as part of the Technovation Challenge curriculum5. Girls 
can attend Hack Day as a team or on their own.
In addition to learning about programming tools, girls learn about programming practices at Hack 
Days. They take turns on computers with internet access and pre-installed with App Inventor. 
Working in pairs (pair programming), one programmer writes code while the other reviews each 
line of code as it is typed. The girls switch roles every 5-10 minutes. A Hack Day instructor leads 
participants through five step-by-step App Inventor tutorials: CrystalBall, PaintPot, MoleMash, 
NoTextWhileDriving, and CreateYourOwnApp. Concepts in the tutorials build upon each other 
and encourage girls to break out and hack the apps by incorporating their own twists to the code. 
Building these apps helps students gain confidence in making something that works. They also 
learn common app mechanics that they use as a base to build their own apps. To keep willpower 
high, Hack Days often include free lunch and snacks. The sidebar explains a bit about the five Hack 
Day tutorials and computer science concepts covered in the 2013 curriculum6. 
5 Hack Day Tutorial Guide 2014: http://iridescentlearning.org/technovation2014/unit02.html.
6 Since the release of App Inventor 2 in 2014, these are the apps included in the curriculum: http://www.technovationchallenge.org/
curriculum/lesson-1/.  (Wolber, David; Abelson, Hal; Spertus, Ellen; Looney, Liz, 2011). 

176
One of our leaders in Orlando, Florida asks 
girls to reflect on the moment they first get 
the CrystalBall app to work. She encourages 
them to relish the excitement and pride of 
making an app work for the first time. “That,” 
she says, “is the feeling you are always looking 
for as a programmer.” The apps the girls create 
often go directly onto their personal Android 
mobile devices. They continue to reflect on 
their accomplishments as they share the apps 
they built with their friends. Teams have the 
opportunity to bolster their App Inventor skills 
through additional tutorials during the 12-
week curriculum.
T E C H N O VAT I O N 
C H A L L E N G E  T H E M E S
After Hack Days, Technovation Challenge 
moves on to the task of creating the best 
possible app in the time remaining. Each 
season, we announce a theme for the app 
competition before the 12-week curriculum 
begins. Our goal goes beyond incentivizing 
the creation of excellent, winning entries, 
toward motivating all teams to create an app 
from start to finish, and helping them grow as 
designers and programmers. The Technovation 
Challenge theme influences what the girls end 
up creating. Through research as well as trial 
and error we have arrived at themes that help 
participants produce their best work. 
S I D E B A R :  H A C K  D AY 
T U T O R I A L S  A N D 
P R O G R A M M I N G  S K I L L S
CrystalBall (teaches event-driven 
programming and variables) Students create 
an app that predicts their fortune. Users ask 
a question such as “Will I win my soccer 
game?” and shake their phone to view the 
crystal ball’s response.
PaintPot (teaches events, variables, camera, 
and pair programming) Students create an 
app that allows users to draw lines and dots 
of various colors on the screen.
MoleMash (teaches procedures and 
debugging) Students create a game in 
which a mole jumps randomly around 
the screen every half second. When users 
successfully touch the mole, their score 
increases by one point.
NoTextWhileDriving (teaches text-to-
speech) Students create an app that auto-
responds to text messages while users are 
driving. Users also have the option to have 
the app speak the message received.
CreateYourOwn App (teaches events, 
variables, lists, procedures, camera, buttons, 
accelerometer, labels, image sprites, timers, 
and sound) Students work alone or in pairs 
to design and develop their own original 
app. Note: Teams need not commit to their 
Hack Day app idea for the competition; 
this exercise is mostly for fun and to apply 
what students have just learned.

177
For the first two seasons of the program, challenges were open-ended and resulted in many fashion 
or “paper doll” apps (Figure 2). The instructors were somewhat disappointed that girls spent time 
customizing their app visually to their own preferences rather than making their apps useful or 
interesting for other users. We wanted girls to identify interesting problems and create apps as 
solutions, encouraging a departure from consumers of technology to makers of technology.
Figure 2. “Paper Doll” Apps, Technovation Challenge 2011.

178
Notable exceptions were apps that had well-
defined problems. For example, one team made 
an app that hails a taxi from a phone as an 
alternative to stepping into traffic (Figure 3).
In an effort to inspire girls to explore STEM 
in the apps themselves and come up with 
interesting problems to solve, the 2012 theme 
was to create a science education app. However, 
the theme did not generally motivate deep, 
interesting app ideas. Most apps focused on 
quizzing and preparing for standardized exams 
(Figure 4). We realized that in classrooms 
where standardized testing in science is a top 
priority, the theme “science education” did not 
inspire innovation for students.
Figure 3. “HailNYC” App, Technovation Challenge 2011.
Figure 4. “Quiz” Apps, Technovation Challenge 2012.

179
As before, however, we saw notable exceptions to the general pattern. Some teams came up with 
apps that creatively interpreted the theme or selected an interesting problem to solve. For example, 
teams created an app that taught teens about safe sex to address the problem of teenage pregnancy, 
an app that helped teens navigate underage drinking situations, and apps that provided alternatives 
to costly and controversial organismal dissections (Figure 5). 
Figure 5. “Social Impact” Apps, Technovation Challenge 2012.

180
Notable apps in 2012 helped us revise the challenge for 2013. The 2013 challenge, “Solve a problem 
in your local community.” was well received. Once again, however, many teams had a common and 
narrow interpretation of this theme. Out of 115 app submissions, 16 focused on the rather mundane 
topic of helping users identify volunteer opportunities (Figure 6). Without a clear problem to solve 
for a specific user, most teams that chose this theme did not generate innovative apps. Below are 
sample volunteer app descriptions.
Sample “Volunteer” App Descriptions, Technovation Challenge 2013
CommUnity: CommUnity addresses these issues with an easy way to find and track volunteering 
opportunities that match your interests and help your community.
Re-Genz: Re-Genz is a free social mobile application, connecting volunteers to specific problems to 
regenerate local communities and help build up young people’s confidence and experience.
Do-gooder: Do-gooder is an Android app that will allow anyone to find opportunities for volunteer work. 
Pass On The Kindness: Do you love Facebook? Do you like helping people? Well, there’s a combination 
of both in an unique application known as Pass On The Kindness! 
Figure 6. “Volunteer” Apps, Technovation Challenge 2013.

181
However, Team Solidárias from Brazil took third place at the Technovation Challenge World Pitch by 
refining the volunteering problem to their community and branding the app with the Brazilian cultural 
value of solidarity (Solidárie Sidebar)7. In addition to Solidárie, other notable apps in 2013 included 
a pet-finding app (Pet Stop, San Francisco), an app that instructs the user on when to call the police 
rather than emergency services (Who2Call, United Kingdom), a teen diabetes app (Diary of a Diabetic 
Kid, Orlando), an app for tourists (TranslateIndonesia, Indonesia), a directory of wheelchair-accessible 
places (EZ Wheels, India), and an early marriage education app (Early Marriage, Yemen) (Figure 8). 
7 Solidárias also promoted their app through social media: http://www.solidarias.com.br/, https://www.facebook.com/pages/
Solidarie/498632113535123, http://www.youtube.com/channel/UCRC4ocWAnyRaMphE-rkPpOg
Figure 8.  “Social Impact” Apps, Technovation Challenge 2013.

182
These apps responded to the challenge by 
deliberately picking problems that teams 
could research and test, thereby increasing the 
relevance of the app to their daily lives and 
taking full advantage of the Lean design cycle 
(we discuss Lean later in this chapter). For 
example, Tek5 developed Who2Call alongside 
the Nottinghamshire Police to implement in 
their community, regardless of the outcome of 
the competition.
12 - W E E K  C U R R I C U L U M : 
E N T R E P R E N E U R S H I P  A N D 
L E A N  T H I N K I N G 
Technovation Challenge extends over a 12-
week period, giving teams enough time to dig 
into their development and incorporate ideas 
that go beyond simple hacking. The program 
timeline for 2014 appears in Table 1. Ideally, 
Hack Days and technology company field trips 
occur before the 12-week program to help 
with recruiting and team-building activities. 
The 12-week program begins in February to 
accommodate as many international academic 
calendars as possible.
The program prepares girls to succeed—teaching 
skills beyond learning to code—by introducing 
the entrepreneurial side of app development. 
The 12 weeks kick off with an introduction 
to entrepreneurship through a product design 
philosophy known as Lean (Ries, 2011). Nine 
of the top ten U.S. business schools teach the 
Lean methodology, and it comes recommended 
by Facebook COO Sheryl Sandberg.
The Lean methodology inspires persistence 
to keep improving and developing one idea in 
students. Each week, Technovation Challenge 
teams fine-tune their deliverables by considering 
S O L I D Á R I E  S I D E B A R 
Solidárie App, Technovation Challenge 2013. 
(con’t on next page)

183
one aspect of the product design cycle. Teams 
learn about market research, user-interface 
design, and business plans. As they refine their 
ideas and pivot—making adjustments to their 
app or business strategy—they may revisit topics 
to fine tune their approaches. For example, a 
team may identify a sizeable market for their app 
idea, but when testing their prototype discover 
that the user needs will not be easily met on a 
mobile device. Based on this finding, they may 
create a new focus for their app or abandon 
their first idea altogether and restart the design 
process. Successful teams typically go through 
the design loop multiple times, improving their 
app, business plan, and pitch with each iteration. 
These teams proactively engage users and 
incorporate feedback at every stage. 

Table 1. The 12-Week Schedule for Technovation Challenge.
Date
Milestone
Early fall
Theme announced/course goes live, registration opens
October-February
Technology company field trips occur (in-person or virtual through our video series)
October-February
Hack Days occur (one day of App Inventor training, can happen anywhere, flexible format)
February-April
12-week curriculum runs with live support
Early April
Regions announced, teams assigned to regions
Late April
Submission deadline, teams submit and get confirmation email
Late April
Judging begins
Late April
Regional Pitch Night coordinators invite teams to Regional Pitch Nights
April-May
Regional Pitching
May
World Pitch Finalists invited and announced
June
Technovation Challenge World Pitching (San Francisco Bay Area), including technology 
company field trips and celebration luncheon for all finalists
S I D E B A R (con’t from previous page)
Solidárie is a mobile application designed 
for people who want to find, connect and 
share volunteer experiences. Our mission 
is to give everyone who wants to help the 
ability to do so, and thus no opportunities 
for action or collaboration are missed. 
The app connects people to nonprofit 
organizations and charity institutions in 
need of donations or volunteer’s support. 
For these institutions Solidárie will be 
vital to expose their needs, and get an 
almost immediate help. Through its social 
features anyone can post pictures and share 
volunteer experiences, creating a bond 
between volunteers and institutions and 
stimulating to volunteer more.

184
Teams also receive help with effective presenting and pitching. A What Is It Like to Work At... 
video series features female engineers at companies such as Twitter, Google, and Facebook speaking 
candidly about their paths to technology as well as daily job responsibilities. These glimpses into the 
lives of women in technology as near-peers inspire girls to explore computer science and business 
careers. Guest blog posts by Technovation Challenge mentors and other experts provide additional 
content tailored to the 12-week curriculum (e.g. career exploration, how to make an effective visual 
presentation, video game design story, etc.).
After a regional round of judging, 10 finalist teams travel to the Technovation Challenge World 
Pitch event to demonstrate and pitch their apps to a live audience and highly esteemed panel of 
experts. The winning team receives $10k in seed funding from Iridescent to further develop their 
mobile app and take it to market. The idea that their team’s app can become a reality proves to be 
a strong motivator for girls and distinguishes our program as a real business experience rather than 
a classroom exercise.
K E Y  R O L E S  I N  T E C H N O VAT I O N  C H A L L E N G E
Behind the program’s curricular components, the adults who lead and teach teams throughout 
Technovation Challenge make the program a success. Below we describe the main roles involved 
with running teams8. 
Regional Coordinators. As our program has expanded, we have relied on regional coordinators, 
adult volunteers or partner organizations, to bring 10 or more teams together in a geographical area 
for events such as Hack Day, regional pitch nights, and mentor mixers. Regional coordinators also 
help match teachers with mentors. Potential coordinators often find us through social media and 
help generate buzz for Technovation Challenge in their areas; their similar personal or organizational 
missions as well as local networks allow them to hit the ground running. Successful regional 
coordinators connect with local technology companies, schools, after-school clubs, universities, 
and youth groups, are active on social media, and reach out to other regional coordinators as well as 
the core Technovation Challenge team at Iridescent to exchange ideas, contacts, and best practices.
Hack Day Instructors. Hack Day instructors are typically undergraduate or graduate students in 
computer science (preferably women) who lead teams and adult leaders through the five Hack Day 
App Inventor tutorials. While no previous experience with App Inventor is necessary, instructors 
ideally spend a week or so familiarizing themselves with the tutorials and have App Inventor 
pre-installed on all Hack Day computers. The ideal instructor thinks on her feet, modeling how 
programmers identify solutions to their problems. Teaching younger students also helps instructors 
improve their ability to communicate with different audiences.
8 These roles are fluid and flexible, allowing teams to coalesce in ways that make sense for their situations. The descriptions below 
are intended as guidelines that may help others think about how to prioritize and provide for the important interpersonal work 
necessary to making a project such as Technovation Challenge a success.

185
Technovation Challenge Teachers and Coaches. Teachers and coaches are adult leaders in youth 
settings who run one or more teams. While some teachers work as regional coordinators, more 
often teachers focus on getting one or two teams through the 12 weeks, dedicating at least four 
hours a week to working with teams. They recruit students, find spaces to meet, and get required 
paperwork together, then partner with mentors to teach the programming and business sides of 
the curriculum. A few teachers with a strong passion for either programming or business have 
functioned as both the teacher/coach and mentor and successfully run the program on their own.
In addition to helping students code their app, teachers can help teams innovate faster by encouraging 
them to define a specific user profile and identify a realistic market. Many students have a one-size-
fits-all idea about apps that relates to their understanding of Google and Facebook as businesses 
that serve everyone while making money from ads. For game apps, Angry Birds presents an unlikely 
economic success that takes reframing for budding entrepreneurs to understand in terms that help 
their own app development. Open-ended questions such as “How will users find your app?”, “What 
will attract potential users to your app?”, “What other apps like this already exist?”, or “How many 
people have told you they have this problem and what do they do now to solve it?” help students 
think as builders and creators rather than consumers. Sometimes helping a student take the next 
step—for example, spending an hour on Google Play typing in keywords, downloading and testing 
free apps, and perusing reviews—will help students avoid the paralysis that often occurs during 
idea generation.
Technovation Challenge Mentors. Mentors function as role models for girls, providing a link to 
the technology and business industries. A mentor can be any woman in technology or business. 
The mentor partners with the coach or teacher to present the 12-week curriculum two hours per 
week during the program, enhancing the material with examples from their own work projects and 
experience.
Ideal female mentors are role models in the technology or business world, and as such they often 
have busy schedules or locations that prevent meeting face-to-face with teams. Working virtually 
with teams via Skype and other platforms addresses problems of access outside technology-rich 
areas like Silicon Valley while modeling how to reach girls in under-resourced regions. This kind 
of virtual mentorship can easily be applied to remote locales such as rural Ghana, as well as areas 
difficult for mentors to reach on public transit, such as New York City’s outer boroughs. The virtual 
format works best when teams have a couple of in-person meetings with the mentor to build rapport. 
In one case, a team in the United Kingdom traveled to meet their mentor in San Francisco after the 
competition ended, taking the opportunity to tour her company and other technology companies 
in the area. 
Finding good mentors has proven to be difficult. Mentors are hard to identify, and not every successful 
woman is a natural mentor. To help close this gap and find more successful mentors, we added a list 
of mentoring best practices in 2013 (Mentor Sidebar). Strategies for our mentor training stem from 
other Iridescent programs such as Engineers as Teachers (EasT) and Curiosity Machine—one of 

186
the many ways our programs improve through 
cross-fertilization9. A successful strategy for 
Technovation Challenge mentors and teachers 
has been to offer support by sharing “how 
I think” rather than “what I know.” Sharing 
“what I know” intimidates students; it feeds the 
assumption that adults know best because they 
have more education and experience. Modeling 
“how I think” creates space for students to 
contribute as thought partners, which allows 
room for student innovation and leadership.
Women who do not have time to support teams 
through all 12 weeks can step in and help as 
needed, for example, as “pitch coaches” who 
help teams polish their deliverables or “regional/
world pitch judges” who select winning apps.
With all this talk about curriculum and 
adults, let’s not forget that the most important 
role is that played by the girls. Technovation 
Challenge students do not need any previous 
experience with programming. We encourage 
adults to think beyond high-achieving students 
and include girls with different educational 
profiles that may bring other skills to the team 
and take away more from the experience.
P R O G R A M  I M PA C T
Unlike other programs that focus on learning 
specific coding languages and skills, the goal 
of Technovation Challenge is not to learn App 
Inventor; it is to create and pitch an original 
mobile app to solve a problem. App Inventor 
is a tool in meeting the challenge and not 
an end in itself. This use of App Inventor as 
a tool inspires girls to explore other platforms 
and programming languages on their own. 
H A N D O U T  F O R  M E N T O R S 
—  B E S T  P R A C T I C E S 
Lead by example. Be an active mentor — You 
are the project manager and leader for your 
team. Some mentors feel nervous at first about 
taking charge and keeping girls on task, but 
strong leadership ensures that teams remain 
focused and meet deadlines.
Manage team dynamics — Working with 
different personalities can be challenging; some 
students may be shy, others may be talkative. 
Establish the “three-then-me” rule where each 
time a person talks she listens to three other people 
speak before speaking again. Encourage shy 
students to speak up by directing questions, they 
will eventually feel comfortable participating.
Stay neutral during discussion — At times 
you may experience tension or arguing in the 
group. Manage conflicts when they occur by 
helping each student share her concerns and 
feel heard without taking sides. While girls 
are brainstorming ideas, encourage them to 
make their own decisions and decide things by 
consensus when appropriate.
Show off your skills — Bring your own skills 
and talents into the mix, even if a given topic is 
not in the existing curriculum. Please customize 
the PowerPoint slides to reflect your own 
expertise and share what you do in your job 
with students. Exposing students to actual work 
projects helps them understand what engineers 
and designers do. If you are an entrepreneur, 
share copies of business plans and tips on how 
to pitch. Whatever your skills are, please share 
them with your team as often as possible.
(con’t on next page)
9 Iridescent Mentoring Philosophy, http://iridescentlearning.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/Iridescent-Mentoring-Philosophy-newer1.pdf

187
Technovation Challenge is not a destination 
in itself but a springboard for girls to pursue 
computer science courses, internships, and 
technology or business careers.
Many girls enroll in computer science courses 
after our program. Fifty-two percent of 
respondents to a Technovation Challenge 
survey, which captured the first four seasons of 
the program (2010-2013), reported enrolling in 
either high school or college computer science 
courses after Technovation Challenge. At 
Piedmont High School in Oakland, California, 
10 girls from Technovation Challenge signed 
up for AP Computer Science in 2013, five 
times more than the number enrolled the 
previous year and a new record for the school. 
At the Nightingale-Bamford School, an all-
girls school, enrollment in a computer science 
elective rose from 2 to 10 girls after the program.
In the same survey, 38% of respondents 
completed an internship after Technovation 
Challenge (18% at a technology company). 
Many alumnae have gone on to complete 
summer internships in technology through 
connections they make in the program, such as 
Jasmine Gao, who was mentioned in the New 
York Times as a data scientist at bit.ly (Seligson, 
2013). Technovation Challenge mentors later 
become sponsors (Hewlett, 2013); Jasmine met 
her future boss Hilary Mason, former Chief 
Scientist at bitly, through our program.
S I D E B A R
(con’t from previous page)

Be a role model — As your team’s mentor, you 
give each student a window into your industry 
and what it is like to be a woman in that field. 
Get to know the girls, share your story with 
them, tell them about your career journey. What 
were your challenges? How did you overcome 
them? Help the girls relate to you by showing 
them photos of your pets, children, favorite 
vacation spots, and telling them about your 
favorite hobbies. Help them understand that 
being a working woman does not mean working 
all the time, you still have a fun and exciting life 
outside of work.
Provide one-on-one interaction — Get to know 
each girl on your team individually. Start a 
conversation with the shy student who is not very 
talkative, ask her what kind of food she likes, 
what she wants to be when she grows up, what 
her favorite classes are and why. Get to know 
each girl so they feel connected and supported.
Encourage and inspire — Hearing you 
say, “I think you are really good at solving 
complex problems. Have you ever considered 
becoming an engineer?” is one of the most 
transformative experiences a girl can have in 
school. Unfortunately, she may not hear it from 
anyone else if not from you. Your opinion may 
also carry more weight as an expert. Hearing 
your encouragement and feedback about her 
strengths might just change her life, particularly 
after you have built a relationship over time.

188
The largest takeaway for participants has been an appreciation for how to create a product, 17% of 
girls who responded to a 2012 survey continued to work on their app after the program. In addition 
to having created original apps, girls in 2012 reported a greater understanding of what engineers 
and computer scientists do (Figure 9). 
A common assumption is that girls lack enough confidence to enter into a boys’ world of 
technology. Many programs similar to Technovation Challenge seek to increase girls’ confidence 
or self-perception of being capable in these fields. Interestingly, statements such as “I am confident 
using technology” and “I am comfortable making presentations” do not show significant gains here 
because girls rate themselves highly on these statements before completing the program. Most girls 
strongly agree with these statements in the pre-survey despite evincing considerable growth in how 
they interact with technology and pitch in front of an audience and experts. 
After four years of results with Technovation Challenge, the notion that girls lack the confidence 
or wherewithal to successfully perform in a technology environment insults gender and observable 
data. For girls, a lack of belonging in a male-dominated field and a tendency to be overlooked by 
Figure 9. Pre- vs. Post-Survey Results, Technovation Challenge 2012.

189
adults in favor of other (commonly male) students may play a part in keeping them from pursuing 
technology degrees and careers. We have witnessed how working alongside other girls and having a 
personal connection to a woman in technology inspires a desire in participants beyond meeting the 
current generation of female innovators to becoming their successors. Twenty-four of our alumnae 
have received the National Center for Women & Information Technology Award for Aspirations 
in Computing. 
Technovation Challenge mentors benefit from their experience as well; they report that they enjoy 
networking with other women in technology (95%), increasing their knowledge of entrepreneurship 
(83%), learning to be effective mentors (88%), and improving their technical skills (63%). Mentors 
are inspired to keep growing professionally for example by starting their own companies, something 
Margaret Butler did when she founded Innovaspire. Many of our mentors return year after year. 
In the future, we intend to deepen the impact on the technology community by providing mentors 
with training that they can more directly apply to their careers.
W H Y  T E C H N O VAT I O N  W O R K S
	
Technovation made programming real. What you’re making is not just a project 
for a grade but it’s something to impact somebody. 
— Technovation 2013 Participant
Figure 10 illustrates how Technovation Challenge serves girls through 12 weeks of applied computer 
science and business activities. The program activities emphasize technology as a collaborative 
effort; girls interact with other girls, mentors, teachers, and judges throughout the program. Girls 
personalize their learning by choosing what they want to work on for an app. They also choose what 
role and projects to focus on within their team.

190
Figure 10. Model for Student Learning Within Technovation Challenge.

191
SciGirls, a weekly television series and educational outreach program for elementary and middle-
school children, scoured the research literature on evidence-based practices and proposed seven 
proven strategies for engaging girls in STEM (SciGirls Seven), summarized below. Examining 
these strategies helps explain why our program succeeds in engaging girls in computer science and 
entrepreneurship. In addition to the programmatic aspects that support these criteria, the basic 
activities of app building, tinkering on mobile phones, and creating media are a good match for 
engaging girls in computer science and entrepreneurship. Reflecting on how abstract criteria play 
out in a concrete program such as Technovation Challenge may help others apply these criteria to 
create their own STEM opportunities for girls.
1. Girls enjoy working in teams. Girls often express excitement about sharing what they learn 
with other girls. They benefit from settings in which they are rewarded for collaboration and 
flourish from the ability to communicate freely on a team. They also become comfortable sharing 
responsibilities and taking turns being in charge. The positive feelings they derive from working 
with their friends can become associated in their minds with technology. These feelings may help 
them seek out internships or declare a computer science major.
Technovation Challenge students work and learn in teams of four or five middle or high school 
girls. Our program can run as an after-school club or even as a formal course. The DSST Cole 
Middle School in Denver, Colorado, for example, taught the Technovation Challenge curriculum 
in a STEM enrichment course of 35 sixth and seventh grade girls. Their teachers shared that girls 
who barely knew each other before the program became best friends by working toward a goal as a 
team. As girls code their apps, they do not go it alone. Girls learn pair programming at Hack Day 
and continue to use this technique throughout the program. Programming apps on their phones 
makes it possible to share what they are building with friends and family.
2. Girls find motivation in projects that are personally relevant and have societal impact. Girls 
enjoy projects that are meaningful and have personal significance. While a career in technology may 
not be an automatic aspiration for many girls, girls demonstrate a general inclination for professions 
in which they can serve their community. Reframing technology and business as a way to solve 
social problems can make these stereotypically cold careers more appealing to girls.
The importance of this factor can be appreciated in our struggle to develop a productive challenge 
over the years. We have designed themes with the hope of motivating girls; even though we have 
not been entirely successful at inspiring great work in every case, our app submissions improve 
each year. Stand-out entries often come from teams who are able to make the challenge personally 
relevant. For example, Team RoundofAPPlause at Thomas Jefferson High School created NaviCar, 
a carpooling app, as a solution to being shuttled around by parents to after-school events in the 
daunting Washington D.C. metropolitan area traffic. Team PrincetonGirlsinIT from Lagos, 
Nigeria redefined “daunting traffic” for the Technovation Challenge World Pitch 2013 audience at 
Twitter when they shared how daily traffic fatalities in their city inspired them to collaborate with 
traffic security agents to create TrafficApp. TrafficApp allows users to report traffic violations the 
moment they occur.

192
3. Girls enjoy projects that are hands-on and open-ended. Innovation typically results from 
exploration and a series of failures that pave the way for success. This format is more easily digested 
when learning occurs within a hands-on and open-ended project-based framework. A girl may be 
more inspired to persevere when designing an app that does not work the first time than when 
receiving a low grade on a computer science assignment or exam.
Although we started off Technovation Challenge with an open-ended theme for apps, we quickly 
realized that most teams had no idea on how to begin. In our iterations of the theme, teams identify 
interesting problems, then decide on the process they will use to create and pitch an app that solves 
their problem. Girls report that they enjoy working on Technovation Challenge because, unlike a 
prescriptive assignment, they have complete ownership over their apps. The ability to display their 
work on personal mobile phones for some girls also makes the experience rewarding.
4. Girls enjoy bringing their own unique set of interests and talents to a project. Concepts in 
computer science may appear boring on their own, but when applied to students’ own interests, take 
on new life. The applied nature of project-based learning allows girls to draw on other skills that 
enhance their chances for success.
While building their apps, girls learn to take advantage of other interests and talents such as artistic 
ability. In 2011, “paper doll” apps suggested that girls sought an outlet for self-expression. In 2012, 
we began to see this self-expression channeled into ways that were more conscientious of the app’s 
end user. ElementQuest, a 2012 app, teaches users about the periodic table of elements by having 
them identify elements in original, illustrated panoramas (Figure 11). Likewise, the creators of 
Arrive, a school attendance app, used their knowledge of robotics to create a robot that opens a door 
after users check in using their app.
Figure 11. “ElementQuest” App, Technovation Challenge 2012.

193
5. Girls gain confidence when they receive positive feedback on things they can control, such 
as effort and strategies. Problem solving promotes a growth mindset, where bad solutions can lead 
to a better solution. When hard work and perseverance pay off, girls may be less inclined to believe 
that their knowledge and skills are inherently not a good fit for certain subjects or careers. The best 
feedback that a girl can get in Technovation Challenge is watching her own app work for the first 
time. We have assembled a team of adults—regional coordinators, Hack Day instructors, teachers/
coaches, and mentors—to make these moments happen as often as possible for girls. Our training 
for mentors and guidelines for teachers emphasize strategies for scaffolding and inspiring students 
to create their best work. We also share best practices with judges at pitch events on how to ask 
questions and give feedback so that girls leave motivated to do more with their apps.
6. Girls gain confidence from critical thinking. Learning can occur from simply questioning 
assumptions and lines of thinking. The ability to evaluate ideas and repeatedly incorporate feedback 
allows girls to realize that they will eventually build a great app. Girls gain critical thinking skills as 
they cycle through Lean methodology to keep improving their app and business plan. Improving 
critical thinking is a major reason we use the Lean methodology; students immediately incorporate 
feedback into the next version of their product, entering another iteration of the product cycle. Girls 
also grow in their ability to present and communicate their ideas to colleagues and experts.
7. Girls are inspired by role models and mentors. Meaningful interaction with role models helps 
dispel stereotypes about careers in technology, and affords girls an opportunity to consider various 
identities. “Side by side” interactions with mentors encourage positive and expanded interpretations 
of technology and business careers. In Technovation Challenge, a mentor and teacher guide the 
girls through the curriculum. Girls interact with other women in technology through events, video 
interviews, blog posts, and activities with other teams. The online platform gives girls the ability to 
access and connect with teachers and mentors from all over the world, and provides them with a 
community that supports and rallies behind them throughout the program.
I N N O VAT I O N  I N  T E C H N O VAT I O N  C H A L L E N G E
Before digital cameras, photography happened in a dark room; only the few people who entered 
a dark room had the privilege to consider themselves photographers. Similar to the revolution of 
digital photography, mobile phones have brought programming into new light. In Technovation 
Challenge we capitalize on the ubiquity of mobile phones to give every girl in the world the chance 
to become a programmer and entrepreneur. Our program has proven innovative in its scale and 
the uniqueness of its product, original mobile apps created and pitched by teams of girls to solve 
community problems. In closing, we would like to highlight three key lessons our experiences have 
taught us for how to get more girls into technology.

194
Reach one girl at a time. Despite working with an online platform that is limitless in the number of 
students it can support, Technovation Challenge’s influence increases through intensive recruiting, 
one girl at a time. Even though teenage girls are active users of mobile phones, they rarely see 
themselves as inventors of technology and do not always realize our program applies to them. 
“People follow the lead of other people they know and trust when they decide whether to take it up. 
Every change requires effort, and the decision to make that effort is a social process” (Rogers, 2003, 
p. 576). During Hack Days, girls experience firsthand the rewards of programming small, working 
apps. After this powerful, positive experience, girls sign up for the 12-week program. Hack Days 
are a successful and critical part of our recruiting strategy; however, they can be effort-intensive. 
We have divided this effort among partner organizations and volunteers (regional coordinators, 
teachers and coaches, mentors), and disseminated online training kits that detail sample resources 
and best practices. These strategies promote one-on-one recruitment and support.
Maintain quality at scale through research and evaluation. Evaluation data support the finding 
that Technovation Challenge changes girls’ attitudes toward and engagement with computing, 
while still growing the program to large scale. We achieved these results by a combination of vision, 
persistence, and data collection. Our process echoes the Lean methodology our girls learn; we 
analyze the program for its most effective and scalable features, and have the courage to pivot, 
making changes to the program as guided by evaluation findings. For example, we moved our 
program to school sites and refined themes to encourage better apps.
Encourage apps with a social mission. One of the most unique and innovative contributions 
of Technovation Challenge is the apps girls create, 278 original apps through 2013. The mobile 
nature of the phone implies that the apps solve problems that traditional desktop computers and 
websites do not. Furthermore, the inventors of the apps are girls, providing a new perspective to 
problem solving in this space as compared to traditionally male software engineers. As a result of 
this diversity of perspectives, apps are innovative, often addressing unique interests and problems. 
Girls who experience the potential social impact and meaning of their ideas are better positioned to 
pursue computer science and entrepreneurship careers.

195
R E F E R E N C E S
Hausmann, R. , Tyson,  L. , & Zahidi, S. (2012). The Global Gender Gap Report. Geneva, Switzerland: World 
Economic Forum. Retrieved from http://www.weforum.org/reports/global-gender-gap-report-2012
Hewlett, S. A. (2013). Forget a Mentor, Find a Sponsor: The New Way to Fast-Track Your Career. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard Business Review Press.
Hing, J. (2012). Can a Black Girl be the Next Steve Jobs? Colorlines, Jul 31. Retrieved from http://colorlines.com/
archives/2012/07/black_girls_code.html
Lacey, T. A. , & Wright, B. (2009). Occupational employment projections to 2018. Monthly Labor Review, November, 
82-123. Retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/2009/11/art5full.pdf
Ries, E. (2011). The Lean Startup: How Today’s Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innovation to Create Radically Successful 
Businesses. New York, NY: Crown Business.
Rogers, E. M. (2003). Diffusion of Innovations (5th ed.). New York, NY: Free Press.
Rusli, E. (2010). Fixing Silicon Valley’s Gender Gap One Pitch at a Time. TechCrunch, April 22. Retrieved from 
http://techcrunch.com/2010/04/22/fixing-silicon-valleys-gender-gap-one-pitch-at-a-time/
The SciGirls Seven: Proven Strategies for Engaging Girls in STEM. Retrieved from http://www.pbs.org/teachers/
includes/content/scigirls/print/SciGirls_Seven.pdf
Seligson, H. (2013). The Apprentices of a Digital Age. The New York Times, May 5. Retrieved from http://www.
nytimes.com/2013/05/05/business/enstitute-an-alternative-to-college-for-a-digital-elite.html?_r=0
Sevo, R. (2009). Literature Overview: The Talent Crisis in Science and Engineering. In B. Bogue & E. Cady, 
Eds. Apply Research to Practice (ARP) Resources. Retrieved from https://www.engr.psu.edu/AWE/secured/director/
assessment/Literature_Overview/PDF_overviews/ARP_Talent_Crisis_in_SandE_Overview.pdf
Teague, J. , & Clarke, V. (1996). Improving Gender Equity in Computing Programmes: Some Suggestions for 
Increasing Female Participation and Retention Rates. In 1st Australasian Conference on Computer Science Education 
(pp. 164-170). Sydney, Australia: ACM.
UCLA IDEA (2012). State’s AP Computer Science Exam: 29 African Americans, 21% Girls. Retrieved from http://
idea.gseis.ucla.edu/newsroom/our-ideas/themes-in-the-news/archive/august-2012/states-ap-computer-science-exam-
29-african-americans-21-girls
Wolber, David; Abelson, Hal; Spertus, Ellen; Looney, Liz (2011). App Inventor: Create Your Own Android Apps. 
O’Reilly Media, Inc..


SECTION FIVE

Connecting to Curated Spaces
15. 	
Quest for the Cities of Gold
16. 	
ParkQuest: Mobile Media Learning as a Large Group Activity
17. 	
Lift Off: A DIY Addition to a Smithsonian Space
18. 	
Horror at the Ridges: Engagement with an AR Horror Story
This section is comprised of chapters which have the design and trial of an Augmented 
Reality game at their center. Also at the center of these projects are the places these 
authors have sought to interpret and transform for their audiences. The spaces and the 
audiences who fill them to play the authors’ games are by design informal. Each game 
was created for a setting where those present could choose to play the game or not. In 
addition to offering perspectives on MML as a  ubiquitous feature of our future world by 
creating learning experiences for ad hoc, non captive audiences, these chapters remind 
us of the value of voluntary action in the learning process by meeting it head-on. If you 
build it, will they come?


199
Chapter FIFTEEN

Quest for the Cities of Gold
Gianna May
In August 2013, I had the opportunity to watch a seven-year-old read a description of an 18th 
century New Mexican textile on display at the Albuquerque Museum of Art and History in order 
to answer a question in a mobile game that I created with help from a few other University of New 
Mexico students: Ann Christmas, Brian Martinez, Sara McGinnis, Paul Strasser, and Sam Strasser. 
We had built this game, Quest for the Cities of Gold, over the summer using free software to provide 
a new kind of interactive experience with history in a museum space. We wanted to help museum 
patrons, especially children, engage more with the history they are exposed to in the exhibits. 
Often, museum patrons look at the artifacts on display, bbut do not necessarily connect the items 
in the museum to the larger historical moments they represent, nor do they take the time to read 
every information plaque located throughout the space. Their experiences are fairly passive. We 
created Quest for the Cities of Gold to remedy this situation; we wanted the game to engage players 
in an exhibit at the Albuquerque Museum and connect the artifacts on display, the information 
contained in the description boxes, and the history and people that the exhibit represents. We 
wanted to encourage our players to interact with the museum space and become participants in 
the historical narrative in-game by answering questions and making decisions based on artifacts 
in the exhibit. The seven-year-old mentioned above was searching for the answer to a question 
asked of him by a New Mexican weaver in the game, and in doing so, was connecting the textiles 
on display to this historical figure while acting as a player in the in-game narrative.
B A C KG R O U N D
My interest in mobile games and history began in 2013 with my work as a history intern at the 
Albuquerque Museum and with a course I took at the University of New Mexico, Games for Change, 
which introduced me to the use of videogames beyond entertainment.. My work in the course 
centered around using videogames to make history more interactive and participation-based by 
inserting the player into the history they were learning about as a character and active participant. 
After the course ended, I used connections established through my internship and established an 
independent study with the professor of Games for Change, Dr. Christopher Holden to continue 
this work in videogames as a way to facilitate learning about history and enhance the experience of 

200
museum exhibits. I wanted to build a game for history education at the Albuquerque Museum that 
patrons would get a chance to play and experience. Further, the Albuquerque Museum lacked any 
digital interactive elements in their displays, so I also wanted to make a game that had the potential 
to be used after the project was complete; this videogame could further act as a prototype for future 
mobile gaming experiments to enrich the exhibit space.
In May 2013, I recruited a few volunteer students who also wanted to help out with the creation 
of this game. The museum provided guidance for what they wanted to see in a mobile game and 
who they wanted it to be for. As a prototype for future gaming projects, the museum wanted a 
game that targeted children, from nine to twelve years of age, and combined teaching history with 
experiencing an exhibit and interacting with the artifacts—an important goal they set for their 
own exhibit designs as well. Their main idea was to have a game that allowed children to slow 
down and connect items on display to the periods they were from. They also requested that the 
game focus on the Along the Rio Grande exhibit, which features an overview of Albuquerque history 
from pre-Spanish contact to World War II. The narrative we developed follows the conquistadores 
in Coronado’s 1540 expedition. The game also has a bonus level set in 19th century Albuquerque, 
where the player becomes a trader along the Santa Fe Trail. 
The independent study itself was meant to be fairly simple. We did not have a lot of outside resources 
and chose to build the game with free game design software, ARIS, which could be downloaded 
and played for free on iPods, which we had available for playtesting. Throughout the process of 
putting the game together, we were constantly trying to balance what the museum wanted, what 
we wanted, and what ARIS was capable of. 
Quest for the Cities of Gold took roughly three months to construct and was released in August during 
a Family Day event at the Albuquerque Museum. The creation of this game was a team effort. As a 
group, we brainstormed and debated over how to create a successful game in a museum space that 
would be the most entertaining, educational, and approachable for players. Together, we created 
the outlines, narratives, and promotional material that we would use. During Family Day, around 
twenty museum patrons played our game. Overall, these players received this game positively. The 
final version of the game and the response we received suggests that we had achieved a significant 
step toward learning how to engage players in history and museum spaces through videogames. 
D E S I G N I N G  Q U E S T  F O R  T H E  C I T I E S  O F  G O L D
Creating Quest for the Cities of Gold involved balancing considerations of design, technology, and the 
overall end goal for the project. At the beginning, we made initial decisions about the technology 
and design as well as the historical narrative we wanted players to experience. To do this, we had 
to take into account the space we would use in the museum and how it would influence our game. 
These considerations ultimately resulted in a prototype version that would be developed over the 
course of the project.

201
Technology
We chose to create the game using ARIS due to its user-friendliness, accessibility, and familiarity. 
The tools to build the game were fairly easy to understand and did not require an in-depth knowledge 
of scripting or computer programming. Further, ARIS is free to download on the iOS App Store; 
players could easily get the app on their own devices. For Family Day, we loaned iPods to museum 
patrons to play our game and also encouraged them to download ARIS on their own iOS devices 
if they had them. With our iPods, we also launched the game on pre-established accounts to put 
players immediately into the game without needing to create accounts in ARIS themselves. This 
last step turned out to be key for patrons to overcome the complexities and friction featured in 
playing Quest for the Cities of Gold quickly on deivces often new to them. The use of ARIS and our 
own iPods (loaned to us by Dr. Holden, purchased through a UNM Teaching Allocation Grant) 
allowed us to create and provide the game without any expenditure on the software or devices for 
us or the players.
At the same time, our decision to use ARIS only partially settled the question of our game’s design. 
ARIS is a generic tool, malleable to different situations in multiple ways. At a basic level we knew 
we wanted to use virtual conversations with characters as the main mechanic,1 but the rest came 
the hard way, down to the decision to navigate the game space within the museum using QR codes 
instead of GPS coordinates or Quick Travel. We went through many iterations trying to figure out 
how best use the features available to meet our goals for creating player interaction through a story 
told in the exhibit space. 
One instance of how our thinking evolved through this process comes from our use of quests to 
help direct players. Before we included the quests as an aspect of the game, players would become 
confused as to what tasks they were supposed to complete.. They would scan QR codes out of order, 
which would throw off the game sequencing created via dialogue in ARIS. As a result, players could 
find themselves unable to progress through the game. Quests provided a way to direct the player 
and serve as a reminder to what they are supposed to do next. The characters in the game would first 
prompt an action, such as “Go talk to the Blacksmith,” and  then a quest would appear to remind 
the player who to talk to, where they might be, and what they look like. Figure 1 is an example of 
a quest presented to the player in Quest for the Cities of Gold. 
1 For information on the basic features and mechanics of ARIS see Chapter 6 in this book. 

202
The structure of the narrative in the game 
allows players to interact with the exhibit and 
uses augmented reality to make the connection 
stronger. Characters had to be accessed through 
QR codes in the exhibit, so we placed these codes 
around the space which further encouraged 
players to physically move around the area to 
play the game. Quests that require players to find 
a particular artifact and interact with it—such as 
asking them to find the chain mail on display 
and lift it up to see how heavy it is—promote 
interactive engagement with the exhibit and 
items on display. Characters even ask questions 
that are answered by reading certain exhibit 
panels and inserting one-word answers in the 
decoder section of ARIS to trigger specific in-
game plaques. Players themselves are characters 
in the narrative, and therefore feel more invested 
in the exhibit and history. Instead of simply 
reading about what others in the past did, the 
game allows them to embody a character from 
this time period who interacts with historical 
figures and their stories. Through our game, 
we create a relationship between the player, the 
history, and the exhibit.
In-game Historical Narrative
Along with the general description above and the basic technology we used to connect museum 
patrons to history, much of our design efforts went into the creation of a story for players to inhabit. 
Many of the specifics of figuring out how to tell a story through a game have been instrumental to 
accomplishing our goal of connecting the player to history through the exhibit. Revisiting a couple 
of these details may be helpful for others who pursue a similar goal. 
In Quest for the Cities of Gold, the player is a conquistador in 1540 who is about to embark on a 
journey north from Mexico with Coronado. This expedition was the first Spanish exploration of 
what would become New Mexico, and is perhaps most famous for the search for the seven cities 
of gold at Cíbola. The game begins with Coronado telling the player to find proper armor for the 
journey. The player then goes to talk to the blacksmith, who tells the player about the different 
forms of armor and their benefits. The blacksmith encourages the player to look in his “shop,” a 
section of the museum that features different types of armor. The player is also specifically directed 
toward a chain mail tunic, which can be touched by museum patrons (Figure 2).
Figure 1. The first quest in Quest for the Cities of Gold. 

203
After the player has chosen their armor, they 
talk to Fray Marcos de Niza, who led the initial 
expedition in 1539 to what he thought was 
Cíbola; his journey would serve as a guide to 
Coronado’s initial expedition. The player is 
asked to find the right map of this expedition, 
which can be found on an information panel 
on the wall. The player must enter the year Fray 
Marcos de Niza went on his own expedition. 
After that, the player sets off on the journey 
with Coronado and is asked a few questions 
regarding what path to take, which ultimately 
results in success or failure. For example, if the 
player chooses to go along a desert path with no 
source of water, they will die of thirst and the 
game will end. However, if the player chooses 
the right path, they will end up in New Mexico 
where they will be asked why they, personally, 
went on the journey with Coronado (Figure 
3). Their response will bring up one of three 
different plaques that concludes their story with 
a short narrative. 
These small choices give players a chance to 
reflect on the nature of the journey and the 
motivations of the conquistadores. In playing 
through this narrative, players are immersed in 
the information present, but often overlooked 
in the exhibit, and are asked to connect artifacts 
and the museum space to history. They become 
active participants in these historical narratives, 
as opposed to a passive observer of history and 
museum artifacts.
The Museum Space
A third element we sought to unify through 
our design was the museum space itself. One of 
our goals in creating Quest for the Cities of Gold 
as a game to engage children in museums and 
history was to make the museum itself more 
child-friendly. The Albuquerque Museum does 
Figure 2. The chain mail is one of the interactive, 
touchable displays in the exhibit. In the game, the 
player is asked to lift it up and see how heavy it is, 
revealing a QR code for the game beneath.
Figure 3. The player’s dialogue options after Coronado 
asks why they went on the journey. Their response will 
affect their ending.

204
contain some interactive, child-friendly elements in the exhibits. However, their placement and 
design does not always allow for children to fully interact with them. One example is a toy Model-T 
in the Route 66 section of the museum. While you are allowed to pick the toy up and drive it, it is 
placed on a ledge only big enough to hold the car itself and the wire that is tied around its wheel 
is too short to allow children to move it to the ground to play with it. Most of the plaques in the 
museum are eye-level for a typical adult—inaccessible to children and others whose eyes are closer 
to the ground. Further, interactive and touchable elements of the exhibit are are not always labeled 
well and are consequently easy to bypass. Quest for the Cities of Gold tries to draw attention to these 
more interactive displays—like the chain mail—while also making other displays—like the map of 
the conquistador expeditions—accessible to children by making it a part of the game.
We chose the conquistador narrative in Quest for the Cities of Gold because of the content the exhibit 
provided and because one of the most popular objects in the entire exhibit are two conquistador 
mannequins and a horse in armor (Figure 4). These objects have the most potential to engage 
players due to their size and the ideas they represent about journeys to New Mexico.
However, working with this space in the 
museum had its shortcomings. The area of the 
exhibit is relatively small, which prevented a lot 
of movement. This limited how far apart we 
could place characters and created congestion 
in areas where players were standing to “talk” 
to characters after scanning their QR codes. 
The room was separated by a center oval divider 
where the conquistador display was located 
which allowed visitors to walk around in a 
circle to see the exhibit, but also made it 
confusing for players to discern a suitable 
starting point and know which direction to go 
in order to progress.  
In spite of this, we created the game to use the 
small area as an advantage. The game was well 
contained in the space and could be structured 
into short narratives. While there still were 
issues with congestion and the flow of the game 
in relation to the space, the area was ideal for 
playtesting. We were able to watch multiple 
players move through the game and see how 
they interacted with the mobile device and 
physical artifacts as they progressed. 
Figure 4. Two conquistadores clad in 16th century 
armor. This display is one the focal point of the Along 
the Rio Grande exhibit.

205
C O M B I N I N G  T H E 
P H Y S I C A L ,  I M A G I N E D,  A N D 
T E C H N O L O G I C A L  S PA C E S
As a whole, our design for Quest for the Cities 
of Gold was a combination of three different 
dimensions of player interaction: the physical 
museum space, the in-game imagined space, 
and the technological space produced in ARIS. 
All three factors had to work together in order 
to achieve our objective; the imagined space 
was pulled out as much as possible in order to 
be experienced in the physical space and was 
facilitated by the technological space, allowing 
players to interact with these different layers 
using an iPod and ultimately drawing them 
into the history and museum space. 
An example of how we utilized these three 
dimensions is illustrated in how we placed 
characters in-game to fit with the small 
physical space of the exhibit and further had 
these characters emphasize the player’s physical 
surroundings. At first, we used the map feature 
in ARIS to locate in-game characters, who 
could be interacted with by touching their icons 
on the map (i.e. Quick Travel). This character 
interaction was later changed due to the 
difficulty in placing several characters in a small 
space indoors and the disconnect it established 
between the in-game world and the museum 
space. We replaced the map-based interaction 
with QR Codes that represented characters and 
other objects and required players to find and 
scan the codes to talk to them and continue 
the narrative (Figure 6). This allowed players to 
interact with the space and the exhibit without 
having to completely separate from the game 
world whenever they looked up from their 
screen or moved to a different location.
Figure 5. Museum patrons playing Quest for the Cities 
of Gold during our launch of the game on Family Day. 
Behind the conquistador display is the armor section 
where the blacksmith is located.
Figure 6. Coronado’s plaque in Quest for the Cities of 
Gold. In order to talk to Coronado, players would scan 
his QR code.

206
The physical, imagined, and technological 
spaces of this game were further blended in 
our attempts to make the exhibit and museum 
experience more child-friendly. To provide more 
objects for players to interact with, we moved 
information that children normally would 
not be able to read—such as the conquistador 
expedition maps (Figures 7, 8)—to the game 
itself. This created a connection between the 
technological space players were using and the 
museum space the map was present in. This 
brought the objects down to eye level so young 
players could view them on their own. 
C H A L L E N G E S  I N  D E S I G N
Throughout development, there were certain 
roadblocks that affected and altered our design 
choices and the general format of the game. 
These problems ranged from ensuring the 
historical integrity of the narrative to choosing 
a title that both described the game and its 
connection to the museum and appealed 
to younger children as an interesting and 
fun game to play. Unfortunately, not all our 
problems had outright solutions. 
In constructing the narrative, our first concern 
was maintaining historical accuracy within the 
game. Part of our goal was to teach children 
history, and so our facts and details had to be as 
accurate as possible. At the same time, we took 
some liberties with the narrative to make the 
experience of playing the game more interesting 
and engaging and suitable for a short narrative. 
For example, Governor Coronado would not 
have asked the player about what route to take 
on the expedition, but this narrative element was 
a good opportunity to give players a reason to 
look at the historical maps. This allowed players 
to become participants in their inclusion of the 
Figure 7. The yellow plaque contains several maps of the 
Spanish expeditions into New Mexico. Unfortunately, 
they are placed high on the wall, preventing children from 
getting a good look. 
Figure 8. An in-game map of  the expedition of Marcos 
de Niza. It contains the same information as the museum’s 
mounted map. By putting this map in the game, we allow 
players to view the map regardless of height.

207
expedition and gave them some agency within the game. In the end, our compromise between 
historical accuracy and fictitious elements feels natural and productive.
When retelling history, in addition to historical accuracy, we confront the question of perspective. 
It is difficult to craft an effective conquistador narrative without considering how Native Americans 
fit into the picture. The representation of Native Americans in our game was a huge topic of debate, 
as was how to present conquistadores in light of the brutality of their historical expeditions. We were 
constantly aware of how we presented the narrative and how we portrayed the different characters 
within in it. At the same time, our narrative still focuses on a colonizing-centric perspective with 
the conquistadores, as opposed to Native American experiences of the same event. We did not want 
to directly glorify the Spanish conquest. However we felt compelled to work with the information 
that was available at the museum. The exhibit, along with our game, addressed the history from 
a neutral, but conquistador-focused perspective—it does not over-glorify their expeditions, but 
neither does it condemn them or address their more violent actions. Like the exhibit in the museum, 
we did not deviate from the standardized historical narrative usually taught in school and found in 
textbooks. As a result, our in-game narrative was rather devoid of a Native American presence and 
focused mainly on the expedition itself. 
We made a choice to teach children about what the museum had to offer in their exhibit and 
artifacts and provide a brief overview of the conquest of New Mexico rather than present a complete 
and balanced historical narrative. A number of factors played into this decision. We felt we did 
not have the time or resources to add interaction far beyond what was already available within the 
exhibit. The time spent in the exhibit and playing the game are brief. Our narrative reflects this 
lack of depth for the sake of presenting a playable and comprehensive game. Finally, we did not 
necessarily feel free to challenge the perspective the museum’s curators had decided upon when 
confronting this same dilemma as they set up their exhibit. While this decision worked for us at 
a level of convenience and logistics, we realize the potential loss of information and dangerous 
implication of enabling the conquistador character to identify as the “hero” in the narrative. I do 
not think that we were able to solve this problem, but recognizing it at least feels like a small victory.
P L AY T E S T I N G
The public playtest for Quest for the Cities of Gold took place during Family Day at the museum. We 
stationed ourselves in the exhibit to observe players’ progress and offer guidance if they got stuck. 
We did run into a few technical issues and had to walk a few players through the game (especially 
those who were not acquainted with touchscreens), but overall the game was well-received. 
Issues that affected the playtest included software bugs and a poor WiFi connection. While playing 
the game, ARIS would occasionally stop working and the program would crash or otherwise prevent 
the player from moving on in the narrative. Often the only solution was to restart the app which 
would also erase the player’s progress because they would be logged out of the custom accounts we 

208
had prepared. And, while the museum had WiFi available in the building, the connection was weak 
at points. If a player was on the network for too long, it would disconnect them and they would 
have to log in again. This disrupted the flow of the game and risked losing the player’s progress 
too. These issues were the most commented on in our surveys, but we were unable to find a good 
solution to them during the playtest. The best we could do was log players back in and get them 
playing again as soon as possible, hopefully without losing their progress in the process.
Not all of our players were acquainted with 
ARIS or touchscreens before playing Quest 
for the Cities of Gold. The ability for players to 
navigate the technology varied, and so we had 
to establish specific guides outside and within 
the game to help those who became lost. After 
players understood how to operate the devices 
and progress in the game—such as using QR 
codes to initiate conversations with the game’s 
characters—they were able to play the game 
and progress smoothly. We created a brochure 
for the event (Figure 9), which included a guide 
for scanning QR codes. Even with knowledge 
of how to scan QR codes, the process was not 
perfect for players. Uneven lighting sometimes 
made it difficult for the iPod’s camera to 
recognize the codes. Explaining how to scan 
codes as well as suggesting potential errors and 
troubleshooting tips became a necessary part of 
running our game. 
As part of the playtest, we requested that 
players fill out a post-game survey. Children 
and parents expressed excitement for having 
this game as a new way to learn about history. 
Over half the players made it to the end of the 
game, and in doing so were able to navigate the 
game successfully and also interact with the 
museum space as intended. Some frustration 
was expressed over the technical difficulties, 
but many of the players were very receptive 
toward the idea of having such a game in a 
museum to facilitate learning and engage 
players, and were happy to struggle with our 
game, in spite of the glitches. 
Figure 9. Our brochure includes a description of what a 
QR code is and how to use it in the game. Because QR 
codes were such an important aspect of progressing in 
the game, understanding how to use them was vital.

209
Parents, in particular, commented on the game as a useful tool to engage children in the exhibit. 
The seven-year-old I mentioned earlier was there with his parents. They commented that he was 
not looking forward to coming to the museum, but once he started playing the game, he began to 
enjoy himself and still learn about history. Siblings who played the game at the same time would 
compete or would help each other through difficult points. One girl played through the game and 
when her younger sister joined her, she excitedly shared what she learned and the experience she 
had in playing the game. 
C O N C L U S I O N
As a project, our game accomplished its goal, but further development is required for it to be used in 
a museum space without outside help. To more fully engage players in history and a museum space, 
the technical difficulties will have to be dealt with and a smoother method to start people playing, 
regardless of familiarity with touchscreens or ARIS, needs to be established. Further consideration 
and development is also required to build a more complete and in-depth narrative that does not just 
follow the conquistador point of view and avoids glorifying or condemning their actions while still 
maintaining its identity as a game where the player is a participant in the history. 
But in spite of the issues still to be resolved, the interest expressed by players and their interaction 
with history and the museum space suggests the potential such a game has. A typical museum 
experience does not always encourage engagement or immersion. We wanted to directly ask the 
player to be more than a spectator of artifacts. Quest for the Cities of Gold allowed players to interact 
with a museum exhibit in a new way, highlighting aspects that often go unnoticed. Throughout, 
players could draw connections between artifacts, history, and people. Quest for the Cities of Gold 
gave players a chance to feel like participants in history, experiencing the narrative on display while 
interacting with the museum space in a unique and engaging way. The excitement we saw during 
Family Day affirmed the hard work we put into Quest for the Cities of Gold and convinced us that it, 
or more games like it which are built by non-professionals using free tools, could potentially change 
the ways in which museums engage people in history.


211
Chapter SIXTEEN

ParkQuest: Mobile Media Learning 
as a Large Group Activity
Seann Dikkers, Ryan Rieder, & Tamala Solomon 
Ohio University
Last year, our design team was approached by the InsideOut! organization. They wanted help 
encouraging urban youth to explore the many trails found at a nearby state park, and thought a 
‘game’ might motivate kids to try hiking. The game would be a small part of a larger event called 
Let’s Go Outside. Over the last year we made our first attempt to introduce kids to hiking for 
fun and created ParkQuest. It wraps story, digital maps, and real-life hiking trails together in a 
mobile game that lead kids into the forest—some for the first time. This chapter reviews the design, 
implementation, results, and lessons from a playtest of ParkQuest at Let’s Go Outside. Moreover, 
ParkQuest should be an idea others can rather easily use or modify for similar outdoor spaces and 
gatherings. This game could be a model for many other home-grown outdoor learning experiences 
that include elements of both story and game.
Figure 1. An aerial view of Alum 
Creek State Park where Let’s Go 
Outside is held.

212
D E S I G N I N G  F O R  T H E  PA R K
Let’s Go Outside is an eight-hour expo at the Alum Creek State Park, north of Columbus, Ohio, 
sponsored by the InsideOut! organization. Over 400 youth from the urban Columbus area, and 
representatives from supporting community organizations were expected, and organizers hoped 
to encourage urban youth to take more of an interest in nature and outdoor entertainments of all 
sorts. They asked our design team at Ohio University to create an activity to address these goals. 
They noted that youth growing up in urban centers have limited access to wild or green-spaces, so 
events like Let’s Go Outside are important in creating awareness to the opportunities they do have. 
Alum Creek State Park features a large central green where most of the event takes place, as well as 
a lake, and extensive paths and trails that venture into the surrounding woods, prairie, and low hill 
country around the green. Let’s Go Outside includes a variety of activities on the green like archery, 
kite-flying, rock climbing, and a geology dig. On the lake, youth can fish, canoe, or learn to kayak. 
In previous years, the trails had remained unused by the event. Previous InsideOut! activities for the 
wooded areas at the event had not successfully encouraged youth to go hiking. Organizers guessed 
that urban youth were hesitant to explore wilderness areas. They tried handing out park maps, 
setting up tables in remote locations, and offering adult chaperones to no avail. In approaching our 
team, they wondered if it was possible to engage and motivate urban youth to want to trek down 
forest and prairie lined paths. 
By adding ParkQuest to the event, our team and the program’s sponsors and coordinators hoped to: 
1.	 Introduce urban youth to map reading and navigation, 
2.	 Encourage kids to explore the outdoors, and 
3.	 Introduce both plant and animal life found in the Ohio wilds along the way. 
We were inspired to this line of thinking by John Martin’s Mystery Trip (2012) where a GPS-based 
mobile game was used to encourage off-trail exploration. Recognizing that a similar game might 
also encourage hesitant kids to travel new paths during Let’s Go Outside, we created a map-based 
mobile game for the event to introduce hiking and following maps—and perhaps indirectly—
jogging, geocaching, and life science topics like botany or zoology. We built this game in the ARIS 
platform. The result is a cooperative effort between InsideOut! and our team at Ohio University to 
investigate the use of digitally mediated experiences for learning. Collectively, we explored how a 
game might inspire a sense of adventure and reward exploration. In the following pages, we briefly 
review the design and implementation of the game, but focus on the real-world issues that emerged 
when coordinating a larger event on location. 

213
D E S I G N  T H R O U G H  C O N V E R S AT I O N  W I T H  PA R K  O R G A N I Z E R S
An essential process for the game’s development was to discuss with organizers their goals and to 
use a prototype of the game as a central aspect of moving that conversation forward. Iterations 
based on feedback from the organizers of InsideOut! highlighted deficiencies in our initial designs 
and helped us create a game that blended with the existing event goals.
Our original design highlighted ‘Freddie’, the mascot frog, looking for tools he suspects ‘Mr. Snake’ 
had stolen. When players visit Mr. Snake, the sneaky critter readily admits that he took them, 
and left them with a variety of animals that were too big to eat. Players are left with the task of 
exploring a nearby wooded area to gather tools from virtual animals. Event coordinators embraced 
the use of hand-held technology and ‘quests’ that challenged players to explore, but shared concern 
about taking participants off-trail (guessing that the youth may not be ready to hike in tall grass). 
Consequently, we decided to use designated hiking trails instead of encouraging off-trail exploration.
Second, the tools taken by Mr. Snake in our story were initially random, but we changed them 
to match those used in a soil conservation dig-station—another activity planned for the Let’s Go 
Outside event. Connecting tools in our story with another activity (even promoting it a bit) seemed 
like a natural fit. 
A third shift was to redesign the game so students finish it at the dig-station, providing an opportunity 
for the geologist running the station to strike up a conversation with them. Though the dig-station 
could be experienced independently, it could also be a connected experience from the mobile game. 
Based on our conversations with park organizers, we also integrated a new design idea outside 
the mobile game that would connect to it: stations with animal handlers for each animal in the 
game. To further engage players, organizers sought out experts to manage tables with real animals 
(partnering with the local zoo), animal models, furs, teeth, and energetic curators to talk about the 
animals with students who find them in their lairs. We matched the cartoon abstractions of animals 
used in the game with real animals at the newly suggested expert stations. The game was then 
designed to direct traffic to stations along the paths where experts could point out animal trails, 
markings, and talk about plants that the untrained eye may overlook. 
Adding information tables not only sought to strengthen our game but, similar to the dig-station, 
would hopefully benefit the informative tables themselves. We hoped that by connecting the mobile 
game to these tables, players of the game would be both prompted and encouraged to initiate 
conversation with volunteer experts; organizers were aware of difficulties with previous attempts by 
these experts to attract attention to their tables. Handlers could reference the storyline of the game 
as conversation starters and youth would quickly discover very natural and authentic discovery 
rewards for hiking into the woods. 

214
Editing the game with organizers also helped our team edit and update the text used in-game, 
selecting words more appropriate to the participants, and shortening and clarifying the activities 
to provide less ‘screen time’ and more ‘tree time’. Conversations needed to be easily read and goals 
clearly expressed both in conversation and in quest directions. Finally, coordinators asked for 
courtesy expressions such as ‘please’ and ‘thank you’ to be added to each dialogue to reinforce and 
model polite discourse. Though small, these updates improved the game’s overall quality and fit for 
the event’s audience. 
M U R P H Y ’ S  L AW:  W H AT  C A N  G O  W R O N G,  T Y P I C A L LY  D O E S
Previous experience with making mobile games told us we needed to not only prepare our game in 
terms of design but to thoroughly test it to make sure it worked on location and for a fresh audience. 
Along these lines, we tested and iterated our design several times to get it right. We conducted both 
remote and on-location walkthroughs of the game to test for bugs, glitches, and playability. These 
uncovered a few minor bugs that we fixed on the fly. Prior to the larger event, we made sure the 
technology worked—including our internet connection, mobile devices, charging stations, and 
player instructions. We thought we were ready to go, but our preparation was not sufficient.
Game day. September 21, 2013, just north of Columbus, Ohio. The rain has been going on all 
night, making the park soggy and muddy. The morning weather report announces ongoing rain 
and all-day clouds. Coordinators have food ready for over 400, providing the 152 actual attendees 
a handsome feast. Upon arrival, the coordinators moved most of the remote stations—the ones we 
designed to line the path of our game—into the larger meeting tents. Paper guides, promotional 
handouts, and mobile devices were packed away in boxes. Weather, of course, is a real risk for any 
outdoor activity. Still, some students wanted to get wet and go mobile (Figure 2).  
The inclement weather also meant the animal 
experts were unable to attend. The rain had 
caused leaks in the roof of their facility the 
night before and they had moved all of their 
animals to a new location. The animals were 
tired and we imagined the keepers were ready 
for bed too. We planned for actual animals and 
their keepers to be at each location where the 
players met a character in the game, but now 
the game would need to work without them. 
The map function of our game also did not 
work as planned. ARIS requires internet 
connectivity to function, in particular to 
provide a player with their location and a map 
Figure 2. Less youth than expected turned out for the 
event due to the rain.

215
of their surroundings. We had planned for this by providing portable routers to give our WiFi mobile 
devices the connectivity they need (Figure 3). However, on game day the heavy clouds interfered 
with the portable routers’ ability to receive cellular data and the map wouldn’t load properly inside 
the game. Later, when the rain stopped, the game itself loaded but players had to find their next 
station without the blue navigational dot, partially nullifying the navigational benefits of the game. 
Students who did play had to do so during infrequent moments of optimal reception.  
Despite the ongoing rain, pre-play interviews revealed that all players were interested in the technology 
and using maps. They naturally grouped themselves into teams of 3-4 as anticipated, each team 
traveling with one device. No players tried the game on their own and some stopped the game after 
talking to the Snake and realizing that the next stop required them to walk a distance from the tents. 
Still, others happily splashed through puddles. Some wanted to stay close to the tents, others ventured 
out. Tenters shared passing interest in playing “if the weather was better” because “this looks cool.” 
Those who tried when the WiFi was weak or batteries ran low did not return later to try again. At first 
glance, the weather, technology problems, removal of live animals, and lower attendance at the event 
seemed to make our first effort less successful than we hoped. For those that did play, they returned to 
the tent excited about: 1) the kind of game it was, 2) the ability to use the devices, and 3) their ideas 
for future “awesome” stories. Their feedback was consistently positive. While we didn’t get hundreds 
of youth to play as we had planned, we did get about 40 of them to enjoy the soggy outdoors.
Figure 3. A Jetpack Portable Router and an iPod Touch. The game, played on an iPod Touch requires data over 
WiFi. The portable router wsa to provide that data, but on game day failed to perform.

216
D E B R I E F I N G  O U R  D AY  AT  T H E  PA R K
We approached the event coordinators discouraged about the level of interest in the game, and 
the technical issues. After attempting to apologize, the organizers interrupted us and said they 
saw significantly more interest in this activity than with their previous attempts to encourage 
exploration, and were looking forward to next year. They explained that previous efforts produced 
nearly no adventuring map readers. The fact that we had any participants tromping off into the 
woods at all, despite all the issues, was a significant win for all the veteran planners involved—
kids were actually hiking the trails! Despite Murphy’s Law, this was the day at the park they were 
hoping for. 
Having participated in the walkthroughs, coordinators knew firsthand that the game was 
functional and that the weather was an unpreventable variable that shut down the canoes and the 
animal handlers too. They minimized the importance of our difficulties with the map function and 
noted that the mobile adventure still provided enough hints to be completed without the aid of a 
map. For instance when the character said to “look in the woods to the north,” players discussed 
which way north was and debated how to figure that out. Then they looked around to see woods 
in that direction. Unintentionally, we provided directive hints in the quest descriptions as a way 
to maintain awareness of context for our players; in the absence of the maps these instructions 
sustained the adventure effectively. 
As designers we missed having live animals, handlers, and stations. The players, on the other hand, 
didn’t miss what they didn’t expect. Players expressed concern for the cartoon versions of the 
animals; we had small facts and information embedded in the game dialogue and item descriptions, 
so players were still able to connect to the wildlife in the game. Coordinators and players felt their 
objective to have players learn about the animals was met by what they saw. 
We learned that the narrative combined with location still held attraction for play. As the narrative is 
constant, the environment is an interesting variable that will have its story elements that it brings to 
gameplay. For instance, for those that played, the soggy weather made the game more adventurous 
than otherwise expected, and they embraced it. Splashing in puddles easily replaced seeing live 
animals as physical rewards for players. 
Additionally, parents were making a point to thank coordinators for the experience, as this letter 
from a parent to coordinators illustrates: 
	
It was also nice to hear all of the good feedback from my son and daughter about 
their experience exploring nature and even interacting with mobile learning 
games that were included as an activity. Rarely do they have the opportunity to 
assemble outside for a full day of play and fun without the distraction of new-
aged media and television at home. - A.R. Murray

217
It was encouraging to hear from this parent, as well as through our conversations with the organizers, 
that our game felt like something that coordinated with the outdoor activities it was meant to 
inspire and be a part of rather than the mindless entertainment they associate with other media and 
television.
Though the smaller attendance to the event was disappointing, feedback indicated that participants 
and organizers both appreciated that the game successfully: 1)  motivated youth to enjoy the 
outdoors, 2) respected the physicality of locative play (even as a contrast to television), and 3) 
warranted integrating mobile learning for future events. In short, even with challenges, coordinators 
saw increased exploration and navigation of park space, and parents and supporters were excited 
to see kids engaged in map-based navigation activities with what they perceived as cutting edge 
learning designs. 
P L A N N I N G  F O R  P U D D L E S
We were interested in how we could have planned better and learn from the unplannable 
elements. We were happy to note that the part of our game that was plannable was surprisingly 
functional. Sun, animal and dig stations, and internet access in a second iteration will of course 
improve the experience for players. In addition, we have considered four more elements to help 
our game respond more robustly to changing conditions—just in case. 
•	
An effective Plan B could be to create paper versions of the game and a map that 
could be handed out in waterproof ziplock bags. This low-tech solution might 
substitute passably if we need it (similarly Macklin and Guster (2012) used 
grocery bag kits to deliver quests and challenges to players in New York).
•	
Similar to what is done with other outdoor activities for participants who might 
not be prepared for bad weather, we could have various sizes of flip-flop sandals 
available to loan out to youth as part of the event. If we could have easily pulled 
out sandals and held their nice shoes for them so they could freely pounce 
puddles, this would have allowed more players to adventure—not only in the 
game but in all the activities.
•	
We could find more robust options to provide internet. In fact, the coordinators 
of Let’s Go Outside have arranged for the Best Buy Geek Squad to bring out a 
van to provide a more robust WiFi signal for the expo next year. Best Buy agreed 
to volunteer this service, so this alternative option is still free for our players. 
Generous local businesses may be able to help solve logistical details that are 
otherwise burdensome with just a couple calls. 

218
•	
We could do more to make it easy for those who volunteer to help run the game. 
Volunteers are often recruited on the day of the event and although happy to help, 
may not know the lay of the land. For our game, this means having ready for them 
short and clear written instructions and details for any live stations. With a mobile 
game, the technology itself can be intimidating. Making volunteering as easy and 
as low-tech as possible can potentially smooth the road for new helpers.
C O N C L U S I O N
Despite the issues mentioned above, we were happy with how the game addressed our primary 
goals of encouraging navigation, trail hiking, player engagement, and delivery. We also maintain 
that despite requiring adjustments for more robust play, the game garnered positive feedback from 
players. Coordinators and parents saw enough of the gameplay that they were excited ParkQuest 
was added to the Let’s Go Outside event. Players were able to navigate and engage in a hands-on 
learning experience in an outdoor environment while hiking through trails in the park. ParkQuest 
was, in the end, quite robust and adaptable in the face of unforeseen problems, especially as 
facilitated by adults who were monitoring the situation and ready to adjust. The portions that 
worked were exceptionally engaging and built enthusiasm for a new way to interact with the park 
space.
Our initial question of engaging urban youth in nature adventures may have not been answered 
fully with the first iteration. However we did: 1) create a park adventure game that echoes 
Martin’s Mystery Trip, 2) found that the game was resilient even under ‘Murphy’s Law’, and 3) 
recognize that we still have an opportunity to refine the design in coming iterations. It is more 
than possible, even under challenging conditions, to build a story and mobile gaming experience 
that encourages pathway exploration in a park setting. 
Due to the simplicity of the actual game, ParkQuest should be easily replicable, resilient, and 
refinable. If you have a park near you, and kids that would benefit from time outdoors, this may 
be the kind of basic adventure game to start with. Mobile media learning, as with any learning, 
is as much about dealing with real-world conditions, people, and hiccups as it is about design 
and technology use. We suggest you expect and anticipate the need for back up plans and that 
this planning frees up concerns over technology function in favor of flexible learning models that 
bring story and game into outdoor learning experiences.
R E F E R E N C E S
Martin, J. (2012). “Mystery Trip”. In Dikkers, S., Martin, J., Coulter, B. Mobile Media Learning. ETC Press. 
Macklin, C. & Guster, T. (2012). “Re-Activism”. In Dikkers, S., Martin, J., Coulter, B. Mobile Media Learning. ETC Press. 

219
Chapter SEVENTEEN

Lift Off: A DIY Addition 
to a Smithsonian Space
Christopher C. Blakesley and Jennifer McIntosh
How can a team sustain the integrity of a vision in less than ideal circumstances? What solutions 
work when pioneering a mobile game activity in a museum-like space? These questions are addressed 
in this story of our team who made a helicopter artifact area more interactive and engaging for a day 
at the Smithsonian Air and Space Udvar-Hazy Center. 
Our teamwork began as Christopher Blakesley, a learning technologist living near the Udvar-
Hazy Center, met and discussed mobile game possibilities with Jennifer McIntosh, the Center’s 
Interactive Education Program Manager. We (Chris and Jennifer) discussed the many aircraft 
artifacts in the Center, their associated histories and stories, mobile technologies, and game-based 
learning approaches. Through several discussions, a shared vision began to take shape: To create 
a proof-of-concept mobile game activity that enhanced visitor engagement with aircraft artifacts. 
Soon after our initial discussions, we decided it would be mutually beneficial to create and facilitate 
a mobile activity at an upcoming event called Super Science Saturday: “Helicopter Day.” This 
was recognized as one of the the most popular events for the Center, with approximately 10,000 
participants expected to attend. During this event exhibitors from the aerospace field facilitate 
hands-on “discovery stations,” where visitors can learn hands-on about aspects of aviation. Visitors 
would even have the opportunity to see functioning helicopters outside of the museum. 
We wanted to create a meaningful experience in which visitors could briefly take on a gameplayer 
identity—to playfully strive for a goal while interacting with responsive artifacts. We hoped for a 
memorable experience imbued with affect and curiosity. To inform our approach, we considered 
the following “five properties of handheld computers that produce unique educational affordances” 
(Klopfer, Squire, & Jenkins, 2008):

220
1.	 Portability - can take the computer to different sites and move around 
within a location.
2.	 Social interactivity - can exchange data and collaborate with other people 
face to face.
3.	 Context sensitivity - can gather data unique to the current location, environment, 
and time, including both real and simulated data.
4.	 Connectivity - can connect handhelds to data collection devices, other hand-
helds, and to a common network that creates a true shared environment.
5.	 Individuality - can provide unique scaffolding that is customized 
to the individual’s path of investigation.
We particularly favored the features of portability and individuality, as we wanted players to walk 
through the center with mobile devices that could augment their perception of the space around 
them. The devices needed to make the experience personalized and replayable. Building upon the 
concept of individuality, we identified fitting features from the role-playing game (RPG) genre to 
incorporate into our game. With a RPG approach, players would take on the identity of a protagonist 
immersed in a fictional world. Players also would explore the world and move a narrative forward by 
completing quests—challenges that usually end with some kind of reward. 
Based on the concepts of portability, individuality, and RPGs, we could envision an engaging 
player experience. Players would walk around the Center with a mobile device, start the game, and 
be assigned a virtual identity (a pilot). Next, the player would consider a quest, such as fueling an 
aircraft to enable lift off. This quest could require the player to find, collect, and return virtual fuel 
to a plane or helicopter. Finally, a rewarding moment would occur by watching an aircraft take off 
via video. We also planned to use our small budget to buy prizes to give players who completed the 
game. We eventually decided to buy Flarbles, a small propeller-like plastic toy that proved to be very 
popular among visitors.
In addition to formulating a game concept, we selected a tool to build the game upon, as well as 
recruited volunteers interested in helping to build the game. In terms of choosing a tool to run the 
game, we chose ARIS. ARIS offered an inexpensive, experimental, and flexible platform needed for 
our goal to create an initial, proof-of-concept mobile learning game1. In addition to having a usable 
mobile authoring tool, we needed help building and facilitating the game, so we decided to recruit 
interested, local youth. This seemed like a rich learning opportunity that young people may find 
personal interest in, or potentially an item for a resumé. The involvement of youth also aligned with 
the mission of the Smithsonian to increase and diffuse knowledge. After communicating through 
our networks, 4 local youth and 2 Smithsonian volunteers joined our team.
1 Below, the authors reference a few specific features of ARIS. For more information about them and ARIS generally, 
see Chapter 6 in this book. -Eds

221
T H E  O R I G I N A L  G A M E  D E S I G N
Our team quickly developed a mobile game concept in which participants would take on the role of 
an aviator faced with three possible quests involving the collection of fuel for one of three selected 
helicopters in the Center. The helicopters we ultimately chose were the Engineering Forum PV-2, 
Bell U-H 1H Iroquois “Huey” Smokey, and the Sikorsky UH-34D Seahorse. We envisioned the 
participants collecting virtual fuel tanks scattered around the center, walking to and “fueling” a 
helicopter, and viewing that helicopter in flight—in a video we could play in ARIS—as a reward. 
We quickly figured out how this idea would 
work in ARIS: A participant would find and 
scan a QR code to collect fuel. Each scan of 
a fuel QR code would increase the fuel in 
the virtual inventory within the participant’s 
mobile device. To fuel up a helicopter, the 
participant would scan a representative QR 
code in front of a helicopter (see Figure 1). 
In terms of game design, we aimed to make 
this activity engaging through the action of 
collecting and a light narrative in the form of 
a role, and a video cut scene as a culminating 
reward. We chose to use short YouTube videos 
to show each helicopter in flight. 
We also designed the quests so that one was 
more challenging than the others. For the 
hardest quest, we chose to involve the PV-2 
helicopter, since its location was harder to find than the other helicopters. We also added a second 
task in this quest, requiring participants to take pictures of the helicopters located outside of the 
Center—In the game story, the pilot was researching other helicopters for future purchase. The 
ARIS platform contains a data collection tool that enabled users to take pictures and save them in a 
virtual inventory; we wanted to use it to instill a feeling of interactivity and closeness to functioning 
helicopters both inside and outside of the Center. In sum, players would need to successfully collect 
fuel and take pictures of the helicopters outside before viewing the final video. The YouTube video 
we selected for the PV-2 flight was also unique, a commercial that argued for cars being inevitably 
replaced by helicopters as the main commuter mode of transportation. This video’s entertaining 
futurist angle made it our choice to provide a satisfying ending to the hardest quest of our game.
However, during our game development process we discovered several jarring constraints that 
threatened our vision for the game. While we were welcome to facilitate a mobile activity during 
Helicopter Day, we would unfortunately be on our own for funding. We would need to secure 
Figure 1. A Helicopter QR Code easel near 
the Sikorsky UH-34D Seahorse helicopter. The 
easel displays a QR code for “fueling” and an 
advertisement flier created for the activity.

222
our own mobile devices, and we agreed that we would not want people taking the devices we used 
away from our station table. This decision was reinforced by the low cellular and WiFi reception 
in the massive Center, meaning that even if players could use our devices or personal devices, they 
wouldn’t necessarily have a good Internet connection needed to run the ARIS app. 
We found ourselves at a crossroads. On one hand, this initiative seemed destined to be nothing 
more than a grounded information table with iPads. On the other hand, we recognized that this 
might be the only opportunity we would have to test our ideas in front of such a large audience and 
in such an impressive space. A successful, proof-of-concept activity could lead to future possibilities 
at the Center, and we didn’t want to pass up the opportunity. While the solutions to our challenges 
were not clear, we decided to press forward and trust that creativity, collaboration, and a shared 
vision of our project would result in it’s success. Also, if we did not succeed we had little to lose!
After three weeks our team completed preparations for our activity, which we dubbed Lift Off!. 
We decided to create the original concept of the game for players with personal mobile phones 
as a starting point. While we anticipated low participation in this option due to limited cellular 
reception, and the required steps of downloading the ARIS app on their phones, we nonetheless 
decided to make this option available. Players had all the information they needed through the 
instructions located on the easels in the center. They could collect fuel indefinitely, fill all three 
helicopters, and view all three videos of the helicopters in flight. Creating this game, with it’s high 
fidelity to our original vision, provided us with a conceptual starting point from which to create an 
alternative game that would be accessible to the majority of our participants.
T H E  A LT E R N AT I V E  G A M E  D E S I G N
To design the alternative game, we started by intentionally retaining the (1) game action of collecting 
fuel and the (2) light narrative feature of a video cut scene reward at the end of the play experience. 
Our primary constraint was that the mobile devices were not mobile—the iPads volunteered for 
the event by members of our team had to remain at our station table. We decided that players 
would begin at our table (see Figure 2), where they would hear a description of the game and then 
be invited to collect a required amount of fuel by walking and collecting QR code printouts found 
in envelopes on easels located throughout the Center. For simplicity, we created one fuel QR code 
that would work for any helicopter rather than separate codes for each helicopter as originally 
envisioned. While participants would be encouraged to collect codes from different locations, they 
would be able to game the system and collect all required codes from one location. We were actually 
curious to see if any participants would be engaged enough to investigate this issue. Fueling the 
PV-2 helicopter required 6 codes, the Huey 4 codes, and the Seahorse 4 codes. 
After collecting fuel QR codes, participants would then return to the table and select one of three 
images of helicopters to fuel (see Figure 3). The images were photographs of three helicopters located 
in the Center. Participants would use an iPad running ARIS to scan the QR codes attached to the 
images to view a video of their “fueled” helicopter in flight. We also decided to offer participants a 

223
Flarble as a prize. The brightly colored Flarbles, 
along with the iPads at our table proved to be 
an appealing draw to players, and provided 
motivation for participation.
FA C I L I TAT I N G  T H E 
A LT E R N AT I V E  G A M E
During the Helicopter Day event our team revised 
the game as needed in response to feedback from 
participants. The gameplay actions of collecting 
and viewing videos were areas we prioritized to 
retain in the game design. We quickly noticed 
that the abstraction of collecting fuel by finding 
and returning QR code printouts proved to be 
a challenging concept for participants. During 
the first hour of the event, our team developed 
a useful approach for introducing the activity to 
participants. We would say some version of this 
statement to passers by:
Do you want to play a game? You get to be a pilot 
who collects fuel to send a helicopter into the air. 
You need to find at least two “tanks of fuel” (hold 
up QR code papers) and bring them back here. 
Then you can watch a video of a helicopter and win 
a prize. 
It usually took a few more minutes to explain that 
the card-sized QR code printouts represented 
fuel, and that the act of bringing the QR codes 
back was intended to be the act of getting fuel. 
Many participants at this point were still not sure 
what to do next. We found another improvised 
solution. We moved an easel containing QR 
codes next to our table and directed players to 
get their first fuel-code there (see Figure 4). For 
the remainder of the event, this scaffold helped 
participants quickly understand the concept of 
the game and get started with the collection 
activity. 
Figure 2. Members of the Lift Off! team (from left to 
right): Jack Sorensen, Chris Blakesley, Jayson Call, 
Yamelet Alvarez, and Joselid Alvarez. 
Figure 3. The three helicopters players can refuel for lift 
off after collecting fuel tanks by scanning the QR codes 
at the bottom of their sheets within the Lift Off! game in 
ARIS.

224
We also adapted to the needs of family and children participants. We noticed that our original 
requirement of 6 or 4 QR codes for fueling was too aggressive for parents of very young children, 
who were primarily motivated to get a flarble, and didn’t understand the game concept. We adjusted 
the game requirements in ARIS (on the fly!) and on the image printouts so that the fueling the PV-2 
helicopter would require 4 codes, while the Huey and Seahorse would require 2 codes, allowing 
families to complete the game more quickly. 
At the same time, many adolescent participants engaged in the collection activity with zeal. They 
frequently returned with many more QR codes than were required (see Figure 5). One discovered a 
QR code flaw—the fact that all the QR codes were in fact the same, mentioned above. His mother 
approached the table asking in a doubtful tone, if her son was correct about all of the QR codes 
being the same. I informed her that he was correct and that he was the only one who discovered this 
feature out of all the people to play our game. I explained that this was a deliberate decision—to use 
the same QR code for all fuel tanks—for design simplicity. 
When we wondered if any participants would try to game the system and discover this minimal flaw, 
our team wondered what reaction this discovery would bring. Scorn? A feeling of being cheated? 
The mother told her approaching son that he was right, which led to a euphoric celebration. I asked 
them how they felt about this discovery and they indicated that they didn’t feel cheated, but rather 
happy that they were the only ones who had discovered this secret. The collecting activity itself, 
rather than the video it led to, could have been the greater reward for many participants.
Figure 4. We placed an easel near our table as a scaffold to guide players with the main gameplay action of 
collecting fuel tanks by scanning QR codes.

225
The sequence of scanning QR codes and 
unlocking a video was an engaging moment for 
many participants, evidenced by commitment 
to watch the videos to their conclusion, 
and conversation occurring during video 
play. Several parents commented and posed 
questions to their children while watching the 
videos together (see Figure 6). Comments like 
“This is a helicopter they thought would replace 
cars...” and “What do you think that helicopter 
is used for?” Our team increasingly described 
context to the videos or insights afterwards to 
participants, such as pointing out where the 
actual helicopters were in the Center. While 
we believe the experience would have been even 
more engaging if the videos were viewed in front 
of the representative helicopters, participants 
still seemed to appreciate the activity. Our 
hope was that participants would notice or seek 
out “their” helicopters during the remainder of 
their time in the Center.
R E F L E C T I O N S
Overall participation at the alternative table 
version of Lift Off! was high, with a total of 
436 players, the second-highest player total 
among all the other Discovery Stations at 
this event (See Figure 7). In addition, the 
original mobile-only version of Lift Off! was 
actually played by two people, a modest 
success. Given that we simply made the 
original game available in the space, without 
providing any hands-on support, we did not 
know if players with iPhones would be drawn 
to playing this game, let alone be engaged 
enough to complete all of the quests. To 
our delight, two participants went to the 
trouble of downloading ARIS and playing the 
Figure 5. A large stack of collected QR codes despite the 
minimum requirement of two codes to play the game.
Figure 6. Participant families watch a video of “their” 
helicopter in flight.

226
original version, and one of these participants completed all 3 quests. These participation results 
demonstrate that a minimally funded mobile game project can successfully engage players in a 
museum-like space. 
We also learned several lessons from our experience. We found it was important to move forward 
with commitment to the vision of a project while also adopting an adaptive attitude. When tough 
problems appeared—and they did appear—a tactical flexibility led to effective solutions. Our team 
originally set out to make a mobile activity that engaged visitors with aircraft artifacts through a 
game-based approach. Due to constraints of limited funding and tabled mobile devices, our team 
got creative with the game mechanics while staying as true as possible to the original project vision. 
Although players couldn’t take devices with them around the Center, we still incorporated movement 
in our game. Although players wouldn’t necessarily be able to see the aircraft during gameplay, the 
experience still promoted a measure of individuality through player choice of helicopter to fuel. 
Figure 7. Players learning about and completing the Lift Off! game at a Discovery Station.

227
We learned that while design tactics may need to change because of constraints, a team commitment 
to a shared vision can still bring a concept to successful, unique fruition. Despite daunting challenges, 
our team made aerospace artifacts more interactive and engaging for a day at the Smithsonian Air 
and Space Udvar-Hazy Center. We hope our lessons can provide insight for other teams working to 
innovate with mobile tools in museum-like spaces. 
R E F E R E N C E
Klopfer, E., & Squire, K. (2008). Environmental detectives - the development of an augmented reality platform for 
environmental simulations. Education Technology Research and Development, 56, 203–228.

S P E C I A L  T H A N K S
Thank you to the volunteers whose preparation, enthusiasm and commitment brought this project 
and chapter to fruition. No one could create and facilitate this project alone; everyone’s help and 
adaptability as a whole was the key to a great experience. We extend sincere gratitude to Joselid 
Alvarez, Yamelet Alvarez, Jacob Bixler, Emily Blakesley, Mary Blakesley, Jayson Call, Tom Caswell, 
Josh Freeman, Sruthi Poduval, and Jack Sorensen.


229
Chapter EIGHTEEN

Horror at the Ridges: 
Engagement with an AR Horror Story
Rebecca Fischer and Seann Dikkers
Ohio University – Athens, Ohio
	
The year is 1900 and you are here to report on the advances being made in medicine 
for the clinically insane. The newly opened Athens Lunatic Asylum is touted as a gem 
of innovation in both architectural design and care for the ill. You think, ‘This is a 
place that the sick can get a little air and let nature heal as it should’. 
	
It’s beautiful indeed, but there is something else that unsettles you here. Perhaps it 
was just the long ride in the train. 
We designed the game Horror at the Ridges to build horror through an augmented reality (AR) 
experience. As part of a series of games we are building around established genres of entertainment, 
Horror at the Ridges explores how a mobile game can draw an emotional reaction from its players. 
We drew from the conventions of horror movies, novels, and past AR games to successfully build 
anxiety, create imagined narrative outcomes, and even scare players. Through a conscious attempt 
to develop an engaging story through AR, Horror at the Ridges also seeks to expand our thinking 
about informal learning design. In this chapter we provide a brief discussion of engagement and 
horror media, outline some of our design considerations for using AR games to produce an engaging 
horror story, and discuss qualitative findings from our playtests. Player reaction was a central part 
of our iterative design process and analysis, so through our observations and reports from our 
players we gain a glimpse of players’ engagement with the narrative we created. We conclude that 
an AR game—through the unique constraints and advantages of mobile media technology—can 
effectively build the emotional states necessary for engaging narratives.
M O T I VAT I O N
One reason for our experiment is to explore the possibilities of AR gaming as a medium. AR 
gaming is currently a niche activity. There are small AR fan communities drawn to location-based 
activities (e.g. geocaching) and more recently massive social territorial marking (e.g. Ingress), but 

230
nothing like those gathered around the artifacts of truly mass media. In addition, a small number 
of educators—like those found in this book and the previous Mobile Media Learning—have built 
educational AR experiences for students, often using story or narrative as operative design. Most of 
these previous efforts with a learning focus have been largely confined to the classroom and similar 
spaces. We wanted to follow this lead, but specifically explore how AR can be used to create an 
engaging story outside any compulsory context. We wonder, will AR have a proper place among 
other popular media formats to tell immersive stories and build fandom? Can we create narrative 
experiences that draw informal players into a story—enough to care what happens next? Can we 
ever expect to have truly popular AR games that might compete with console titles? We postulate 
that emotional reaction and caring about a story, or engagement, is the first step to being a fan, 
sharing an experience with a friend, and eventually to the popularization of the medium. 
At the same time, Horror at the Ridges is an experiment in game-based learning. We see our 
investigation of an audience’s uncompelled engagement with an AR game as a stepping stone to 
designing compelling learning experiences. Connecting learning to engagement is not a new idea. 
Research in the fields of education, media studies, anthropology, and psychology all suggest that 
engagement can be a powerful force for learning (Hirumi, Appelman, Rieber, & Van Eck, 2010). 
When engaged in a game, learning can be a natural outcome of participation (Squire, 2011), invite 
players into social networks or third spaces (Steinkuehler & Williams, 2006), and be as rigorous, 
gritty, and complex as the game affords (Gee, 2005). To accomplish these positive ends however, 
game designers focus on an essential experience first, and playtest for engagement as confirmation 
of design (Schell, 2008). Previous thinking about engagement and games and the possibilities for 
AR games to explore narrative genres by placing the audience in the story convinced us to try 
and make an AR game that was worth playing. Though we have a long term desire to use these 
experiments to think about learning—Horror at the Ridges is an effort to focus on creating an 
essential experience first to further design and contribute to a conversation about engaged media. 
H O R R O R  A S  E N G A G E M E N T
Our specific question for Horror at the Ridges was whether we could make an AR game engage a 
player well enough for the player to report a feeling of horror. H.P. Lovecraft called horror “the 
oldest and strongest emotion of mankind”. Fear connects us viscerally to an experience as well as 
providing thrill-seekers with a rush of sensations. We do understand horror to play into our unease, 
but when we engage in the experience, it can fill us with a feeling of accomplishment, survival, and 
courage. The audience pay off for their engagement in horror can be a very positive experience. 
Although our team sees the horror genre as but one example among many in theory representable 
through AR, in this case we hoped to leverage existing author expertise in horror writing/film for 
compelling AR narrative writing, to make a game that could scare people in a good way. In short, if 
we can scare players with an AR game, we can reasonably conclude that engagement with the story, 
place, and/or empathy with the fictional characters is possible more generally within the medium. 

231
In addition, the emotion of fear is often an easily observable phenomena that allows researchers 
clear, observable indications of engagement. It should be easy enough to see when our game is 
working in the ways we have intended.
To produce engagement, a work of horror requires the audience to develop a strong emotional 
connection to the narrative; to be afraid, or horrified, one must fully realize characters and events 
mentally and become repelled by or anxious about the imaginary or real outcomes that await. Being 
scared while experiencing a fictional narrative is to be empathetic with fictional characters and their 
bad situations. For the purpose of making our game, we used the AR storytelling tool ARIS and 
operationalized fear as: 
1.	 Having limited sensory inputs (sight, sound, knowledge), causing one to imagine 
awful things they might experience if they had the chance; 
2.	 Heightened attention to potential negative outcomes to a situation; and/or 
3.	 Unexpected or startling sensory input (“Boo!”). 
AR can literally place the player in the physical space of the narrative (See Chapter 2 of this book - 
Eds) so the story is all around them and thus remove a layer of unreality from the player’s perceptions. 
If they are playing our game in a creepy place, players are not distracted by a comfortable couch or 
theater. Imagined negative outcomes are easier to compose when you hear real wind, feel real dirt 
crunching under their feet, or when you smell real mildew and decay. 
T H E  AT H E N S  L U N AT I C  A S Y L U M
To make an engaging AR horror narrative, we needed a place that would effectively set the proper 
tone and mood and we found the perfect location. Nestled in the Ohio Appalachian foothills is a 
bucolic multi-building campus called The Ridges—formerly known as the Athens Lunatic Asylum. 
Horror at the Ridges uses dreadful—and actual—historical medical archives from that closed state 
asylum, and takes place at The Ridges.
Founded in 1874, and used for over a century, the former asylum has been host to over one hundred 
years of unique and “innovative” medical philosophies. Locals claim the campus is one of the most 
haunted places in America and tell stories of lost patients, crocodiles, hidden tunnels, and ghost 
sightings. It has already found its way into television and books. 
Closed in the 1970s, The Ridges has fallen into disrepair. The whole place has a brooding sense of 
loneliness and decay—a sense of a former gilded age, or greatness, for the campus and those that 
came here. While there have been cursory attempts at refurbishing the buildings, a closer inspection 
reveals many of the structures are still boarded up, with flaking paint, covered in danger signs, and 
seemingly abandoned. The entrance to the main building (Figure 1) looms over nearby Athens. 

232
Walking around the grounds one quickly understands how the rich history of myths and local legends 
have flourished. Our current disconnect with early 20th century medicine creates compelling curiosity. 
Functionally named buildings today sound unfamiliar to visitors: the suicide ward, lobotomy labs, and 
the ballroom. The human-sized heat ducts (that housed a crocodile in the winters) are bewildering. 
Many tourists are uncomfortable with the history of electroshock therapy, lobotomies, isolation 
treatment, and management practices employed by a medical staff that largely lived in isolation on 
site with the patients. For instance, when they buried their inmates in the on-site graveyard, the leaders 
of the Athens Lunatic Asylum chose to mark the graves only with an ID number. The patients were 
left nameless. This already creepy place is a natural location to stage a horror game. 
Figure 1. The Main Entrance and Early Game Location.

233
The location offers many nooks and crannies particularly suited to setting the mood for our players. 
Some of the first floor rooms look like sets from popular horror movies and games: there are boiler 
rooms (Nightmare on Elm Street, BioShock); workshops with old tools still laying around (Saw, Texas 
Chainsaw Massacre, Doom); broken porcelain restrooms and living quarters (The Shining; 7th Guest); 
and rooms like those in Figure 2 look like cells, including writings on the wall (Portal; Batman: 
Arkham Asylum). Many of the windows into these room/scenes have been overgrown by plants and 
cobwebs. This makes these locations feel cramped even while viewed from outside. 
Figure 2. The View into Lucy’s Room.

234
Prior to designing our game, we spent an afternoon as visitors and observed natural tourist behaviors. 
We informally observed that visitors did not necessarily walk up to windows to see these sites, most 
chose to drive by or stay on the marked sidewalks. One might expect many visitors would be 
looking into windows or through doorways to get a peek at the preserved history and horror of the 
location, but they do not. Some of the best views of the location were being lost to the casual tourist 
in favor of a single repurposed art gallery in the main building. As a partially abandoned and public 
space (it is currently owned by Ohio University), players were free to walk around, but it is not a 
curated space that gives active permission to look around. Visitors’ current use of place fell short 
of what the location could actually evoke, which created an opening for us to use an AR game to 
create new, stronger experiences.
We began to imagine how narrative, and specifically the mechanics of horror stories could be 
applied to leverage the evocative qualities of this place to draw players in and really scare them. The 
story could prompt players to leave their usual paths and venture further into the buildings and 
grounds. Not only would this get them to the areas that make for varied creepy sets or backdrops for 
storytelling, but also give them permission to do something they would not otherwise feel they had 
permission to do. This could actively build anxiety, contributing to a player’s feelings of isolation 
and being somewhere they are not supposed to be, inducing a fear that they could be caught. The 
obscurity of the darkened rooms and windows could be opportunities to limit a player’s sensory 
input (our first common element to horror stories) and anticipate the horrors within. 
C R E AT I N G  A  N A R R AT I V E  F O R  H O R R O R
An old, and some say haunted, asylum goes a long way towards achieving our goal of making 
players afraid; what brings us one step closer is crafting an effective narrative. We had a location 
that was in and of itself unsettling, but none of the visitors to the Asylum who we saw expressed 
the verbal or physical horror that we expect from the genre. Could our story actually deliver on this 
promise? Would players actually leave the beaten path? Would players engage with these unsettling 
windows if prompted by an AR narrative guide? Would the experience connect emotionally with 
them, or would it feel like just another tour? The story still had to pull back a layer of knowledge 
about the place, and allow the player time and clues that would inspire. 
Writers often use history as backdrop, as do films like National Treasure, Bill and Ted’s Excellent 
Adventure, or the recent Mr. Peabody. Current game franchises like Assassin’s Creed also allow players 
moments of connection when they first see game versions of the Hagia Sofia or Rome’s Coliseum; 
designers recognize the delight of historical cameos and the excitement in meeting legendary figures 
for players. Learning, in all of these media, is a positive outcome, but not a necessarily or centrally 
planned outcome. For instance, in Assassin’s Creed, the central activities of the player are to move, 
climb, hide, fight, and solve problems to move the story forward. Though you can learn much about 
renaissance Italy from Assassin’s Creed, this is a small part of what the game was designed to do. 
Likewise, entertainment and engagement remain our central design goals for Horror at the Ridges, 

235
and learning benefits were secondary. The experience of the player includes walking, looking, 
sharing, or even running in fear. We want them to experience horror first, and we use archived 
history not for learning design, but for engagement. 
We wanted to make use of the reality of the asylum to come up with an engaging story, but we 
had to be careful to do so ethically. There are people still living who worked at or were patients in 
the Asylum. While we used many local legends and bits of history in the game, we also looked to 
movies like A Beautiful Mind and Shutter Island to help build a narrative where the people in the 
game (and by extension the institution) were not the real enemy as a way to distance our story from 
that reality.
Our story unfolds in five chapters, and follows an arc commonly found in horror-style narratives: 
Context (Horror at the Ridges!), Introduction of Characters, Harbingers of Doom, Rising Tension, 
Confirmation of Fear, Chase, and Climax and Resolution. 
1.	 Players are introduced to the game in the role of a reporter, freshly arrived at 
the Athens, Ohio train station and ready to do some research for his or her next 
article on the new asylum (establishes Context, funnels visitors to the location 
and introduce basic game navigation interface). 
2.	 Players freely explore The Ridges through the game, exploring the grounds as 
well as meeting and interacting with recreations of some of the people who 
created and shaped the institution (Introduction of Character). 
3.	 Players become more familiar with some of the fictitious residents of the asylum 
and their needs. It is here that players discover the cheerful outer exterior might 
be hiding something more sinister (Harbingers of Doom!). 
4.	 Players discover they cannot locate either of their new friends (Rising Tension) 
and the horrors happening at the asylum (Confirmation of Fear). 
5.	 Players attempt to escape and return to the newspaper (Chase) to report on the 
clear corruption at the Athens Lunatic Asylum (Climax and Resolution). 
Horror comes not from elements that startle players, but rather from the gradual unveiling of the 
horrors around them.1 Early chapters of the game are almost cheerful, meant to lull players into a 
false sense of security while giving them the opportunity to learn a little history about the asylum 
and interact with some of its founding members. Players know this is written as horror, so the 
carefree nature serves to build imagined realities, behind the veil, prior to actually unveiling them 
later. Hints indicate something might be amiss despite characters describing compassionate patient 
care and beautifying the grounds. Later chapters reveal secrets about characters and places that invite 
the player to rethink their motives, previous script, and how closely they are tied to real history. 
1 For horror buffs, this follows a Hitchcockian style of suspense and anticipation, rather than a Wes Craven-style shocker.

236
In producing this storyline, we were able to leverage actual history of the place and mental health 
practices. For instance, the actual horror of early medical experiments comes into focus when, in the 
game, you find one of your co-conspirators is completely incapacitated due to a lobotomy treatment 
given by the facility. Doctors and nurses in the game treat the surgery as routine because it actually 
was. This allowed the narrative to take on a level of reality that players could react to. Also, when 
playing, you discover one character is a ghost—following a local legend that claims many ghosts 
still walk the Asylum today. We also studied patient files to create mentally ill characters loosely 
based on real people who had passed through the asylum’s doors. The game takes echoes of the 
past—the people, the places, the events that happened—and weaves them into an experience for 
the player. Some of the scariest elements of the game were not the ghosts we created—rather horror 
was realized in the discomforting knowledge that many of the most disturbing narratives at Horror 
at the Ridges were based on the real history of what occurred there and the full understanding that 
these horrors are not confined to fiction.
P L AY I N G  H O R R O R  AT  T H E  R I D G E S
With the location and game ready, we invited players to come and try a new game at the former 
asylum. If anyone actually showed up, this would at least prove our AR game could draw an 
informal audience. When they did arrive, we asked if they would be willing to talk briefly after 
the gameplay to share more about the experience and give us suggestions. We did not offer any 
incentives other than a chance to play Horror at the Ridges. Even though this was a preliminary 
playtest of a small prototype, we wanted to get as close as we could to the question of recruiting 
natural interest in AR gaming.
We hosted nineteen players over three sessions. Those who tested the game varied in ages from 13 
to 42. Gender was balanced. Playtesters consisted of mostly undergraduate and graduate students at 
Ohio University. All but two came with a friend or family member. This served as what we considered 
a small sample, however for a new medium, travel distance, and the size of the community, we 
considered this a positive first effort. The largest playtest attendance came on a foggy, misty day—
iconic for horror stories—making us wonder if weather actually helped recruit for the event or if this 
was a coincidence. Observations of their play combined with interviews provided data concerning 
their engagement with the narrative and explanations of their experiences.
When participants were done playing we conducted a short interview with each group. We asked 
players their opinions on several of our design choices and considerations and how they thought we 
could make the experience better. Was the game scary? What was captivating and what elements 
of the story were engaging? In cases of specific and observable shock or horror, we asked what 
exactly made them react while noting where they were in the story and what they were thinking 
at the time. Playtesting over three iterations meant we could learn from our players and refine the 
elements of our game with each group.

237
Overall, we see promising evidence of engagement with the narrative and successful reconstruction of 
horror elements in the AR medium. From the data, we have organized and summarized key findings 
around indicators of engagement: 1) narrative-driven navigation, 2) space as anxiety builder (primarily 
looking in windows), and 3) building dread through narrative and how it links to interest in history. 
Changing Paths
One of our hopes was that we could use the game to draw people further into the asylum. The 
game provided license to leave the sidewalks, and our players took the bait, even as they felt unsure 
about walking up to windows. Players shared that they did not think they would have gone off of 
the paved path if not for the game, 
	
“I had to move off the course to get where Ms. Jefferson was … I wouldn’t … 
I wouldn’t have! Why should I go like step on places that are not protected … 
fenced and grass growing when there is a clear path that I can follow. I would 
not have gone there had it not been the game.”
The use of the phrase “not protected” hints that the player thought he was being slightly deviant. 
Yet the grounds are public without any fences, signs or other indication that it is not acceptable to 
walk on the grass. The player here was attempting to comply with the game—even with confliction 
or discomfort in leaving the path. That we could coerce players to change their behavior and go 
against their instincts is a positive sign of the possible effectiveness of the medium.
Other players liked being directed to unusual places and commented on them as a rewarding aspect 
of play: 
	
“... more secluded places. Places that no one can ever think of going to. Such 
elements can develop the sense that it’s getting more … more even strange. I felt 
that was good … secluded building. Like uh, dark places.”
The game changed how players would have otherwise visited the former asylum. This was positive 
confirmation for us that the game and place were in conversation with each other. Narrative driven 
navigation, in AR, requires engagement not with the place as visitors normally experience it, but 
through experiencing the place in new and different ways. 
Moments of Horror
Players compared the overall experience of Horror at the Ridges to being in a horror film; a clear 
example of this was a player who exclaimed, “I love horror movies and it’s neat to come and live one.” 
Rather than playing a game, they saw Horror at the Ridges as allowing them to be inside the story. The 
connection to the genre was of course first encouraged by the location selection, “The way the buildings 

238
look reminds me of the Haunted Mansion or Tower of Terror at Disney World,” but also fostered by 
the discourse and story design within the game that augmented the location and conditioned the 
players’ experiences within a commonly known genre. It was clear that players recognized the genre 
and began to connect the AR narrative with familiar media experiences within it. 
The most welcomed aspect of Horror at the Ridges turned out to be the opportunities for players to 
look into the windows of the old asylum. Players appreciated seeing things at the ridges that they 
would have “never seen otherwise”. Having to shield your eyes to see inside the windows meant not 
quite being able to see what was around. We imagined these interactions around windows would 
contribute to our ability to deliver horror because this moment of waiting involved our players 
having limited sensory input and the opportunity to imagine awful things inside. They also would 
have to risk something in getting close enough to see the interior.
Throughout the game digital characters ask the players to look inside windows on the ground level 
to find clues, evidence, or other narrative elements (Figure 3). We found that groups would playfully 
challenge each other, saying things like “Who wants to look first?” Players took turns, creating an 
interaction where the first looker would display a reaction that the other lookers would react to. 
Excitedly one would ask, “What did you see?” This was either followed by a verbal description or 
physical reaction of anxiety from the first viewer like shrugging with a grin, shaking with a chill, 
or a poker face, “I won’t say. You have to see this one. Take a look”. In interviews, players explained 
that they were imagining what they were about to see and comparing expectations to actual views 
inside the windows. 
Some players felt that looking in windows was 
the tipping point for building anxiety and a 
sense of horror. One remarked, 
	
“It was all well and good until we 
got to the room over there, then it 
was ‘help me, help me’ [written on 
the back wall of the room]. It was 
like, ‘No, No we’re moving on’. 
That was scary.”
Another stated, “That’s when it got real for me 
and that’s when I felt the connection, I guess.” 
Looking in windows also served to confirm that 
the place was real. Players knew on one level 
that the game experience was not real. Yet on 
another level, the history used for inspiration 
was; confounding, cruel, and/or bad, things 
happened here. These historical links were 
Figure 3. A screenshot from Horror at the Ridges. The 
player is asked to look inside the window.

239
powerful connection points for players to engage with the narrative. For instance: 
	
“You remember the girl? The girl in the basement? That is something that could 
have made me very very like sad, peeping in that building and you see a piece 
of cloth very deserted for one time there’s no sense of life in the building. And 
you imagine somebody is there and that person is waiting for some help from 
nowhere … I felt sad.”
Finally, one player expressed that he enjoyed a sense of accomplishment from not being scared—
another common reaction to horror stories told through other media. But to claim you were not 
scared is to confirm that you have overcome a risk and/or that you are superior to normal reactions. 
As the player put it, 
	
 “Maybe it was my personality or being a risk taker and I don’t want to sound 
very, very stereotypical but boys are not scared. So I like to be like a hero.” 
Looking in windows was a chance for this player to be brave, to encourage others he was playing 
with, and to express a disconnect with worry. His desire to see himself as a hero is part of his 
comfort and attraction to horror stories. 
Building Dread
Recall that an important part of the horror story we were trying to create is not just the delivery of 
the disturbing truth, but to set up this discovery with a sense of unease. Players did feel unease early 
in the narrative and did find some of the interactions with characters to be creepy even in the initial 
parts of the game, indicating a general sense of unease and worry that something might go wrong.
	
“I like how the things that the characters are saying don’t quite add up. It, it 
makes it seem like the characters are actually mentally ill. Everything isn’t quite 
right ... I like that. It contributes to the realism … all was not as it seemed in this 
nice, supposedly friendly place.” 
	
“It’s kind of creepy when Lucy talks about flipping a switch to make the patients 
feel better.”
After the game was over, players reflected on the experience and the way the game stuck with them. 
	
“At first it was a little creepy but it wasn’t really terrifying but as the night wore 
on and it got darker, the story sort of got scarier and scarier as it got darker 
outside … It had a sort of growing effect.”

240
One player sought us out to explain a week after the event that: 
	
“Lucy’s story—how she was murdered and kept in a room and then buried in an 
unmarked grave—is disturbing to think about ... That Lucy will follow me … 
it’s creepy … It makes me want to look over my shoulder everywhere … Stuff 
like that just really gets me, the idea of a ghost who was murdered going around 
with you … it’s scary to me.”
The game was not actually over for some when it ended; residual consideration of the plot and story 
caused fear to linger after the AR game. These responses indicate success with cultivating dread, the 
slow, uneasy aspect of telling a horror story.
T O WA R D S  A  B E T T E R  D E S I G N
Although we were happy that our basic design was received well by our players, that is not to say 
that everything went perfectly. Our players also were helpful in informing us about how our design 
or use of the possibilities of AR might better fit their purpose. By listening to the difficulties and 
missed connections of our players, we can learn to make AR games that do more. Here are a few 
examples.
Early on, players had difficulty with the level of physicality required by the game, about two hours 
of wandering the site. We responded by making later revisions shorter in length and distance, 
bringing the narrative playtime to about an hour. Yet exploration could take longer for those that 
wanted to discover remote, non-essential, elements of the plot. The level of time and physicality 
were not mentioned after these changes, indicating that this might be a sweet spot for an AR game 
session of this nature. Walking time should be a key design consideration for AR games; we will 
target 45-60 minutes for future games. 
Our game is rather text heavy. Clearly we could do better by taking advantage of more modes 
of experience. One player described their desire for audio to compliment the story: “I wish there 
were actual, like audio dialogue rather than just reading it. It would be nice to be able to hear 
the characters saying the dialogue.” Audio could amplify the effects of looking in windows, add 
ambiance, and even create startling moments that were unexplored in this study. 
Players followed the historical connections from our game to the asylum’s past, indicating a way for 
us to deepen the opportunities to learn history through the game. Players expressed an interest in 
learning more and claimed they felt they already had more of a connection to this history by playing 
the game. Some players were expecting to learn more facts about the asylum, and others felt that 
they learned enough to make the topics worth pursuing more. 

241
D I S C U S S I O N
Horror at the Ridges was our first attempt to combine AR and horror design elements to create 
new media to engage players. We combined narrative, place, and historical authenticity to create 
emotional reactions among our players. We saw strong signs that players were engaged with the 
narrative enough to alter their walking tours of the space, fearfully enjoy the supposedly simple act 
of looking in windows, and embrace a sense of dread throughout the experience and afterward. 
Slowly revealing horrors through an unfolding story connected to the players through history of the 
place can contribute to the player’s growing sense of unease and horror.
There is much room to grow in the genre of AR horror. By refining the design techniques used 
here—use of space, re-direction of walking to new paths, familiar genre-based narrative structures, 
and continuing to build on more engaging digital and non-digital elements for players—we can 
continue to move forward. Further, our preliminary work left clear targets for improving the game 
and our future research; we anticipate adding audio, taking better advantage of looking in windows, 
monitoring walking time, and attempting engagement across media and with an increasingly 
diverse player base. Finally, we seek to monitor play counts over time to see if engagement is also 
leading to sharing the experience with friends. 
Preliminary engagement is not our ultimate goal, but a waypoint on the path to fandom that emerges 
from sustained, shared interest. The possibility of recruiting attention is an important precursor to 
the production of worthwhile programming directed at specific learning goals. We value our work 
on Horror at the Ridges as a step toward building a range of engaging AR games that people will 
increasingly engage with as informal experiences. We are further haunted by the possibilities of how 
mobile media engagement can lead to increasingly powerful mobile media learning. 
R E F E R E N C E S
Gee, J. P. (2005). Why video games are good for your soul: Pleasure and learning. Melbourne, Vic.: Common Ground 
Publishing.
Hirumi, A., Appelman, B., Rieber, L., & Van Eck, R. (2010). Preparing instructional designers for game-based learning: 
Part 1. Techtrends, 54(3), 27–37.
Schell, J. (2008). The art of game design: A book of lenses. Amsterdam: Elsevier/Morgan Kaufmann.
Squire, K. (2011). Video games and learning : teaching and participatory culture in the digital age. New York: Teachers 
College Press.
Steinkuehler, C. A., & Williams, D. (2006). Where everybody knows your (screen) name: Online games as ‘third places’. 
Journal Of Computer-Mediated Communication, 11(4), 885-909.


SECTION SIX

Discussion
19.	
What Have We Seen, What is Missing, and What is Next for MML?
In finishing this book, let’s consider what we have seen, who or what is missing, 
and what is to come. A brief discussion of these themes may add texture to your 
reflection and further planning in your investigations of new learning contexts with MML. 
We return in the end to a more general discussion of MML in reference to the actual 
stories presented.


245
Chapter NINETEEN

What Have We Seen, What is Missing, 
and What is Next for MML?
Christopher Holden
W H AT  H AV E  W E  S E E N ?
There are a couple of final points to be made in the name of interpreting the myriad approaches 
you have now seen. One concerns the role that technical difficulties play in the design and use of 
technologically intensive educational projects. Another point is about the role of place. Finally, 
we recognize the projects here all employ concrete ways of looking outward from their own 
immediate settings as an expression of design; despite their differences, each references a context 
external to their own educational setting in their production and use of mobile media. Productive 
failure, interacting with place, and the extroverted side of design are uncommon features in many 
educational settings. They can help us understand MML a bit better and may provide direction in 
considering how designers, instructors, and students can play complementary roles in collaborative 
processes where everyone is involved in the learning. 
Failure
Many of the stories contain segments about failures of technology and advice about how to avoid 
or handle such problems. Technical difficulties are expected when using developing technologies. 
Not only was the technology our authors used new to them, but it was new to the world, and on top 
of that they were often combining several technologies at once. Most performed their experiments 
without the benefit of a test group or other nets into which they could fall safely. If you search 
the book for the word “disaster” you will find many hits. Yet, the overall tone from these authors 
was not one of failure but excitement and resilience. When our authors’ internet connections went 
down, when the software was glitchy, they did not chuck their devices in the trash and give up. 
They did not swear off advanced technologies until the day they become bulletproof. They are all 
excited to try again. 

246
One reason for this: the technology is not all-or-nothing, and it is surely not everything. Projects 
went well while the technology failed because the technology was not at the center of what our 
authors were working towards. A clear example is provided by Garza and Rosenblum’s work in 
chapter 9. Their neighborhood trip featured a rather large failure of the technology. But the success 
of the ARIS tour wasn’t their main goal. Through a successful debrief, and because the tour was 
only important for getting the students to think in better ways about East Austin—a focus on 
place—their project that contained the tour was a success. As a design course, such understanding 
was a corequisite to finding the skills and voice to put something new back into the world. If we 
think too narrowly about Mobile Media and Learning—if we think about it as a new kind of 
content deliver—we may miss the comprehensiveness of their design. 
But there is more to success than resiliency in the face of failure. The way we usually talk about 
technical difficulties in relation to educational technology—to be avoided by the competent 
educational technologist so teachers and students have something bulletproof to implement—
misses something important about the role of failure itself in learning. Failure is an important part 
of learning and should be designed to be a natural and productive aspect of learning experiences. 
One example from this book is Frandy’s students’ first attempts at ethnography (chapter 8); the 
expected variability among students’ work early in the semester, made communal through ARIS, 
was used to improve all students’ ability to conduct ethnography later on. Technical difficulties turn 
out to be a concrete aspect of a generally productive attitude toward failure, something MML may 
help make more common.
Place
Places—locations with significant meanings and not just any old classroom—were primary features 
of most of the projects in this book. Place took on meanings in many ways for our authors, their 
students, and the learning they were trying together to make happen. One strategy was to use real 
places as theaters for academic content. A real setting can make ideas concrete and come alive. 
MML can take a museum or a classroom—places designed for learning—and reimagine them. 
Place has also been considered as a fundamental part of the mobile medium and hence incorporated 
as a natural part of authors’ designs, as seen, for example, in Fischer and Dikkers’ Horror on the 
Ridges game (chapter 18). Others look to directly explore places with MML through data collection 
activities, or more complexly such as in the case of Adam and Perales’ experimental cinema (chapter 
9), where place is both setting and subject, and as cinematographers, they are both audience and 
participants. 
Even the seemingly place agnostic projects in the book depend in key ways on specific aspects of 
place. Bressler’s game School Scene Investigators (chapter 5)—made with the intent of being portable 
to any other school—actually reimagined the school itself as a place for student activity; instead of 
working within a single classroom, students moved throughout the school. The game had the front 
office and principal conspire to become part of the mystery, involving their locations and actions 
in the design of the learning experience. With Technovation Challenge, the idea is to scale to reach 

247
girls everywhere. But to actually set up and facilitate the Challenge, much has been demanded 
of the places that have and will continue to host it. They have worked hard to locate aspects of 
local culture that can be successfully reproduced or created away from the techno-business centers 
where these elements already exist and where the Challenge began. Cultivation of local place is an 
inherent part of their plan to scale. 
Place and mobile are closely intertwined. Certainly their relationship derives in part from the basic 
affordances of mobile devices to interact with location (e.g. knowing location via GPS), but there 
are subtle yet pervasive ways that mobile interacts with place as well. There are many perspectives to 
consider; mobile and place are not simple to disentangle. In Mobile Media Learning: Multiplicities 
of Place,1 Kurt Squire posits that when it comes down to it, the main thing mobile does—generally, 
not just within designed learning—is enable people to remediate the spaces they inhabit. Mobile 
technology is how we transform ourselves in new places and what places mean to us. Interacting 
with place also can be seen as an application of the values we borrowed from Papert (chapter 2). 
Places have a specificity, and our actions in them and interpretations of them pull us into the 
concrete, connecting us to the lives of others. 
Advocates of place-based learning such as David Sobel, David Gruenewald, or James Mathews 
would say we should go farther, suggesting a reversal of the previous implication: being involved 
with place is a central value; concreteness and connectedness are how that value is articulated. Their 
and other diverse views about why and how we can and should encounter the dimension of place 
when designing for learning will take time to sort through. But they do coincide in noticing, with 
our authors, the new access given to educators by mobile for availing themselves of a too-much 
ignored resource for learning.
Design
We mentioned in Practical Considerations (chapter 3) that imagining the real world as a destination 
for student designs can be a motivating factor in their production. When we talk about design we 
can refer to many different acts and means of creation, but at the center is this act of imagination, 
the hope that what you make might have purpose for someone else. And while it is noteworthy to 
involve students, it is just as important that this same attitude is shared by the educators in our 
book, that they are motivated by the prospect of design. Our authors imagine their projects have 
something to contribute to a world outside their immediate use; they took the trouble to write about 
them for you. 
Technovation Challenge (chapter 14) has grown so big because of its organizers’ commitment 
to enable girls everywhere to make something that might matter in the world. The creative 
software our authors and their students have used offers another perspective on this theme: 
1 Squire, K. (2009). Mobile media learning: multiplicities of place. On the Horizon, 17(1), 70-80.

248
This software is produced for other people to directly take up and use in any setting they choose 
and for whatever purpose they desire. The developers at some point made a conscious decision 
and considerable effort to make their tools appeal to and available for a general public. Their 
software is the result of a dream that somewhere, someone else might do something interesting 
with this tool. It is a contrast to the common but myopic concern in instructional design, 
curricular planning, and educational research with only one’s classroom, one’s students, and 
their performance on designed educational tasks. 
With everyone—students, instructors, software developers, etc.—designing, it may be easy to 
become a bit pessimistic about the quality, utility, or reach of what has been designed. But you 
have seen how the success of an MML design can happen in many ways. Evaluation of MML 
design will typically involve some consideration of both process and product. Torres (Chapter 14), 
for example was very careful to note that large commercially successful apps make poor models 
of success for girls making apps in Technovation Challenge. This is not just because that kind of 
success is unlikely, but because focusing on it can blind them to what other forms of success look 
like. It is doubtful that any of the actual designs mentioned in this book will directly achieve true 
scale at the level of any mass market. But it is not the ability to deliver a mass market winner that 
makes the designers’ dreams viable. It is the fact that these dreamers are neither idle nor alone and 
that the internet creates many small opportunities, not all of which run on money. Some are local 
and immediate, others dispersed through time and space.
A focus on design that contains modest but real external ambition is in agreement with Papert’s 
values of “inherent virtue of informal learning” and “creating publicly” (see chapter 2). It is also an 
important instance of the kind of grassroots collective action we considered as means of educational 
change in the same chapter. It can be used to connect educators and learners together by providing 
shared goals, and is itself a direct expression of our desire to increase agency through MML. It is a 
statement of independence through interdependence. Like Place though, there are many theories 
and expressions of learning through design to be sorted through as we move forward. 
W H O/ W H AT  I S  M I S S I N G ?
This book has yielded a small, though important, sample of who is out there doing MML and in 
relation to what. It would difficult if not impossible to achieve a complete representation in this 
sense. But it is imperative to now ask, as we look forward to what has not yet been done instead of 
reflecting on what has been tried, “Who isn’t at our party? What educational contexts, groups of 
people, and job descriptions are not represented here, not just because an author did not write in 
our book but because work there is generally lacking or talked about in non-overlapping circles? 
Why are they missing?”
Those without advanced devices. Access to capable devices and the internet is still a barrier to 
participation for many. We can note that the bar is getting lower all the time as smartphones 

249
reach worldwide saturation or the programs that make devices available in some unlikely situations, 
but we shouldn’t be too smug about these problems going away entirely, or soon. Devices will 
become even more plentiful, but internet access, necessary for so much that these devices can help 
us do, remains in this country rather expensive and, even worse, difficult logistically for schools 
and institutions to help provide. This is especially true when we leave  school grounds or other 
WiFi-enabled bases. Finally, the complexity of privacy issues raised by mobile technologies, along 
with a history of institutions making the legally safe but horrifyingly defeatist decision to try to 
ban outright anything they cannot totally control or guarantee as safe, may continue to prevent 
educators and learners from exercising creative and purposeful use of mobile and the internet as 
part of their official business of learning together.
The examples presented here do add one statement to the well-discussed issue of access: it too 
can be successfully dealt with on a contingent, local level. Large institutions balk at the cost to 
provide everyone with devices and service, but small initiatives can depend on BYOD—devices 
that students have—and fill in the gaps with relatively little funding. In situations like these, 
there is the added benefit that the use of these technologies is directly planned and motivated by 
the end users.
Difference and Disability. A large part of our message with MML is about diversity, inclusion, 
and multiple paths to success. But none of our stories specifically involve those differently-abled, 
take place in a therapeutic learning context, or focus on specific ways that MML can enable 
participation by those who might often be considered incapable. We do know that mobile may have 
a key role to play in how we can provide equal opportunity to all learners. In particular, we can see 
assistive devices in a less stigmatizing way now that we are all using them (and we are using the same 
devices). We know that mobile devices like the iPad are replacing and augmenting legacy assistive 
technologies due to their affordability and flexibility. It is obvious that formerly strong distinctions 
about how a person is able to communicate with the outside world might begin to fade once we get 
used to doing so with the help of multimodal communication through these devices. Idiosyncratic 
rather than mass-market software development, as we have already discussed, helps small groups 
with diverse agendas design for their needs. We know these ideas and stories are out there, but 
we need to make connections with those working in specifically in these areas and pay particular 
attention to issues of difference and disability in our own work to say anything substantive about 
them. More than for the sake of completeness, meaningfully broadening discussions of MML 
to include disability and difference may help uncover the commonality in what all educators are 
working towards.
The Very Young. Perhaps the most common revelation bestowed by the advent of mobile technologies 
for learning is the ease and facility which even the youngest of children find in using these devices. 
Planned or not, these days a smartphone or tablet is likely part of a child’s learning experiences 
before they ever set foot in a school. And because one and two year-olds can and are using these 
devices, software development for them has suddenly become a big business. Depending on who 
you are, it is either fascinating or terrifying to watch a young child learn how to play a mobile game 

250
that was made for someone their age. Many of these titles are meant to appeal directly to parents 
by emphasizing a learning that maps easily onto typical expectations for School learning (letters, 
shapes, numbers, etc.) similar to a large portion of physical children’s toys. But another class seems 
to tap more directly into this audience’s inherent and developing abilities and desires (Toca Boca is 
probably the most well known publishing house for this kind of toddler software design). Here too, 
we have no concrete information or expertise to add to this massive area of MML. And once again, 
we suspect that this is an oversight or lack of communication on our part. What these devices and 
their ecologies can do for young people should share much with what we are collectively exploring 
for older learners.
Other Disciplines. There are many disciplines, academic and otherwise, represented in this book 
and elsewhere with MML. Our enthusiasm for MML is closely bound to the way it connects to so 
many ways of seeing, thinking about, and acting in the world. Some disciplines however are absent 
from this work. Certainly there are disciplines not directly represented in this book but which are 
known to have found their way under the umbrella of MML elsewhere. For example there are 
no chemistry-based projects mentioned in the above chapters, but Bressler (chapter 5) has made 
another School Scene Investigators game since writing her chapter, this time based on a chemistry 
activity. But we do not yet know what the natural limits are, if any, to the breadth of human 
experience capable of being enlivened through MML. Paleontologists may not be excited to share 
the exact locations of long-dead vertebrates through a mobile app, and mathematical thinking is 
somewhat typified by learning to do paper-based, abstract work, purposefully disconnected from 
embodied examples in the real world, but does reasoning like this actually correspond to some 
material disaffinity? We don’t yet know.
Design Software. General purpose, easy to use, media production software is absolutely essential 
to the utility of MML for large audiences. The software that our authors have mentioned in this 
book (ARIS, App Inventor, NoTours, Traveler, Taleblazer) and popular favorites in use elsewhere 
(Garage Band for example) is not beholden to a specific educational agenda or use, and that is 
exactly what makes it so useful. Since we discuss such software frequently in this book, it may 
seem strange to list it among those aspects of MML that are not yet in place. But we need more 
tools like these. Outside mobile, there are more examples, from web design (Google Sites) and 
media production (iMovie) platforms to modding tools that ship with commercial games (The 
Sims) and indy game design software (RPG Maker). MIT’s Media Lab has established a reputation 
as a perennial producer of these kinds of tools; we need more outfits like them. And we also need 
others who will follow different paths like those taken in the development of ARIS, Traveler, and 
NoTours—small development efforts willing to and capable of reaching large outside audiences 
with tools not only to use but to help define through our interpretive uses. There are also important 
decisions to be made about how the software is developed and distributed. Open source is a model 
that fits MML in two ways: 1) free software is software that is accessible to all, and 2) the ability to 
yourself become a developer of that software is yet another path to increasing agency. 

251
W H AT  I S  N E X T ?
As you can see, there’s still a lot to work to do concerning MML. Compared to the first book, this 
book is a deeper dive into what MML is about, with more numerous and diverse examples to work 
from, but the ideas here have a ways to go before we begin to see closure. Some possible themes 
worth looking into further:
•	
Place and learning. We know place is important, but we have yet to sort through 
how in a way that squares with both what people are doing and what has been 
said before about what place should be about.
•	
Boundaries and overlaps. MML intersects significantly with many more areas 
of thought and action about learning, for example “games and learning” and 
“learning through design”. Where are the boundaries between shared ideas 
important or superficial? How can considering practices that do not include 
mobile strengthen our understanding of it and when is it a distraction to do so?
•	
Growth and collaboration. When does this action begin to look collective 
instead of individual? How can it grow within and across settings? Does growth 
that is non-hierarchical and non-compulsory mean that schools will not often be 
sites for it?
•	
Comprehensive Plurality. As we bring in more concepts to think about MML 
and as work with it multiplies, how do we do so in a way that doesn’t pave over 
the complexities for the sake of unifying the message? How is it possible to 
continue to respect simultaneously the diversity of perspectives among those 
employing MML and the need to put these ideas and projects together through 
summative descriptions and analyses?
•	
Developing the Medium. We have lauded the inherent value of mobile media 
creations beyond their utility for specific learning outcomes. What projects are 
moving the medium itself forward? Where is it headed?
In opening up discussion of MML to perspectives that resemble theory, let us not forget the value 
of concreteness. The lived learning experiences of educators and learners are the fodder for the 
evolution of practice. We need to keep sharing practical ideas and stories from our own backyards 
for MML to organically grow. Theory can help us find the words to make sense of those experiences 
for others, but it should serve a cause, not become a cause of its own. Like musicians, artists, or any 
community of creative expression, we need to not only make and share our work, but to be students 
of others’ work too. We look forward to an emerging MML scene that can feed its own creative 
energy toward better design.




255
Closing
When we put together our first book about Mobile Media Learning (MML), our primary goal was 
to simply share the unique, daring, exceptional work that we were seeing emerge around the globe 
using mobile devices. For our readers, we hope they enjoyed reading about them and perhaps were 
inspired to make their own trials and experiments. That was then. 
This new book has taken on a slightly different timbre. MML, while still not a common feature 
of educational environments, has been employed by an increasingly numerous set of educators in 
diverse settings. Tools for producing and enacting MML experiences—hardware, software, and 
inspirational—have multiplied and improved, expanding options for educators to take advantage 
of mobile affordances more easily, effectively, and interestingly. As you’ve now seen, MML is being 
employed not so much as a way to keep up with technology or to appeal to the younger generation, 
but to reinvigorate learning experiences for everyone involved. So, our goal in this book has been 
to share the edges and innovations still challenging our understanding of what MML is and what 
it can do for how we think about and design learning experiences. To this extent, we hope that 
this second effort has inspired you to move to those edges or to share your stories of the work you 
do with MML. You may not be ready to test for emotional response or have learners playing with 
bees, but you may be ready to start by using MML to enliven a field trip, or build a scavenger hunt 
on campus. 
As pleased as we are with the work we have put into this book, on its own it necessarily falls short of 
opening up communication among educators about MML. That is because it is a book. Messages 
from us to you, frozen in time. Within these pages, there are no comments or follow-up, no further 
details to be had or way to respond to your ideas and questions. But we do hope this book can bring 
you into conversation about MML even if it cannot directly provide it. 
If you haven’t yet, we hope you start making something amazing to increase the agency of youth 
and adults in the name of education in your own way. As you work with MML, please get in touch. 
Ask any of us for help. Or maybe you already have stories to share. Maybe you’re working in one of 
our missing areas. Share your stories informally and broadly. We want to hear from you to and to 
help you reach others. We want your story in our next book.
- The Editors


257
Mobile Media Learning: 
Innovation and Inspiration
Editors and Authors Biographies
In order of appearance
Christopher Holden is an Assistant Professor at the Honors College of the 
University of New Mexico. His research revolves around place based game 
design for learning. He makes games and helps others to make games for 
a wide variety of learning contexts, from language learning to community 
action, from classrooms to museums and community centers. He also 
helps produce ARIS, an easy-to-use, open source, augmented reality game 
platform. Chris teaches classes involving mobile game design, and directs 
the Local Games Lab ABQ, a fancy name for supporting unfunded faculty, 
students, and community members to make games and other interactive experiences to develop 
new forms of meaning within their local natural, cultural, and educational environments. Chris 
was once a number theorist but at some point went rogue thanks to the Games+Learning+Society 
folks at UW-Madison. As compensation, the group has generously set up Dance Dance Revolution 
for him each year at their annual conference. 
Seann Dikkers is an assistant professor in the Educational Technology 
division of the The Patton College of Education at Ohio University. 
Formerly, Dikkers served fourteen years as a middle school history 
teacher, high school principal, and education consultant. Dikkers’ work 
focuses on the integration of new media technologies for formal and 
informal educational settings. His books, Real-Time Research, Mobile 
Media Learning, and TeacherCraft: How Teachers use Minecraft in the 
Classroom are helping educational innovators to integrate technology into 
classroom learning. His projects include CivWorld, the Comprehensive Assessment for Leadership 
in Learning (CALL), Mobile Game Design, TeachOn!, and co-director of Playful Learning - Ohio. 
His current partnerships focus on the development of Life Master: The Card Game that Just Happens 
and Just-inTime teacher professional development systems.  

258
John Martin has been integrating technology to increase learning in 
higher education in various roles since 1998. He is currently a Senior 
Teaching & Learning Consultant at the University of Wisconsin–
Madison, where he teaches and develops socioculturally-rich teaching and 
learning practices. For his Ph.D. in Curriculum & Instruction, he broadly 
considered the motivational and sociocultural learning affordances of 
video games, and specifically focused on learner-designed place-based 
mobile games. Drawing on a background and interest in technology, art, 
writing, outdoor education, and with a commitment to environmental and social sustainability, John 
investigates tools of inquiry and expression that promote greater understanding and appreciation of 
the social and physical spaces we inhabit.
Breanne Litts is a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Pennsylvania 
where she investigates STEM learning and computing through electronic 
crafts as part of an NSF-funded project. Her scholarly interests coalesce at 
the intersection of identity, learning, design, and technology, particularly 
from a learning sciences perspective. Broadly, she studies how people learn 
through making, design, and production within makerspaces, mobile 
augmented-reality applications, and game-based learning environments. 
Breanne has conducted myriad research and evaluation studies in out-of-
school contexts, especially focused on designing makerspaces and investigating the learning that 
happens within; much of this work has been in collaboration with the Learning in the Making team, 
an NSF-funded research partnership. Moreover, she helped found the Mobile Learning Incubator 
(now the Field Day Lab) as their lead researcher by examining mobile technologies as tools for 
field research, design, and games across a range of contexts. She remains an active member of the 
Games+Learning+Society research group at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. 
Lohren Ray Deeg is an Assistant Professor of Urban Planning at Ball 
State University in Muncie, Indiana, where he has taught beginning 
design studio and visual communication courses for fourteen years, 
serving as the College of Architecture and Planning’s common first 
year program coordinator from 2010-2014. Mr. Deeg collaborates with 
multidisciplinary design / planning practices in Muncie, Indiana, and 
maintains an illustration practice as a member of the American Society 
of Architectural Illustrators (A.S.A.I.). Lohren resides in Muncie, Indiana 
where he is an avid cyclist and advocate for healthy communities.

259
Kyle Parker is a Senior Software Engineer for Developing Technologies 
at Ball State University in Muncie, Indiana, where he has worked in 
Information Technology since graduating from the university in 2000. 
During his time at his alma mater, Mr. Parker has served as a web developer 
specializing in Microsoft products and tools; a group leader overseeing 
project management and other developers; and most recently, a software 
engineer working with a variety of mobile and wearable technologies. 
With a focus on the mobile app space, Mr. Parker is collaborating with 
instructors and students to imagine, create, and develop apps; deploy and integrate emerging 
technologies; and provide the students with new learning opportunities beyond the classroom. Kyle 
currently resides in Muncie, with his wife and daughter.
Shaileen Crawford Pokress is an advocate for gender and racial equity 
in computer science and engineering. Ms. Pokress earned a bachelor’s 
degree in computer science from Cornell University and a master’s degree 
in education from Harvard. Through her work at TERC, a national non-
profit, she facilitated the development and curation of MSPnet.org, the 
groundbreaking online network supporting thousands of math and science 
educators working under grants from the National Science Foundation. 
Ms. Pokress later served as Director of Education for MIT App Inventor, 
a blocks-based programming platform that allows a wide variety of students to engage in the power 
of building mobile apps. Leveraging two decades of experience, Ms. Pokress joined Project Lead 
The Way to develop and deploy problem-based computer science curricula for K-12 students. Ms. 
Pokress is passionate about giving all students the opportunity to become technology creators who 
can fully participate in their 21st century world.
Denise Bressler is passionate about the potential for learning with 
mobile technologies. Formerly, Denise worked as an Exhibit Developer 
and Project Manager at Liberty Science Center in Jersey City, NJ. She 
developed the mobile learning initiative called Science Now, Science 
Everywhere. Recently, Denise received her Ph.D. in Learning Sciences and 
Technology from Lehigh University. Her research revolved around mobile 
game-based learning and mobile augmented reality (AR) experiences. 
Denise created a series of mobile AR games called School Scene Investigators 
which can be played with WiFi-enabled iOS devices and QR codes posted in a school environment. 
Denise is now an Education Researcher with the Center for Innovation in Engineering and Science 
Education at Stevens Institute of Technology.

260
Tim Frandy is a folklorist and outreach specialist for Native American 
communities at the University of Wisconsin—Madison’s Collaborative 
Center for Health Equity and the Native American Center for Health 
Professions.  In this work, he supports indigenous cultural revitalization 
efforts that improve the health and wellness of the community.  These 
projects include birchbark canoe building, the revitalization of traditional 
Anishinaabe wintertime games, and the building of the first winter lodge 
in Lac du Flambeau in centuries.  Frandy earned his Ph.D. in Scandinavian 
Studies and Folklore from UW-Madison in 2013, and he has conducted extensive fieldwork in both 
the Upper Midwest and in the Nordic countries.  His research interests involve indigenous cultural 
revitalization, ecological folklore, cultural worldview and belief, identity, and traditional health and 
healing.  He has taught folklore, literature, and language at both UW-Madison and Washington 
State University.
Kim Garza is an Assistant Professor of Graphic Design at St. Edward’s 
University in Austin, Texas. As an educator, she employs innovative 
methods to create an engaging learning environment for her students. As a 
designer, her work moves across the print, interactive and motion mediums. 
Prior to teaching, she worked in a variety of professional design settings — 
an advertising agency, boutique design firms, in-house design departments 
and as a sole proprietor. Kim received a Bachelor of Arts degree at Anderson 
University and a Master of Graphic Design degree at North Carolina State 
University. In her spare time, she works on experimental short films in collaboration with her singer-
songwriter husband. She is also the proud mother of two beautiful boys.
Jason Rosenblum is an Assistant Professor of Digital Media in the Bill 
Munday School of Business at St. Edward’s University. He teaches courses 
that range from interactive technologies to digital music and audio, the 
business of gaming and social media and digital analytics. In addition 
to 20 years of experience as an educational technologist, Dr. Rosenblum 
holds a Master’s degree in Computer Education and Cognitive Systems 
from the University of North Texas in addition to a Ph.D. in Curriculum 
and Instruction from the University of Texas at Austin, with an emphasis 
in Learning Technologies. In his dissertation research, Dr. Rosenblum studied people’s experiences 
with sound in educational games. His doctoral studies include a focus on game-based learning, 
game sound, music psychology and innovative applications of learning technologies to support 
curriculum design and development.

261
Verónica Perales Blanco (PhD) is teacher at the Arts School and also 
at the School of Communication, University of Murcia. Working on 
Transmedia Narratives. Fred Adam is a freelance Art director expert in 
Mobile Learning and Spatial Narratives, currently working with scientists 
in Australia and the United States. Founder of GPS Museum. Both are artist 
members of Transnational Temps collective (Art+Technology+Ecology) 
and part of the Research Group on Communication, Culture and 
Technology (University of Murcia, Spain).
Bob Coulter is director of the Litzsinger Road Ecology Center, a division 
of the Missouri Botanical Garden focused on educational research and 
development. He has served as PI/PD for four Federal grants focused 
on game development. Previously he was an award-winning elementary 
school teacher. 
Ross Stauder has been designing games on mobile and computer platforms 
for almost four years. When he is not designing games he enjoys playing 
soccer, building robots and playing games rather than designing them. 
He hopes one day either to be a computer coder and work at Google, or 
to be an engineer, most likely a robotics engineer.
Jameela Jafri has spent 15 years in the field of science education, working 
as both a high school science teacher and developing high-quality science, 
technology, engineering, math (STEM) programs for out-of-school time 
(OST) education. In 2010, she was awarded a Fulbright Fellowship 
to examine perceptions of science among underprivileged women in 
Damascus, Syria. Jameela directed girls’ programming for Project 
Exploration, a science education nonprofit organization in Chicago. She 
then served as STEM advisor for After School Matters, Chicago’s largest 
provider of out-of-school time programs for high school youth. Currently, Jameela is program 
design manager at After School Matters, where she oversees the design and implementation of 
strategic enhancements and initiatives to refine and scale quality programming. Jameela holds a 
master’s degree in secondary science education from Teachers College, Columbia University and a 
bachelor’s degree in biology from Barnard College, Columbia University. She lives in Chicago with 
her husband.

262
Gabrielle Lyon is a nationally-recognized non-profit leader, educator, 
and public speaker on education reform with a background that includes 
founding and leading award-winning organizations and initiatives focused 
on leveling the playing field of educational opportunity for underserved 
youth - particularly in science and technology. She synthesizes data-driven 
social-justice work with education, championing the belief that high-
quality educational opportunity can and should be accessible to everyone, 
especially those to whom it has historically been closed. In 1999 Lyon 
cofounded Project Exploration, a high-impact nonprofit dedicated to changing the face of science 
for underserved minority youth and girls. As the Vice President for Education and Experience at 
the Chicago Architecture Foundation Lyon is responsible for leading the organization’s thinking 
on how to best enable youth, educator, mentor and family communities to experience the built 
environment and design thinking through in-person and online experiences
Stephanie Madziar lives in Chicago, Illinois.  She has been teaching 
middle school science for seven years in a Chicago Public School and 
is also an instructional leader helping coach and develop three other 
science teachers. Stephanie was a Teaching Fellow for Project Exploration 
through the National Summer Learning Association Summer Pathways 
for Innovation. She is very enthusiastic about teaching her students about 
native bees. 
Rebecca Tonietto is a PhD candidate in the Plant Biology and 
Conservation program at Northwestern University, jointly offered with 
the Chicago Botanic Garden. She studies native bee communities in restored 
and urban systems, and is interested in native bee conservation. She has 
worked with Project Exploration’s Sisters 4 Science program since 2008.
Juan Rubio is an expert in educational technology who secures 
funding, develops, and manages programs for youth in underrepresented 
populations. He creates programs that incorporate a wide variety of 
digital media, such as video games, virtual worlds, and social media, to 
give students a voice about issues that matter to them. Currently, he is the 
Associate Director of the Online Leadership Program for Global Kids, a 
youth development non-profit. He has also designed curricula for other 
professionals in cultural institutions such as Tribeca Film Institute, New 
York Department of Education, Brooklyn Public Library, and Carnegie Hall. He has a Master’s 
degree in Media Studies from the New School University in New York City and studied film at 
Howard University School of Communications in Washington D.C. Originally from Honduras, 
he is fluent in Spanish.

263
Angélica M. Torres, Ph.D., led Technovation Challenge at Iridescent 
as Director of Educational Technology in New York in 2012 and took 
the program global as Senior Director in 2013. Angélica’s passion is for 
unearthing hidden potential and bringing different groups together to 
innovate and better the world. She trained as a physical anthropologist at 
New College of Florida and Yale University. She was an Edward Zigler 
Social Policy Fellow at Yale and the first Judith Gueron Methodological 
Innovation Social Policy Fellow at MDRC for her work on early childhood 
environments. She spent her own childhood in Puerto Rico and now lives in Dallas with her 
husband and son, where she writes and consults.
Gianna May is currently a graduate student in the History Department 
at the University of New Mexico. She is studying 20th century Southwest 
North American history with a focus in women’s history. Her research 
interests center around medicine in the Southwest and the intersection 
of traditional and professional healthcare at the turn of the century and 
how the medical field interacts across categories of race, class, and gender. 
Gianna continues to work with games as a way to facilitate learning and 
enhance a museum space. She is currently working on attaining museum 
certification in order to further her work with video games in museum spaces and plans to build 
more educational games in the future. For more information on Gianna’s current work, feel free to 
check out her website at http://www.giannamay.org.
Ryan Rieder is pursuing his PhD in the Instructional Technology 
division of the Patton College of Education at Ohio University with a 
focus on technology and language learning. Currently, he is the head 
of ESL at Hocking College and works as a graduate assistant at Ohio 
University. Previously, Ryan taught EFL in Izmir, Turkey and Aleppo, 
Syria and Arabic as a Foreign Language (AFL) at Ohio State University. 
As a graduate student at Ohio State University, Ryan earned his M.A. in 
Near Eastern Languages and Cultures with a focus on Arabic and Islamic 
studies. During his time as an undergraduate student, he majored in History with a focus on the 
Middle Eastern and Russian histories. Also during his undergraduate years, Ryan studied Arabic at 
the University of Los Angeles California (UCLA). His research will include integrating technology 
with language learning.

264
Tamala Soloman

Dr. Christopher C. Blakesley specializes in the intersection of narrative, 
gameplay, learning, and technology for education. He currently manages 
an Executive MBA curriculum as Assistant Dean of Instructional Design 
at the Jack Welch Management Institute at Strayer University.
Jennifer McIntosh is the Interactive Education Program Manager at the 
National Air and Space Museum, Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center.
Rebecca Fischer is a graduate researcher pursuing her PhD in Instructional 
Technology at Ohio University in Athens, OH. She comes to the field 
of educational technology from a background in computer science. She 
uses her technical expertise and skills to research how games can make 
a difference in learning. Rebecca looks to leverage the power of mobile 
games in new ways to help create engaging learning routes and provide an 
experience that has more impact than a traditional lecture. 

265
Acknowledgements
There are so many people who have done so much to make a large effort like this possible but who are 
not listed as part of the official credits. I will try my best here to name the names of at least a few of 
those responsible. 
You also have seen the names of the editors and authors of this volume, and hopefully read their 
inspiring words. I praise my co-editors and our authors for their incredible, inspiring work that gave 
them something to write about here, and the determination to see this work, through all the comments 
and revisions, to the end. Thank you for sharing your lives with me and our readers. Thank you for 
your patience in waiting, revising, re-revising, and waiting some more. Thanks to Seann Dikkers, 
John Martin, and Breanne Litts especially for all the time spent meeting over this book, planning it, 
putting it together, and giving me the confidence to continue when we got to tough spots along the 
way. Thanks too to the families, students, departments, and other support networks that are at most 
a step away from the actual words in this book; everything we have contributed here is a reflection 
not only of our relationships with you, but the time we steal away from you to produce these words. 
Being involved as we are with many new technologies, we could not do what we do without the 
creative effort that goes into the creation and articulation of these technologies. At a basic level, these 
are the devices and basic software packages, and the networks that allow us to create with these 
tools ourselves. At a more specific level, we are lucky to have software and expertise generated with 
application to learning in mind. Just as Papert and others put together Logo and gave it to teachers 
and young people decades ago, much of the work done in this book would not be remotely possible 
without software generated for the public good. ARIS, Taleblazer, Traveler, and App Inventor are the 
principal titles you’ve seen mentioned, but there are others too. Their creators and supporters are too 
numerous to mention here, but they deserve immense thanks for what they make possible. They not 
only deliver us tools, but are responsible for the creation of ecosystems, places for the creation of new 
meaning by inviting newcomers into the creation process itself. ARIS of course holds a place dear 
to my heart due to my extensive involvement with it over the last several years. There are dozens of 
people whose contributions to ARIS have been essential, but without David Gagnon at the center, 
none of them alone would have meant much. But ARIS is not the only platform with a long-lasting, 
deep connection for me. The first piece of software that gave me the ability to become a mobile game 
designer—to realize the dream that I’d always had but never felt equal to pursue—was another piece 
of MIT’s educational software empire: MITAR, a project begun by Eric Klopfer and later led by Judy 
Perry (I don’t know if this is fully accurate, but I think of MITAR having gone underground for a few 
years to re-emerge triumphantly as Taleblazer). Their determination (and that of others who worked 
on the project but whose names I don’t recall or know) to create an authoring tool useable by non-
programmers to make geolocational games inspired me and a generation of educational designers to 
think big when it came to mobile. The later work at UW-Madison, MIT, and Harvard in AR game 

266
design, not to mention that done by the same personnel but who moved to new locations to start AR 
game research there, owes a lot to MITAR and its authors. 
Hardware and software are not the only technologies and contexts influential for us. The first MML 
book did a nice job of acknowledging some of the more general intellectual debts we have accrued in 
doing this work. To them I would obviously add Seymour Papert and those whose projects were so 
thoughtfully described in that previous volume. Those earlier pioneers have directly influenced much 
of the activity in these last pages. Certainly we have already mentioned, in our chapters themselves, 
some of the thinkers and doers whose foundational insights were essential to our endeavor. We asked 
everyone involved to limit their citations to those few most pivotal in their own work, so please *do* 
follow up on them. Rather than reprise our list of references here, I would like to personally thank 
some of the people whose hard work and help have been provided personally, but who otherwise might 
go unnamed. 
First, I have a long yet incomplete list of people from Games+Learning+Society (GLS), beginning 
with Jim Gee. His insights into literacy, learning, and games are of course fundamental to our work 
and that of many others. But Jim also started GLS at UW-Madison, a group through which all the 
editors of this book have now passed. The remarkable thing about GLS is the diversity, talent, and 
enthusiasm of its members and leaders over the few short years it has been around. We are not the only 
ones to have been transformed by that fire. There’s a lot that Jim has done to make this work possible, 
but creating something like GLS is something quite rare, and I feel lucky to be a part of it. 
Kurt Squire is one of the current leaders of GLS, but my gratitude stems from things he did earlier in 
his career. Like Jim, Kurt’s thinking on games and learning is foundational. But about a decade ago, 
he personally welcomed me into the world of games and learning; he believed in and encouraged me 
when there was really no good reason to do so. I got my start in designing educational technology and 
games for learning in a course he taught. It was an incredible incubator. There were at least a dozen 
people who learned to trust in their creative abilities in that semester. A year later, he asked me to help 
design mobile AR games for a large grant he shared with Harvard and MIT (The ARGH project). 
This is where I first used MITAR (Eric Klopfer was the PI at MIT), learned more than I could have 
thought possible, not only about the research and design of place, mobile, games, and learning, but 
teamwork, photography, Milwaukee, lakes, and life generally. Kurt put together a fantastic team in 
Madison, each of whom deserve mention here: Mark Wagler, Jim Mathews, Ming Fong Jan, Dani 
Herro, Christine Johnson, and John Martin (who you now know). We like to say that you learn a 
lot when you make games; it is this experience, making and running games with these people that is 
the example I have in my mind that embodies this maxim, without peer. Although Kurt shared and 
made us of his deep knowledge of games, learning, and mobile, he also gave us an incredible amount 
of freedom to develop ourselves and our ideas on this project. He did not treat us like lackeys despite 
our station and (in my case—he took a big chance on bringing me into that group) inexperience. He 
did something very similar in supporting David Gagnon, Seann Dikkers, Chris Blakesley, and Kevin 
Harris as they began work on what would become ARIS, and in many, many other instances. Kurt is 
one of the most welcoming, selfless, giving people I know. Being a teacher is ultimately about learning 

267
to share, and it was from him I learned how to share. When I work on ARIS, mentor students, or am 
writing this book, I am looking for ways to pay forward what he gave me. 
While I cannot mention every single person who has been a part of GLS or attended their conferences, 
I probably should. The truth is that this collective has nourished an incredible amount of talent and 
good will. Their annual conference has ruined academics for me. Each year I am rejuvenated by 
attending. The cynicism and pettiness that is too often a hallmark of scholarly pursuits at the higher 
levels simply melts away as I arrive to encounter so many vibrant, enthusiastic people. The people of 
GLS have become my closest friends. Together they set an example for scholarship at its very best. 
Groups like this make not only easier to get through the days but fill one’s work with meaning and 
direction. Three final special thanks from among their ranks: Constance Steinkuehler, whom I first 
knew as a student in the program. More than anything, I am thankful for her showing me what 
confidence looks like from the inside. Her indefatigable can-do spirit is infectious. This is especially 
important when you are studying not only education—already low on the totem pole of academic 
entelechy—but games to boot. A close second is introducing me to Katamari Damacy. The leaders of 
GLS have variously shown me how to play new games, ones I would not have played otherwise. It is 
a microcosm for the maintenance of a vital curiosity, to explore and always be trying new experiences 
and ideas. Katamari is special though because it is the game I most like to share with others. The joy 
she shared with me is something I have shared with everyone in my life, not just scholars of games and 
other students. It probably sounds like a small thing, but it isn’t. 
I would also like to single out Elizabeth Gee (formerly Hayes). I wrote a chapter for Learning in Video 
Game Affinity Spaces which she coedited with Sean Duncan. They were both kind and thoughtful 
editors, but it was Betty’s close yet encouraging attention to my poorly written text that has made me 
a much better writer over the years and has helped me to understand the essential role an editor plays 
in producing quality writing. She was certainly my inspiration as I worked on this book. 
And lastly from GLS, but not last in my heart: Ben Devane. I worked with him on that first game 
design project in Kurt’s course, and later took over his job on the ARGH project. He let me come in on 
his game design for *Hip Hop Tycoon*. Ben was my first peer in GLS. Outside these projects we were 
close friends and it was with him whom I formed much of my thinking about games and learning, 
through many long arguments. Without his help, I never would have gotten started.
Finally, I’d like to thank a couple more people who have been directly involved in this book finding 
its way into your hands. Everybody at ETC Press and Drew Davison in particular are excellent. I can’t 
believe how easy going and yet entirely professional they have been to work with. They make it look 
so easy to do what they do. I’d also like to thank Sarah McKinney, my wife, for being my editor on 
this project. If this book is accessible to those outside our little educational technology bubble, she 
deserves much of the credit.
Chris Holden
Albuquerque, NM
February 24, 2015




