www.allitebooks.com

Mobile Communication Systems
www.allitebooks.com

To the memory of my Mother
www.allitebooks.com

Mobile Communication Systems
Krzysztof Wesolowski
Poznari University of Technology, Poland
JOHN WILEY & SONS, LTD
www.allitebooks.com

Translation from the Polish language edition published by Wydawnictwa Komunikacji i Lacznosci
sp z o.o., Warszawa
Copyright by Wydawnictwa Komunikacji i Lacznosci sp z o.o., Warszawa 1999
Copyright © 2002 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
Baffins Lane, Chichester,
West Sussex, PO19 1UD, England
National 01243 779777
International (+44) 1243 779777
e-mail (for orders and customer service enquiries): cs-books@wiley.co.uk
Visit our Home Page on http://www.wiley.co.uk or http://www.wiley.com
All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning
or otherwise, except under the terms of the Copyright Designs and Patents Act 1988 or under the
terms of a licence issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London,
W1P 9HE, UK, without the permission in writing of the Publisher, with the exception of any material
supplied specifically for the purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system, for exclusive
use by the purchaser of the publication.
Neither the author(s) nor John Wiley & Sons Ltd accept any responsibility or liability for loss or
damage occasioned to any person or property through using the material, instructions, methods or
ideas contained herein, or acting or refraining from acting as a result of such use. The author(s)
and Publisher expressly disclaim all implied warranties, including merchantability of fitness for any
particular purpose.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. In all
instances where John Wiley &: Sons, Ltd is aware of a claim, the product names appear in initial capital
or capital letters. Readers, however, should contact the appropriate companies for more complete
information regarding trademarks and registration.
Other Wiley Editorial 
Offices
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 605 Third Avenue,
New York, NY 10158–0012, USA
WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH
Pappelallee 3, D-69469 Weinheim, Germany
John Wiley & Sons Australia Ltd, 33 Park Road, Milton,
Queensland 4064, Australia
John Wiley & Sons (Canada) Ltd, 22 Worcester Road
Rexdale, Ontario, M9W 1L1, Canada
John Wiley & Sons (Asia) Pte Ltd, 2 Clementi Loop #02-01,
Jin Xing Distripark, Singapore 129809
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 0471 49837 8
Produced from PostScript files supplied by the author.
Printed and bound in Great Britain by Antony Rowe Ltd, Chippenham, Wiltshire.
This book is printed on acid-free paper responsibly manufactured from sustainable forestry, in which
at least two trees are planted for each one used for paper production.
www.allitebooks.com

Contents
Preface 
xiii
Elements of digital communication systems theory
1.1 
Introduction
1.2 
Model of digital communication system
1.3 
Speech coders and decoders
1.4 
Channel coding
1.4.1 
Channel models for channel coding
1.4.2 
The essence of the redundant coding
1.4.3 
Classification of codes
1.4.4 
Block codes and their polynomial description
1.4.5 
Application of error detection in block coding - ARQ
technique 
24
1.4.6 
Convolutional codes 
26
1.4.7 
Error spreading - application of interleaving 
30
1.4.8 
The concept of concatenated coding 
32
1.4.9 
The turbo-coding principle 
33
1.5 
Digital modulations applied in mobile communication systems 
35
1.5.1 
Multicarrier modulation 
44
1.6 
The principles of spread spectrum systems operation 
49
1.7 
Multiple access methods used in mobile communications 
55
1
www.allitebooks.com

vi 
CONTENTS
1.8 
Methods of duplex transmission 
58
1.9 
Competing for channel access 
59
1.10 The OSI model 
61
1.11 X.25 - a protocol for a packet switching network 
64
1.12 Signaling system No. 7 
67
References 
68
2 Overview and classification of mobile communication systems 
71
2.1 
Introduction 
71
2.2 
Paging systems 
72
2.3 
Wireless telephony 
72
2.4 
Trunking systems 
73
2.5 
Cellular telephony 
74
2.6 
Personal satellite communication systems 
76
2.7 
Wireless access to the local area networks 
77
References 
77
3 Characterization of the mobile communication channel 
79
3.1 
Introduction 
79
3.2 
Free-space signal propagation 
80
3.3 
Influence of the multipath effect on signal propagation 
83
3.4 
Transmission channel in mobile communication systems 
88
3.5 
Modeling the propagation loss 
95
3.5.1 
The Lee model 
96
3.5.2 
The Okumura model 
98
3.5.3 
The Hata model 
100
3.5.4 
The COST231-Hata model 
103
3.5.5 
The COST231-Walfish-Ikegami model 
103
3.5.6 
Examples of path loss estimation using selected
propagation models 
104
3.5.7 
Estimation of the propagation loss for indoor channels 
105
3.6 
Influence of the channel on the transmitted narrowband and
wideband signals 
107
3.7 
Diversity reception 
110
References 
113
4 Paging systems 
117
4.1 
Introduction 
117
4.2 
Basic characteristics of paging systems 
117
www.allitebooks.com

CONTENTS
4.3 
Classification of paging networks
4.4 
The POCSAG protocol
4.5 
ERMES - the European paging system
4.6 
FLEX family of paging protocols
4.7 
Conclusions: The future of paging systems
References
The cellular system concept 
133
5.1 
Simplified design of a classic cellular system 
135
5.2 
Elements of the traffic theory applied to cellular systems 
144
5.3 
Ways of increasing the system capacity 
147
5.4 
Channel assignment to the cells 
150
References 
154
First generation cellular telephony - NMT and AMPS examples 
157
6.1 
First generation cellular systems 
157
6.2 
NMT architecture 
158
6.3 
Information flow control in the NMT system 
162
6.4 
Services offered by NMT 
165
6.5 
Typical mobile station and base station design 
166
6.6 
The overview of AMPS 
168
6.7 
AMPS radio interface 
169
6.8 
Call processing in AMPS 
173
References 
174
GSM cellular telephony - architecture and system aspects 
175
7.1 
Introduction 
175
7.2 
Basic GSM architecture 
176
7.3 
Basic radio transmission parameters of the GSM system 
179
7.4 
Logical channel description 
180
7.5 
GSM time hierarchy 
182
7.6 
GSM burst structures 
183
7.7 
Description of the call set-up procedure 
187
7.8 
Handover 
194
7.9 
Ensuring privacy and authentication of a user 
196
7.10 Modifications and derivatives of GSM 
199
References 
202
5
6
7
www.allitebooks.com

viii 
CONTENTS
8 GSM cellular telephony - physical layer 
203
8.1 
Introduction 
203
8.2 
Construction of a typical mobile station 
203
8.3 
Coding and decoding of a speech signal 
208
8.3.1 
Full rate speech coding 
208
8.3.2 
Half rate speech coding 
210
8.3.3 
Enhanced full rate speech coding 
212
8.4 
GMSK modulation 
213
8.5 
Sequential data detection 
214
References 
217
9 Data transmission in GSM 
219
9.1 
Introduction 
219
9.2 
Organization of data transmission in the GSM system 
220
9.3 
Data services in GSM 
220
9.3.1 
Rate adaptation 
222
9.3.2 
Channel coding 
225
9.3.3 
Radio Link Protocol (RLP) 
226
9.3.4 
Data transmission in the aspect of access to different
networks 
227
9.4 
Transmission of short messages - SMS 
228
9.5 
High-Speed Circuit-Switched Data service - HSCSD 
232
9.6 
General Packet Radio Service - GPRS 
234
9.6.1 
GPRS system architecture 
235
9.6.2 
GPRS physical layer 
236
9.6.3 
GPRS transmission management 
240
9.6.4 
GPRS services 
241
9.6.5 
GPRS protocol architecture 
241
9.7 
EDGE - Enhanced Data rate for Global Evolution 
243
9.7.1 
Main improvements in the physical layer 
244
References 
247
10 CDMA in mobile communication systems 
249
10.1 Introduction 
249
10.2 Motivation for considering CDMA as a potential multiple access
method 
249
10.3 Spreading sequences 
250
10.3.1 m-sequences 
251
10.3.2 Gold and Kasami sequences 
254
www.allitebooks.com

CONTENTS 
ix
10.3.3 Walsh sequences 
255
10.4 Basic transmitter and receiver schemes in the CDMA system 
255
10.5 RAKE receiver 
258
10.6 Joint detection of CDMA signals 
261
10.7 Basic properties of a CDMA mobile system 
266
10.8 Conclusions 
268
References 
268
11 Description of IS-95 system 
271
11.1 Introduction 
271
11.2 Frequency ranges 
271
11.3 Downlink transmission 
272
11.4 Uplink transmission 
281
11.5 Power control 
283
11.6 Simplified connection set-up 
284
11.7 Enhancements of IS-95B for high-speed data 
284
References 
286
12 Trunking systems 
287
12.1 The idea of trunking 
287
12.2 MPT 1327 Standard 
289
12.3 EDACS - an example of a proprietary trunking system standard 292
12.4 TETRA — a European standard of a trunking system 
293
12.4.1 Services offered in TETRA 
294
12.4.2 General architecture of TETRA 
295
12.4.3 The TETRA physical layer 
296
References 
304
13 Digital cordless telephony 
305
13.1 CT2 standard 
306
13.2 DECT system 
309
13.2.1 DECT architecture 
309
13.2.2 DECT physical layer 
310
13.2.3 DECT MAC layer 
313
13.2.4 DECT/GSM interworking 
314
13.2.5 Description of a typical DECT handset 
314
13.3 Personal Access Communications System (PACS) 
316
13.4 Personal Handyphone System (PHS) 
319
References 
322
www.allitebooks.com

x 
CONTENTS
14 Wireless local loops 
325
14.1 Introduction 
325
14.2 PMP systems 
326
14.3 Application of cellular technology in WLL 
328
14.4 Cordless telephony in the realization of WLL 
330
References 
332
15 Satellite mobile communication systems 
333
15.1 Introduction 
333
15.2 First and second generation of mobile communication networks 334
15.3 Personal satellite communications 
335
15.4 Services offered by personal satellite systems 
338
15.5 Description of the most important personal satellite systems 
339
15.5.1 Iridium 
339
15.5.2 GLOBALSTAR 
342
15.5.3 ICO 
347
15.6 Future wideband access systems 
349
15.6.1 Teledesic 
349
15.6.2 Skybridge 
350
References 
352
Appendix 
354
16 Wireless Local Area Networks 
355
16.1 Introduction 
355
16.2 Types of WLANs 
356
16.3 Hidden station problem 
358
16.4 HIPERLAN Type 1 
359
16.4.1 HIPERLAN/1 MAC sublayer 
361
16.4.2 HIPERLAN/1 CAC layer 
362
16.4.3 HIPERLAN/1 physical layer 
363
16.5 IEEE 802.11 WLAN standards 
364
16.5.1 IEEE 802.11 physical layer 
366
16.5.2 IEEE 802.11 MAC sublayer 
370
16.6 IEEE 802.11 and HIPERLAN standards for 5 GHz band 
374
16.6.1 HIPERLAN/2 physical layer 
376
16.6.2 HIPERLAN/2 data link control layer 
378
16.7 Bluetooth 
379
References 
385

CONTENTS 
xi
17 Third generation mobile communication systems 
387
17.1 Introduction 
387
17.2 The concept of UMTS 
390
17.3 UMTS radio access network architecture 
391
17.4 UMTS air interface 
395
17.4.1 UTRA FDD mode 
399
17.4.2 UTRA TDD mode 
408
17.5 cdma2000 
412
17.6 Appendix - The Software Radio concept 
420
17.6.1 Introduction 
420
17.6.2 Minimum radio standard 
420
17.6.3 Basic elements of Software Radio architecture 
421
17.6.4 Software Radio in the realization of base stations 
423
References 
423
18 Application of smart antennas in cellular telephony 
427
18.1 Introduction 
427
18.2 Basic principles of smart antenna systems 
428
18.3 Phases of smart antenna deployment 
436
18.4 Influence of the smart antenna technology on the cellular system
capacity 
437
References 
438
Index 
441

xii

Preface
Mobile communication systems have become one of the hottest topics in communica-
tions. It has been forecast that within ten years half of the connections will be at least
partially wireless. Mobile communications evolved from an upmarket toy for rich users
towards a massive popular market. Rapid development of the Internet, its applica-
tions and new services created even higher challenges for further development of mobile
communication systems. These systems in their theoretical and practical aspects have
become a topic of academic lectures and have become an interesting subject for many
engineers and technicians who work in the area of telecommunications. A long list of
books available from leading publishers are devoted to several aspects of mobile commu-
nication systems. The book you are holding in your hand is trying to enter this list. It
has evolved from the lecture notes prepared for telecommunication students at Poznari
University of Technology, through the book published in Polish by WKiL, Warsaw in
1998 and 1999. This edition is a completely revised English translation, which takes into
account new developments in mobile communications since 1999. Some of the details
interesting for a Polish reader have been replaced by more general considerations. Due
to the limited space, the book does not go into great detail when presenting examples
of mobile communication systems. The readers interested in detailed information are
asked to check the references included at the end of each chapter.
Chapter 1 is devoted to the basic theory of digital communication systems. Mod-
ern mobile communication systems are mostly digital and they share many aspects of
transmission, multiple access and digital signal processing with other digital commu-
nication systems. The key material presented in this chapter is intended as reference
and refreshment for those readers who completed their studies several years ago, or who
have never studied digital communications before.
xiii

xiv 
PREFACE
Chapter 1 presents a model of a digital communication system, the principles of
speech coding, the basics of channel coding, an overview of digital modulations applied
in mobile communication systems, the principles of spread spectrum systems, the mul-
tiple access and random access methods, the OSI reference model, basic information on
X.25 and the Signalling System No. 7.
Chapter 2 characterizes the main types of mobile communication systems such as
cellular telephony, cordless (wireless) telephony, trunking systems, wireless LANs and
personal mobile satellite systems.
Chapter 3 presents the characteristics of a mobile communication channel. We start
from the basic information on antennas and signal propagation in free space, then we
consider the influence of the multipath effect on the received signal. Next we derive the
channel model in the form of a transversal filter with time-varying tap coefficients and
we present a model of the Doppler effect. We show the channel models which have been
used in the GSM design. A substantial part of Chapter 3 is devoted to modeling the
propagation loss and to the description of the most popular propagation models. After
considering the influence of the channel properties on the transmitted narrowband and
wideband signals, diversity reception is presented.
In Chapter 4 we consider the paging systems. After classification of paging networks
we concentrate on the popular POCSAG protocol, the European ERMES paging system
and the family of FLEX protocols.
The cellular system concept is the subject of Chapter 5. We describe a simplified
design of a classical cellular system, we present the basic elements of the traffic theory
applied in cellular system design and we consider the ways of increasing the system
capacity such as cell sectorization, cell splitting and microcell zones. Next we present
the rules of channel allocation in the cells and several strategies used in the practice.
Although first generation analog cellular systems slowly lose popularity and soon will
have a historical meaning only, they deserve a general description which has been pre-
sented in Chapter 6. Two representative examples have been selected: the Scandinavian
NMT system and American AMPS.
Chapter 7 is devoted to GSM which is the most important cellular system from
the European point of view. We consider the GSM architecture and system aspects.
We present basic radio transmission system parameters, and describe logical channels.
GSM time hierarchy, burst structures and frame organization. We also describe the
call set-up procedure, types of handover and the means of ensuring privacy and user
authentication. Finally, we present modifications and derivatives of GSM.
Chapter 8 covers the GSM physical layer aspects. We consider the construction of a
typical mobile station, and coding and decoding of a speech signal according to three
possible algorithms. Next we describe the GMSK modulation applied in GSM and the
principle of sequential detection applied in a GSM receiver.
In Chapter 9 we discuss the principles of data transmission in GSM. First, we consider
typical data transmission based on the circuit-switched mode in which data rates of up
to 14.4 kbit/s are achieved. We also sketch the rules of SMS transmission. Next we
present the HSCSD system which works in the circuit-switched mode and substantially
enhances data transmission capabilities. Finally, we describe the GPRS system based
on the packet-switched mode. We present the GPRS architecture, its physical layer.

PREFACE 
xv
transmission management, offered services and protocol architecture. At the end of
the chapter we consider EDGE - Enhanced Data Rate for Global Evolution, mostly
concentrating our attention on its physical layer.
Chapter 10 presents the basic knowledge necessary to understand the rules of oper-
ation of CDMA systems. We survey typical spreading sequences and basic transmitter
and receiver schemes. We focus our attention on the RAKE receiver and we present
basic rules of joint detection receivers. Finally, we consider basic properties of a CDMA
system.
In Chapter 11 we describe the most popular CDMA system, i.e. IS-95. We con-
centrate mostly on the physical layer of forward and reverse (downlink and uplink)
transmission and give some information on IS-95 enhancements.
Chapter 12 presents trunking systems. We start with the idea of trunking. Next we
consider the MPT 1327 standard and we concentrate on TETRA, showing its general
architecture, the offered services and the physical layer.
Chapter 13 describes basic types of digital cordless telephony. We concentrate on
DECT, although the American PACS and the Japanese PHS systems are also briefly
considered.
In Chapter 14 we present general rules of operation of wireless local loops, which have
recently attracted a lot of interest due to the development of mobile communication
technology.
Chapter 15 is devoted to personal mobile satellite systems. General classification
of these systems is presented and a short description of INMARSAT systems follows.
Most attention is given to Iridium, GLOBALSTAR, ICO and future broadband satellite
communication systems such as Teledesic and Skybridge.
Chapter 16 presents basic properties and the rules of operation of wireless local loops
(WLANs). We describe the most important WLAN standards such as HIPERLAN/1
and 2, and a few versions of IEEE 802.11. We also briefly consider Bluetooth, which
has the opportunity to become a popular standard of wireless connections in everyday
life.
Finally, in Chapter 17 we consider the third generation mobile communication sys-
tems. We present basic properties of the Universal Mobile Telecommuncations System
(UMTS) and concentrate our attention on two types of air interface: WCDMA FDD
and WCDMA TDD. We show the system architecture, the physical layer and some
basic system procedures. Next we present a short description of the cdma200Q sys-
tem, which has evolved from IS-95. We end the chapter with the presentation of the
idea of Software Radio, which can become quite useful in the world of many mutually
incompatible air interface standards.
The final chapter of the book is devoted to a general description of smart antenna
technology and its application to cellular telephony. This is a related subject because
smart antennas are applied in the third generation mobile communication systems.
The above chapter description shows that this book attempts to tackle most of the
important subjects in mobile communications. It is not possible to do it in great depth
within the limited space of this book. Almost each chapter of this book could be. or
already is, the subject of a separate book. We hope that the reader will understand
this fact and, if needed, he/she will study other, more specialized books.

xvi 
PREFACE
This book would not be in its present form if it had not been given attention and time
by many people. First of all, I would like to thank Prof. Zdzislaw Kachlicki and Dr.
Tomasz Kosilo, the reviewers of the Polish edition, for their valuable comments. Similar
thanks are directed to the anonymous reviewers of the English proposal. I am also
grateful to Mark Hammond, the Senior Publishing Editor of John Wiley &; Sons, Ltd..
Sarah Hinton, the Assistant Editor and Zoe Pinnock, the Production Editor who were
particularly patient and helpful. Someone who substantially influenced the final form of
the book is Mrs Krystyna Ciesielska (M.A., M.Sc.) who was the language consultant and
as an electrical engineer was a very critical reader of the English translation. Finally,
the book would not have appeared if I did not have the warm support of my family, in
particular of my wife Maria and my father Aleksander.
KRZYSZTOF WESOLOWSKI

Elements of digital
communication systems
theory
1.1 
INTRODUCTION
The following chapter contains the introduction to digital communication systems to
the extent which is necessary to understand problems encountered in the mobile com-
munication systems. The author assumes that only some readers have studied digital
communications in recent years. The progress in this area is very fast. Many technical
solutions now applied in modern mobile communication systems were no more than the
subject of theoretical considerations several years ago and they seemed beyond techni-
cal implementation using then existing technical means. Today they can be found in
popular mobile phones.
The aim of this chapter is to present an overview of basic issues of digital transmission
over communication channels, methods of digital modulation and digital receiver struc-
tures applied in mobile communication systems. We will also briefly describe the basic
rules of error detection and correction, as well as other methods aimed at improving
the performance of digital transmission over dispersive channels. We will also introduce
the Open System Interconnection (OSI) reference description model. We will use it for
an ordered description of digital communication systems and networks. This model is
applicable in defining the interfaces between the systems on the level of their several
layers. We will also consider selected protocols for information exchange in higher layers
of the OSI description model.
The author leaves the choice to the reader if he/she wishes to become acquainted
with the theoretical material presented in this chapter or to refresh his/her knowledge
or simply to skip this chapter and study the next chapters.
1
1

2 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
1.2 
MODEL OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEM
Let us consider the basic model of a digital communication system presented in Figure
1.1.
Channel
Noise
Channel
Encoder
RF
Figure 1.1 Model of a digital communication system
The source generates messages which have either the form of continuous functions
of time or are streams of discrete symbols. An example of a message continuous in
time is a waveform characterizing human speech. In this case, in order to send such
messages over the digital communication system, the continuous speech signal has to be
discretized in time and its samples have to be quantized. To fulfill this requirement, an
analog-to-digital (AD) converter samples the analog signal at the sampling frequency f3
and a binary block determined by the sample amplitude is assigned to each sample. Such
an operation is performed, for example, by the PCM encoder in standard telephony.
The PCM encoder samples the analog signal from the microphone at the frequency
fs = 8 kHz and assigns 8-bit sequences to each sample, using a standardized nonlinear
characteristic. Due to quantization performed with the selected accuracy, a certain
part of information contained in the sampled signal is lost. As a result a quantization
noise is observed. In case of speech signals, a nonlinear quantizer assigning binary
sequences to the signal samples can be considered as a source encoder. Due to nonlinear
characteristics applied in this process and taking into account the dynamic properties
of the human ear, a single sample can be represented by an 8-bit word. If the AD
conversion was linear, a comparable quality would be achieved with 12–13 bits.
Another example of a speech source encoder is the DPCM encoder. This encoder
is based on strong correlation between subsequent speech samples. It encodes only the
differences between them. More advanced methods of speech encoding will be briefly
described in Section 1.3 and in the chapters describing the GSM system and wireless
telephony.
An example of a source of discrete messages is a computer terminal. One can consider
the alphanumeric characters generated by the terminal as the source messages. They are
usually represented by 8-bit blocks in accordance with the widely used ASCII alphabet.
Although very popular, the ASCII alphabet is not an efficient representation of the
alphanumeric characters. Some characters occur very often, the others have low rate
of occurrence. A good source encoder fits the length of the binary sequences to the

MODEL OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEM 
3
statistical properties of the message source. More and more frequently, data compression
is applied, which allows for efficient representation of messages generated by the source.
This efficiency manifests itself by a low mean number of bits used for encoding of a
single message.
Several physical phenomena occurring in communication channels result in errors
made by the receivers. The errors are visible as the difference between the transmitted
binary sequences and the binary sequences decided upon on the basis of the received
signals. In order to correct the errors or at least to detect them, a channel encoder
at the transmitter and a channel decoder at the receiver are applied. The information
blocks are supplemented by a certain number of specially selected additional bits. These
bits are the results of modulo-2 addition of information bits selected in such a way that
algebraic interdependencies among them are created which allow for potential correction
or at least detection of errors. If error detection is applied, a signal of the erroneous
reception of the binary sequence is an indication that transmission of this sequence
should be repeated. Both error correction and detection are frequently applied in mobile
communication systems.
A modulator is a block which generates a sinusoidal signal (a carrier), whose pa-
rameters such as frequency, amplitude and/or phase are the functions of the digital
sequence applied to its input. As a result of modulation the signal carrying the in-
formation is placed in the appropriate part of the spectrum and has properly shaped
spectral properties. This is a very important feature in mobile communication systems.
They should use the spectral resources assigned to them efficiently, so as not to distort
the signals transmitted by neighboring spectrum users. They should also guarantee
the largest possible number of their own users in the assigned frequency band. The
electromagnetic spectrum is a valuable and limited resource. Recently, many systems
have been put in operation, and new services have been offered on the market. As a
result, new equipment and systems working in higher and higher frequency ranges are
designed and more and more sophisticated technology is required. The distribution
of the electromagnetic spectrum among radio systems is the subject of international
negotiations and agreements.
Multiple access to the transmission medium is a subject closely related to the channel
properties and the applied modulations. Multiple access can be realized by different
methods. The first one is the division of the spectrum assigned to the system into a
certain number of subbands which are used by different users (mostly, only if they are
active). That kind of access to the channel is called Frequency Division Multiple Access
(FDMA). In another approach, the users share the same spectrum but they divide time
among themselves. This approach is called Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA).
Users can also generate signals that occupy the whole system bandwidth and time;
however, due to the application of specific signal sequences (code sequences) uniquely
characterizing each user, the receiver is able to extract the signal of the selected user
from the sum of signals emitted by different users. This access method is called Code
Division Multiple Access (CDMA). Combinations of the three above mentioned multiple
access methods are possible.
The RF block operates in the range of radio frequencies arid amplifies the radio signal
to the required level. The bandwidth of the signal depends on the selected modulation
www.allitebooks.com

4 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
and the multiple access method applied. A frequently encountered limitation for the
RF amplifier applied in a mobile communication system is its energy consumption. For
example, a mobile phone should utilize as little energy as possible in order to lengthen
the time between subsequent battery recharging. For this reason, the RF amplifier
should have large dynamics and should work in the nonlinear range of its characteristics.
This fact has serious implications for the choice of digital modulations applied in the
mobile communication systems. So far, mostly digital modulations, characterized by a
constant or low-dynamic envelope, have been applied in order to minimize the nonlinear
distortions caused by the characteristics of the RF amplifier.
In mobile communication systems the transmitter emits the signal into space using
the antenna. The channel properties strongly depend on the type of transmitter and
receiver antennas, in particular on their directivity and gains. The antenna parameters
determine the range of the system and its performance. Although important from the
practical point of view, the antenna theory remains beyond the scope of this book. The
reader can find books entirely devoted to antennas such as [1] and [2].
The processes performed in the receiver are matched by those taking place in the
transmitter. After amplification and filtration in the RF front-end the received signal
is demodulated. The last process strongly depends on the digital modulation applied
and on the channel properties. The acceptable cost of the receiver also has an impact
on the type of the demodulator applied. In general, the demodulator extracts the pulse
sequence from the modulated signal received from the RF part. On the basis of these
pulses, the detector makes the decisions upon transmitted data symbols and transforms
them into binary sequences.
The channel decoder, using the redundant bits introduced by the channel encoder and
sometimes applying additional information on the reliability of the received symbols,
attempts to find the code sequence and, based on it, a binary information sequence.
The latter is the subject of source decoding. Two examples of channel decoders are
a decompression block recovering the original data from the received compressed data
and a speech synthesizer generating speech samples. In the latter case, the source-
decoded samples are D/A-converted and fed through the amplifier and a loudspeaker
to the message sink - the user's ear.
In following sections we will describe the processes taking place during the transmis-
sion of digital signals over mobile channels.
1.3 SPEECH CODERS AND DECODERS
Transmission of speech is the most frequent communication service. In analog systems
the signal representing human speech modulates one of the parameters of a sinusoidal
signal such as amplitude or frequency. The second generation mobile communication
systems transmit speech signals in digital form. For this reason the effective digital
representation of a speech signal is of particular importance.

SPEECH CODERS AND DECODERS 
5
Pulse Code Modulation1 (PCM) is the oldest method of digital coding of speech.
Figure 1.2 presents the basic scheme of PCM encoder and decoder.
PCM Encoder 
PCM Decoder
8-bit Nonlinear Quantizer
* 
64kbit/s
Speech 
.. 
Speech
Signal 
Antialiasing 
Linejf 
» 
! 
Smoothing 
Signal
*• 
Filter 
r 
f 
' 
> 
>• 
8-bit 
-* 
D/A 
> 
„ 
» 
> 
Fi,t 
>
, 
Quantizer
Figure 1.2 PCM encoder and decoder
The PCM encoder consists of ananti-aliasing filter, a sampler and a nonuniform quan-
tizer. The anti-aliasing filter limits the bandwidth of the input signal to such frequency
that is at most half the sampling frequency f3. In practice, the anti-aliasing filter cuts
off the bandwidth above 4 kHz, and the sampler picks up the samples of the input signal
at the frequency of 8 kHz. The nonuniform quantizer can be theoretically decomposed
into a nonlinear memoryless signal compression circuit and a linear quantizer. The
characteristic of the nonlinear circuit is standardized by the ITU-T recommendations
and is described by the formula
Ax 
n 
T
——- for 0 < x < \
< 
n 
(1.1)
1 + In Ax 
p 
,
for 
4 < x < I
where for the 8-bit quantizer the constant A = 87.6. For this quantizer sampling at
the frequency equal to 8 kHz, the data rate of the resulting binary stream is 64 kbit/s.
Let us note that for small signal amplitudes the characteristic is linear and for the
amplitude higher than the threshold I/A it is logarithmic. In the PCM decoder the
applied characteristic is described by the function that is inverse to (1.1), so the cascade
connection of both nonlinearities is linear. As a result, the shape of the processed signal
is not changed. Thanks to the compression characteristic applied in the transmitter, a
small amplitude signal is more strongly amplified than a large amplitude signal. As a
result, the signal power to quantization noise power ratio is almost constant in the large
range of the quantized signal amplitudes. In case of linear quantization that ratio would
change linearly with the power of the quantized signal. The PCM speech coding is used
in some early solutions of wireless links replacing a subscriber loop. It is otherwise
seldom used because of low spectral efficiency of the speech signal representation in the
form of a 64-kbit/s binary stream as compared with the speech signal represented by the
'This is a traditional term. PCM is not a modulation but a source coding procedure.

6 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
analog FM modulation. Recently PCM speech coding with logarithmic characteristic
(1.1) or (1.2) has been applied as one of the speech coding methods in a new de facto
standard called Bluetooth [20].
Another standard of the compression characteristic, similar to that described by
formula (1.1), has been adopted in the USA and Canada. The normalized input-output
magnitude characteristic is described by the formula
where the value of u = 255.
The speech signal is characterized by strong autocorrelation. This means that two
subsequent samples do not differ too much from each other. In consequence, if the
differences between subsequent samples are encoded, the data rate of the binary stream
representing the speech waveform can be decreased. Moreover, knowing a sequence of
the recent samples and their correlation properties, one can predict the next sample.
We take advantage of the observation that in a limited time span the speech signal is
quasi-stationary. Thus, instead of coding the subsequent samples or even coding the
differences among them, one can code the difference between the current sample and its
predicted value calculated by the predictor on the basis of a few previous samples. Fig-
ure 1.3 presents the encoder and decoder of Differential Pulse Code Modulation (DPCM)
exploiting this idea. The anti-aliasing filter in the transmitter and the smoothing filter
in the receiver have been omitted for the clarity of presentation of the DPCM idea.
x(t) 
xn 
en 
en 
xn=xn+en
- - - » - - - 
»• + • - - • -> 
Quantizer 
• 
»• + 
•
A- 
A
- 
T 
*"
v 
*
Predictor 
•« 
+ 
Predictor 
•*
{ai}
DPCM Encoder 
DPCM Decoder
Figure 1.3 DPCM encoder and decoder
As we see in Figure 1.3, the subject of the quantization in the DPCM encoder is the
difference between the input signal xn and the predictor output xn, the latter being
derived as the weighted sum of the recent p samples of which each is the sum of the
predictor and quantizer outputs. This means that en = xn — xn- where
p
1=1

SPEECH CODERS AND DECODERS 
7
Equation (1.3) describes the operation of the predictor and shows that this functional
block can be realized in the form of a finite impulse response (FIR) digital filter. The
quantized form en of the prediction error en is sent to the receiver.
The DPCM decoder derives the output signal as the sum of the predicted sample
and the quantized prediction error which has been received from the DPCM encoder.
Usually the predictor coefficients are selected in such a way that the mean square
error between the signal sample and its predicted value is minimized. The prediction
coefficients are the solution of the system of linear equations derived from minimization
of the following expression
E[e
2
n] = E
P
/ j
(1.4)
P
2
where E[.] denotes the ensemble average. Assuming stationarity of the signal xn and de-
noting the values of the autocorrelation function of the signal xn as ri-j = E[x n-ix n - j],
after calculating the first derivative of (1.4) and setting it to zero we end up with the
following system of equations
p
^r^di = rj 
for j = 1, ...,p 
(1.5)
i=l
Let us stress that the assumption of signal stationarity is valid only in short time periods.
The solution of the system (1.5) is the set of the predictor coefficients ai, ( i = 1 , ...,p)
so the calculated coefficients get their averaged values. Periodical updating of the
coefficients would be a certain improvement in the predictor's operation; however, the
coefficients should be sent to the receiver or calculated adaptively on the basis of the
received signals.
Adaptive Differential Pulse Code Modulation (ADPCM) is a meaningful improvement
of the PCM and DPCM encoding. In 1984 this method was specified in the ITU-T Rec-
ommendation G.721, which was later replaced by Recommendation G.726. It is worth
noting that this method of waveform encoding is applied in a few popular mobile com-
munication systems, in particular in wireless telephony and wireless subscriber loops.
Subjective speech quality when ADPCM coding is involved is comparable to that which
is achieved when a typical PCM processing is performed.
ADPCM encoding combines two PCM improvements - the differential encoding de-
scribed earlier and the adaptive quantization. The basic scheme of ADPCM encoder
and decoder is shown in Figure 1.4. The analog signal is sampled and linearly processed
in a 12-bit quantizer, resulting in the signal representation xn. Subsequently, the dif-
ference en = xn — xn between the sample xn and its prediction xn is calculated. The
resulting error signal en represented by a 12-bit word is the subject of processing in the
quantizer having the base-2 logarithmic characteristic with 16 quantization thresholds.
As a result, a 4-bit representation of the error sample is received. At the sampling

8 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
4-bit 
en 
^ 
en 
Reverse 
% ,
Quantizer 
Quantizer 
* 
^
12-bttlinear 
' 
* 
*
qn 
Quantization 
Quantization 
4n 
^
•-- 
Step 
•« « 
Step 
o«w<i^~
^ 
Adaptation 
Adaptation 
Krefflcwr
T
Reverse
* Quantizer
»_ 
en
Adaptive 
**
* 
Predictor *= 
+
ADPCM Encoder 
AOPCM Decoder
Figure 1.4 Scheme of ADPCM encoder and decoder
frequency of 8 kHz the resulting ADPCM data stream has a data rate of 32 kbit/s.
The 4-bit error signal en determines the quantization threshold applied both in the
adaptive quantizer and in the circuit recovering a linear quantized form of the error en.
The latter error is added to the signal xn that is received at the output of the adaptive
predictor. This sum constitutes the predictor's input signal for the next timing instant.
The adjustment of the predictor's coefficients is performed on the basis of the output
signal received from the adaptive inverse quantizer (see Figure 1.4).
Some blocks of the ADPCM decoder are identical to those applied in the encoder.
The adaptation of the inverse quantizer is performed on the basis of the quantized error
en, as it is done in the encoder. The resulting linearly quantized error en is added
to the adaptive predictor output signal, giving the approximation xn of the ADPCM
encoder's input signal. The adaptation processes are determined by the same signals in
the transmitter and receiver so the results of adaptation performed in the transmitter
do not need to be sent to the receiver. The adaptation algorithms are constructed in
such a way that in case of transmission errors occurring in the encoded binary signal
the algorithms return to their correct operation so their stability is ensured.
Detailed description of the ADPCM encoder and decoder can be found in the Rec-
ommendations G.721 and 726 [3] and the application note [4] presenting the ADPCM
encoder/decoder implementation on a fixed point signal processor. Their more detailed
analysis is beyond the scope of this chapter.
The next method of waveform encoding, which is worth mentioning, is Delta Modu-
lation (DM). The DM can be considered as a special case of DPCM. In the DM the
difference between the current and previous samples is calculated and quantized using
a two-level quantizer. The price paid for a much simplified encoding scheme is the need
to apply a much higher sampling frequency as compared with the minimum sampling
frequency used in the PCM encoder. In the basic delta modulation encoder the sam-
pling frequency is a compromise between the resulting encoder's output data rate and
the tolerable level of the quantization errors. Slope overloading and granulation noise
are two phenomena resulting in the particularly large values of the signal quantization
errors. In the slope overloading the errors are a result of slow tracking of the steep

SPEECH CODERS AND DECODERS 
9
input signal slope performed by the DM encoder which generates the linearly increas-
ing quantized output signal. Granulation noise is a result of the quantization of the
quasi-constant signal. A constant signal encoded using the DM method results in the
alternating positive and negative binary pulses. The adaptation of the quantization
step size performed in Adaptive Delta Modulation removes the above mentioned draw-
backs at the price of the increased encoder and decoder complexity. Typically, the DM
encoder generates a binary stream at the data rate of 16 kbit/s. Such a method of
speech signal representation used to be applied in military equipment. Unfortunately
it does not possess sufficient quality for commercial mobile communication systems.
(a)
(b)
en
-•• 
*• 
Xrv1
^Accumulator
Step size
control
(c)
An 
,t 
T 
:
*x 
>•• + . - >; T 
> Saturation 
*x
Vn 
Vn-1 
Vn-1 
*
h
Figure 1.5 Scheme of the continuous variable slope delta encoder (a), decoder (b) and accumu-
lator (c) used in the encoder and decoder
Much higher quality, even better than for regular PCM encoding, can be achieved by
applying a version of adaptive delta modulation called Continuous Variable Slope Delta
Modulation (CVSD). It has been selected as an alternative speech coding method in the
Bluetooth standard [20]. The CVSD has been designed to reduce slope overload effects.
Figure 1.5 shows the schemes of the CVSD encoder, decoder and of the accumulator
used in both blocks. As in regular delta modulation, the object of two-level quantization
is the difference between the input signal sample xn and the sample "xn–1 at the output
of the accumulator, which approximates the previous sample xn-1. Thanks to the factor
h, which is slightly lower than one, the accumulator has a property of slow forgetting
its contents (see Figure 1.5c). The CVSD modulation can be described by the following

10 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
set of equations
en = Xn 
Xji_i
yn_i = saturation(yn_i) 
(1.6)
yn = xn-i + An -en
where saturation(.) is self-explanatory. The value of the step size An depends on the
sequence of the most recent values of en. Figure 1.6 shows a typical approximation of
the continuous signal by a CVSD quantized signal and shows a binary representation of
en [21]. The receiver is able to adjust its step size in the same way as the transmitter
on the basis of the received values of en only.
1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0
Figure 1.6 A typical approximation of the continuous signal by a CVSD quantized signal [18]
(©Ericsson Review)
The speech encoding methods presented so far relied on the encoding of speech
samples or their differences. More and more sophisticated methods leading to higher
and higher binary stream reduction have been proposed. However, there are even more
effective coding methods which are used in the mobile cellular systems. These methods
rely on the Linear Predictive Coding (LPC) and Vector Quantization principles.
Let us start with the LPC method in its general form [5]. The speech signal encoding
is a process of speech analysis in which the encoder parameters and the type of excitation
signal are determined. These parameters are subsequently transmitted to the receiver
where they are used by the decoder working as a speech synthesizer.
The vocal tract can be modeled using a filter with periodically updated coefficients.
This filter is excited every few tens of milliseconds by a periodical signal or a noise-like
signal. The speech encoder synthesizes the filter modeling the vocal tract, determines
the type of excitation (noise or the pulse sequence) and its period. The criterion of the
filter synthesis is usually the minimum of the mean square error, where the latter is
understood as the weighted sum of squares of the differences between the input speech
samples and the samples synthesized by the encoder with the given coefficients.
Figure 1.7 presents the general scheme of the LPC encoder [5]. The filter modeling
the vocal tract is digital. It works on the input samples according to the equation
p
xn-k + Gvn 
(1.7)

Noise
Generator
Pulse
Generator
" 
A
Period 1/fo
SPEECH CODERS AND DECODERS 
11
... 
Filter Modeling
X. 
the Vocal Tract f 
*
Figure 1.7 General scheme of the LPC encoder
where G is the gain of the excitation signal vn and ak are the filter coefficients. In
practice the modeling filter is usually a lattice filter in which the filter coefficients ak
are replaced by the coefficients akk called the reflection coefficients. 
Thus, the speech
synthesizer looks like that shown in Figure 1.8.
Noise
Generator
X •*"+:• 
> + 
. 
- »> 
»•+ 
.
' * " _ * 
* 
* 
'
„ 
** 
, *x
Pulse : I 
° 
X.> 
^
Generator 
T 
> X 
*• X
* 
I 
- 
-. 
* 
. 
«.
T *•- 
+ •« 
» > T * 
+ * 
* 
T
Period 1/fo
Figure 1.8 LPC encoder with the lattice filter
The LPC model parameters have to be renewed every 15–30 milliseconds due to the
quasi-stationarity of the speech waveform, so this time period determines the speech
encoder frame length. The frame contains the binary block from the LPC output. For
example, [5], this block consists of a single bit determining the type of excitation signal,
6 bits determining the period of the excitation signal, and 5 bits describing the gain G in
the logarithmic scale. The reflection coefficients akk of the modeling filter require a 6-bit
representation for each coefficient. Up to 10 coefficients are applied. In consequence,
a typical frame consists of 72 bits and the binary stream has the data rate of 2400 to
4800 bits/s depending on the frame period. The speech signal recovered by the receiver
operating in accordance with the LPC model has a relatively low quality and sounds
"synthetic". For this reason more advanced speech models are applied in commercial
systems, resulting in much higher speech quality. Figure 1.9 presents a general scheme
of an encoder using such a model [6], called the analysis-by-synthesis speech encoder.
The analysis-by-synthesis encoder consists of a speech synthesizer attempting to
generate the signal similar to the speech signal being the subject of encoding. The
weighted difference between both signals is a cost function used to adjust the parameters

12 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
Speech
Input
Signal
-
Excitation 
|_TP 
. 
STP 
*"
Generator 
Filter 
Filter 
-
Optimization 
Weighting
Algorithm 
* 
Filter 
"*'
Figure 1.9 Scheme of the speech encoder applying "analysis-by-synthesis" rule
of the speech synthesizer. The synthesizer consists of the excitation generator, the Long-
Term Prediction filter (LTP) and the Short-Term Prediction (STP) filter. The STP
filter models a short-term correlation of the speech signal, or equivalently, its spectral
envelope. The LTP filter reflects a long-term correlation or the precise speech signal
spectral structure. As previously, the subjects of transmission are the STP and LTP
filter parameters and the parameters of the excitation signal. The structure of the
speech encoder applied in the GSM system is similar to that described above and its
details are presented in the chapter dealing with the GSM physical layer.
4 V^rff, 
.. 
«-- 
index i
' * . 
,. Address 
»
• •- 
Selection
Codebook
Figure 1.10 Vector quantization principle
In order to describe another important encoding method called Code Excited Linear
Prediction (CELP), we have to present the idea of vector quantization. In this type
of the quantization process, the object of processing is a block of N subsequent signal
samples. The quantizer uses the table of appropriately selected signal sample represen-
tations ordered in the form of a codebook. The quantizer associates the block of N input
signal samples with one of the code words. The criterion of the code word assignment
is often the minimization of the mean square error between the input signal samples

SPEECH CODERS AND DECODERS 
13
and the code word samples. The result of the vector quantization is the address of the
selected code word that is transmitted to the receiver. The encoding process is shown
in Figure 1.10. The decoder contains the same codebook so the received address of the
code word allows for generation of the selected code word which best approximates the
encoded sample sequence.
a)
xn 
Weighting
* 
Filter
I ^ Codebook 
y 
*. _i_ 
k
 
STP
* 
1 
! 
A 
» + .
.
.
-
»
. 
R|ter
'*"
Selection of L, I, H
Minimization of
Error E
VSELP Encoder
Codebook
1
* 
» 
LTP
index I 
; 4., 
4., 
. 
STP 
>
T 
^ 
Filter
G2 
* 
*
Codebook 
fc 
v
 
! 
», v 
, ,
2 
X 
G3»- X 
| 
{ai}
Index H
L
Excitation Generator
VSELP Decoder
Figure 1.11 Scheme of the VSELP encoder (a) and decoder (b)
Figure 1.11 shows the CELP encoder and decoder in the version called Vector Sum
Excited Linear Prediction (VSELP) applied in the second generation cellular system IS-
54B/136 operating in the USA. As we see, the encoder is a modification of the "analysis-
by-synthesis" circuit shown in Figure 1.9. The excitation generator is implemented on
the basis of the selection of N-element words received from two codebooks, and their
appropriate weighting. The LTP filter is realized as a, two-tap filter in which the current
sample is summed with the sample delayed by L sampling instants and weighted by
the coefficient G3. The weighting coefficients GI, G2 and G3, the indices L, H, I and
the set {ai} of the STP filter coefficients are selected so as to minimize the sum of the
squared differences between the synthesized samples generated by the encoder and the
weighted sequence of the input samples xn. We have to stress once more that the whole
encoding and decoding procedure is performed on the sample blocks collected in the
time period of about 20 ms. The optimized encoder parameters are sent to the decoder
and, since the codebooks in the encoder and decoder are identical, the transmitted
www.allitebooks.com

14 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
parameters allow for the synthesis of the speech signal frame in the decoder. The binary
stream generated by the described encoder has the data rate of about 8 kbit/s. Due to
the type of calculations performed by the encoder and decoder, both blocks are usually
implemented in software on a digital signal processor. Computational complexity of the
CELP encoder and decoder does not exceed the capabilities of a typical DSP processor.
1.4 CHANNEL CODING
The application of the Forward Error Correction (FEC) or Error Detection coding is
one of the most important means of ensuring the reliability of digital transmission. In
this section we will present the basic rules of channel coding. First, we will consider
simple channel models representing the whole system contained between the channel
encoder and decoder.
1.4.1 
Channel models for channel coding
Figure 1.12 presents a few basic versions of the channel models useful for analysis of the
channel coding process. The simplest model version is known as a binary symmetric
memoryless channel model (Figure 1.12a). The channel inputs and outputs are binary.
The transmitted and received blocks are observed at the input and output of the channel
model on the bit-after-bit basis. Every bit of the encoded sequence appears unchanged
at the channel output with the probability 1 — p . With the probability p the transmitted
bits are negated, which is equivalent to the bit errors. The decoder makes a decision
Bindrv
* 
Channel 
c 
Memoryfess 
r> 
Chf™51 
a»
a> 
-* 
Encoder 
* 
* 
Decoder
Binary
b) 
^ 
C* 
Channel 
r*
b> 
* 
Encoder 
with Memory 
Decoder
a^ 
Channel 
_ 
c> 
M-ary Output 
r> 
Channel 
a
Encoder 
Channel 
Decoder
Figure 1.12 Channel models from the point of view of channel coding
about the transmitted coded sequence c on the basis of the received binary sequence
r. In the decision process it can apply only the algebraic interdependencies among
particular bits of the transmitted sequence which have been implied by the coding
rule. Due to the memoryless nature of the considered model, the occurring errors are
mutually statistically independent, i.e. the occurrence of errors at previous moments

CHANNEL CODING 
15
does not have any influence on the error probability at the current moment. In reality
only some transmission channels can be considered as memoryless. In most channels
the errors occur in bursts. On the other hand there are many decoding algorithms
which are designed for the correction of random errors, i.e. for memoryless channels.
In order to ensure the error correction with the sufficient quality, additional means are
undertaken in order to spread channel error bursts in the receiver. A widely applied
method of destroying the error bursts is interleaving. It will be explained further in this
chapter.
The second channel model reflects the bursty nature of errors occurring in the trans-
mission channel. In this case the occurrence of a single error at one moment increases
the probability of errors at the following moment. In this sense the channel has a mem-
ory of its previous states. There are special codes and decoding algorithms fitted to
such a situation.
b)
p(x|a,)
PM-A) 
...... 
p(x|A)
_
A
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
A
Figure 1.13 Example of use of the additional knowledge from the channel output for soft-decision
decoding
The third model, similar to the first one, is also memoryless; however, it illustrates the
case when more than binary information only is retrieved from the channel output. It
means that the decoder uses not only algebraic interdependencies among particular bits
in the coded sequence but also additional knowledge received from the channel, allowing
for the improvement of the decoding process. Figure 1.13 illustrates a simple example of
this case. Binary symbols are represented by bipolar pulses having values equal to ±A.
They are distorted by additive statistically independent Gaussian noise samples. Let
the binary pulse —A represent the binary symbol "0", whereas the pulse +A represent
binary "1". The sample x, being the sum of the pulse and the noise sample, has the
probability density function conditioned on the transmitted symbol +.4 or —A. In the
receiver the sample x is quantized by an M-level quantizer, giving the output symbol
r. Assigning a digit in the range from 0 to M — 1 to each possible quantization level,

16 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
we obtain a channel model with binary input and M-ary output. In the case of a
binary quantizer this channel model is reduced to the binary symmetric memoryless
channel model. As we see, in our channel model the channel output is measured much
more precisely as compared with the binary channel model. This allows us to use
that additional knowledge on the received symbols to improve the decoding quality, i.e.
to decrease the probability of a false decision upon the received coded sequence. In
Figure 1.13b the dashed lines indicate the subsequent quantization levels. The type of
decoding in which additional channel knowledge is used is called soft-decision decoding,
as opposed to hard-decision decoding when only binary symbols are used by the decoder.
Most of the decoding algorithms applied in modern digital cellular telephony use soft
decisions. The kind of knowledge used in the soft-decision decoding resulting from the
M-level quantization is not the only one used to improve the decoding quality. There
are other methods of measuring the bit reliability applied by soft-decision decoding.
The power level of the signal carrying the information bit is one of them.
1.4.2 
The essence of the redundant coding
As already mentioned, the channel coding relies on appending the information sequence
by additional bits which constitute information redundancy. Let the subject of coding
be a fc-bit information sequence a. Assume that the information source can generate
any combination of bits in the k-bit block. Thus, 2fc different information sequences
are possible. As a result of supplementing fc-bit information blocks by n — k additional
bits we receive n-bit sequences. There are 2n different binary sequences of length n.
however, only 2fc sequences are selected from them. Each of them represents one of the
possible information sequences a. Let us call them code words. The n-bit sequences
are selected in such a way that the sequences should differ from one another as much
as possible. Thus, despite the erroneous reception of some bits, the decoder can assign
with a high probability that coded sequence to the received sequence, which has been
sent by the transmitter. Difference among the coded sequences can be measured by the
number of positions on which the bits of any pair of two coded sequences are different.
This number is called the Hamming distance between two sequences. One can show
that if binary errors occur statistically independently of each other (which means that
we represent the channel by the binary, symmetric memoryless channel model), then 2fc
code words of length n should be selected in such a way that the minimum Hamming
distance occurring between some pairs of them should be maximized. The optimum
maximum likelihood decoder finds that sequence among 2k of code words which is
the closest to the received n-bit sequence in the sense of the Hamming distance. If
the minimum Hamming distance dmin between the coding sequences is maximized, the
coding sequence can be erroneous in no more than t = [(dmin - 1) /2] positions2 and the
maximum likelihood decoder is still able to make a correct decision upon the received
sequence.
2 [x] denotes the integer part of x.

CHANNEL CODING 
17
Let the decoder have the unquantized channel output samples xi (i = l,...,n) at
its disposal. Assume that the additive noise samples are Gaussian and statistically
independent. One can prove that in case of the channel model shown in Figures 1.13a
and 1.12c, the optimum decoder finding the maximum likelihood code word should
select the coding sequence c = (c1,C2, ...,cn) which is the closest in the sense of the
Euclidean distance to the received sequence x = (x1,x2,...,xn). 
It means that the
decoder selects that code word which fulfills the criterion
n
minV^ (xi — 
ci)2 
(1.8)
c 
^—'
'i— 1
In practice, the decoder does not handle the ideal values of the samples x, but their
quantized versions. Moreover, from the implementation point of view, it is much easier
to calculate the distance between the received sequence and the code word in a sub-
optimum way in form of the sum of modules of the differences between the elements of
both sequences, i.e. the decoder has to search for such a coding sequence c, for which
min> h-cvj 
(1.9)
c 
*•—'
is fulfilled.
The decoder operating according to criterion (1.8) is the optimum maximum like-
lihood soft-decision decoder. In practice, slightly higher error probability is received
when criterion (1.9) is applied.
with Coding
without Coding
[dB]
Figure 1.14 Illustration of the coding gain on the plot of block error probability versus
with and without channel coding
The term coding gain is also strictly associated with the essence of coding. If we wish
to compare the communication system with channel coding with the system without
it. we have to assume that the time periods used for the transmission of sequences

18 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
representing the same k-bit information block are equal in both cases. If the signal
energy per bit in the system without coding is equal to Eb then the energy of a single
bit in the system with coding has to be smaller due to the fact that redundant bits
must be additionally transmitted. Thus, for the n-bit sequences representing the k-bit
information block the energy per bit is equal to k/n Eb In general, the probability of
erroneous decoding of a code word is a function of the ratio of the energy per bit to
the noise power density No. Despite the fact that the energy per bit in the system with
coding is lower than that for the system without coding, the performance of the system
with coding is higher if the energy per bit to the noise power density ratio exceeds a
certain threshold value. Figure 1.14 shows that feature. For the raising value of Eb/No
the plots of the probability of the erroneous block decoding for coded and uncoded
systems are becoming more and more parallel and asymptotically they are shifted one
with respect to the other by G dB along the EB/NOaxis. The value G is called an
asymptotic coding gain.
1.4.3 
Classification of codes
There are several criteria of classification of channel codes. The first one is the function
they perform. From this point of view we divide channel codes into error correction and
error detection codes. The differences between these two code categories have already
been explained.
The second criterion is the way the codes are created. Let us assume, similar to
the previous section, that the binary information stream is divided into k-bit blocks
aJ , where j is the block number. If the code word Cj is a function exclusively of the
current information block a.j for each j, the code is called a block code. If the code
word is a function of the current information block aj and a few previous information
blocks aj_i,aj_2, ...,aj_i, it is called a convolutional code. From the point of view
of the logical circuit theory a block code encoder can be implemented using only the
combinatorial circuitry (logical gates), whereas the convolutional code encoder is an
automaton and requires some memory cells. The term "convolutional code" originates
from the observation that the binary sequence at the output of the encoder can be
considered as a discrete convolution of the binary input stream with the encoder impulse
response. The encoder impulse response is understood as the response of the encoder
to a single "one" followed by a stream of zeros.
The basis of the next classification criterion is the number of different symbols of
which code words are built. The symbols are mostly binary. A code in which binary
symbols are used to compose code words is called a binary code. All operations per-
formed on the elements of code words are realized in an algebraic field which consists
of two elements: zero and one. In consequence, an additive operation is the addition3
modulo-2, whereas a multiplication operation is a logical conjunction.
In some special applications nonbinary codes are used. The number of different
symbols used for representation of the code words is a primary number or is its power.
3Recall that the modulo-M operation is the calculation of the remainder of division by M.

CHANNEL CODING 
19
An example of a practical application of a nonbinary code is correction of a binary
stream distorted by errors concentrated in bursts. A code word of the nonbinary code,
in which the symbols selected from the set consisting of digits {0,..., (2m — 1)} are used,
is created in such a way that subsequent symbols of the code word are represented
by m-bit blocks. The additive operation is then addition modulo-2m, whereas the
multiplication operation is multiplication modulo-2m. If the error burst does not exceed
m subsequent bits, it distorts at most two subsequent nonbinary code symbols. Then,
in order to correct all m-bit long error bursts, it is sufficient to apply a nonbinary code
which is able to correct at least two erroneous symbols.
According to another criterion of code classification, we divide codes into systematic
and nonsystematic. In systematic codes the information blocks appear in the code
words in the direct form and they are followed by parity bits. On the other hand, the
symbols of the code word in a nonsystematic code are the sum of information symbols
calculated in conformity with a selected coding rule and the information symbols do
not appear in a direct form.
1.4.4 
Block codes and their polynomial description
There are a few ways of describing block codes. The simplest way is to show the
algebraic equations for the parity bits. For example, the expression
(a1,a2,a3,a4, (a1 + a2 + a3), (a1 +a2 +a4). (a1+ a3 + 
a4)) 
(1.10)
describes a block code of the code word length equal to n = 7 with the number of
information bits k = 4. We symbolically denote such a code as (7,4). The symbol " + "
denotes addition modulo-2. As we see in (1.10), the first four bits are independent,
whereas each of the remaining three redundant bits is the sum of selected independent
bits. These redundant bits are called parity bits. If we denote the parity bits as
05 = (a1+a2+ a3), a6 = (a 1+a 2+ 
a4), 
a7(a1+a3 
+ 
a4) 
(1.11)
then the direct consequence of a modulo-2 operation is the set of equations
a 5+a 1+a 2+a 3=0, a 6+a 1+a 2+a 4 
= 0, a7 + 
a 1 + a 3 + a 4 = 0 
(1.12)
called parity equations. They are used in the decoder to check if the elements of the
received block fulfill them and, in consequence, if this block is a code word. The above
description of the block code is efficient only for codes using short code words.
In practice, for large n and k it is much more comfortable to describe the method
of generating code words applying a polynomial notation. This is possible for a class
of codes called polynomial codes. For such codes each code word can be represented by
a polynomial, whose coefficients are elements of the code word. Strictly speaking, the
polynomial
C(x) = Cn-1Xn-1 + Cn- 2X n - 2 + . . . + c1x + C0 
(1.13)
describes the code word (cn_1,cn_2, ... ,C 1,C 0). For binary codes, among 2n possible
n-bit blocks and, what is equivalent, among different polynomials of the degree equal at

20 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
most to n— 1, the code (n, k) contains these code words, whose polynomials are divisible
by a certain common polynomial g(x) of degree n — k, called a generator polynomial.
Division of polynomials is performed in a traditional manner, bearing in mind that the
polynomial coefficients are equal to 0 or 1 and the additive operation is the addition
modulo-2 and the multiplication operation is a logical conjunction. Each code word
polynomial is divisible by the generator polynomial g(x) so it can be represented as the
product of two polynomials
c(x) = a(x)g(x) 
(1.14)
where g(x) is, as previously, the generator polynomial of degree n — k and the degree
of a(x) is not higher than k — 1. The form of the polynomial a(x) depends on the
information bits. We often wish to place k information bits at the beginning of the
code word, which means that the code is systematic. The sequence of k information
bits can be represented by the polynomial as
b(x) = b k - 1x k – l + b k - 2x k – 2 + • • • + b1x + b0 
(1.15)
In order to create a code word with the bits (bk-1,bk-2, •••b1 b0) in its highest positions,
the polynomial b(x) should be multiplied by xn-k and the remaining n — k bits should
be calculated. This is equivalent to finding such a polynomial p(x) of the degree equal at
most n — k — I that the sum of the polynomials is divisible by the generator polynomial
g(x). In other words
c(x) = x n - kb(x) + p(x) = a(x)g(x) 
(1.16)
In case of modulo-2 operations, after addition of p(x) to both sides of expression (1.16)
we obtain
x n - kb(x) = a(x)g(x) + p(x] 
(1.17)
As we see, the polynomial p(x) of the degree lower than the degree of g(x) is the
remainder of division of the polynomial x n - kb(x) by the polynomial g(x). Knowing that
the calculation of the remainder of division by the polynomial g(x) can be represented
as a modulo-g(x) operation we get
p(x) = [x
n - kb(x]] mod g(x) 
(1.18)
For the code word polynomial the remainder of its division by the generator polynomial
is equal to zero, which means that
c(x)mod g(x) = 0 
(1.19)
Let us note that the test if the given polynomial is divisible by g(x) is checking if this
polynomial describes a code word. This observation is utilized by many block code
decoders which detect or correct errors in the code words.
Cyclic codes are an important subclass of the polynomial codes. For these codes, if
the sequence (C1,c2,... , Cn ) is a code word, then the sequence (cn. c1, c2,... . cn-1) is

CHANNEL CODING 
21
a code word as well. One can prove that the generator polynomial of the cyclic codes
is a dividend of the polynomial xn — 1. In practice n — 2m — 1. Among the cyclic
codes the BCH4 codes are particularly important due to their features. They are able
to correct more than one error and their minimum distance among code words at the
assumed word length n is larger as compared with other block codes of the same length.
Detailed consideration of these codes is beyond the scope of this chapter. The reader
interested in coding theory is advised to study the rich literature in particular [10] and
[11]. Here we only sketch the general idea of BCH codes. In order to do it we have to
introduce some algebra.
The operations performed on the polynomial coefficients considered so far have been
made exclusively on two digits "0" and "1". This set of digits with the multiplicative
and additive operations defined above creates an algebraic structure known as a finite
field or Galois field GF(2). One can show that finite fields exist for the sets of digits
{0,1, ...,p — 1}, where p is a prime number. In this case the multiplicative and additive
operations are simply multiplications and additions modulo-p.
Consider a polynomial description of the code words for p = 2. We know very well
that each polynomial can be represented as a product of the polynomials of the degree
lower than the original one. If the polynomial factorization has the form
f(x) = (x - B 1}(x - B 2 ) • . . . • (x - 
Bk) 
(1.20)
then B1,B2,... ,Bk are the roots of the polynomial f ( x ) . However, in the same way
as in the polynomial algebra over the field of real numbers, the roots do not always
belong to the same field5 as the polynomial coefficients. Some of them belong to the
extension field GF(pm) of which the number of elements is a power of a prime number.
The elements of GF(pm) are all possible polynomials of the degree lower than m. They
constitute a set of all possible remainders obtained from the division of polynomials by a
certain irreducible polynomial p(x) of degree m. Irreducible polynomials are analogous
to prime numbers and are tabulated. The additive and multiplicative operations are
performed in GF(pm} on the polynomials modulo-p(x), i.e. the result of the addition
of two polynomials over GF(pm) is a remainder from the division of the sum of them
by p(x). In each extension field there is a single element denoted as a and called the
generator or primitive element, such that every other nonzero element can be expressed
as a power of this element. As a result, each Bi (i = 1,.... k) in (1.20) is a certain power
of a.
Recall that polynomial codes are determined by the generator polynomial g(x). Be-
cause the generator polynomial of degree n — k of the polynomial code (n, k) can be
factorized in the form
g(x) = (x- B1}(x -B2) . . . . (x - 
B n_ k) 
(1.21)
this code is equivalently determined by the set of the roots {B1,B2 ••••,Bn-k}. Because
each code word polynomial is divisible by the generator polynomial, each code word
4The abbreviation BCH comes from the first names of the code inventors: Bose, Chaudhuri and
Hockenghem.
5The roots of the polynomial with real coefficients can be complex numbers.

22 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
polynomial has the roots of which {B1,B2,..., Bn_k} is a subset. Instead of explicitly
describing the generator polynomial, some codes are defined by selecting the roots of
g(x). The BCH codes belong to such codes. The formal definition of BCH codes is
following
Definition 1 A t-error correcting BCH code (n, k) with the code symbols belonging to
GF(p) is a block code of length n which has Bmo,Bm°+l,. . . ,Bm°+2t-1 as roots of the
generator polynomial g(x). (B is an element of GF(pm). If B is a primitive element
a of GF(pm) then the length of the code words n = pm — 1. Otherwise n is such a
number for which Bn = 1 in GF(pm). mo is a parameter selected during the BCH code
synthesis.
A particularly important subclass of the BCH codes is the class with m = m0 = 1.
These codes are called the Reed- Solomon codes. The codes are defined over GF(p).
their block length is n = p — 1, the roots of the generator polynomial are a, a2, ... , a2t.
so the generator polynomial is given by the formula
g(x) = (x- a)(x - a2) • . . . • (x - a2t) 
(1.22)
where t is the number of correctable symbol errors. The codes are non-binary because
p is obviously higher than 2 and is a power of a prime number. Thus, a Reed-Solomon
code is determined in the extension field. Typically p = 2m which means that the
code operates on 2m— ary symbols. Each symbol is represented by a m-bit block, so the
codes correct burst errors. For this reason they are very useful in two-level concatenated
coding schemes which will be described later in this chapter.
We have already mentioned that the codes can be used for error correction or detec-
tion. Let us assume that during the transmission on n bits of the code word c some bits
have been the subject of errors and instead of c the sequence r has been received. This
sequence can be denoted as a modulo-2 addition of the code word c and the unknown
error sequence e, so r = c + e. In the polynomial notation we have r(x) = c(x) + e(x).
Checking if r(x) is a code polynomial results in s(x), where
s(x) = r(x) mod g(x)= [c(x) + e(x)] mod g(x) = 
(1.23)
= c(x) mod g(x) + e(x) mod g(x) = e(x) mod g(x)
The remainder from the division of r(x) by g(x) denoted as s(x) is called a syndrome
polynomial and, as we see in (1.23), is determined only by the error polynomial e(x).
The result of calculations shown in (1.23) is a consequence of the following facts:
• calculation of the remainder from the division of the sum of two polynomials by
another polynomial is a disjunctive operation, and
• the remainder from the division of the code word polynomial by the generator
polynomial is zero (see (1.19)).
The idea of decoding very often relies on the calculation of the syndrome polynomial
s(x) and determining e(x) on the basis of s(x). This last step is the most difficult and

a)
b)
- rn-2- rn-1 ;
> 
i-» 
[-«->. 
•<» 
. »».
. » 
T 
» 
T
_ 
.
Output
P,
CHANNEL CODING 
23
bQ
bk-2
"1" -Acknowledge
"0" - Not Acknowledge - Alarm
Figure 1.15 Example of the error detection encoder and decoder for the block code generated
by the polynomial g(x) = x8 + x7 + x6 + x4 + 1
requires most of the decoder resources in form of the required memory, computational
complexity, etc. After finding e(x) the error polynomial is added to the polynomial r(x)
resulting in the most probable code word polynomial.
The operation of error detection system applying block coding relies on the calcula-
tion of the parity bits in the encoder according to expression (1.18). The decoder checks
if the polynomial r(x) describing the received sequence r is divisible by the generator
polynomial g(x). In other words, it checks if the syndrome s(x) = r(x) mod g(x) is
equal to zero. The parity bits calculated in the manner described above are often called
CRC (Cyclic Redundancy Check) bits. Figure 1.15 presents an example of the circuit
calculating the CRC bits (Figure 1.15a) and the circuit calculating the syndrome s(x)
(Figure 1.15b). Let us note that the configuration of both circuits depends only on the
form of the generator polynomial and does not depend on the length of the code words.
As a result, this error detection method can be applied for very long data sequences.
Let us recall again that the symbol "+" in Figure 1.15a denotes modulo-2 addition.
The encoder of the (n, k) block code operates as follows. It is assumed that at the
start of the operation all the memory cells contain zeros. During the first k clock cycles
the switches PI and P2 are in the first position so the information bits are transferred
directly to the output and to the input of the circuit dividing by g(x). One can check
that after k clock cycles, the coefficients of the polynomial p(x) are contained in the
memory cells of the circuit implementing expression (1.18). Then the switches change
their positions. The feedback in the circuit dividing by g(x) is interrupted and the
contents of the memory cells is gradually transferred to the output.
The error detecting decoder of the block code (n, k) divides the received sequence
represented by the polynomial r(x) by the generator polynomial g(x). After n clock
cycles the memory cells of this device contain the syndrome coefficients. If the received
www.allitebooks.com

24 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
sequence is a code word, the contents of the memory cells is zero. Any non-zero contents
is an indication that the received binary block has been corrupted. Such a state is
detected by the logical circuit. Its output returns logical one if the sequence is a code
word, otherwise it shows logical zero.
One can easily show [9], that such error detection is a very reliable method of detec-
tion of error bursts of any length b. The error burst of length b is a sequence of errors
which starts and ends with a logical one and contains any sequence of zeros and ones
between them. One can prove that if the degree of the generator polynomial g(x) is
equal to n — k then all the error bursts of length not higher than n — k will be detected,
whereas the fraction of undetected error bursts of length higher than n — k among all
possible error bursts is equal to 2 –( n - k). Typically the length of the CRC block is 16
or 32 so the fraction of undetected error bursts among all errors bursts of length higher
than 16 (or 32, respectively) is 2–16 or 2–32, which are very small numbers.
1.4.5 
Application of error detection in block coding - ARQ technique
Transmission of data sequences supplemented with CRC blocks for error detection, is
often applied in data transmission systems, including mobile data systems. In this
case it is necessary to introduce the feedback channel in which the information on
acceptance or rejection of the transmitted block is sent. If the feedback channel cannot
be created (e.g. due to an excessive loop delay) the only way to increase the transmission
performance is to use a sufficiently strong feedforward error correction (FEC).
Cj
J> Encoder ^ 
J 
r, 
a
'••••- 
Transmitter 
» Main Channel 
»• Receiver 
»Decoder 
' »
Buffer
Feedback Channel* 
ACK/NAK
Figure 1.16 Transmission system with the block repetition and the feedback channel
Figure 1.16 presents a transmission scheme if a feedback channel is used. The main
data stream flows from the transmitter to the receiver over the main channel. Each data
block a.j supplemented with the CRC block constitutes a code word Cj. In the receiver
the syndrome of the received sequence rj, is calculated. In case of the zero syndrome
the receiver sends a short block which acknowledges the positive reception of the data
block. Such information is usually denoted as ACK (Acknowledge). In case of a nonzero
syndrome the receiver sends to the transmitter the message NAK (Not-Acknowledged).
In consequence, the block which has not been acknowledged is sent to the receiver once
more. The procedure of information block exchange is realized automatically, so this
technique is often denoted as ARQ (Automatic-Repeat-Request).
In general, the time necessary to transmit a data block using the ARQ technique
is random and it depends on the number of block repetitions and the arrangement of
the information block exchange. In return, the quality of the received and accepted

CHANNEL CODING 
25
data blocks is high and constant, as opposed to the FEC coding scheme. In this latter
case the quality of the received data is variable because in case of breaking the error
correction capabilities the decoder emits erroneous blocks. However, the data are sent
at the constant delay which is an important feature for some applications. The system
designer has to decide which solution is more advantageous for him.
> 
Waiting 
Retransmission 
Retransmission
V 
T
Transmitter 
1 
2 
2 
3 
4 
5 
5
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
*
Channel 
o 
|T 
• % 
£ 
o 
^-
« 
« 
*) 
* 
4; 
*
Receiver 
1 
2 
2 
3 
4 
5
A 
A
Error 
Error
b) 
Delay 
Retransmission 
Retransmission
_ * 
y
Transmitter 
1 2 3 4 ! 5 6 7 8 9 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 7 ' 8 9 10 11 12
Channel 
,
4
Receiver 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
789
A 
A
Error 
Error
c)
Transmitter 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 3 8 9 10 7 11 12 13
f'honnal 
O O ^ " O O O ^ " O O O O O
wl leal (I let 
CT- 
CT- 
^^ ^- "o- ^? ^^ ^ 
w- w- w- w-
4
Receiver 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 ' 3 8 9 1 0 7 1 1
A 
A
Error 
Error
Figure 1.17 Examples of basic ARQ techniques
There exist many ARQ methods differing in circuit complexity and associated data
transmission efficiency. In general they can be categorized into the following three
groups [11] (see Figure 1.17):
• the stop-and-wait ARQ (idle ARQ, Figure 1.17a),
• continuous ARQ with go-back-N retransmission strategy (Figure 1.17b), and
• continuous ARQ with selective repeat strategy (Figure 1.17c).
The first kind of ARQ strategy is simple in implementation, however, the link uti-
lization is often low. It is worth using in short links with the moderate data rates. The

26 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
transmitter sends a data block and waits for its acknowledgement. If the receiver, on
the basis of CRC block and syndrome calculation, decides that the received sequence is
a code word, it sends the ACK message. Subsequently, the transmitter sends the next
data block. In case of erroneous reception of the data block the NAK message is sent to
the transmitter and the latter emits the last data block once more. The retransmission
can occur a few times. If the subsequent attempts of the block retransmission are not
successful, the link is considered unreliable. In general, in the time between transmis-
sion of subsequent code words the link remains unused, which causes a relatively low
efficiency of the link utilization. It can be improved by lengthening the data block: how-
ever, the probability of the block error increases and, in consequence, the frequency of
block repetition increases as well. Despite its inefficiency, the stop-and-wait ARQ pro-
cedure is applied in the widely used bisync (Binary Synchronous Control), the protocol
originally developed by IBM.
The transmitter applying the continuous ARQ with go-back-N retransmission strat-
egy sends subsequent data blocks continuously. It does not wait until the ACK message
is received. However, the transmitted blocks are stored in the memory buffer until their
acknowledgement is received. The size of the memory buffer depends on the size of
data blocks and the maximum expected round-trip delay. After the reception of the
NAK message the transmitter sends the whole sequence of blocks again, starting from
the corrupted one. If this strategy is applied, the receiver does not need to be equipped
with a buffer. The blocks following the corrupted one are marked as erroneous blocks
until the positive acknowledgement of the erroneous block is received. This type of the
procedure is applied in another famous communication protocol known as Synchronous
Data Link Control - SDLC. Low efficiency of this procedure becomes noticeable when
the delay loop is long and the data transmission rate is high. This inefficiency arises
from the fact that the positively received blocks which are preceded by an erroneous
block have to be retransmitted.
The continuous ARQ with selective retransmission avoids the above mentioned draw-
back. In this strategy, the receiver repeats only those blocks which have not been
received correctly. Because the end-user should receive the data blocks in a correct se-
quence, the buffers in the receiver and transmitter are necessary. In the receiver buffer
the received blocks are properly reordered to maintain the appropriate block sequence.
Let us note that in the latter case data blocks must be equipped with block numbers
which allow for block ordering.
More information on ARQ procedures can be found in [11] and [19].
1.4.6 
Convolutional codes
Convolutional codes are an important class of error correction codes which are more
and more frequently applied in digital communication systems. One of their features is
simplicity of the coding process and a well-known decoding technique both in the hard-
and soft-decision forms. In the sense of the theory of logical circuits the Convolutional
code encoder is an automaton. It features a certain number of states which are entered
and left due to the input information bits which can be considered as the automaton's

CHANNEL CODING 
27
excitations. The output signal, which is a code word, is the result of the encoder's
transition between two subsequent states.
a) 
i ,*,«*'*«
 
b)
«;. .. v 
. 
oo,™ ;
* 
" 
010 
no
*'+* 
g3(x) 
1°1 
»,
a=00
6=01
c=10
001.. 
100 
100 
100
010 
010
Figure 1.18 Example of the convolutional code encoder (a), related trellis diagram (b) and the
path on the trellis diagram resulting from the encoder input sequence 0101101101 (c)
Let us consider a simple example of the convolutional code encoder, shown in Figure
1.18. As we see, the encoder has two memory cells. The encoder output signals are
obtained by modulo-2 addition of the input bit and the selected bits contained in the
memory cells. The switch periodically sends the bits from the subsequent outputs of
the logical circuits directly to the encoder output. It selects each of the logical outputs
in one-third of the input bit cycle.
A state diagram is one of the typical ways of automaton description. The encoder
state is determined by the contents of the memory cells. In case of convolutional codes
it is more advantageous to present the operation of the encoder using a particular form
of the state diagram called a trellis diagram. This kind of diagram describes possible
transitions from the states at the n-th moment to the states at the n 4+1-st moment.
The output bit blocks associated with particular transitions among states are placed
above the arrows symbolizing these transitions. The excitation being the reason of a
particular state transition is shown by a solid line in case of the zero input signal or by a
dashed line for the input signal equal to logical one. Let us note that for the considered
convolutional code encoder, for each input bit three bits are generated at the output
of the encoder, so the code has the coding rate R = k/n = 1/3. Figure 1.18b presents
possible state transitions for the n-th moment. One can easily imagine a whole sequence
of transitions starting at the initial moment and ending at the current moment, so the
operation of the encoder is equivalent to wandering between subsequent states along
a particular path of the trellis diagram. As we know, state transitions are determined
by the state of the encoder and its input excitation signal. Let us note that assuming

28 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
that the initial state of the encoder at the zero moment (mostly characterized by zeros
in the memory cells) is known to the decoder, the determination of the encoder path
along the trellis diagram in the encoding process is equivalent to the determination of
the sequence of information symbols. Concluding, the decoding algorithm can be based
on finding the most likely path on the trellis diagram which has been travelled by the
encoder.
Upper Output
Puncturation 
*
» 
- •»• 
• - »• 
• 
Table 
>
1-0,0,1,1 
>. 
3 
•• 
*"
0 1 0 
0 1 1 1
Lower Output
Figure 1.19 RCPC encoder with the coding rate R = 4/5
There are applications in which the coding rate of the form R — l/n is not appropri-
ate. For example, a coding rate of 4/5 or 2/3 is desired. One of the ways of achieving
this goal is elimination of selected output bits, called puncturing. Such codes are called
Rate Compatible Punctured Convolutional Codes (RCPC). Figure 1.19 presents the ex-
ample of generation of the RCPC code of the coding rate R = 4/5. The convolutional
encoded bits are sent to the output, taking into account the so called puncturing table.
Such a table applied in the encoder shown in Figure 1.19 has the form:
(124)
0 
1 
( 
}
The table shows that for each four pairs of the encoder output puncturing results in
elimination of the second and third bit from the lower encoder output and the fourth
bit from its upper output.
As in a block code decoder, the decoder of a convolutional code optimal in a maximum
likelihood sense selects the code word which is the closest to the received sequence. In
case of the hard-decision decoding the measure of distance is the Hamming distance.
whereas for soft-decision decoding the Euclidean distance is applied. As we have already
mentioned, very often a suboptimal measure is used, leading to simplification of the
decoder implementation.
An effective method of selection of the decoded code word was proposed in 1967 by
Andrew Viterbi [12]. The Viterbi algorithm searches for the optimum code sequence
which is associated with the 'shortest' path (in the sense of the selected distance mea-
sure) on the trellis diagram. Such a path is found by extending the paths starting from
the known initial state to each possible trellis state at the current (n-th) moment. A
specific cost is associated with each transition between trellis states. It is the distance
between the code sequence associated with that particular transition and the received
sequence. The key point of the algorithm results from the observation that the shortest

CHANNEL CODING 
29
path to the i-th state at the n-th moment consists of the transition from one of possi-
ble states (e.g. the k-th state) at the (n — l)-st moment, from which the i-th state is
achievable, and the shortest path to the k-th state at the (n — l)-st moment. Thus, the
selection of the shortest route to each state is a recursive procedure - we find it using
the results of the search at the preceding moment. In case of a finite code sequence
the algorithm makes a decision upon the transmitted code sequence by tracking the
path to that state for which the distance measure is minimal. Sometimes, as it happens
in the GSM system, the information sequence is supplemented with a few known data
symbols, e.g. zeros. Thus, the decoder knows the number of the final state or the subset
of the states in which the path along the trellis diagram can end. This knowledge can
be utilized in the selection of the code sequence by the decoder.
In the case of a continuous transmission it is necessary to make a decision with a
finite time delay. It is possible due to the fact that at the probability close to unity, the
shortest paths to each state contain a common route up to D time instants back with
respect to the current moment. It means that the route from the initial moment up to
the (n — D)-th time instant is the same, independent of which state at the n-th moment
features the lowest distance measure (has the shortest path). Thus, the decoder is able
to generate the final decision upon the transmitted symbols delayed by at least D steps.
Figure 1.20 presents an example of the shortest path to each trellis state for the
encoder shown in Figure 1.18 when a particular data sequence has been received. The
code sequence from Figure 1.18c distorted by five binary errors has been selected for
illustration. The lowest distance measure (the cost) of reaching each state at a given
moment is denoted above each state. This cost is in fact the Hamming distance between
the received binary sequence and the code sequence associated with the shortest path
ending at the considered state. In Figure 1.20c the route featuring the shortest distance
measure is bordered by a double dotted line. This is the route which would be selected
by the decoder if the decision upon the transmitted binary sequence had to be made
at that moment. Let us note that the path selected by the decoder is identical to that
in Figure 1.18c, so the decoder has corrected all the errors contained in the received
sequence.
Beside the Viterbi algorithm there are other methods of decoding the convolutional
codes, e.g. the Fano algorithm or algebraic decoding] however, the Viterbi algorithm
has gained a fundamental practical meaning and it has made the convolutional codes
very attractive from the implementation point of view. It is applied in the main second
and third generation mobile communication systems such as GSM, IS-54/136, IS-95,
UMTS and cdma2000.
The Viterbi algorithm determining the code sequence on the basis of the minimum
distance from the received sequence has been introduced following the assumption of
statistically independent errors occurring during the transmission, i.e. the assumption
that the transmission path can be modeled as a memoryless channel. In the case of
mobile communication systems this assumption is often not fulfilled due to the chan-
nel properties. The errors frequently arise in bursts which substantially decreases the
performance of the Viterbi algorithm. The remedy lies in application of interleaving.

30 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
Received
Sequence
a=00 •
a)
b=01
c=10«
d=11»
000 
101
(0) 
(2)
>» 
>•
(4)
•f
J3> 
JJ>
15)
• 
-1*
Sequence 
°°° 
101 
01° 
100 
°11
(0) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(4)
a=00» 
>» 
>• 
>• 
>• 
•
b)
(4) 
(3) 
(4) 
(4)
b=01 
T» 
-^ 
^ 
,.
(3) 
(1) 
(4) 
f3) 
(5)
c=10« 
J« 
J« 
J« 
•*• 
"V
(5) 
(2) 
(3) 
(5)
d=11 • 
• 
-^ 
• * • > • • * *
S^utn^ 
°°° 
101 
01° 
100 
011 
01° 
100 
110 
11° 
100
<°) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(8) 
MO) 
(9)
a=00 • • - - • - 
> • • - > • 
>• 
>• 
^» 
>• 
>• 
>• 
>• 
.f
C^ 
(4) 
(3) 
(4) 
(4) 
(5) 
(8) 
(8) 
(6) 
(9)
b=01» 
.
^
.
y
.
^
^
^
y
.
^
^
^
i
(3) 
J1) 
(4) 
n) 
(5) 
(6) 
(5) 
(7) 
(9) 
(6)
c=10 
• 
•
•
•
'
•
"
i
^
A
.
-
V
'
-
U
-
V
(5) (2) (3) (5) (6) 
(7) 
(5) 
(7) 
(8)
Figure 1.20 Illustration of the shortest path search for each trellis stage at the n-th moment:
after two clock cycles (a), after five clock cycles (b), after 10 clock cycles (c)
1.4.7 
Error spreading - application of interleaving
Application of interleaving in the transmitter at the output of the FEC encoder and
deinterleaving at the receiver in front of the decoder improves the operation of most of
the decoding algorithms for block and convolutional codes. Subsequent bits of the code
sequence are transmitted over the channel in a modified order as compared with the
order of generation. Such a modified sequence may be distorted by burst errors caused
by transmission conditions in the mobile channel. At the receiver the received bits are
reordered so that in case of the error absence the original code sequence could be recov-
ered. As we see, the operations of interleaving and deinterleaving are complementary.
In practice, the deinterleaving causes tearing apart the burst errors and spreading them
over the whole range of the processed block. Thus, at the output of the deinterleaver
the errors are quasi statistically independent. There are two basic categories of the
interleaves: block interleaver and convolutional interleaver.
In case of the block interleaver the bits from the encoder are written in a two-
dimensional matrix in a prescribed sequence. The simplest method is writing them into

CHANNEL CODING 
31
subsequent rows. If the whole matrix is filled with the input bits, the phase of reading
begins, in which the bits are read out of the matrix in a different order, usually along
subsequent columns. In the receiver the incoming bits are stored in an identical two-
dimensional matrix in the order in which they have been read out in the transmitter.
When the incoming bits fill up the matrix they are read out in the order of writing them
into the interleaver matrix. Writing in rows and reading in columns is the simplest way
of spreading the burst errors. One can define another sequence of writings and readings
to/from the memory of the interleaver and deinterleaver. Both processes have to be
complementary. The sequence of addresses and the size of the matrix determining so-
called depth of interleaving have to be selected in such a way that the burst errors
occurring in the channel are dispersed to that extent that they look like random errors.
Figure 1.21 presents the simplest example of interleaving with writing in the rows and
reading in columns on the transmitter side.
Direction
of Writing
Burst
r 
Errors
Direction 
. 
i
of Reading 
!' 
* 
Direction
* 
of Writing
Direction
+
Interleaving 
Deinterleaving
Figure 1.21 Example of block interleaving and deinterleaving
We have to stress the crucial meaning of synchronization for the correct operation
of the interleaver and deinterleaver. If the frames of the transmitter and receiver are
shifted in time with respect to each other, the ordering of the bits in the deinterleaver
does not give appropriate results. Therefore the transmitted sequence often starts with
a short synchronization word. Because writing into the matrix and reading from it have
to be performed at the same time, the number of matrices is doubled. One of them is
used for storing the input bits whereas the other one is in the phase of reading of the
bits written to it in the previous phase. After reading/writing from/to the whole single
matrix the matrices reverse their functions.
As already mentioned, the second way of spreading the burst errors is the application
of the convolutional interleaver. Its operation is shown in Figure 1.22.
The binary sequence is sent by the commutator on the bit-by-bit basis to the inputs of
B parallel registers. The i-th register (i = 1,... , B) delays the input bits by (i — 1)M
cycles. The output signals of each delay register are fed serially to the interleaver
output through the second commutator. The deinterleaver operates exactly in the
same way as the interleaver. The only difference is the ordering of the delay register
blocks according to the decreasing delay. Therefore the upper register delays the input
sequence by (B — 1)M cycles, whereas the lowest branch of the deinterleaver does rot

32 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
*• 
M
from Encoder 
(B-1)M 
to 
Decoder
4 
• 
> 
*
>• Channel 
^. * : 
• 
;* . 
^ +
' 
•• 2M • 
r 
A
Figure 1.22 Basic scheme of convolutionsl interleaving and deinterleaving
introduce any delay. As in case of the block interleaver, the synchronous operation of
the interleaver's and deinterleaver's commutators has a fundamental meaning. Thus,
the delay introduced by the cascade of interleaver and deinterleaver in each parallel
branch is the same and equal to (B — 1)M cycles.
As already mentioned, the quality of error spreading depends on the interleaving
depth. However, we have to note that the interleaver/deinterleaver pair introduces a
substantial delay, which in some communication systems can be tolerated to a limited
extent.
1.4.8 
The concept of concatenated coding
Transmission of digitized speech over mobile channels sets a moderate requirement on
the binary error rate which can be achieved mostly by application of convolutional cod-
ing and interleaving. However, other services such as data and multimedia transmission
require much lower BER than that which is sufficient for speech signals. One way to
achieve a very low BER is the application of concatenated coding.
Information Outer Code 
Inner 
Code 
^ 
-. 
. 
.Inner Code 
^ Outer Code
~ * 
Encoder 
* 
Encoder 
* 
Channel 
•> Decoder 
•
81 
R=K/N 
Cl=a2 
r=k/n 
c2 
r2 
a2=r1
Figure 1.23 
Principle of concatenated coding
The idea of concatenated coding was introduced by Forney [22] in 1966 and is shown
in Figure 1.23. The channel coding at the transmitter side is realized by two encoders.
The first one is called an outer code encoder. Let its coding rate be R = K/N, where K
is the number of information bits and N is the code word length. The code words are
treated as the information bits by the inner code encoder with the coding rate equal
to r = k/n. One can easily show that the overall coding rate is rR = kK/nN . In
the receiver the data stream appearing at the output of the channel is the subject of
decoding in the inner decoder and the information bits at its output are the input bits
for the outer decoder. Several arrangements of the inner and outer codes have been

CHANNEL CODING 
33
investigated. In many applications the inner code is a convolutional code, whereas the
outer code is a rionbinary Reed-Solomon code. The task of a strong inner code is to
correct as many errors caused by the channel as possible. However, some error patterns
can be beyond the capabilities of error correction and cause error bursts at the output
of the convolutional code decoder. Thus, the outer code decoder corrects the remaining
burst errors.
Such a configuration in which the outer code is a Reed-Solomon code and the inner
code is a convolutional code is often called classical. In another widely-known concate-
nated coding scheme two parallel convolutional codes with the interleaver between the
outer and inner encoders are applied. Such a scheme is called turbo-coding and is the
subject of our considerations below.
1.4.9 
The turbo-coding principle
The idea of turbo-coding was first presented in 1993 [23]. An example of a turbo-code
encoder is shown in Figure 1.24, whereas a respective turbo-code decoder is depicted
in Figure 1.25.The turbo-code encoder shown in Figure 1.24 consists of two Recursive
Systematic Code (RSC) encoders, an interleaver and a multiplexing and puncturing
device. 
The recursive systematic code is a kind of a convolutional code where in the
c,
Recursive
Systematic
dk 
. 
Code 
v
gt
. . « . - , * T * T » - T ' « - T 
'|f 
Output
!"§. 
"
Delay 
•" i " 
v 
2E "i
line(L1) 
Y<k „ 
ra
Interleaving 
, 
2k».
C2
Recursive
Systematic
Code
Figure 1.24 Example of turbo-code encoder (based on [23], © 1993 IEEE)
encoder the input information bits are directly transferred to the output, and redun-
dancy bits are generated in the logical circuit containing a feedback shift register (see
Figure 1.24). It turns out that the application of two parallel RSC encoders with the in-
terleaver preceding the second one results in very good properties of the generated code
words, such as a large Hamming distance between code words. The construction of the
interleaver is crucial for the code performance. Usually, non—uniform (pseudorandom,
www.allitebooks.com

34 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
Feedback loop
. Deinter-
z,, 
i(dk) 
Mdg 
Cleaving
"* 
». 
Decoder 
•• lnter- 
+ Decoder
? 
' 
DEC, 
* leaving 
* 
DEC,
x 
--• »• 
>•
Input 
£
-- 
1 
yiR 
^Deinter-
E 
1k- 
* leaving
Decoded output
Figure 1.25 Turbo-code decoder for the code shown in Figure 1.24 [23] (© 1993 IEEE)
as opposed to block or convolutional) interleavers are applied. In such an interleaver,
reading to and writing from memory are performed in a pseudorandom fashion. As in
other types of interleavers, the processes of reading and writing are complementary. In
order to achieve high code performance, the size of the interleaver memory has to be
large, leading to a substantial delay introduced by the coding and decoding processes.
The application of two RSC encoders determines the lowest coding rate R = 1/3 (three
output bits are generated as a response to each information bit). The coding rate can
be increased by applying puncturing.
The turbo-code decoder consists of two soft input/soft output decoders6 separated
by an interleaver. The output signal of the second decoder is fed back to the input of the
first decoder. The decoding process is performed iteratively in the feedback loop. Both
decoders use channel state information consisting of instantaneous signal amplitudes
and noise variance. Both decoders process the information signals, redundancy signals
and the LLR values.7
The performance of the turbo-code decoder, expressed as the BER versus Eb/N0.
improves with the number of iterations performed in the decoding process. Figure
1.26 shows the gradual improvement of the performance with the increasing number of
iterations for the code presented in Figure 1.24 applied for transmission over additive
white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. Let us note that the greatest improvement is
6Soft-decision decoding is performed in the decoders.
7The LLR means the Logarithm of Likelihood Ratio and is denoted in Figure 1.25 as A(dk). It is
determined by formula
\ 
Pr{dk 
= 1 [observation}
Pr{dk = 0[observation}
where Pr{dk = 1 [observation} is the a posteriori probability determining the probability that the data
symbol dk = 1 has been transmitted knowing the observation signal at the receiver. The variables
A(dk) shown in Figure 1.25 denote extrinsic information generated by the decoder. Details can be
found in [23] or [29].

DIGITAL MODULATIONS APPLIED IN MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 
35
Iteration: 
Iteration Iteration 
Iteration
#18 ! . #3 
#2 
#1
0 
1
Theoretical
limit
5 
Eb/N0 (dB)
Figure 1.26 Performance of the turbo-code decoder in function of the number of iterations [23]
(© 1993 IEEE)
achieved at the beginning of the iterative process and the final performance is close
to the Shannon limit. In this sense turbo-coding is a considerable achievement in the
coding theory. Turbo-codes can find applications in services requiring very low BER,
values, which can tolerate high delay introduced by the decoder.
1.5 DIGITAL MODULATIONS APPLIED IN MOBILE COMMUNICATION
SYSTEMS
Let us consider the next block of the digital communication system model shown in
Figure 1.1. The binary stream, having been protected against possible transmission
errors, is fed to the modulator, which, depending on the logical values of the binary
stream, modifies one or more parameters of the output sinusoidal signal, such as phase,
frequency, or amplitude.
Let us consider a very general model of operations performed in the modulator. In
fact this model characterizes all modulation types and is given by the formula
s(t) = :x
I(t) cos2irfct - xQ(t) sin2irf ct = Re {x(t}
1.25)
where Re {.} denotes the real part of the complex argument, and x(t) = x1 (t) -f j x
Q ( t ) .
Signals xI(t) and xQ(t) are the signals modulating the cosinusoidal and sinusoidal carrier
of frequency fc. The modulating signals are called the in-phase and quadrature com-
ponents, respectively. By selecting these signals appropriately, we are able to describe

36 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
any digital modulation. Due to the introduction of the complex signal x(t). we can
consider each modulation in the complex plane as a set of its characteristic points (so
called constellation points] with the trajectory characterizing the movement in time of
the signal point having the coordinates (xI(t),xQ(t)) in the complex plane. Signal x(t)
is called a baseband equivalent signal.
As we have already mentioned, one of the desired features of the modulations applied
in the mobile communication systems is a constant envelope. This feature results from
the necessity of obtaining a possibly high level of the signal at the output of the nonlinear
power amplifier. A constant envelope is the attribute of phase (PM) or frequency (FM)
modulations, which are generally described by the equations
xI(t) = rcosp(t) 
and xQ(t) = rsinp(t) 
(1.26)
If
t
<p(t) = 2-jrkFM 
I m(r)dr, 
where 
\m(t)\ < mmax 
(1.27)
— oc
and m(t) is a continuous signal, then formulae (1.26) and (1.27) represent the analog
frequency modulation. Factor kpM is the FM modulation index given by the expression
kFM 
— Af/mmax. 
A/ is the frequency deviation, i.e. the maximum deviation of
the instantaneous signal frequency from the carrier frequency. The analog frequency
modulation has been applied in the first generation cellular and wireless telephony
systems for transmission of analog speech signals. However, even in those systems the
control signals are digital, so in this case the carrier is digitally modulated. In the case
of the Frequency Shift Keying (FSK) the equation describing the instantaneous phase
as a function of time and of the transmitted digital stream is given by the equation
r
</>(£) = 27r/i ^ 
at I g(r - iT)dr 
for nT<t<(n+l)T 
(1.28)
i=-x 
-oc
where a; is the data symbol (ai = ±1) transmitted in the i-th signalling period and
h = 2A/T is the FSK modulation index. T is the modulation period and Af is. as
previously, the frequency deviation. The data symbols are mostly binary (equal to
±1), although in some cases multilevel data symbols are applied. Function g(t) is a
frequency pulse and determines the frequency variation in time. Let us note that the
instantaneous frequency can be derived from the formula
f ( t ) = _L^rw = h ^ 
a.g(t _ ir) for nT<t<(n + l)T 
(1.29)
i= —oc
In turn
t
Q(t] = j 9(r}dr 
(1.30)

DIGITAL MODULATIONS APPLIED IN MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 
37
is a phase pulse and is a phase response to the single unit data pulse. In the simplest
case the frequency pulse g(t) is a gate function of length T and of the height of 1/2T.
Then the instantaneous frequency with respect to the carrier frequency fc equals ±Af.
The frequency and phase pulses for this case are shown in Figure 1.27.
T 
t 
T 
t
Figure 1.27 Frequency and phase pulse for continuous phase FSK
The signal described by equations (1.25) and (1.26) is characterized by the phase
continuity for any integrable shape of the frequency pulse g(t). This feature has a
fundamental impact on the spectral properties of the modulated signal. In practice,
the FSK signal generated by the modulator described by (1.25) and (1.26) with the fre-
quency pulse shown in Figure 1.27 has a continuous phase. The example of a modulator
generating a signal with a non-continuous phase would be an FSK modulator imple-
mented in the form of two unsynchronized sinusoidal generators of nominal frequencies
fc ± Af followed by the circuit switching between the generators' output signals, con-
trolled by the current data symbol. The signal generated by such a modulator has poor
spectral properties.
It was found relatively early that the choice of the frequency pulse, or equivalently,
the phase pulse, and the value of the modulation index h have a fundamental influence
on the spectral properties of the modulated signal. For the frequency pulse shown
in Figure 1.27 and for h = 1/2 we have a special case of the FSK modulation, so
called Minimum Shift Keying (MSK). One can show that the MSK modulation can be
interpreted as a linear modulation8 as opposed to FSK modulations with other than
h = 1/2 values of the modulation index.
Several frequency pulses have been investigated with respect to their influence on
the spectral and detection properties of the modulated signal. Beside the narrow signal
spectrum, it is desired that the sequences of elementary signals determined by different
input data sequences differ maximally from each other in the sense of the selected
distance measure. This can be achieved by extending the frequency pulse beyond the
modulation period T. Unfortunately, this leads to high complexity of the receiver, which
has to apply the Viterbi algorithm for implementing the sequential detection.
One of the best binary modulations having excellent spectral properties results from
the application of the frequency pulse given by the formula
8A modulation is linear if the rule of superposition with respect to the modulating signal is valid.

38 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
where * denotes convolution and the function rect(t/T) describes the rectangular pulse
(gate function) of the unit height and lasting from —1/2T 
to 1/2T. The FSK modulation
which uses the frequency pulse described by (1.31) and which has the modulation index
h = 1/2 is called Gaussian Minimum Shift Keying (GMSK). In a GMSK modulator
the rectangular frequency pulse is filtered by a Gaussian-shaped filter. In (1.31) the
parameter a = \/ln2/(27r5T), where B is a 3-dB bandwidth of the Gaussian filter. The
pulse g(t) usually lasts for a few modulation periods, so subsequent pulses which are
the response to the data symbols interfere with each other and the Viterbi algorithm is
useful in the data sequence detection. The GMSK modulation is described in detail in
the chapter explaining the physical layer of the GSM system. GMSK is applied in the
GSM and in a few other systems because of its particularly good spectral properties
manifesting themselves as a very narrow main lobe and very low and sharply decreasing
levels of sidelobes.
The constant envelope of the FSK (MSK, GMSK) modulated signals can be easily
presented in the complex plane. One can conclude from formulae (1.25) and (1.26) that
for the above listed modulations their signal envelope is determined by the expression
r(t) = ^(xI(t}Y + (xQ(t))2 = r^/cos2 y(t) + sin2 p(t) = r = const 
(1.32)
The steadiness of the envelope is ensured for any angle </?(£). Figure 1.28 presents the
envelope of the MSK modulated signal. Let us note that in this case, within a single
modulation period the angle </?(£) changes its value by ±7r/2 and the final value of the
angle depends not only on the current data symbol but also on the phase determined
by the data sequence transmitted before the current modulation period. In this sense
the MSK modulator has a memory.
<P<O
Figure 1.28 Envelope of the MSK modulated signal in the in-phase - quadrature plane
The steadiness of the envelope is usually not preserved if the signals modulating the
in-phase and quadrature components result from the linear filtration of the data signals.
Let us consider this case in detail (see Figure 1.29).
A binary data stream (mostly received from the output of the error correction or
detection code encoder or interleaver) is fed to the input of the mapping block, which
maps the blocks of binary data onto pairs of data symbols, d and dQ
n. These data
symbols constitute the input of the baseband transmit filters with the impulse responses
p(t) and q(t). The signals modulating the in-phase and quadrature carriers are described

DIGITAL MODULATIONS APPLIED IN MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 
39
cos2nfct
d1 
At) 
T
* 
p(t) 
*x
Mapping
.. J 
to Data
Binary 
Symbols 
d a
Sequence
s(t)
q(t)
sin2nfct
Figure 1.29 Linear modulator for a two-dimensional modulation
by the formulae
(1.33)
Various types of linear modulations can be described using (1.33). Assuming q(t) = 0,
d^ = ±1 and p(t) =rect(t/T), we obtain a two-level phase modulation called Binary
Phase Shift Keying (BPSK). In turn, taking SI
n - dQ
n = ±1 and p(t) = q(t) = rect(t/T)
we obtain a four-level phase modulation called Quadrature Phase Shift Keying (QPSK).
Higher level modulations such as Quadrature Amplitude Modulations (QAM) are ob-
tained by selection of multilevel data symbols dI
n and dQ
n. Figure 1.30 illustrates constel-
lations of a few most important digital modulations. It is worth noting that the QAM
modulations have not been directly applied in the mobile communication systems so
far, due to their variable envelope and the necessary precise gain control in the receiver.
However, they are used for modulation of the subcarriers in a multicarrier modulation,
which will be discussed in the next subsection.
The spectrum and envelope of the modulated signal can be determined by selection
of the transmit filters p(t) and q(t). A typical transmit filter p(t) applied in digital
communication systems has a square-root raised cosine spectrum given by the formula
P(f) =
-a
(1.34)
The parameter a is called a roll-off factor and its value falls within the range 0 < a < 1.
In the receiver, the filter of the same characteristics is applied. The signal spectrum
obtained by the application of such filters ensures low sidelobes and concentration of
the signal energy in the main lobe. However, from the point of view of mobile commu-
nication systems such a signal has a substantial drawback. Its envelope is variable and
can take instantaneous values close to zero. Figure 1.31a illustrates this phenomenon
for the QPSK modulation with the square-root raised cosine transmit filter character-
istics (a = 0.35). Such a QPSK signal is not very immune from nonlinear distortion. A
substantial improvement is achieved if the quadrature component is delayed by a half
of the modulation period, i.e. if q(t) = p(t — T/2). Such modified QPSK modulation

40 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
Q
(b)
(c)
(d)
Q
Figure 1.30 Examples of signal constellations: BPSK (a), QPSK (b), 16-QAM (c). 64-QAM (d)
is called Offset Quartemary Phase Shift Keying (OQPSK). This type of modulation
is applied in the second generation cellular system IS-95, which will be considered in
Chapter 11. The OQPSK signal envelope versus time in the complex plane is shown in
Figure 1.31b.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.31 Envelope in the I-Q plane for QPSK (a) and OQPSK (b) modulations
Another method of decreasing the dynamics of the envelope is the addition of the
7T/4 phase shift to the differential quarternary phase shift keyed signal in each modu-

DIGITAL MODULATIONS APPLIED IN MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 
41
lation period. Such a modulation, denoted as 7T/4-DQPSK, is applied in a few mobile
communication systems, e.g. in IS-54/136 and TETRA (see appropriate chapters for
the details).
At the present state of development of the mobile communication systems which ap-
ply single carrier modulations, the modulation level higher than 8 is not used.9 Higher
level QAM modulations are applied in some wireless LANs which use multicarrier mod-
ulations, e.g. in HyperLAN/2 [24].
The problem of demodulation is directly related to the modulation applied in a mo-
bile communication system. This is the subject of many pages in academic textbooks
devoted to communication systems. We will only sketch the most important demodu-
lation methods applicable in mobile communication systems.
In general, the signal reception can be coherent (synchronous) or non-coherent (asyn-
chronous). The coherent reception requires the knowledge of the beginning and end of
the modulation period (timing synchronization) and of the carrier frequency and phase
(carrier synchronization). In a coherent receiver, the whole knowledge of the received
signal parameters is used so it is no surprise that the performance of a coherent demod-
ulator, shown as the bit error rate (BER) versus the SNR, is better than that of other
demodulators. Figure 1.32 presents a synchronous QPSK receiver (we assume that both
transmit filters in the in-phase and quadrature branches are identical, i.e. p(t) = q(t)).
+ X 
»• 
p(-t) 
': > 
f 
fj I
A 
V 
Binary
cos(2ft+o) 
T« 
* 
Decoder 
Sequence
Received 
„ 
„ cos(<OTrcr+vj 
-.« 
(Demap- 
»
Signal 
d° 
ping)
»•
••x 
•* 
p(-t) 
+ 
'• 
• ».
'
Carrier 
« 
. •* * 
-
and Phase 
* 
Timing
Recovery 
Recovery
Figure 1.32 Scheme of the optimal synchronous receiver for QPSK signals
The received signal (usually converted down to the intermediate frequency) is put
to the inputs of two synchronous demodulators consisting of mixers and lowpass filters.
On the one hand these filters are the immanent part of the synchronous demodulator
(they cut off the spectral components around double carrier frequency), on the other
hand they serve as the filters matched to the transmit filters. One can prove that in
the case of transmission over a nondistorting channel with an additive white Gaussian
noise, the impulse response of the receive filter should be a mirrored response of the
transmit filter. In the case of the filters with the characteristics given by formula (1.34)
for which the impulse response is symmetric, the receive filter has an identical impulse
response.
98<I>-PSK with appropriately spectral shaping has been proposed for EDGE GSM radio interface.

42 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
The carrier and phase recovery block shown in Figure 1.32 uses the difference between
symbol decisions generated by a decision device in the in-phase and quadrature branches
and the signals fed to the decision device input. This error is a measure of the phase
difference between the received and reference signals and the rate of change of its value
is a function of the frequency difference between both signals. This type of a carrier
recovery feedback circuit is one of the possible solutions. There are other carrier recovery
circuits, among them those based on the nonlinear processing of the received signal.
resulting in the artificial generation of the spectral line equal to the carrier frequency.
The difference between decision device input and output signals is often used for
adjusting the timing recovery circuit as well.
Distortions introduced by a typical transmission channel, such as a multipath, flat
and selective fading, intersymbol interference and phase jitter (see Chapter 3), imply
the application of the increased complexity synchronous receiver or even make such
a receiver non-realizable. The latter occurs in particular when the channel properties
change so quickly that the carrier recovery circuit is not able to track them and generates
the estimates of the carrier frequency and phase of insufficient quality. In this case
the solution is the application of the appropriately selected modulation with its non-
coherent reception. We will illustrate this kind of reception with three examples: a
non-coherent reception of a differential quarternary phase shift keying (DQPSK) and
two methods of reception of FSK modulated signals.
First, let us consider a DQPSK non-coherent receiver. The DQPSK modulated sig-
nal can be described by formula (1.25), where the in-phase and quadrature baseband
components are given by
oo 
oo
xI(t)= 
dip(t-nT) 
x Q(t)= 
d%p(t-nT] 
(1.35)
This time a two-bit information block is not represented by the data symbols dI
n and
dQ
n nor by their argument (pn = arg(dI
 n + jdQ
n) but by the phase difference between two
subsequent modulation periods A<pn = v?n — (Pn-i- The scheme of this receiver is shown
in Figure 1.33.
-COSf(n+9)
— >. x --- * p(-fl ---> . . 
»x-».+ > 
\
-
H
' 
„.
Received 
* 
-* 
i. 
>r 
* « 
V 
Binary
-*• x 
-•> p(-t) -•->-. , 
• «x * 
«• ]
* 
. .._ ......... _
sm(2nfjt)
~sin(«Pn+e)
Figure 1.33 Non-coherent receiver for DQPSK signals
The samples from the outputs of in-phase and quadrature branches are taken once per
data symbol and are proportional to the cosine and sine of the angle <pn+9, respectively.

DIGITAL MODULATIONS APPLIED IN MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 
43
where 6 characterizes the difference between the carrier phase of the received signal and
the phase of the reference carrier signal used in the demodulator. The receiver does
not track the carrier phase of the received signal. The sine and cosine of the angle
(pn-i +@ received in the previous signaling period are stored in the memory cells, so the
receiver can use the samples from the current and previous modulation periods. Let
us note that for the DQPSK modulation it is sufficient to know in which quadrant of
the in-phase/quadrature plane the angle A(pn can be found. In order to check it, it is
sufficient to determine the sign of the functions sin A<^n and cos A</?n. The latter can
be found from the well-known trigonometric dependencies
COS A<£n = COS (((f>n + 0) - ((f>n-l 
+0)) 
=
= cos((pn + 6} cos(<pn_i +0) + sin((pn + 9) sin(<^n_i + 9) 
(1.36)
sin A<pn = sin (((pn + 0) - (^n~i + 0)) —
= sin(</?n + 0) cos(<^n_i +0)- 
cos((pn + 9) sin(</?n_i + 0) 
(1-37)
Let us note that the set of multipliers and adders in Figure 1.33 implements formulae
(1.36) and (1.37). The receiver works well at the assumption that the angle 9 hardly
changes within the signaling period. That means the phase jitter is slow as compared
with the signaling period.
Let us now illustrate the non-coherent reception of the frequency modulated signals.
The first type of receiver realizing this kind of reception is shown in Figure 1.34. It is
called a non- coherent optimal FSK receiver.
^ BPF 
Envelope 
^ 
Envelope
FSK 
(f0) 
Detector 
Matched Filter
Signal
BPF 
^Envelope . 
Envelope
(f,) 
Detector 
Matched Filter
Data
Figure 1.34 Non-coherent optimal FSK receiver
The received FSK signal is the subject of bandpass filtration in two filters whose
center frequencies are equal to the nominal frequencies fc ± Af characterizing the
logical data symbols equal "0" and "1". Thus, at the output of one of the bandpass
filters a sinusoidal signal is received, whereas at the output of the second one only noise
is observed. The envelope detectors calculate envelopes in both parallel branches. In
order to maximize the signal to noise ratio, the outputs of the envelope detectors are
fed to the matched filters working in the same way as in the synchronous receiver. The
outputs of the matched filters are sampled once per modulation period and compared
with each other. The larger sample indicates the more probable data signal transmitted.
Another, even simpler way of non-coherent detection of FSK signals is reception
on the basis of a frequency discriminator. The FSK signal is treated as a regular
www.allitebooks.com

44 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
FM modulated signal for which the modulating signal is a stream of binary pulses
representing a logical data sequence. Therefore the frequency discriminator converts the
instantaneous frequency of the received signal into a signal of the amplitude proportional
to this frequency. The next part of the receiver is realized in the baseband. A typical
circuit realizing frequency discrimination often applied in mobile communications is a
phase-locked loop (PLL). Figure 1.35 presents the block scheme of this receiver.
FSK
Signal 
p^ 
Frequency 
k Baseband Pulse . 
+ 
\
*" 
..... 
*" Discriminator 
Matched Fitter 
*"
H(f)
Figure 1.35 FSK receiver based on the frequency discriminator
An important task in the design of the FSK receiver with a frequency discriminator
is choosing the bandpass filter which extracts the desired FSK signal. For a given
modulation index h, determining the difference between two nominal FSK frequencies
equal to 2Af with respect to the modulation period T, the optimum characteristics of
the bandpass filter can be found. It ensures the minimum error rate at the output of
the non-coherent receiver.
Summarizing the signal reception methods, we have to stress that the detection
quality of several types of receivers can be quite different. For a given signal-to-noise
ratio, the synchronous reception using the whole knowledge of the received signal results
in the lowest probability of error, the non-coherent reception with optimal envelope
detection has worse performance, whereas the non-coherent reception with a frequency
discriminator is characterized by the highest bit error rate. Nevertheless, the latter is
often used in traditional systems due to its simplicity.
1.5.1 
Multicarrier modulation
So far we have considered digital modulations of a single carrier. If the data symbol rate
is comparable with the channel bandwidth, or if the channel time spread (see Chapter 3)
is a considerable part of the modulation period, the intersymbol interference (ISI) arises
which makes the reception much more complicated and decreases the system perfor-
mance. The ISI countermeasures include adaptive channel equalization and sequential
data detection. In the latter method the real or estimated channel impulse response
is needed. The alternative to a single carrier modulation with a complicated receiving
procedure is the multicarrier modulation.
Instead of transmitting a fast data stream on a single carrier serially, the stream is
divided into a large number of much slower data streams. Each of them modulates a
separate subcarrier. The data signaling on each subcarrier is so slow that the ISI lasts
for a small portion of a data symbol only. Moreover, the subcarrier frequencies can
be selected so densely that their spectra overlap. Despite this, the receiver is able to
detect data symbols on each subcarrier by correlation of the multicarrier signal with
the required reference tones. Below we will explain the operation of the transmitter

DIGITAL MODULATIONS APPLIED IN MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 
45
and the receiver for the multicarrier modulation in detail. The reason for that is the
increasing importance of that type of modulation, in particular in the wireless LANs.
For the n-th modulation period (nT <t< (n + l)T) the multicarrier (MC) signal is
represented by the formula
k,np(t - nT) cos27r(/, + kAf)t - bk,np(t - nT) sin27r(/c
(1.38)
As previously, p(t) denotes the shape of the baseband data pulse, the pair (ak,n-bk,n)
represents the data symbols modulating the in-phase and quadrature components of
the k-th subcarrier and Af is the subcarrier spacing. The set of the data symbol pair
is determined by the type of modulation applied on each subcarrier. In actual systems
using the MC modulation, the signal constellations range from BPSK to 64-QAM. Let
us note that the designer is free to select the modulation individually on each subcarrier.
The choice of the subcarrier spacing strongly influences the operation of the system
applying the MC modulation. As we have already mentioned, the parameters of the
MC modulation are selected in such a way that the ISI caused by the channel lasts
for a small fraction of the modulation period T. Let us divide T into two parts: the
so-called guard time Tg and the orthogonality period Tort, i.e. T — Tg + Tort- The
guard time covers at least that fraction of the modulation period in which the channel
response to the transmitted data pulse has not yet reached a steady state. After that
time the channel output becomes stable. This phenomenon is illustrated in Figure
1.36. The guard time is usually not more than 25 percent of the modulation period.
(a) J
(b)
Figure 1.36 Baseband equivalent channel response (b) to a rectangular pulse (a) (illustration of
the guard time and the orthogonality period)
If the subcarrier spacing Af is selected to be equal to l/Tort then in the time period
Tort all the subcarriers are mutually orthogonal. Very often the MC system with the
subcarrier spacing selected according to this principle is called Orthogonal Frequency
Division Multiplexing (OFDM) system. The mutual orthogonality of subcarriers results

46 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
from the fact that for any j and k
T
/cos(27r(/c + k J-)t)cos(27r(fc + j^-)t)dt = { lort/2 ?* £ 7 f 
(1-39)
J 
J-ort 
1 ort 
{ 
U 
IOr K f J
, 0rr/~ «« "• -j 
(1-40)
and
T
/ cos(2?r(/c + k——)t) sin(27r(/c + j—— )t)dt = 0 for any k and j 
(1.41)
J 
lort 
Tort
T
±g
Without loss of generality let us consider the operation of the receiver in the first
modulation period (n = 1). The determination of the data symbols (ak,1,bk.1) 
on the
k-th subcarrier can be performed based on the formulae
T 
T
I x(t)p(t) cos(27r(/c + k&f)t)dt = aMi 
/ p2(t)dt 
(1.42)
x(t)p(t)sm(27r(fc + kAf)t)dt = bk^~p2(t)dt 
(1.43)
The right-hand sides of (1-42) and (1.43) are explained by the fact that the pulse shape
p(t) is often rectangular or at least constant in the integration period so the results of
the correlation of the MC-modulated signal with the reference tones are proportional
to the data symbols ak,1 and bk,1
The realization of the MC transmitter and receiver based on (1.38), (1.42) and (1.43)
respectively can be difficult if the number of subcarriers is large. Fortunately, the
generation of the discrete samples of the signal described by (1.38) and the correlation
of the received signal samples with the reference tones can be efficiently realized using
Fast Fourier Transformation (FFT). Let the number of signal samples collected in the
orthogonality period Tort be denoted by N. Thus, the samples xi = x(i^j*-}. (i —
0, ... , JV — 1) can be calculated from the formula
k 
T
(afc)
= Re exp j27r/c 
(aM + j&M) exp 
(1.44)

DIGITAL MODULATIONS APPLIED IN MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 
47
The factor exp (j27r/ci^p) in (1.44) expresses the shifting of the MC signal to the
carrier frequency /c, whereas the second factor calculates the samples of the MC modu-
lated signals in the baseband. Let us compare the latter with the well known formula
for inverse discrete Fourier transform (IDFT)
(1.45)
As we see, the samples of the MC modulated signal can be generated using the IDFT if
we treat the data symbols (ak,1 +jbk,1) modulating each subcarrier as spectral samples,
) for k — 0,1,... , TV — 1 
(1.46)
An efficient way to implement the IDFT is to apply the Inverse Fast Fourier Transform
(IFFT) algorithm. This is possible if the number of signal samples N is a power of 2,
i.e., N — 2m. Thus, even for a few hundred subcarriers the generation of the multicarrier
modulated signal can be implemented in hardware or using a digital signal processor.
Let us note that TV is not only the number of samples in the time domain but it is
also the number of spectral samples spaced by l/Tort. Thus, the maximum number of
subcarriers is equal to TV = 2m. However, mostly fewer than TV subcarriers are applied.
Some of them, in the spectral guard intervals on both edges of the signal spectrum, are
left unused.
The above considerations deal with the calculation of the samples within the orthog-
onality period. The guard time is usually filled with the samples taken from the end
of the orthogonality period. Such a set of samples is called a cyclic prefix and makes
synchronization with the MC signal at the receiver much easier, in particular if the
subcarriers arrive at the receiver with different delays.
Now let us consider the implementation of the receiver. Let the received signal be
described by the expression
y(t) = x(t) * h(t) + n(t) 
(1.47)
where x(t) is the transmitted signal, n(t) is the additive noise and h(t) is the channel
impulse response. We stress again that the channel impulse response is much shorter
than the modulation period. The received signal has to be down-converted to the base-
band. Let us denote the baseband signal as w(t). Thus, in the remaining part of the
receiver, the baseband signal is processed. The core of the baseband receiver is the set
of the correlators operating according to (1.42) and (1.43) in the time period [Tg,T].
For p(t) being constant within the orthogonality period and for digital realization of
the correlators in which the samples w(i) — w(ii) 
of the baseband signal w(t) are
processed, we have the formula
/ 
j JU \
W(k] = ]T w(i) exp ( -J2ir— ) 
(1-48)
i=0 
^ 
'

48 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
The samples W(k) (k = 0, . . . , N — 1) received at the output of each of N correlators
are the samples of the channel output spectrum when the signal with the spectrum
given by (1.45) is fed to their inputs. It is clearly seen from (1.48) that the samples
W(k) (k = 0, ...,7V — 1) can be calculated from the time domain samples w(i) (i =
0, ..., N — 1) using the discrete Fourier Transformation (DFT) implemented efficiently
by FFT. Taking into account the baseband signals and the baseband equivalent channel
the correlators outputs are described by the formula
W(k) = H (k)X(k) + N(k) 
for fc = 0, . . . ,N-1 
(1.49)
where N(k) is the noise sample on the output of the k-th correlator and H (k) is the
sample of the channel transfer function. Thanks to a long modulation period and the
application of the cyclic prefix, the channel for each subcarrier can be interpreted as the
channel with the gain |H(k)| and shifting the phase of the k-th subcarrier by a.rgH(k).
In order to make a decision on the transmitted data, each correlator's output has to
be modified to compensate the gain and phase shift introduced by the transmission
channel. This is done by multiplying the correlators' outputs by complex coefficients
C(k). The block performing this function is called an equalizer. Thus, the equalizer
outputs are described by the expression
Z(k) = C(k)W(k) for k = 0, . . . , N – 1 
(1.50)
The decisions on the transmitted data can be made on the basis of samples Z(k)
(1.51)
The scheme of the transmitter and receiver in the OFDM transmission system is
presented in Figure 1.37. It summarizes our considerations of the OFDM transmitter
and receiver. The OFDM transmission is highly flexible. As we have already mentioned.
it is possible to select the type of modulation individually for each subcarrier and assign
to each subcarrier an appropriate power level. Moreover, it is possible to switch off
some deeply attenuated subcarriers. The necessary condition for the OFDM system
optimization is the existence of the feedback between the OFDM receiver and OFDM
transmitter. One can prove [5] that the optimum power allocation to each subcarrier
ensuring the highest overall bit rate at the assumed error probability should take into
account the channel characteristics and obey a "water pouring principle" . This principle
is illustrated in Figure 1.38.
The multicarrier modulation has gained a lot of attention in digital communication
systems. It is the basis of high speed digital transmission in a subscriber loop in the
Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line (ADSL) mode [25], one of the alternatives in Very
High-Speed Digital Subscriber Lines (VDSL) [26], the transmission method in European
Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB) terrestrial segment [27], Digital Audio Broadcasting
(DAB) [28]. It is also the basis of the radio access method in high speed wireless LANs
of which HyperLAN/2 [24] is an example.

THE PRINCIPLES OF SPREAD SPECTRUM SYSTEMS OPERATION 
49
X(0) 
x(0)
t
* 
~l 
*
JD 
£ 
co m i 
»• 
* 
.ro
Binary 
"g 
"g« 
: 
• 
?
Data . | 
| || 
IFFT 
I > gjg • ^MJju- 
^channel
w(0) 
W(0) 
Z(0) 
a0n+jb0n*'
S2
_to^ 
-f .
2 
jjS 
i> 
|« 
$ 
Binary
Demo- j Cyclic Prefix 
^ 
o_ 
CCTT 
' giS" • 
JDQ 
>,"5 
ss 
Data
Idulator ;•*; Removal ; * | 
! «-|- ' 
£0. 
«c ; 
«| 
| 
^
Figure 1.37 General scheme of the OFDM system
1.6 THE PRINCIPLES OF SPREAD SPECTRUM SYSTEMS OPERATION
Digital modulations described so far have been created to maximally utilize the limited
bandwidth assigned to the given digital communication system. Claude Shannon, in
his fundamental paper [13] giving the foundations of information theory, derived the
formula for the capacity of the channel limited to W Hz in which the signal is distorted
by the additive white Gaussian noise of the power density spectrum No/2. The formula
has the following form
where Pav is the input signal average power. This formula is the result of the opti-
mization procedure with respect to the input signal properties. It turns out that the
amount of information which can be sent through the channel with additive white
Gaussian noise achieves its upper bound called the channel capacity if the input signal
is Gaussian. A multicarrier digitally modulated signal is Gaussian distributed if the
number of subcarriers is large. Many other digitally modulated signals do not have this
probability distribution. In traditional systems the achievable data rate is maximized
and is getting closer to the channel capacity bound if the signal-to-noise ratio expressed
by the ratio Pav/WNo in (1.52) is maximized. This can usually be achieved in a
limited range using very sophisticated means such as trellis coding, equalization, etc.

50 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
Figure 1.38 Water pouring principle: example of the channel characteristic (a), the signal power
assignment along the frequency axis (b)
One can easily show that the same channel capacity can be reached by expanding the
signal spectrum (provided expansion is possible from the point of view of spectrum
management and implementation limitations) to such a width that the signal level
falls even below the noise level. This observation has been utilized in spread spectrum
systems.
Consider the most popular type of spread spectrum systems, denoted in the literature
as DS-SS (Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum). In the DS-SS system the digital signal
carrying information is spectrally spread by being directly multiplied by a pseudo-
random sequence. Let Tb denote the duration of a data symbol. A binary sequence
of length M is used to represent a single data symbol. Each element of the binary
sequence, called a chip, lasts for Tc = Tb/M second. The sequence is selected in such a
way that the external observer sees it as a random sequence, so for him it has properties
similar to the noise. Because the duration of a single chip is M times shorter than the
duration of the information bit, the spectrum of the signal representing the data bits
in form of the pseudorandom sequences is M times wider than the spectrum of the
original data signal.
It is known from the communication systems theory that the optimal receiver of the
signals distorted by a white Gaussian noise is a correlator. It correlates the distorted
received signal with a known reference signal which is synchronized with respect to the
received signal. In our case the reference signal is a pseudorandom signal used in the
transmitter for representation of the data bit. Figure 1.39 shows the transmitter and
receiver in a DS-SS system. We assume that the binary information signals shown in
Figure 1.39 have bipolar representation, therefore controlling the polarization of the
pseudorandom sequence by the information bits is equivalent to the multiplication of
the pseudorandom sequence by —1 or +1.
Summarizing our consideration of the scheme shown in Figure 1.39, we conclude
that the pseudorandom sequence is treated as an elementary signal which characterizes
a single data bit, whereas the same sequence with the reversed polarity represents the

THE PRINCIPLES OF SPREAD SPECTRUM SYSTEMS OPERATION 
51
A 
' 
- - - -
an 
- -. 
• BPSK 
^ 
BPSK 
. 
r 
'
<T\ 
2 
'Modulator 
Demodulator 
£ 
J v/ar
v ' b / 
• 
r 
nTb
q (TJ 
c, | (Tc)
PN 
PN
Generator 
Generator
Figure 1.39 General scheme of the DS-SS system
data bit logically negated. The effect of spread spectrum is also achieved if the period
of the pseudorandom sequence is longer than the duration of a single data bit.
The DS-SS system is an alternative to narrowband systems. One could wonder what
it offers with respect to them. For many years the spread spectrum systems have had
military applications mostly. Transmission of the pseudonoise signals close or below
the noise level makes them difficult to detect. In order to make detection possible the
receiver has to know the particular pseudorandom sequence applied in the transmitter
and has to be synchronized with it. Pseudorandom sequences used in real systems
have the period ranging from a few tens of bits to many thousand of bits. For the
sequences having such long period their number becomes very large. The sequences
are selected in such a way that their autocorrelation function is approximately equal
to zero independent of the time shift between the sequence and its shifted replica,
with the exception of the zero shift for which the autocorrelation function achieves its
maximum. At the same time the mutual correlation function for different sequences
of the same length should be equal to zero for any time shift between the correlated
sequences. The zero autocorrelation function for the time shifts different from zero
makes the system robust against the multipath. This robustness is possible if the chip
duration is shorter than the smallest difference of the delays between different signal
paths. The signal reaches the receiver in the form of a few replicas shifted in time.
These time shift differences are usually larger than the chip duration. In consequence,
the receiver is synchronized with the strongest component of the received signal. As a
result of correlation all other replicas of the desired signal are eliminated. In the same
way, thanks to the zero cross-correlation between any two different sequences, the other
users' signals are eliminated as well. However, we have to stress that the elimination
of all but the strongest component of the received signal is not the optimal strategy.
It leads to losing information contained in the eliminated echoes. These echoes can
be positively used after having been individually extracted and after their weighted
summation has been performed in such a way that the energy of the signal sum is
maximized. That operation is realized by a RAKE receiver, which will be explained in
Chapter 11. The RAKE is the basic type of the receiver for multipath channels.
Directly from the cross-correlation properties of the applied pseudorandom sequences
we can deduce the following feature of the spread spectrum systems. Because the
correlators applied in the receiver eliminate all other sequences but their own one, the
same spectrum can be shared by many users applying different pseudorandom sequences.
This observation is the basis of the Code Division Multiple Access method.

52 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
s— W
Distortion
Distortion
Distortion
Figure 1.40 Spectra in particular locations of the DS-SS system in the presence of the narrowband
distortion
Military system designers have been interested in spread spectrum systems because
these systems show natural immunity to narrowband distortions. This feature is qual-
itatively illustrated in Figure 1.40. This figure also shows the operation of the DS-SS
system in the frequency domain. The following notation has been introduced in it:
S b ( f ) - spectrum of the information-carrying signal, Sc(f) ~ spectrum of the spread-

THE PRINCIPLES OF SPREAD SPECTRUM SYSTEMS OPERATION 
53
ing sequence, 5mod(f) - spectrum at the output of the BPSK modulator, Sdem(f)"
spectrum at the output of BPSK demodulator, H i n t ( f ) - the transfer function of the
integrating circuit and Sout(f) - the output signal spectrum. As a result of correla-
tion consisting of multiplication by a pseudorandom sequence, followed by integration,
the spectrum of the narrowband distortion is spread. Recall that the spectrum of the
pseudorandom signal is very wide and the multiplication of the distortion and the pseu-
dorandom signal in the time domain is equivalent to the convolution of their spectra.
Thus, only a small part of the distorting signal energy appears at the output of the
integrator.
There are other versions of spread spectrum systems. However, the DS-SS system
shown above is the one most frequently used in second and third generation cellular
telephony, wireless subscriber loops and is also to be used in personal satellite commu-
nication systems. We will now briefly present two other system types.
As already mentioned, ensuring the synchronous reception, in particular the realiza-
tion of timing recovery with the accuracy of a fraction of a chip, can be a very difficult
task if the channel is time variant. In such case a possible solution for a spread spec-
trum system is the application of frequency hopping. The Frequency Hopping Spread
Spectrum (FH-SS) system is shown in Figure 1.41.
- 
. 
A 
. 
.
FSK 
FSK 
Data
* Encoder 
H Modulator 
* 
Mixer 
* 
Mixer 
* "Demodulator ;•> Decoder 
*
.T.
PN 
: 
J Frequency 
Frequency 
Synchronization
Generator 
* Synthesizer 
Synthesizer 
^yncnromzation
'A"
PN
Generator
Figure 1.41 Example of the basic FH-SS system
The data bits, which are optionally FEC encoded, control the output of the FSK
modulator. The FSK signal is shifted by the frequency interval determined by the
pseudorandom generator controlling the frequency synthesizer. If the synthesizer is able
to generate 2m — 1 different frequencies, then ra subsequent bits of the pseudorandom
generator determine the output frequency. Due to a large frequency range of generated
signals it is very difficult to ensure phase synchronization between carriers selected in
the subsequent frequency hops. Therefore a non-coherent FSK demodulator is used in
the receiver. We have to stress that frequency hops occur many times within a single
information bit period. The FSK modulation period TJ, is divided into many short time
intervals called hop times Th. In this case the system is called fast frequency hopping.
Figure 1.42 illustrates the operation of such a system for Tb = 8Th. The change of
www.allitebooks.com

54 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
Th 
2Th 
3Th, 4Th 5Th. 6Th, 7Th, 87h=7b *,
Figure 1.42 Example of the frequency hopping in the FH-SS system
carrier frequency can also take place once for a data block and such a system of carrier
frequency changes is called slow frequency hopping.10
The FH-SS systems are often applied in military systems. They are robust against
intentional jamming. The robustness is the result of a short occupancy time of a single
carrier frequency, which does not allow the jammer to tune to this frequency. Slow
frequency hopping performed jointly with FEC coding allows many users to share the
common spectrum. It can also be a tool for increasing cellular system capacity.
The third type of the spread spectrum systems is called a Time Hopping Spread
Spectrum (TH-SS) system. In this system the data bit period is divided into MT time
slots. The pseudorandom generator determines in which time slot the information signal
is being transmitted. Figure 1.43 presents the TH-SS system. Its characteristic feature
PSK
• Encoder ^ Buffer-* Gate 
* Modulator 
* Gate 
» Demodulator *" Buffer 
> Decoder
PN 
PN
Generator 
Generator
-
Synchronization
Figure 1.43 The basic scheme of TH-SS system
10In the GSM cellular system the term slow frequency hopping denotes the pseudorandom change of
channel frequency which occurs once in a whole data slot containing a 148-bit burst.

MULTIPLE ACCESS METHODS USED IN MOBILE COMMUNICATIONS 
55
is its burst nature - the signal is transmitted during I/Mr fraction of the data signalling
period. A natural choice of Mr is the number of the order of a thousand. However,
such a number of slots creates serious synchronization problems which are much more
difficult to cope with than those in the DS-SS systems. In order to ensure smooth
transmission of information over the TH-SS system the transmitter and receiver have
to be equipped with buffers.
Hybrid solutions of spread spectrum systems combining the three above mentioned
system types are also considered in the literature. However, the DS-SS and FH-SS
systems have the biggest practical meaning.
1.7 MULTIPLE ACCESS METHODS USED IN MOBILE COMMUNICATIONS
Multiple access is one of the most important issues in communications if more than two
users share a common resource such as a common band of the electromagnetic spectrum,
or a common wireline (metallic or optical fiber) channel. We briefly addressed this
problem when describing the model of a typical digital communication system. Now we
will consider it in more detail. We will concentrate on the peculiarity of the multiple
access for wireless communication systems.
In wireless communications the common resource is the band assigned to the system
by an administrative body such as FCC (Federal Communications Commission) in
the USA or CEPT (Conference Europeene des Postes et Telecommunications) in the
European Union. National administrative institutions also have a decisive influence on
the spectrum assignment.
The oldest multiple access method is Frequency Division Multiple Access (FDMA).
In this method the total band assigned to the system is divided into a certain number
of frequency intervals which can be used for individual transmission between two users.
They can also be used in the broadcasting mode. The frequency intervals are usually
narrow enough to maximize the number of created channels and, consequently, the
number of simultaneous users. On the other hand, they have to be broad enough to
ensure the required transmission performance. If transmission is analog, the FDMA
is the only possible multiple access method because it guarantees continuous access
to the transmission medium required by analog signals. Figure 1.44 illustrates this
method. The characteristic feature of the FDMA is the existence of the guard bands
between neighboring channels which decreases the number of possible channels and
the spectral efficiency of the system. Transmitters and receivers have to be equipped
with high quality channel filters. On the transmitter side, they filter the transmitted
signal to fit its spectrum into the channel bandwidth, whereas in the receiver they
extract the signal received in the desired channel. A problem arises if the powers of
two neighboring channels differ too much from each other. The attenuated sidelobes
of the strong channel can have a similar level as the mainlobe of the weak channel,
causing serious deterioration of the performance of the latter. Therefore, a certain level
of power control of each transmitted signal is required to avoid this phenomenon.
Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) is another multiple access method (Figure
1.45). Instead of access in a fraction of the band assigned to the system, users are allowed

56 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
Figure 1.45 Illustration of TDMA method
to transmit their signals in the whole band but only in a fraction of time assigned to
them periodically. The basic time unit is called a frame. The frame is divided into a
number of slots. The maximum number of simultaneous users is equal to the number
of slots in the frame. On average, however, the number of users is slightly lower because
some slots are used for control, synchronization and maintenance purposes. For that
reason the frames are often organized in higher order structures such as multiframes,
superframes etc. The characteristic feature of the TDMA is the necessity to compress
user's data stream into short blocks which fit into the assigned slots. If there are M
slots in the frame, then the data rate within a slot must be M times higher than the rate
of a single user. The consequence of that fact is the widening of the signal spectrum M
times as compared with a continuous data stream. This is why the spectra in Figure 1.45
are much wider than those for FDMA shown in Figure 1.44. Another consequence of
applying the TDMA is that the transmitted signals must be digital. Otherwise the time
compression would not be possible. In the same way as for the FDMA, for which the
frequency guard range between the neighboring channels is applied, the TDMA applied
in the radio systems requires time guard periods between the data blocks occupying the
neighboring slots. The reason for that is a finite time of switching the amplifiers on and
off and possible propagation time differences between different users communicating
with a common radio station. The guard time, in the same way as the guard band in
the FDMA, decreases the spectral efficiency of the TDMA multiple access mode.

MULTIPLE ACCESS METHODS USED IN MOBILE COMMUNICATIONS 
57
In practice, the hybrid TDMA/FDMA mode is very often applied. Thus, a number
of frequency channels occupies the system spectrum and the time axis of each channel
is divided into time slots. Such an approach has been applied in the GSM, IS-54/136
and in Japanese PDC cellular systems.
The third type of multiple access is Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA). We
mentioned its existence when explaining the principles of spread spectrum systems. We
noted that if the spreading codes are selected so that their cross-correlation is equal to
zero, the signal of the desired user can be retrieved from the mixture of signals generated
by many other users by correlating the received signal with the selected reference signal.
Thus, all the users occupy the same bandwidth and transmit continuously their binary
data in the form of pseudorandom sequences modulated by their information data.
Figure 1.46 illustrates this type of multiple access. The CDMA allows extraction of
Figure 1.46 Illustration of the idea of CDMA
the user data ideally as long as the used codes are perfectly orthogonal i.e. their
cross-correlation is zero. Unfortunately mobile channels mostly suffer from multipath
(see Chapter 3) which causes the loss of the signal orthogonality at the receiver input.
It is very difficult to find a large number of spreading sequences which are mutually
orthogonal and at the same time orthogonal to their time shifts. As a result, the
orthogonality of user spreading sequences is not perfect which has negative influence on
the signal-to-noise ratio at the receiver and the receiver's error rate.
The CDMA can be used in a hybrid mode with other multiple access methods such
as FDMA or TDMA. In the case of CDMA/FDMA the total spectrum assigned to the
system is divided into a number of frequency bands and in each of them the CDMA is
applied. In the hybrid TDMA/CDMA, spreading and CDMA take place in the assigned
time slots leaving the remaining time slots to the other users.
In recent years another multiple access method supporting the other already de-
scribed methods has been introduced. It is the Space Division Multiple Access (SDMA).
SDMA relies on the application of antenna arrays which are able to generate highly di-
rectional, electronically steerable beams. Thus, if the users are sufficiently separated in
angle, they are able to use the same frequency channels, time slots, codes or combina-
tions thereof, depending on the main multiple access method used in the system. The
application of SDMA has a serious influence on the overall system performance and will
be discussed in Chapter 18.

58 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
1.8 METHODS OF DUPLEX TRANSMISSION
Unidirectional transmission is characteristic for broadcasting systems. Apart from these
systems, it rarely appears in digital and mobile communications, as the information
flow mostly takes place in two directions. A telephone call is its simplest example.
Similarly, data transmission often requires a feedback channel (see the Section 1.4.5 on
ARQ techniques) or it is simply bidirectional or duplex. In consequence, the problem
of organization of two-directional information exchange has to be solved. This task is
common for many communication systems so we will discuss it briefly.
In the first method of duplex transmission the total spectrum assigned to the system
is divided between two opposite directions. Such an approach is called a Frequency
Division Duplex (FDD). The frequency bands assigned to both directions have to be
disjoint and sometimes other systems can use the spectrum between them. In many
applications both bands have the same width. FDD is advantageous if independent
transmission in both directions is desired.
Figure 1.47 Examples of FDD and TDD duplex modes
Time Division Duplex (TDD) is another duplex transmission method. In this case
the whole bandwidth is used in both directions. However, the time axis is divided
between them. Similar to TDMA, the frame structure has to be defined. TDD trans-
mission is useful if the propagation time is short with respect to the applied data blocks.
Guard times for reversing the direction of the transmission have to be foreseen. In more
advanced systems the time assigned to both transmission directions can be adjusted to
the realized service. In this sense in some applications the TDD mode is more flexible
and can result in a higher system throughput. Figure 1.47 illustrates both types of
duplex transmission.
Frequency or time division duplex transmission is applied with one of the above de-
scribed multiple access methods. In practice we find systems using TDMA/FDMA with
FDD (GSM), TDMA/FDMA with TDD (DECT), CDMA with FDD (IS-95, UMTS
WCDMA FDD), TDM A/CDMA with TDD (UMTS WCDMA TDD). The examples of

COMPETING FOR CHANNEL ACCESS 
59
these combinations will appear in the chapters describing the most important mobile
communication systems.
1.9 COMPETING FOR CHANNEL ACCESS
Multiple access and duplex transmission methods are not sufficient to solve the problems
occurring while using a common channel. Usually information exchange between two
users lasts for a determined time period. During this time some system resources,
particularly a channel meant as a frequency channel, a sequence of time slots and/or a
code sequence are used by the pair of users. Before and after this period the channel
can be used by other users or it can remain idle. If the total number of users is large,
the situation is dynamic. It can happen that several users want to set a connection and
use a particular channel. As a result, different users may compete for the channel and
collisions can occur. In order to cope with them several arrangements are introduced.
They will be briefly described below. From the communication system point of view
the attempts at channel reservation by particular users look like a random process. The
problem of the random access is particularly important if messages sent by users are in
the form of short packets and setting a fixed connection would be a waste of network
resources.
The simplest although the least effective arrangement of random access is called
pure ALOHA protocol. It was developed at the University of Hawaii arid put into
operation in 1971. According to this protocol, users transmit packets encoded with an
error detection code whenever they have something to send. Collisions among packets
occur if at least two of them overlap in time. The reception of each packet has to be
acknowledged. If the ACK packet does not reach the sender in the determined time, the
user considers the packet lost in a collision and he/she sends it again with a randomly
selected delay. In this way repeated collisions can be at least partially avoided.
Introducing some order in packet emission improves the properties of the ALOHA
protocol. The simplest modification of the pure ALOHA is known as the slotted ALOHA
protocol. It relies on the division of time into time slots equal to a packet transmission
time. A user has to be synchronized to the time slots and is allowed to send his/her
packets within the slot. Thus, the packets of different users cannot partially overlap, as
happens in the pure ALOHA protocol; however, they can overlap, if two terminals tend
to use the same time slot. Slotted ALOHA is often applied in wireless communications.
It is used in the GSM system in the process of setting a connection arid in some other
procedures.
The users applying ALOHA protocols and wishing to send a packet do not take into
account what other users are doing. If they first "listened" to the channel and then
sent a packet, the number of packet collisions would decrease. The protocols which
apply this rule are called Carrier Sense Multiple Access (CSMA) protocols. Selected
protocols of this type are used in wireless packet data networks and wireless LANs.
The simplest protocol belonging to the CSMA group is called 1-persistent CSMA.
The time remains unslotted. The terminal wishing to send a packet "listens" to the
channel and sends it as soon as the channel is free. Subsequently, it waits for the packet

60 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
acknowledgement. If ACK is not received in a specified time period, the terminal starts
to "listen" to the channel after a random time period and sends the packet again as
soon as the channel is available. One of the drawbacks of this protocol is the influence of
the propagation delay on the overall protocol performance. If two terminals attempting
to transmit a packet are separated in space, packet collisions can occur. The more
distant terminal considers the channel available whereas the channel has already been
occupied by another terminal; however, the detection of this fact is impossible due to
the propagation delay.
Another version of the CSMA protocol is known as nonpersistent CSMA. In this
protocol, if the terminal detects that the channel is busy, it waits for a random time
interval before sensing the channel again. If the channel is available, the packet is
sent immediately. In this way, the collisions occurring in the 1-persistent CSMA and
resulting from possible start of packet transmission by more than one terminal are
eliminated. On the other hand, if the number of users is low, the 1-persistent CSMA
protocol is more efficient because the random waiting time before next channel sensing
is a waste of time.
The p-persistent CSMA is an improvement of the 1-persistent protocol. Here time is
divided into slots. Typically, the duration of the slot is equal to maximum propagation
delay. The terminal which has a packet to send "listens" to the channel. If the channel
is free, it transmits the packet with probability p. Thus, with probability p = 1 — p
the current slot is not used for packet transmission. The action is repeated in the next
slot and possibly in the next ones till the packet is finally sent. If the channel is busy,
the terminals check its availability continuously. If the channel becomes free again, the
whole procedure starts from the beginning.
1.0
0.8 
«
CO 
/
• 
Slotted nonpersistent CSMA
g 
0.6
o> 
Nonpersistent CSMA
£
H 
0.4 
1 - persistent CSMA.
A 
both slotted
« 
and not slotted
0 2 
^ 
Slotted ALOHA
v
ALOHA
0
0.1 
1.0 
10 
100
Offered load G
Figure 1.48 Comparison of throughput versus offered load for ALOHA and CSMA protocols
We conclude this short overview with the comparison of various random access proto-
cols shown in Figure 1.48 [28]. The curves in Figure 1.48 were derived at the assumption
that the propagation delay is one-tenth of the packet transmission time Tp. Figure 1.48
presents the throughput 5 versus the offered load G. The throughput S is defined as
the average number of successful packet transmissions per packet transmission time Tp.

THE OSI MODEL 
61
The offered load G is the number of packet transmissions attempted per packet time
Tp, including both new packets and retransmitted ones.
As we see in Figure 1.48, the CSMA protocols substantially outperform the ALOHA
protocols. Despite that, the slotted ALOHA protocol is frequently applied. The proba-
ble reason for that is its insensitivity to the values of the propagation delay as compared
with the CSMA protocols.
1.10 
THE OSI MODEL
So far we have concentrated on the transmission and reception methods of analog and
digital signals. We have considered the basics of channel coding and associated infor-
mation exchange protocols, as well as multiple access and duplexing methods. The
organization of the digital communication systems has become so complex and the
equipment and services markets have been so rich that setting standards on different
levels of digital systems organization has become a necessity. In 1977 the International
Standardization Organization (ISO) derived the Open System Interconnection (OSI)
reference model which was aimed at setting in order the description of the information
transmission procedures and simplifying the network design.
The description of the information transmission networks is organized in the form of
a set of layers. A layer relates to the process or device within the system which performs
a particular function [15]. The designers of a particular layer have to know the details
of the system operation in their own layer. For system users and the designers of higher
layers the process or device is a "black box'' with the specified input and output signals
and with interdependences among them. In such a way a complicated architecture and
system operation is decomposed into a set of smaller and better defined structures and
operations.
In the OSI reference model particular layers communicate with each other through
strictly defined interfaces. Each layer performs a number of basic functions using a set
of functions defined in the OSI reference model in the layer located directly below it.
Each layer offers a number of services to the layer located one level higher. The upper
layer does not know the details of implementation of the services offered by the lower
layer. In order to make the services possible, the interfaces between the layers have to
be defined.
Figure 1.49 presents the OSI reference model, using as an example the interconnection
of two systems. Each layer of the first system communicates with the same layer of the
second system using a set of rules called layer protocols. On the level of each layer the
respective processes cooperate with each other. Let us note that physical connection
between both systems exists only on the physical layer level, whereas the communication
between the layers of both systems has a virtual character. In reality it is realized
through the subsequent layers located below the given layer in both systems.
We will shortly describe the meaning and functions of the layers in the OSI model.
The task of the Physical Layer is the realization of the physical connection ensuring
the data bits transmission over the channel linking the terminal with the network node
or connecting two network nodes. The physical layer is equipped with the physical

62 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
Used
Application
Layer
Presentation
Layer
""*
____________ y __________
Session
Layer
_._..
Transport
Layer
Network
Layer
A
__ 
T .
Data Link
Layer
' ' 
A 
•-"
*
Physical
Layer
System 1
Network
Layer Protocol
Application Layer Protocol
Presentation Layer Protocol
Session Layer Protocol
Transport Layer Protocol
Network
Layer
User 2
Application
Layer
A
T
Presentation
Layer
Session
Layer
Data Link Protocol
. T.
Data Link
Layer
A
T
Physical
Layer
Data Link
Layer
Physical
Layer
Physical Link
Network Layer
Protocol
Data Link
Protocol
Physical Link
Network Node
Network
Layer
A
T
Data Link
Layer
A
T
Physical
Layer
System 2
Figure 1.49 Reference model of the open systems interconnection (OSI model)
interface modules placed on each end of the physical link. On the transmit end, the
task of the interface is to adapt the binary stream received from the Data Link Control
Layer to the form in which it can be transmitted over the physical channel. On the
receive end the interface module performs a function which is complementary to that
on the transmit end. The typical functions of the physical interface are the modem
functions. Problems associated with digital modulations, transmission over particular
channels and reception of digital signals must be solved at this level.
The main task of the Data Link Control Layer is protection of the transmitted data
stream against errors occurring during transmission between the network nodes. As
a result, in the interface between the data link control layer and the Network Layer
a binary stream of constant quality is received. The problems of error detection and
correction, framing, as well as the ARQ methods are dealt with in the data link control
layer.
The third layer of the OSI model is the Network Layer. The main tasks of this layer
are the routing of the data packets and their flow control. Within the first task the
network layer process operating in a network node decides to which link direct packets
arriving to this node. In the destination node the packets are processed for transfer to
the next layer - the Transport Layer. In turn, the task of the packet flow control is to
prevent blocking and overloading of the buffers accumulating the data packets arriving
nonrhythmically from the network. In order to avoid these events, the network layer
process determines when the packets from the higher layer should be accepted and when
to transmit the packet to another network or destination node. The network layer is

THE OSI MODEL
63
believed to be one of the most complicated layers [15]. It has a key meaning for reliable
functioning of the whole digital network.
The next remaining layers of the OSI model are so called higher level layers [17]. The
protocols associated with these layers deal with the interconnections between systems
and they are not directly associated with the functions of a particular communication
system. Therefore their meaning for the description of the mobile communication sys-
tems is lower. However, for the completeness of the OSI model presentation we will
shortly describe the higher layers as well.
The Transport Layer supports the reliable mechanism of data exchange between
processes run in different systems. The transport layer ensures that the received data
units do not contain errors, that they are ordered in the appropriate sequence, they are
complete and do not contain duplicated elements. The transport layer is also associated
with the optimization of the network services and ensuring their quality required on the
level of the session layer by the network terminals.
The Session Layer assures the means for controlling the dialog between the applica-
tions. This layer assigns the resources to two application processes in order to establish
a connection between them, called a session. After establishing a session between two
users the processes of this layer manage the dialog between them.
The Presentation Layer establishes a common format to be applied between two
terminals, using common rules for data representation. This layer process transforms
input data to the format which allows selection of a set of services by the application
layer. One of the transformations which can be realized by the presentation layer is
data encryption.
The highest layer, the Application Layer, ensures that the end user has access to the
OSI environment.
Application
Layer
Data Applica-
tion Block
Presentation
Layer
Header of
Presentation
Layer
Application
Data Block
Session
Layer
Header of
Session
Layer
Presentation
Data Block
Transport
Layer
Header of
Transport
Layer
Session Data
Block
Network
Layer
Header of
Network
Layer
Transport
Data Block
Data Link
Layer
Header of
Data Link
Layer
Network
Data Block
Data Link
Trailer
Physical
Layer
Physical Layer
Frame
Figure 1.50 Packet structures of the particular layers in the OSI description model

64 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
Figure 1.50 illustrates the operation of the digital communication system from the
perspective of the OSI reference model. Information exchange between two users is
initiated in the highest layer. This layer receives a data block from the user, denoted
as the application block. This block is transferred down the subsequent layers. On
each layer level a header is added which contains the control information necessary to
realize the protocol of the given layer. The whole block, supplemented by the header.
is treated by the lower layer as a data information block. In the data link control layer
usually not only the header but also a trailer is added. The task of the trailer is error
detection and correction. For example, the trailer is a CRC binary block which we have
described in the subsection on channel coding.
On the receiver side the dual processes take place. The blocks of a particular layer are
unpacked; headers and trailers are removed and the received information is transferred
to the higher layer.
1.11 
X.25 - A PROTOCOL FOR A PACKET SWITCHING NETWORK
In general, networks can be divided into channel switching and packet switching net-
works. In case of a channel switching network, a physical connection is established for
a period of time in which the information exchange between two users takes place. In
case of radiocommunications a physical connection is the channel frequency (in FDMA
mode), the channel frequency and the assigned time slot (in TDMA/FDMA mode)
or the spreading sequence (in CDMA mode). A representative example of a channel
switching network is a network based on the GSM standard.
In the channel switching networks some information, in particular control messages,
has the form of packets. On the other hand there are networks of entirely packet
type. During the information exchange between two network users there is no physical
connection between them. Instead, the users send to the network the numbered data
packets containing the destination addresses. Numbering assures the appropriate order
of the packets on the receiver side. The packets are sent to the closest network node
and from this node they are directed through a dynamically established route to the
destination. In the case of the packet type of traffic, the network resources can be
used much more efficiently in packet switching networks (assuming that there is no
network overloading) than in channel switching networks. The network resources of a
packet switching network are only used if there is a packet to transmit, while in channel
switching networks the whole chain of devices on the path between the transmitter and
receiver is reserved whether the transmitter has something to send or not.
One of the most frequently applied protocols in packet switching networks is the
X.25 protocol. Its name is set by the number of ITU-T Recommendation describing
it. This protocol is also applied in the data transmission offered by the GSM. It will
be the subject of our consideration in Chapter 11. A short description of the X.25 is
presented according to [15].
The X.25 protocol has a level structure which matches the three lowest layers of the
OSI reference model. The level-to-layer relationship is shown in Figure 1.51. In the

X.25 - A PROTOCOL FOR A PACKET SWITCHING NETWORK
65
Application
Layer
Presentation
Layer
A
T
Session
Layer
v
Data Link .
Layer
A
.t.. .
Physical
Layer
OSI Architecture
Packet
Level
Link Access
Level
A
V...
^ 
Physical
Level
X.25 Architecture
Figure 1.51 Relationship between the architecture of network OSI description and the architec-
ture of X.25 protocol
X.25 terminology the subsequent levels are called: physical level, link access level and
packet level.
The Physical Level determines the form of bit representation and how the connection
and synchronization with the network node are established. This level defines the
electrical, physical and procedural interfaces between the user's end device and the
network node.
The Link Access Level ensures the synchronous operation of the receiver with respect
to the transmitter and it also performs error detection and/or correction. On the Packet
Level the services of the virtual channel established in the network are realized.
The functions of the link access level are realized using the LAP-B (Link Access
Protocol - Balanced) protocol. This protocol determines how any number of information
bits is transmitted through the network. The binary sequences are transmitted in
sequenced frames whose structure is shown in Figure 1.52.
Number
of bits
Flag
Address
Control
8n >0
Packet
16
CRC
Flag
Figure 1.52 Frame structure in the LAP-B protocol

66 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
This protocol allows transmission of any number of bytes. The frame starts and ends
with a specific 8-bit sequence of the form 01111110. This flag is used to synchronize the
receiver with respect to the received frame (frame synchronization). The reception of a
sequence of seven 1s indicates the link problems. The sequence of the length equal to at
least fifteen 1s sets the channel in the idle state. In order not to detect the end of frame
erroneously while observing the received data sequence or detecting the signal indicating
network problems, so-called bit stuffing is applied in the transmitter which is realized
by adding an additional 0 to the sequence of five Is. In this way sequences denoting
the start and end of frame do not appear within the frame except at the beginning and
end of a frame. In the receiver the binary stream is continuously monitored. In case of
detection of five subsequent 1s (let us note that the sequence of five 1s must has been
preceded by a 0), the following sixth bit is checked. If it is a 0. it is removed because its
value indicates that an additional bit has been stuffed in the transmitter. If the sixth
bit is a 1, the receiver checks the value of the seventh one. If it is a 0, the end of the
frame has been detected. If the seventh bit is equal to 1 and if an appropriate number
of the following bits are also equal to 1, such a sequence indicates either the channel
problems or the transfer of the channel to the idle state.
The address field of the LAP-B frame has a size of a single byte. It contains the
address of the station transmitting or receiving the given frame. The control field
determines the frame type, i.e., whether it is an information frame, a management
frame or an unnumbered frame. The information frames contain the data to be sent
between the network elements. Besides information data they can contain the data
from the system network layer. The management frames contain the ARQ mechanism,
whereas the unnumbered frames transmit additional information associated with the
link management.
The packet field contains any number of bits which have to be sent over the link.
The CRC field is applied to check the frame parity in order to detect possible errors.
In the protocol the division by the following generating polynomial specified by the
ITU-T is implemented
g(x) = x16 + x12 + x5 + 1
Using the above error detection code, the parity of the whole frame, excluding the
starting and ending flags, is detected.
As we have already mentioned, the packet level of the X.25 protocol sets a virtual
channel for the period of time of the information exchange between the end devices.
It is started by the terminal initiating a connection by sending a special packet to the
network node. Among other elements the packet contains the source and destination
addresses and the request of setting up a connection. The network sends a similar packet
to the end terminal with which the initiating terminal wishes to set up a connection.
After sending the accepting packet by the called terminal a virtual duplex channel is
established.
When one of the terminals wishes to close the information exchange, it sends the
closing packet to the network node. The latter sends back an acknowledgement packet.
The X.25 protocol has been described here in a simplified manner. However, the
description gives an overview of the tasks of its particular levels. The word "X.25"

SIGNALING SYSTEM NO. 7 
67
will appear many times in this book with reference to several mobile communication
systems.
Another protocol, called LAP-D (Link Access Protocol on the D Channel], is closely
associated with the LAP-B protocol. It is a protocol applied in the Integrated Services
Digital Network (ISDN) for the connection management over the ISDN D channel.11
This protocol is also used in some mobile communication networks for transmitting the
control information and data sequences. The frame structure in this protocol is very
similar to the frame shown in Figure 1.52. In this case, however, the address field is
extended to 16 bits and the length of the information field cannot be greater than 260
bytes. The control field can have the length of a single byte or two bytes. The size of
this field depends on the task of the transmitted frame and on its format. In the format
applied for transmission without acknowledgement there are no information bytes (the
length of the information field is zero) and the size of the control field is a single byte. In
case of transmission with acknowledgement, the numbering of the subsequent frames is
necessary in order to repeat the unacknowledged frame if errors are detected in it. The
length of the control field is then equal to two bytes. The LAP-D protocol is applied
in the data link control layer of the GSM system.
1.12 
SIGNALING SYSTEM NO. 7
The performance of the digital communication networks does not depend only on the
data rates offered to the users. The time of setting up, monitoring and closing a connec-
tion requires transmission of a number of control signals. The number of control signals
in mobile communication networks is much higher than in fixed networks due to the
mobility of the terminals and the necessity of tracking their locations. In consequence,
an efficient and reliable system of control signal transmission is particularly important
for the performance of a mobile network.
The best known signaling system is Signaling System No.7 (SS7). Some mobile
communication networks use this signaling system within their structure. The GSM
system belongs to them.
The SS7 uses the network independently of the users' network, in which the control
signals associated with many information channels are transmitted. This is known as the
common channel signalization [18]. Thanks to the separation of the signaling network
from the users' network it is possible to transmit the signaling information through the
connections that are already set up. Transmission of the signalization signals is fast
compared with other signaling methods. The signaling network can also be used for
the transmission of maintenance and exploitation messages between the switching nodes
(switching centers) and the network maintenance center. The signaling network consists
of signaling links and nodes. The Signaling Points (SP) and Signaling Transfer Points
(STP) are the nodes of the signaling network. The signaling points either send the
signaling messages or they receive them. The signaling transfer points are the centers
11 In the basic access to the ISDN system a user has two 64 kb/s (B) channels and a single 16 kb/s (D)
channel at his disposal.

68 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
switching the signaling packets and directing them to the appropriate signaling nodes
through the selected signaling links. Since the signaling system is crucial for the proper
functioning of the whole communication network, the signaling points are connected
with other signaling points or the signaling transfer points in a redundant manner.
The SS7 system is organized in layers, in the same way as the OSI reference model.
There are four network layers which are related to the seven layers of the OSI model.
The first three layers, the signaling data link, signaling bridge and signaling network,
create a so-called a Message Transfer Part (MTP). They ensure reliable transmission
and distribution of signaling messages among the signaling points. The Signaling Data
Link corresponds to the physical layer of the OSI model, so it determines the physical
link parameters between the signaling points and neighboring signaling transfer points.
The second layer, the Signaling Bridge corresponds to the data link control layer of the
OSI model. It manages the information exchange by putting messages into numbered
sequences, realizes the error detection in the received packets and orders their repetition
if necessary. The third layer, the Signaling Network takes care of the distribution of
messages among the signaling points in this network. Three lower layers of the SS7
signaling system together with the Signaling Connection Control Part (SCCP). which
belongs to the fourth SS7 layer and is responsible for the signaling connections, create
the Network Service Part. The remaining part of the fourth layer is the so-called User
Part.
A more detailed description of the SS7 system is beyond the scope of this introductory
chapter. More interested readers are advised to study [18].
The aim of this chapter was to overview the basic elements of digital communication
systems, error detection and correction codes, digital modulations and their demodu-
lation, as well as multiple access and duplex transmission methods. We also explained
the OSI reference model used later in some chapters for the description of the mobile
communication systems.
The above chapter has an overview character. It mostly does not contain the deriva-
tion of the system structures or the analysis of their performance. The reader who
wishes to deepen his/her knowledge in this area is advised to study the academic hand-
books such as [5], [14] and [15]. The overview of the basic theoretical problems of mobile
communications can be also found in [16]. General considerations on digital networks
can be found, among others, in [17].
REFERENCES
1. S. R. Saunders, Antennas and Propagation for Wireless Communication Systems.
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Chichester, 1999
2. C. A. Balanis, Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design, Second Edition. John Wiley
& Sons, Ltd.. Chichester, 1997

REFERENCES 
69
3. ITU-T Recommendation G.726, "40, 32, 24, 16 kbit/s Adaptive Differential Pulse
Code Modulation (ADPCM)", Geneva, 1990
4. J. Rainier, M. McMahan, M. Arjmand, "32-kbit/s ADPCM with TMS32010", in
Digital Signal Processing Applications with the TMS320 Family: Theory. Algorithms
and Implementations, Texas Instruments, 1989
5. J. G. Proakis, Digital Communications, Fourth Edition, McGraw-Hill. New York.
2001
6. W. C. Wong, R. Steele, C.-E. W. Sundberg, Source-Matched Mobile Communica-
tions, Pentech Press, London and IEEE Press, New York, 1995
7. R. J. Sluijter, F. Wupperrnann, R. Taori, E. Kathmann, "State of the Art and
Trends in Speech Coding", Philips J. Research, Vol. 49, 1995, pp. 455-488
8. "IS-54, Cellular System Dual-Mode Mobile Station 
Base Station Compatibility
Standard", EIA, May 1990
9. M. Schwartz, Information Transmission, Modulation, and Noise, McGraw-Hill, New
York, 1972
10. G. C. Clark, Jr., J. B. Cain, Error-Correction Coding for Digital Communications,
Plenum Press, New York, 1981
11. S. Lin, D. J. Costello Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications,
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1983
12. A. J. Viterbi, "Error Bounds for Convolutional Codes and an Asymptotically Opti-
mum Decoding Algorithm", IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. IT-13,
April 1967, pp. 260-269
13. C. Shannon, "A Mathematical Theory of Communication", Bell System, Technical
Journal Vol. 27, 1948, pp. 379–423 and 623–656
14. E. A. Lee, D. G. Messerschmitt, Digital Communication, Second Edition, Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Boston, 1994
15. S. Haykiri, Digital Communication, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1994
16. J. D. Gibson Jed.], The Mobile Communications Handbook, IEEE Press and CRC
Press, New York, 1996
17. W. Stallings, Data and Computer Communications, Third Edition, Maxwell Macmil-
lan International Editions, New York, 1991
18. R. L. Freeman, Practical Data Communications, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New
York, 1995
19. F. Halsall, Data, Communications, Computer Networks and Open Systems, Fourth
Ed.. Addison-Wesley, Harlow, 1996

70 
ELEMENTS OF DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS THEORY
20. Bluetooth Specification Ver. 1.0 B, November 1999
21. J. Haartsen, "Bluetooth - the Universal Radio Interface for ad hoc Wireless Con-
nectivity", Ericsson Review, No. 3, 1998, pp. 110–117
22. G. D. Forney, Concatenated Codes, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachussetts, 1966
23. C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, P. Thitimajshima, "Near Shannon Limit Error-Correcting
Coding and Decoding: Turbo-Codes", Proc. of IEEE International Conference on
Communications, ICC'93, Geneva, 1993, pp. 1064–1070
24. ETSI TR 101 683 VI. 1.1, "Broadband Radio Access Networks (BRAN); HIPER-
LAN Type 2; System Overview", February 2000
25. T. Starr, J. M. Cioffi, P. J. Silverman, Understanding Digital Subscriber Line Tech-
nology, Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, N.J., 1999
26. Special Issue on Very High-Speed Digital Subscriber Lines, IEEE Communications
Magazine, May 2000
27. ETSI EN 300 744, "Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Framing Structure, Channel
Coding and Modulation for Digital Terrestrial Television", VI.2.1, February 1999
28. J. L. Hammond and P. J. P. O'Reilly, Performance Analysis of Local Computer
Networks, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1986
29. Ch. Heegard, S. B. Wicker, Turbo Coding, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston.
1999

2
Overview and classification
of mobile communication
systems
2.1 
INTRODUCTION
Mobile communication systems are characterized by a variety of features. They differ
from each other in the degree of their complexity, the level of the offered services and
operation costs. The attributes of all mobile comunication systems are the mobility of
at least one of the connection users and the lack of wireline connection of this user's
terminal with the remaining part of the system. In this chapter we will survey the basic
types of mobile communication systems and their main characteristics which determine
their applications.
One of the classification criteria of the mobile systems is their degree of complexity
and the range of the offered services. From this point of view the mobile communication
systems can be divided into the following categories:
• paging systems,
• wireless telephony,
• trunking systems,
• cellular telephony,
• satellite personal communication systems,
• systems of wireless access to local area networks.
In the following section we will shortly describe the above categories, their charac-
teristic features arid differences between them.
71

72 
OVERVIEW AND CLASSIFICATION OF MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
2.2 
PAGING SYSTEMS
Paging systems are an example of broadcasting systems. In a classical paging system
the communication is unidirectional. The signal is transmitted from the base station
connected with the call center to a selected receiver (pager). 
All receivers listen to
the broadcast signals, detecting that particular one which is addressed directly to it.
In a classical system the pager is able only to receive signals. In the early phase of
development the paging signal was very simple. It triggered a beeper generating an
acoustic tone. At present the paging signal typically has the form of a sequence of
alphanumerical symbols or is a short voice message. The pager is selected by sending the
message with its unique address. Typically, messages are transmitted using a frequency
modulation. Due to the fact that a pager is very simple and not able to transmit
signals, its power consumption is very low and its size is small. On the other hand,
the base station emits a high power signal which is able to penetrate building walls. A
unidirectional connection established between the base station and the particular pager
is optimized taking into account the connection asymmetry.
A typical system consists of:
• the call center to which one can submit requests to page a given user, in the form
of voice or alphanumerical messages,
• the base station transmitter operating in a few hundred-MHz band,
• the set of receivers (pagers).
The paging systems range from small ones having a single antenna and short range,
to regional ones with multiple antennas properly located in a determined area up to sys-
tems covering a whole country. There also exists a Paneuropean system called ERMES.
which will be described in Chapter 4.
The development of paging systems has led to the introduction of a feedback channel
allowing for acknowledgement of the received paging messages. In recent years a further
development of paging systems has been slowed down due to the enormous success
of cellular phones. It seems that the paging systems have a chance to survive in a
specialized market segment and with new applications, such as remote control.
2.3 
WIRELESS TELEPHONY
Wireless telephone systems appeared in the late seventies. They can be characterized
as a low power wireless communication means intended for a user moving slowly and
located a short distance from the base station. The basic aim of introducing a wireless
telephone is to replace a wireline one. The connection quality and the cost of a wireless
station should be comparable to the quality and cost of a traditional wireline phone.
The base station is that part of the wireless system which is connected to the public
switched telephone network (PSTN) and it is seen by the latter as a regular telephone.
In most cases one base station co-works with a single mobile station. The time between
successive battery rechargings should be as long as possible. As a result of the above

TRUNKING SYSTEMS 
73
mentioned features, the wireless telephone systems has a small number of users per
unit of the assigned spectrum, a small number of users per base station, mostly a large
number of base stations per area unit and a short base station range. These features
properly characterize a wireless telephony implemented in analog technology. In order
to avoid connections of a mobile station with the wrong base station (other than its own
one), several technical means can be applied, for example, the exchange of a password
(a digital sequence) known to the base station and its own mobile station. Another
security means is the search for a free channel among those which are accessible for the
mobile station-base station pair.
The application of the digital technology in wireless telephony introduced a substan-
tial enhancement of the system capabilities. The coverage area was widely expanded.
Previously, the range had been limited to the user's working environment or home. A
second generation system known as CT-2 (Cordless Telephony-2), introduced in the
United Kingdom, offered an additional service called Telepoint The base stations were
placed in highly populated areas. The user with a registered Telepoint service was able
to initiate a mobile originated call within the CT-2 system. However, he/she was not
able to be found except in cases when he/she was located in the range of his/her own
base station. Overtaking the call of the user who initially communicated with another
base station was not possible either. The CT-2 system did not become popular in the
UK; however, it was quite successful in other places, such as Hong Kong and Singapore.
It was also introduced in Paris under the marketing name of Bi-Bop. Some of the CT-2
mobile stations were equipped with an additional pager thus making possible to inform
a CT-2 user about a desired connection with an external user.
The technical and unification works done within the European Union resulted in the
EU standard of the digital wireless telephony known as DECT (Digital Enhanced Cord-
less Telecommunications), previously Digital European Cordless Telephony), optimized
for the application in the indoor environment. The DECT base stations are connected
through system controllers to private branch exchanges (PBXs). Thanks to the DECT
controllers, subsequent base stations are able to handle the connection when a mobile
station changes its location. A desired mobile station can also be called by any base sta-
tion in whose range it is currently located. Although primarily designed for an indoor
environment, the DECT systems are also installed in places featuring very intensive
communication traffic, such as airports, city centers, railway stations, etc. After certain
modifications the DECT technology can be successfully applied in wireless local loops.
It has also been used in the wireless access to local area networks (LANs).
2.4 TRUNKING SYSTEMS
Trunking systems are mobile communication systems specializing in communications
within large enterprises which manage resources dispersed in space, such as a fleet of
trucks or service vehicles. Trunking systems are particularly useful in transport compa-
nies, and special services such as police, emergency services, gas and power suppliers,
etc. Their characteristic feature is the existence of a dispatch and control center which
manages the calls. Thus, special kinds of connections are arranged which in regular

74 
OVERVIEW AND CLASSIFICATION OF MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
telephone networks are possible as special services only. The examples are a call from
the dispatch center to all mobile stations or to a selected group of them. Another con-
nection typical of trunking systems is a common call set-up within a group of mobile
stations.
The trunking systems evolved from a system with a single base station and a common
radio channel over which all mobile stations could listen to the signals sent to any of
them, through the more sophisticated analog systems operating in conformity with the
British standard MPT 1327 up to a fully digital system, known under the name TETRA,
standardized by ETSI (European Telecommunications Standards Institute) which is able
to transmit both voice and data signals.
The basic idea and the name of trunking systems stem from the rule of channel
assignment applied in these systems. The system resources consist of a certain number
of channels which are a common resource. Any free channel can be applied by a new
connection and will be immediately returned to the common quota after ending the call.
This is the basic difference between trunking systems and classical dispatch systems in
which the channels were assigned to fixed groups of users. The occupancy of all the
channels within one group made it impossible to get a connection with a user from that
group even if some channels in other groups were free.
2.5 
CELLULAR TELEPHONY
Cellular telephony is the next and perhaps the most representative example of mobile
communication systems. The cellular phone system is characterized as a system en-
suring bidirectional wireless communication with mobile stations moving even at high
speed in a large area covered by a system of base stations. The cellular system can
cover a whole country. Moreover, a family of systems of the same kind can cover the
area of many countries, as in case of the GSM system.
Initially, the main task of a cellular system was to ensure the connections with
vehicles moving within a city and along highways. The power used by cellular mobile
stations is higher than that used by the wireless telephony and reaches the values of
single Watts. In case of mobile handhelds their limited radiated power is one of the
main factors deciding upon their long use between battery recharging and can be one
of the main reasons for their success on the market. However, the consequence is their
limited range and the necessity to locate the base stations with sufficient density.
The first generation cellular systems were implemented in analog technology. Voice
was transmitted using frequency modulation with FDMA as the channel multiple access
method. However, the control of the connection set-up, the change of the base stations
during a connection (so-called handover or hand-off) 
caused by the mobile station
mobility, as well as other control procedures such as mobile station power control,
are implemented by transmission of digital signals. In the eighties many mutually
incompatible analog cellular systems were built, such as American AMPS (Advanced
Mobile Phone System), English TAGS (Total Access Cellular System), Scandinavian
NMT (Nordic Mobile Telephone system) or German C-Netz. The development of the
digital technology, on one hand, and frequent cases when analog systems reached their

CELLULAR TELEPHONY 
75
full capacity, especially in big cities, on the other hand, led to the development of
the second generation systems implemented in digital technology and using TDMA or
CDMA as the multiple access method. These are the GSM system (Global System for
Mobile Communications) operating in Europe and other continents, the IS-54/136 and
IS-95 systems operating in the USA and some other countries and the Japanese PDC
(Personal Digital Cellular) system working exclusively in Japan. The GSM and IS-95,
as the most representative examples of the systems using TDMA and CDMA channel
multiple access respectively, will be the subject of detailed analysis in further chapters.
The main aim in the design of the second generation systems was the maximization
of the system capacity meant as the number of users per spectrum unit per area unit.
On the other hand the communication with vehicles moving on highways in sparsely
populated areas required high power and long-range base stations. Since these con-
flicting requirements had to be taken into account in the system design, the resulting
systems have the following features:
• relatively large transmitter power,
• high complexity of the mobile phone, in particular its digital signal processing
part,
• lower connection quality as compared with the stationary phone systems,
• high network complexity resulting from handover and mobility management pro-
cedures, necessity of finding the desired mobile station within the system and the
variety of services offered.
Despite evident differences among the second generation cellular phone systems these
systems are similar in some aspects, such as:
• low data rate of the digital stream representing a user's voice signal - because of
complicated speech coding algorithms the data rate of the binary stream does not
exceed 13 kbps, which increases the system capacity at the cost of certain loss of
speech quality,
• relatively large transmission delay in both transmission directions of the order of
200 ms caused by the speech coding and decoding algorithms and complicated
detection of digital signals,
• duplex transmission with the use of frequency division (FDD),
• mobile station power control which ensures equal connection quality despite the
distance of the mobile station from the base station.
Further progress in the second generation cellular systems has brought a lot of novel-
ties. In particular, the offer of data transmission services has substantially broadened.
Originally, the second generation cellular phone systems were designed mainly for the
transmission of voice signals. The wide application of the Internet, general development
of computer networks and the popularity of portable computers (laptops, palmtops,

76 
OVERVIEW AND CLASSIFICATION OF MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
etc.) created a demand for Internet access through a mobile station. This required
much faster data transmission in the existing systems. Designers have also proposed
a simplified access protocol to the Internet which with the appropriate design of web
pages enables the user to surf on the Internet using a mobile phone.
In the last decade the third generation cellular systems have been developed. It was
foreseen that data and multimedia transmission would constitute a larger part of the
transmitted signals. Thus, much higher capacity and several types of traffic have been
assumed for the new systems. It has been established that the data rate will be at least
384 kbps and can reach 2 Mbps, thus enabling video transmission. A world standard
was desired for the third generation cellular systems which would allow the user to move
with the mobile station all over the world. So far this task has not been successfully
completed and separate standards have been established for Europe, America and some
Asian countries, resulting in the whole family of ITU recommendations presented under
the common name of IMT-2000 (International Mobile Telecommunications 2000). The
basic channel access method is the code division multiple access (CDMA). A more
detailed description of the third generation systems will be presented in Chapter 17.
2.6 
PERSONAL SATELLITE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Satellite mobile communication systems already do exist. A good example of them is
the family of INMARSAT systems specialized in global maritime communications. The
systems belonging to this family are also used in individual communications with a
mobile station of the size of a briefcase or laptop.
The characteristic feature of currently existing satellite systems is uni- or bidirectional
voice and/or data communications at a limited quality in very large areas. Their main
advantage is the wide range. The access to the system is difficult inside buildings. The
system capacity strongly depends on the number of satellites used. However, a large
number of satellites substantially increases the system cost.
In recent years, a few new satellite systems have been proposed, among others those
known under the names of Iridium, Globalstar and ICO. All of them make use of
satellites which are located on low or medium orbits. In case of low orbits the number
of satellites has to be large, the coverage of each of them is small but the size of
the satellite and its cost are low as compared with a satellite requiring higher orbits.
Additionally, the delay introduced by the way to and from the satellite is relatively small
and the power of a mobile station located on the Earth surface can be low, allowing
for the application of handheld phones. At the same time, a small delay ensures a
higher comfort in voice signal perception. A large number of low orbit satellites having
a small coverage implies a high overall system capacity due to the multiple usage of
the channel frequencies. The current prospects of low orbit personal communication
satellite systems seem to be still unclear due to the marketing problems of some of
the systems. Despite this such systems will be the subject of our interest due to their
specific concepts.
The geostationary satellite systems require the smallest number of satellites. How-
ever, each of them is very expensive. Due to a high satellite orbit (around 37.000 km

WIRELESS ACCESS TO THE LOCAL AREA NETWORKS 
77
above the earth) each satellite covers a high area, thus the channel reuse is much lower
as compared with the low orbit satellite systems. In consequence the system capacity
will be much lower as well. Additional difficulty is a substantial delay introduced due
to a long signal propagation to and from a geostationary satellite (up to around 0.5
seconds). Such a delay makes the voice transmission unpleasant for the user. A com-
promise between low orbit and geostationary systems is the system with intermediate
circular orbits (ICO). The required number of satellites is reasonable and the introduced
delay is acceptable.
2.7 
WIRELESS ACCESS TO THE LOCAL AREA NETWORKS
A new category of mobile systems has appeared in recent years. The wireless technology
has been used to realize a wireless access to computer networks. The assumptions and
tasks of such systems are different from those described so far. First of all, it is usually
assumed that the range of the system and the user mobility are very limited. The power
of mobile stations is very low due to assumed short distance to the nearest base station or
another mobile station if direct connection between mobile stations is possible. Several
frequency bands will be used in wireless LANs. Some systems use an ISM (Industrial,
Scientific and Medical) band, whereas other systems use the spectrum in the 5 GHz
range. Other frequency ranges are also investigated for wideband data transmission.
An interesting difference between the systems implementing the wireless access to
LANs and other mobile systems is often the network structure. Several configurations of
wireless LANs are possible starting from well-defined structures with the base stations
and master controller and ending with the ad hoc networks, where there is no particular
master station and all mobile stations can communicate with each other.
This chapter has been devoted to the general characterization and classification of the
mobile communication systems. The future is seen to be the creation of a universal
mobile communication system on the basis of a few subsystems applied depending on the
actual location and speed of movement of the mobile user. In contrast to a traditional
communication system in which a number is assigned to the localized telephone set,
in the future universal radiocommunication system the number will be assigned to the
user with a personal mobile phone who can be in any place of the globe. Such a type
of communication will certainly have a serious impact on the future social relations.
REFERENCES
1. D. C. Cox, "Wireless Personal Communications: What Is It?", IEEE Personal
Communications, Vol. 2, No. 2, April 1992, pp. 20-35

78 
OVERVIEW AND CLASSIFICATION OF MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
2. B. H. Walke, Mobile Radio Networks: Networking and Protocols, John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd., Chichester, 1999
3. J. D. Gibson (ed.), The Mobile Communications Handbook, IEEE Press and CRC
Press, New York, 1996
4. N. J. Boucher, The Trunked Radio and Enhanced PMR Radio Handbook, John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., New York, 2000
5. M. J. Miller, B. Vucetic and L. Berry, Satellite Communications. Mobile and Fixed
Services, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, 1993
6. R. A. Dayem, Mobile Data and Wireless Technologies, Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle
River, N.J., 1997
7. B. Bing, High-Speed Wireless ATM and LANs, Artech House, Boston, 2000

3
Characterization of the
mobile communication
channel
3.1 INTRODUCTION
Specification of the transmission channel characteristics has a crucial meaning for the
design of any communication system. Channel propagation properties, introduced dis-
tortions and disturbances as well as the allowable transmitted signal bandwidth deter-
mine achievable transmission rate and its quality. Thus, before the specification of any
communication system, the designer has to know the properties of the channel applied
in the designed system. In this respect a mobile communication channel is not an excep-
tion. Therefore, before considerations of functioning of mobile communication systems
we present transmission channel properties which are specific for mobile communica-
tion systems. Characteristic features of the transmission channel strongly depend on
the type of the system. Channel properties are quite different for various systems, e.g.
for indoor communications, cellular or satellite communication systems. In this chap-
ter we will concentrate on some common features of communication channels currently
used in mobile communications.
We will start with a basic set of terms associated with antennae. Then we will present
basic expressions dealing with signal propagation in free space and calculation of the
link power budget. Subsequently we will investigate the influence of the multipath effect
on the transmission properties. In turn, we will present transmission channel models
allowing for evaluation of communication system quality. We will also give examples
of standardized channel models characterizing signal propagation in typical types of
terrain, which are used in the GSM cellular system design. We will also survey the
most important channel propagation models useful for evaluation of the cellular base
station coverage. At the end of this chapter we will consider the phenomena of flat and
selective fading and the diversity reception as a method combatting these phenomena.
79

80 
CHARACTERIZATION OF THE MOBILE COMMUNICATION CHANNEL
. P
Figure 3.1 Angles y? and 9 in the Cartesian system
3.2 
FREE-SPACE SIGNAL PROPAGATION
Signal transmission in a radio system is based on converting the electrical signals gener-
ated by the transmitter into electromagnetic waves, propagation of waves in space and
conversion back into electrical signals at the receiver side of the system. The proper-
ties of a mobile communication channel depend on many factors, in particular on the
characteristics of the applied antennae, the properties of the physical medium in which
the radio waves propagate, the features of the electronic circuits participating in signal
transmission and reception, and the velocities of mobile stations. In order to give a sim-
ple presentation of mobile communication channel properties, we will first consider an
ideal case - the signal propagation in free space. We will precede these considerations
by explaining a few basic terms referring to antennae [21].
Let us consider a theoretical case of an antenna which emits the signal equally in
all directions at the power level of PT Watts. Such an antenna is called an isotropic
antenna. It is an ideal device which cannot be built in practice; however, it serves as a
reference for other antenna types. If we draw a sphere of radius r around the isotropic
antenna, at each point of its surface the electromagnetic field induced by this antenna
is identical. Real antennae focus the radiated energy in specific directions, therefore we
usually describe a normalized radiation antenna characteristics with the expression
^nax~ 
(3.1)
where E(9, (p) is the field at point P of the sphere whose coordinates are determined by
the angles 0 and tp, whereas Emax is the maximum field on the surface of the sphere.
Figure 3.1 presents the coordinate system in which the angles 9 and y? are denoted.
The isotropic antenna is located in the origin of the coordinate system. It is easy to
see that the normalized characteristic does not depend on the sphere radius r. The
term radiation density is closely related to the normalized characteristic. It is the
power radiated in the determined direction within a unit solid angle.1 Both antenna
1 Solid angles are measured in steradians. Let us recall that the full solid angle measures 4vr steradians.

FREE-SPACE SIGNAL PROPAGATION 
81
characteristics appear in the expression
where Umax is the maximum radiation density. The total power PT radiated by the
antenna is the integral of radiation density with respect to the solid angle, i.e.
PT = I U(0, </?)dQ = 47rJ7mean 
(3.3)
\J
47T
where dO = sin$d#d<£>. Let us note that the radiated power can be expressed as the
product of the mean radiation intensity Umean and the value of the full solid angle which
is equal to 47T. Mean radiation intensity can be interpreted as the radiation density of
the isotropic antenna radiating the same power PT as the given antenna. The ratio of
the radiation density U(0, (p) to the mean radiation density is called directivity gain of
the antenna. Its maximum value is called the antenna directivity D and is described
by the expression
T-, 
L>max 
'-'max 
'•'max 
/0 ,(\
47T
The term directivity means that the radiation intensity in the direction of the maximum
radiation is D times larger than the radiation intensity of the isotropic antenna radiating
the same power as the given antenna.
In the case of a real antenna the radiated power is only a part of the power Pinput
given to its connector. Part of the input power is dissipated and converts into heat.
Thus the antenna is characterized by the power efficiency 
rj = PT/Pinput. In order to
power dissipation in the antenna characteristics, the term antenna gain is introduced
and defined as the ratio
G = _u^_ 
(3.5)
47r -Hnput
Comparing (3.4) with (3.5) we get
G = r)D 
(3.6)
The antenna gain is often used in the determination of the Effective 
Isotropic Radiated
Power (EIRP) which is described by the product PinputG. EIRP is the power which
would have to be supplied to the isotropic antenna in order to achieve the same field at
the reception point as that which is received at that point due to the antenna with the
gain G and supplied by power Pinput. This case is illustrated in Figure 3.2.
Another type of the reference antenna is the half-wave dipole. If we compare the
power of the antenna with the gain G with the power of the half-wave dipole, we define
the so-called Effective 
Radiated Power (ERP). The half-wave dipole has a gain equal to
1.64 equivalent to 2.15 dB as compared with the isotropic antenna. The ERP radiated
by a given antenna is 2.15 dB lower than the EIRP power. Depending on the reference

82 
CHARACTERIZATION OF THE MOBILE COMMUNICATION CHANNEL
Antenna
Figure 3.2 Illustration of the effective isotropic radiated power EIRP
antenna, the units of the antenna power gain are denoted as dBi for the isotropic
antenna or as dBd for the half-wave dipole.
Let us consider a transmit antenna which radiates the power of PT Watts into free
space. Let the antenna gain in a given direction be GT. The density of power sent
in this direction and measured at the distance d is PTGT/^Trd2 W/m2. The receive
antenna directed at the transmit antenna and located at a specified distance from the
latter "collects" only a part of the radiated power. This received power depends on the
effective area of the antenna AH and is given by the formula
p (/1\
Prt(d) = -~ 
(3.7)
Formula (3.7) shows the dependence of the received power on the distance between the
transmit and receive antennae.
The electromagnetic field theory shows that the effective area of the receiving antenna
can be described by the expression
[m2] 
(3.8)
where GR is the receiving antenna gain, A = c/f is the wavelength of the transmitted
signal, c is the light velocity and / is the frequency of the transmitted signal. Substi-
tuting (3.8) in (3.7), we obtain the formula for the power of the received signal
(3.9)
Let us define the free-space path loss Ls by the expression
/ A \2
Ls = ( -±- ) 
(3.10)
\47rd /
which allows us to write the received power, taking into account additional loss, for
example the atmospheric loss La, by the formula
PR(d) = PTGTGRLsLa 
(3.11)

INFLUENCE OF THE MULTIPATH EFFECT ON SIGNAL PROPAGATION 
83
Let us note that the form (3.11) is particularly well suited for calculations. The calcu-
lation of the logarithm of (3.11) yields in the sum of the transmitted power, consecutive
gains and losses expressed in the decibel scale. Thus, from (3.11) we get
The gain of the receiving antenna GR and its effective area depend on the geometrical
properties of the antenna and on the received wavelength. For example, the effective
area of a parabolic antenna of diameter s is described by the expression
o
7T *>
AR = —a 
(3.13)
where 7rs2/4 is the real antenna area and a is the illumination efficiency factor con-
tained in the range between 0.5 and 0.6. Comparing formulae (3.8) and (3.13) we obtain
the expression describing the parabolic antenna gain of diameter s
As we know from the digital communication systems theory, the principal criterion
of the communication system performance is the error rate. In case of transmission
over the channel introducing the additive Gaussian noise, the error rate depends on the
signal-to-noise ratio and on the type of the applied receiver. Usually, the error rate
(equivalently, the error probability) is given as a function of Eb/N0 - the signal energy
per bit over the power spectral density of a white Gaussian noise. The additive white
Gaussian noise is the model of the thermal noise observed at the receiver input because
the thermal noise power density spectrum is flat in a very wide frequency range. Let us
express the ratio Eb/N0 in terms of the received power PR and single bit duration Tb
( ' 
}
N0 
N0 
RN0
We can conclude from formula (3.15) that at the selected bit rate R and for the
existing noise power density N0, in order to achieve the Eb/N0 required by the demanded
bit error rate, we have to ensure the appropriate level of the received power PR resulting
from the formula
7T = *(f) 
(3.16)
NQ 
V^O/ 
required
On the other hand, from (3.16) we are able to determine the maximum transmission
bit rate if the remaining transmission system parameters have been set.
3.3 
INFLUENCE OF THE MULTIPATH EFFECT ON SIGNAL PROPAGATION
Let us come back to the signal propagation. The power received at distance d from
the transmit antenna can be expressed with respect to the power measured at a certain

84 
CHARACTERIZATION OF THE MOBILE COMMUNICATION CHANNEL
standard distance d0, i.e. the reference power PR(d0). Thus, on the basis of formula
(3.9) the power received at the distance d can be expressed as
/ j \ 2
PR(d) = P(dQ) I -^ ) 
d > do 
(3.17)
\d J
Prom (3.17) we see that the received power of the signal propagating in free space is
inversely proportional to the square of the distance from the transmit antenna. The
reference distance d0 has to be appropriately large in order to consider the receiver
power at distance d in the antenna far-field determined by the so-called Fraunhofer
distance df given by the expression
2/2
df = — 
(3.18)
where L is the maximum physical linear size of the antenna and A is the wavelength.
In practice, in the frequency range of 1 to 2 GHz the reference distance do is assumed
to be 1 m for antennae used in the indoor environment (for example in the wireless
telephony systems) or to be 100 m or 1 km in the outdoor environment [11].
Consider now the transmission of a sinusoidal signal of amplitude AT and frequency
/. Assume that only the direct wave reaches the receiver placed at distance d from the
transmitter. The received sinusoidal signal can be described by the expression
Re(A exp(j27rf(t - r)) = Re(Aexp(jipR)exp(j2Trft)) 
(3.19)
where A = A(d) is the amplitude of the received signal and its phase shift is determined
by formula (pR = — 2?r/T = — 2?r/d/c (c is the light velocity). Because in free space the
power of received signals decreases with the square of the distance from the transmit
antenna, its amplitude decreases linearly with the distance, expressed by the formula
which is
/j \
(3.20)
In mobile communication systems the transmitted signal reaches the receiver after
travelling by many paths. The signal propagating along each path is the subject of
subsequent reflections and diffractions. At each reflection a part of the signal energy is
absorbed by the reflecting surface. Let the j-th reflection of the i-th path be charac-
terized by the reflection coefficient aij. The joint reflection coefficient for the i-th path
is
(3.21)
where Ki is the number of reflections in the i-th path. If we assume that the number
of paths along which the signal reaches the receiver is equal to L, the signal phasor can
be characterized by the expression
L
i(pR) = A0d0 > -1 expOVi) 
(3.22)

INFLUENCE OF THE MULTIPATH EFFECT ON SIGNAL PROPAGATION 
85
where ^ = -~2irfdi/c. Then the power of the signal reaching the receiver along L paths
can be expressed by the formula
PR(d) =
(3.23)
d2
Figure 3.3 Illustration of two-path effect
Let us consider a simplified model of signal propagation observed in mobile communi-
cations. Figure 3.3 presents the model of two-path propagation, which is a simplification
of the real situation. Let the transmit antenna and receive antenna be placed h1 and
h2 meters above the ground level, respectively. The distance on the ground between
both antennae is equal to d meters and is much longer than the heights of both an-
tennae. Let us assume that the signal reaches the receiver along two paths: the direct
one (line-of-sight) and one with reflection from the ground, as shown in Figure 3.3. Let
the reflection coefficient a1 = — 1, which means that the ground behaves as a lossless
reflecting surface. The power of the signal arriving at the receiver is then
= P(d0)d2 —
"1
-T- exp(jV2)
"2
(3.24)
Simple geometrical dependencies allow to derive the lengths of both paths. They are
(3.25)
Figure 3.4 presents the normalized power PR(d) with respect to P(d0) as a function
of distance d for a few carrier signal frequencies in case of two-path propagation. Let us
note that the level of the received power depends not only on the distance but also on
the signal frequency. Besides a visible tendency of the power level to decrease one can
also observe fast power level fluctuations as a function of the distance. This is in fact
an illustration of the fading phenomenon. For certain values of the distance between
antennae the signals travelling along both paths combine at the receive antenna with
the opposite phases which causes the decrease of the signal power. For some other
values of d the incoming signals add to each other constructively, which results in the

86 
CHARACTERIZATION OF THE MOBILE COMMUNICATION CHANNEL
0
TO 
-20 /- 
•;
~S 
. '••''• I 1
| 
-40 - : ' j
1 - 6 0 
! 
i
Q. 
;
5 - 8 0
ms. -
100
-120
0 
100 200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
900
Distance [m]
Figure 3.4 Relative power level versus distance [m] (h1 = 50 m, h2 = 3 m, solid line - fc = 100
MHz, dashed line - fc = 500 MHz, dashed line with dots - fc = 1 GHz)
increase of the signal level. Of course there are many intermediate cases as well. The
model of a two-path channel is a simplification of the reality; however, it shows the
essence of the multipath influence on the signal reception.
Let us consider the approximate power variability as a function of the distance, which
characterizes the trend of power decrease. If we assume that d is much longer than
both antenna heights h1 and h2, the difference between distances d1 and d2 becomes
insignificant. In that case, d1 and d2 in (3.24) can be replaced by the distance d and
written in front of the absolute value. The phase difference between two signals arriving
along both paths is
27T/Ad 
27T A ,
A</> = — - - = —Ad 
(3.26)
C 
A
At the above mentioned assumptions the distances d1 and d2 given by (3.25) can be
simplified to the formulae
j ~ A - (^i ~ 
fyz) 
/- or.
- - 
^ '
These approximations result from the Taylor expansion of the square root function
and from retaining the term of the first degree. We can conclude from (3.27) that the
difference in distances is Ad = d1 — d2 = 2h1h2/d, so the phase difference between both
path signals is
(3.28)
Finally, at the above assumptions the received power can be expressed by the formula
/ . \ 2
PR(d) w P(do) ( -y } |1 - exp(jA<p)|2 
(3.29)

INFLUENCE OF THE MULTIPATH EFFECT ON SIGNAL PROPAGATION 
87
which for small angles A<£>, knowing that |1 — exp(j'A^)| « |1 — (1 — jA</?)| w |A(/?|, can
be simplified to the form
Formula (3.30) indicates that the appearance of the second path besides the direct
one has a serious impact on the received signal power level as a function of distance d
from the transmit antenna. For two-path propagation the received power is inversely
proportional to the fourth power of the distance! Thus in the logarithmic scale the power
decrease is equal to 40 dB per decade of distance, as opposed to 20 dB per decade in case
of a single path transmission in free space. Two-path propagation is only a theoretical
case, giving the insight into the influence of the multipath propagation on the properties
of the transmission channel. In reality the number of paths is much higher and depends
on the specific features of the environment. Generally, the signal power received at the
distance d from the transmit antenna is often described by the formula
(3.31)
where the value of the power 7 depends on the propagation environment and is contained
in the range between 2 and 5.5.
Received
power [dB]
Distance
Figure 3.5 Typical path loss (dB) as a function of a distance from the transmit antenna
Figure 3.5 presents a typical plot of the power decrease against the distance between
the transmitter and receiver. Similar to Figure 3.4, we notice the decreasing tendency
(although not always monotonic), denoted by a bold dashed line, and fast power level
changes around the mean, denoted by a thin continuous line. Variability of the mean
power is called slow fading whereas fast changes around the mean value taking place at
the distance of the order of a fraction of the carrier wavelength are called fast fading.
In the next paragraph we will explain the physical reasons for fast fading and show
the channel model which takes it into account. In the subsequent paragraph we will
survey the methods of modeling the power loss.

88
CHARACTERIZATION OF THE MOBILE COMMUNICATION CHANNEL
3.4 TRANSMISSION CHANNEL IN MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Consider a cellular telephony system as an example of a mobile communication system.
The area covered by the system is divided into smaller areas with base stations in their
centers (see Chapter 5). Communication with mobile stations is performed through
base stations. Typically, base station antennae are omnidirectional or emit the signals
into three sectors of the angle width of 120 degrees each. Mobile stations, due to
their movement and continuous change of location with respect to the base station,
have omnidirectional antennae. These facts imply the properties of the transmission
channel. Because the power is emitted in all directions (or at least within a wide angle),
the signal, prior to reaching the receiver, is the subject of reflections, diffractions and
dispersion caused by several obstacles. The actual environment has a crucial meaning
for these propagation phenomena. Figure 3.6 presents typical signal propagation from
the base station to the mobile station.
Figure 3.6 Example of signal propagation in the mobile communication system
Let us notice that the signal arrives at the receiver along a few distinguishable paths.
In the direct vicinity of the mobile station each signal component is additionally dis-
persed due to terrain obstacles which slightly differentiate its delays and phase shifts.
Very often, in particular in hilly and urban areas there is no direct visibility of the base
and mobile station antennae and the signal arrives at the receiver exclusively in the
form of the reflected and dispersed components. Although the channel model shown in
Figure 3.6 is very simple, it reveals the basic phenomena occurring in a short time scale
during digital signal transmission at the rate ranging from a few tens to a few hundred
kbps in the frequency range between a few hundred MHz and 2 GHz.

TRANSMISSION CHANNEL IN MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 
89
Let us denote the signal emitted by the base station as s(t). Its analytic2 form is
given by the expression
s(t) = u(t) exp(j27rfct) 
(3.32)
where u(t) is the complex baseband equivalent signal. For example, in the GSM system
the carrier frequency is around 900 MHz. Let us consider a mobile station installed
in the vehicle moving at a speed of 250 kmph. Due to fast speed the Doppler effect
is becoming significant. The signal components arriving along different paths at the
receiver undergo different frequency shifts, which depend on the value of the carrier
frequency, the vehicle velocity v and the angle between the direction of arrival of the
signal component and the direction of the vehicle movement. In general, the Doppler
frequency fD depends on the above mentioned factors according to the formula
/D = /c-cos<£ 
(3.33)
c
where c is the light velocity. For the channel model shown in Figure 3.6 we can write
the following formula describing the received signal in the analytic form
M 
M 
N
Let Tki be the delay after which the signal component rki(t) arrives at the mobile
station. Let us note that for the given path index k the components rki(t) travel along
almost the same path and undergo additional dispersion and reflections around the
mobile station, so their delays rki (i = 1, . . . , N) are similar. Let Tk be the mean delay
of the signals originating from the same k-th path. Then the single component rk(t)
can be expressed in the form
TV
k&(t ~ 7fc)e''2'r(/c+/Dfci)(*-T") * 
(3.35)
N
where aki is the attenuation introduced by the path denoted by indices k and i. Let
us note that the simplification made in formula (3.35) is justified because the phase
rotation caused by the factor exp(j2irfDkiTki) is negligible. For the Doppler frequency
equal to 200 Hz and the maximum value of the relative delay equal to 20 /us, the angle
27T f D max Tki is not larger than 1.6 degrees. In general, the signal received by the mobile
station can be described by the expression
r(t) =
u(t - Tk)ck(t)
.k=1
2Compare formula (1.25) from Chapter 1. The analytic form of the signal s(t) is denoted by s(t).

90 
CHARACTERIZATION OF THE MOBILE COMMUNICATION CHANNEL
where
N
= V akie-J^f-^^fDkit 
(3.37)
Equation (3.36) indicates that the baseband equivalent channel model can be considered
as a tapped delay line with time-varying tap coefficients C k(t), (k = 1, . . . , M). Without
loss of generality we can assume that T1 < T2 < . . . < TM•
U(t)* 
T! 
> T2-T, 
» TM-TM.,.
T 
T 
T
Ci(t) •• X 
C2(t) * X
Figure 3.7 Short-term mobile communication channel model
At the given assumptions the channel model can be presented as in Figure 3.7. As
we see, if the input and output signals are u(t) and v(t), respectively, then the channel
impulse response can be described by the formula
M
h(t,T)=Y,Ck(t)6(r-Tk) 
(3.38)
k=i
The variable t denotes the actual time whereas T describes the short time run of the
impulse response if the excitation pulse has appeared at the channel input at the moment
t. Let us stress that such a model is adequate in short time intervals only. In a short
time span the delays T1, T2, . . . , TM do not change visibly. As an example confirming
this observation let us consider the channel in the GSM system if the mobile station
moves at maximum speed. As we will learn in Chapter 7, the GSM system transmission
is organized in bursts. Each burst consists of 148 bits lasting for 3.69 /zs each. At the
mobile station speed of 250 km/h, during reception of a single burst the mobile changes
its location by about 3.8 cm, so its place relative to the terrain topography practically
does not change.
Let us concentrate on time variability of coefficients ck(t). Inspecting (3.37) we
see that these coefficients depend on parameters o^ki, fDki and Tki, which cannot be
directly measured. However, due to the mobile station movement they depend on the
time variable terrain topology. For this reason these parameters are treated as random
variables. At the assumption that from the point of view of a mobile station the location
of dispersive and reflecting obstacles can be considered as random, the above mentioned
random variables can be treated as statistically independent. Then for sufficiently large

TRANSMISSION CHANNEL IN MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 
91
N, taking advantage of the central limit theorem,3 we can consider the real ck (t) and
imaginary cI
k(t) parts of the coefficient Ck(t) as random variables with approximately
Gaussian probability distribution with the variance equal to oj,2/2. This variance can
be calculated from the formula
fc&l 
(3.39)
I 
Klj 
>
Because c k(t) and ck(t) (k = 1, 2, . . . , M) are approximately Gaussian, they have a
zero mean. Furthermore, assuming that for different paths the variables aki, fDki and
Tki are statistically independent, then c R ( t ) and c k(t) are mutually uncorrelated. For
a large number of dispersion components we can assume that the phase shifts 27tfcTki
resulting from the delays Tki are uniformly distributed in the (0, 2?r) interval. Thus we
can easily find that at all above assumptions c k(t) and ck(t) (k = 1, 2, . . . , M) are the
wide sense stationary processes. Because the main components (k = 1, 2, . . . , M) are
also uncorrelated, such a channel model is usually called the Wide-Sense Stationary with
Uncorrelated Scattering (WSSUS) model. Let us stress once more that these properties
are fulfilled only in a short time interval.
Let us note that because c k(t) and ck(t) are independent Gaussian processes, the
envelope of the process Ck(t) is Rayleigh distributed, whereas the phase is uniformly
distributed in the (0, 2-Tr) interval.
In order to find a better channel characteristics, let us determine the properties of
the process C k(t) more precisely. We conclude from formula (3.37) that Ck(t) is the sum
of exponential signals characterized by Doppler frequencies fDki. These frequencies
depend on the angle (pki between the vector of the mobile station movement and the
direction of the signal arrival and are given by the formula
v
/D^ki) — /Dki = /£> max COS V?fc,; , / £) max = /e ~ 
(3.40)
C
As already mentioned, ak is the mean power of the process C k(t). If the number N
of the dispersed components arising from the k-th path tends to infinity, then the
power fraction received in the angle interval [yk?fc, (</?/,- + d(pk)] approaches the continuous
distribution p(pk). Then the power received in the given angle interval originating
from the k-th component is a^p^^^k- Clearly, the change of the angle is equivalent
to the change of the Doppler frequency according to formula (3.40). Knowing that
fD(^k) = f D(^fk), 
we are able to write the following equation which involves the
power density, the Doppler frequency and the angle y>k [2]
(3.41)
It results directly from (3.40) that
(3.42)
3 The central limit theorem states that the probability distribution of a random variable which is the
sum of random variables approches the Gaussian distribution as the number of components tends to
infinity, regardless of the probability distributions of the summed components.

92 
CHARACTERIZATION 
OF THE MOBILE COMMUNICATION 
CHANNEL
In turn, from the Pythagoras theorem we can write
ID max (sin v?fc | = ^/J max - /J (#k ) 
(3.43)
Putting (3.43) into (3.42) and using the latter in (3.41), we receive the power spectral
density as the function of the Doppler frequency and the angle </?k
for
(3.44)
0 
otherwise
G(fD) is also called the Doppler power density spectrum. As we see, the spectrum
depends on the distribution p(<pk) which in turn is determined by the terrain topography.
If we assume the idealized case in which the signal is received at the same power from
all directions, then p((fk) — l/2?r for </?&k belonging to the interval [0, 2yr] and the power
density of signal Ck(t) is described by the Jakes formula:
for |fD|<fD 
max
(3.45)
otherwise
fDmax 
0 
fDmax
Figure 3.8 Doppler power density spectrum for the process Ck(t) according to Jakes formula
Figure 3.8 presents the Doppler power density spectrum described by formula (3.45).
This spectrum shows an idealized case, however, it is useful in mobile channel modeling
and can be the basis for comparison of several systems and their robustness against the
channel impairments. In case of the occurrence of direct path, the spectrum in Figure
3.8 has to be supplemented with the spectral line at the appropriate Doppler frequency.
Figure 3.9 presents the measured Doppler power density spectra [3]. As we see. the
results differ from the ideal case, however, their characteristics are still close to that
shown in Figure 3.8.
The dependencies shown above do not exhaust the methods of description of mobile
transmission channels. For WSSUS channels the scatter function is often presented in

TRANSMISSION CHANNEL IN MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 
93
Power spectral density [dB]
-5
-10
-15
-20
-25
-30
-
5
0
5
Doppler frequency [Hz]
Power spectral density [dB]
-5
-10
-15
-20
-25
-30
- 5 0 
5 
1 0 
1 5
Doppler frequency [Hz]
Figure 3.9 Measured Doppler power density spectra: (a) for the channel with a direct path, (b)
for the channel without a direct path with a long channel impulse response [3]
the form of a three-dimensional plot. It shows the power density in function of the
delay r and the Doppler frequency fD.
Intensive research on the GSM system performed in the eighties resulted, among
others, in the unification of standard channel models which characterize the signal
propagation in the 900 MHz bandwidth. ETSI GSM 05.05 standard [5] presents the ta-
bles of channel model power delay profiles recommended for laboratory experiments and
simulation of transmission channels, characteristic for a few basic types of environment.
Each line shown in Figure 3.10 characterizes the mean power of a discrete component
which undergoes dispersion, reflections and the Doppler effect. The standard sets up
the Doppler power density spectra conforming to formula (3.45) or the same spectra
supplemented by a discrete line in the case of the direct path existence. The plots shown
in Figure 3.10 present the standardized values of the variances ak (k = 1, . . . , M) of
each discrete component, expressed in dB scale, i.e. the power delay profiles described
by the expression
M
JW = £>^(r - Tfe) 
(3.46)
k=1
We see from Figure 3.10 that the best transmission channel is the one characteristic
for the rural area. Besides the main path the echoes concentrate in a very short time
interval, which for the GSM system spans no more than a single modulation period

94 
CHARACTERIZATION OF THE MOBILE COMMUNICATION CHANNEL
¥ '2
2. -4
c ? •••
Delay M
Delay [us]
Figure 3.10 Power delay profiles standardized by ETSI GSM 05.05: (a) rural area, (b) hilly
terrain, (c) urban area, (d) E-test
(3.69 p,s). The model for the urban area imitates the multipath propagation caused
by reflections from buildings. The channel in the hilly terrain is even worse for digital
transmission. The echoes arrive at the receiver after a relatively long delay due to
reflections from the obstacles located far away from the receiver. In consequence, the
channel impulse response is long. Finally, the E-test model, although unrealistic, is a
very difficult test channel model intended for new constructions of mobile stations.
Multipath propagation and dispersion are not the only distortions occurring in mo-
bile communication channels. The other impairments are impulse noise, interference
from other users (in case of cellular systems known as intra- or intercell interference)
and thermal noise. The users operating in the same cell but using different frequency
channels distort the reception of other users' signals due to imperfectly filtered side-
lobes of their own signals (interchannel interference). 
Interference arising from the
signal generated in the same frequency channel but in a different cell is another source
of distortion. The thermal noise is the result of the self-noise of the electronic compo-
nents used in the receiver and of the noise introduced in subsequent blocks of the radio
link.
The basic reason of impulse noise is human activity. Car ignition systems and elec-
trical motors are a particularly frequent source of this kind of distortions. Other causes
of impulse noise are atmospheric phenomena.
Nonlinearity is another distortion encountered in radio systems. Its basic cause is
the tight link power budget in mobile stations and the necessity of using a high power
amplifier operating close to saturation. The influence of nonlinearity is minimized
thanks to the application of constant envelope digital modulations such as FSK and
GMSK. In future systems which will be characterized by higher throughput and higher

MODELING THE PROPAGATION LOSS
95
spectral efficiency, multilevel QAM modulations or OFDM transmision will be applied.
The influence of the amplifier nonlinearity will be minimized by the application of an
amplifier predistorter or specially designed waveforms.
3.5 
MODELING THE PROPAGATION LOSS
The channel model described in the previous section explains the origin of multipath
propagation and time variability of the channel characteristics caused by the movement
of the mobile station and by signal dispersion in its direct vicinity. The model shown
in Figure 3.5 is associated with the fast power level changes around the mean value.
As we already know, even small changes in the location of the mobile station can be
the reason of substantial changes in the received signal level. From the point of view
of mobile system design the following factor has to be taken into account as well. This
factor is the mean power level as a function of the distance from the base station.
Usually the measurements are averaged in the distance interval of 5A to 40A, where A
is the carrier wavelength [11]. In the frequency range between 1 and 2 GHz the local
mean power is averaged over the distance of 1 to 10 meters. The measurement results
are the function of the distance from the transmit station (compare (3.31)) and actual
configuration of the main obstacles and distorting and reflecting elements along the
paths to the receiver but not in close vicinity of the receiver. This type of information
is necessary in the design of cellular systems. The design of cellular systems will be
discussed in Chapter 5.
Let us come back to the analysis of formula (3.31). It turns out that this formula
shows an agreement with the measurements if they are averaged over all possible posi-
tions of the receive antenna at distance d from the transmit antenna. After calculation
of the logarithms of both sides in (3.32) we obtain the expression
(3.47)
We conclude that the mean power decreases linearly with distance d in the decibel
scale. The rate of decrease is 107 dB per decade. As already mentioned, the parameter
7 depends on the propagation environment. Table 3.1 [11] presents typical values of
the path loss exponent 7 for several types of environment.
Table 3.1 Values of 7 for several environment types
Type of environment
Free space
Urban area cellular radio
Shadowed urban cellular radio
In building line-of-sight
Obstructed in building
Obstructed in factories
Path loss exponent 7
2
2.7 to 3.5
3 to 5
1.6 to 1.8
4 to 6
2 to 3

96 
CHARACTERIZATION OF THE MOBILE COMMUNICATION CHANNEL
Formula (3.47) shows how the mean received power depends on the distance from
the transmit antenna. It has been observed that the power levels measured in two
different locations equally distant from the transmit antenna can be quite different
due to different layout of the reflecting, attenuating and diffracting obstacles. This
phenomenon is called shadowing. The measurements indicate that the level of the
received power is random. Moreover, it has been found that the power level in dB-scale
is a Gaussian random variable, i.e.
(P(d))dB = (P(d0)dB - 107 
+ X(0, a) 
(3.48)
\ao/
where X(0, cr) is a Gaussian random variable with zero mean and variance a2. Thus.
in the linear scale, the received power has a log-normal distribution. In general, the
log-normal distribution of the random variable X is given by the formula
xax
— (log x — log x)
21
(3.49)
Knowing the distribution in the dB-scale, in particular knowing the variance a2, it is
possible to calculate the probability of the event that the received signal level at the
given location point exceeds a selected threshold. Such calculations can be useful in the
evaluation of the base station coverage area.
Radio propagation in a terrain featuring several obstacles such as buildings, terrain
irregularities and trees and bushes is such a complicated process that the system de-
signers often perform practical electromagnetic field measurements in specified terrain
locations in order to determine the real base station coverage. Such measurements are
very expensive, so on the basis of the measurement campaigns performed in different
representative environments, several propagation models have been established which
estimate the mean power loss in function of distance d from the base station, the type
of environment and transmit and receive antenna heights. In the following sections we
will present the most representative examples of the experimental propagation models.
3.5.1 
The Lee model
W.C.Y. Lee [12] proposed a very simple signal propagation model originating from
a series of measurements made in the USA at the carrier frequency fc= 900 MHz.
According to the Lee model, the mean power measured at distance d from the transmit
station is determined by the expression
d
(3-50)
or equivalently in the logarithmic scale
= (P0)dB - 7log (£) - nlog f -f ) + (F0)dB 
(3.51)
\do/ 
V/o/

MODELING THE PROPAGATION LOSS
97
The symbol P0 is the reference median power measured at distance d0 = 1 km, whereas
F0 is the correction factor selected on the basis of a series of component factors according
to the formula
(3.52)
where the subsequent factors Fi are described by expressions
Actual BS antenna height [m]
30.5 [m]
/ Actual MS antenna height [m] \ v
\
3
H
(3.53)
(3.54)
The power v = 1 for the mobile station antenna heights lower than 3 m and v = 2 for
the heights larger than 10 m. In turn
Actual power
(3.55)
F* —
-*~ 
a.
BS antenna gain with respect to half-wave dipole
(3.56)
$ = MS antenna gain with respect to half-wave dipole
(3.57)
The parameters P0 and 7 are selected experimentally based on the performed mea-
surements. Table 3.2 presents the values of PQ and 7 for some characteristic types of
environment.
Table 3.2 Values of P0 and 7 for different environments
Environment
Free space
Open (rural area)
Suburban, small city
Philadelphia
Newark
Tokyo
P0
-41
-40
-54
-62.5
-55
-78
7 [dB/decade]
20
43.5
38.4
36.8
43.1
30.5
The mean power loss in function of frequency is modeled by the factor 
(f/f0)-n
and the choice of power n. The value of n is contained in the range between 2 and 3
for the frequencies from 30 MHz to 2 GHz and the distances between mobile and base
stations contained in the range between 2 and 30 km. The power n also depends on
the terrain topography. It is recommended to select n = 2 for suburban and rural areas

98 
CHARACTERIZATION OF THE MOBILE COMMUNICATION CHANNEL
Figure 3.11 Calculation of the effective height of the base station antenna
when operating at the frequencies below 450 MHz, and n = 3 for urban environment
and carrier frequencies over 450 MHz.
In uneven terrain the effective antenna height can be quite different from the physical
height. Figure 3.11 shows how to calculate it.
The measurements which are the basis of the Lee empirical model have been per-
formed in the system characterized by the following parameters, which appear in the
formulae for the factors Fi (i = 1, . . . , 5):
• carrier frequency: f0 = 900 MHz,
• base station antenna height: 30.48 m (100 feet),
• transmitted power: 10 W,
• base station antenna gain: 6 dB with respect to half-wave dipole,
• mobile station antenna height: 3 m,
• mobile station antenna gain: 0 dB with respect to half-wave dipole.
3.5.2 
The Okumura model
The Okumura model is also a result of intensive measurements. It was presented first
in [13]. The measurements in the frequency range between 150 and 1920 MHz were
performed in the Tokyo area. The authors proposed the following formula for the
median loss (L50)dB in function of the distance d from the transmit antenna of the base
station
(L50)dB = Ls + A(f, d) + G(hBS,eff ) + 
G(hMS) 
(3.58)
where Ls is the free space loss (compare formula (3.10)). The symbol A(f, d) denotes
the median attenuation relative to free space in an urban area over quasi-smooth terrain
with the effective base station antenna height hBS,eff = 200 m and the mobile antenna

MODELING THE PROPAGATION LOSS
99
height hMS = 3 m. G(hBS,eff) is the correction term in dB associated with the base
station antenna and depending on its effective height if the latter is different from 200 m.
G(hMS) is the correction factor in dB associated with the mobile station antenna if its
height is different from 3 m. The free space loss is calculated from (3.10) in the dB-scale.
Formula (3.58) together with Figures 3.12, 3.13 and 3.14 allow evaluation of the signal
attenuation in an urban area for the frequency range between 150 and 2000 MHz if the
distance between the base and mobile stations is contained between 1 and 100 km and
the effective base station antenna height is in the range of 30 to 1000 m.
A(f,d)
[dB]
30
20
10
200
500
1000 
2000 3000
Frequency [MHz]
Figure 3.12 Median attenuation A(f,d) relative to free space over a quasi-smooth terrain [13]
(© IEEE)
In [13] additional correction terms are proposed which take into account terrain slope,
type and irregularities.
In the literature one can find another equivalent to (3.58) version of the formula
describing the Okumura model. It has the form
A(f, d) - G(hBS,eff) - G(hMS) - GAREA
(3.59)
The parameter A(f,d) is, as previously, read from the plots in Figure 3.12, whereas the
correction terms G(hBS,eff) and G(hMS) are given by expressions
G(hBS,eff) = 20 log
10 m < hBS,eff < 1000 m
(3.60)

100
CHARACTERIZATION OF THE MOBILE COMMUNICATION CHANNEL
20 
30 40 
60 
100 
200 300400 
600 
1000
Effective base station antenna height [m]
Figure 3.13 Base station antenna height gain factor in urban area as a function of range [13] (©
IEEE)
„,, 
x 
inl
G(hMS) = 10 log
< 3 m
(3.61)
3
3 m < hMS < 10 m
(3.62)
The correction term GAREA (in dB) depends on the type of terrain and carrier frequency
and is read from the plots in Figure 3.15.
The Okumura model is very simple. It is based exclusively on the measurement
data collected in the Tokyo area. The characteristic of Japanese urban areas is slightly
different than in Europe or the USA. Nevertheless, the Okumura model is popular and
is considered one of the best models used in cellular and other land mobile systems [11].
The main drawback of the Okumura model is its slow reaction to the change of terrain
type. The Okumura model is suitable for urban and suburban environment, however,
it is not too practical for the rural area.
3.5.3 
The Hata model
The Hata model [14] has been developed as a result of proposing empirical formulae
to describe the plots created by Okumura and his collaborators. These formulae well
approximate the plots for certain carrier frequency ranges and for the quasi-smooth
terrain. Hata proposed the following empirical formulae for estimation of the signal
attenuation.

MODELING THE PROPAGATION LOSS
101
1 
2 
3
4
5
6
7
8 1 0
Mobile station antenna height hMS [m]
Figure 3.14 Mobile station antenna height gain factor in urban area as a function of frequency
and type of a city [13] (© IEEE)
For an urban area in the frequency4 range from 150 to 1500 MHz and for the effective
base station antenna heights 30 < hBS,eff < 200 m we have:
(L50)dB Urban = 69.55 + 26.16 log f – 13.83 log(hBS,eff) +
– a(hMs) + (44.9 - 6.55 log(hBS,eff)) log d
(3.63)
where the correction term depends on the height of the mobile station antenna and in
the range 1 < hMS < 10 m is calculated from the expression
a(hMS) = (1-1 log f – 0.7) hIMS – (1.56 log f – 0.8) [dB] 
(3.64)
For a large city this term is described by the equations
a(hMS) = 8.29 (log 1.54hMS)2 – 1-1 [dB] for f < 400 MHz 
(3.65)
a(h M S) = 3.2 (log 11.75hMS)2 – 4.97 [dB] for f > 400 MHz
For a suburban area the propagation loss can be estimated according to the formula
/
(urban - 2 
log
28
5.4
(3.66)
4In the Hata formulae frequency is expressed in MHz.

102 
CHARACTERIZATION OF THE MOBILE COMMUNICATION CHANNEL
100 
200 300 
500 700 1000 
2000 3000
Frequency [MHz]
Figure 3.15 Correction term GAREA in function of frequency and area type
whereas for the open area
(L50)dB = (L50)dB Urban - 4.78 (log f)2 + 18.33 log / - 40.94 
(3.67)
The propagation models presented so far allow for the estimation of the signal loss
in function of the carrier frequency, the base and mobile station antenna heights and
type of terrain. They better or worse reflect signal propagation at a large distance
from the base station, exceeding 1 km. They are mostly valid for the frequency ranges
reaching up to 1.5 GHz. However, Personal Communication Systems operate in the
1.8 to 2.0 GHz range. Two examples of such systems are DCS 1800 or PCS 1900
- two versions of the GSM system operating in Europe and the USA. respectively.
Therefore, a lot of experiments and measurements have been performed in order to
construct the propagation models for the band 1.8 to 2.0 GHz for the environments and
at assumptions characteristic for the PCS systems. Due to larger signal attenuation
in the 1.8 GHz band as compared with 900 MHz band traditionally used by cellular
systems, the basic difference between PCS and classical cellular systems is the smaller
size of the cells. The research on new propagation models was intensively conducted
within the European Union COST#231 project.5 There are at least two well-known
propagation models reported in literature and developed within COST activity. These
are the COST231-Hata model [15] and the COST231-Walfish-Ikegami model [16].
5 COST — Cooperation for Scientific and Technical Research

MODELING THE PROPAGATION LOSS 
103
3.5.4 
The COST231-Hata model
Mogensen et al. [15] proposed an extension of the Okumura and Hata model to the
frequency interval between 1.5 and 2 GHz. In this frequency range the original propa-
gation models deliver underestimated values of the signal attenuation. The COST-Hata
model is valid for the carrier frequencies between 1.5 and 2 GHz, the base station an-
tenna heights between 30 and 300 m, the mobile station antenna height between 1 and
10 m and the distance among them between 1 and 20 km. This model allows estimation
of the attenuation according to the formula
(L50)dB = 46.3 + 33.9 log f – 13.82 log (hBS,eff ) + 
(3.68)
— a ( h M S ) + (44.9 – 6.55 log (hBS,eff )) log d + C
where the constant C = 0 for medium cities and suburban areas with average tree
intensity and (7 = 3 for large city centers.
Formally, the Okumura, Hata and COST231-Hata models can be applied for the base
station antenna heights larger than 30 m; however, they can also be applied for lower
antennae under the condition that the surrounding buildings are considerably lower than
the antenna. The COST231-Hata model is not suitable for estimating the attenuation
for the base-mobile station distances less than 1 km. In the latter case the attenuation
strongly depends on the topography of the closest terrain in which propagation takes
place. This model should not be used for estimation of signal propagation along streets
with high buildings, i.e. in so-called street canyons.
3.5.5 
The COST231-Walfish-lkegami model
This model can be used in cases when the base station antenna is placed either above
or below the roof line in the urban area. In the set of empirical formulae defining the
model several factors are taken into account, such as the base and mobile station heights,
the street widths, distances between buildings, their heights and the street orientations
relative to the signal propagation. In general, the formula describing the signal loss
consists of three terms: the free-space path loss Ls, the roof-top-to-street 
diffraction
and scatter loss Lrts, and multiscreen diffraction 
loss Lms. The second term, Lrts, is
caused by diffraction of the signal waves on the building roofs. As a result, the signal
reaches the mobile station moving along the street. The third term, Lms, is caused by
multiple diffraction from the row of buildings. Finally, the median loss is determined
by the formula
(L 5 0)dB = LS + Lrts + Lms 
(3.69)
The citation of the full set of formulae describing the COST231-Walfish-Ikegami model is
beyond the scope of this book. The interested reader is advised to study [16]. We should
add that the above model is considered by the International Telecommunication Union
as a standard model for the universal third generation system IMT-2000. The model is
useful for the following ranges of parameters: 800 < fc < 2000 MHz, 4 < hBS < 50 m,
1 < hMS < 3 m, 0.02 < d < 5 km. The COST231-Walfish-Ikegami model works well for
the base station antenna heights much greater than the roof heights.

104 
CHARACTERIZATION OF THE MOBILE COMMUNICATION CHANNEL
3.5.6 
Examples of path loss estimation using selected propagation models
In summarizing the overview of selected propagation outdoor models let us consider
two examples quoted according to [17] and [18], which illustrate the application of the
Hata and Lee model for the base station signal path loss estimation.
Example 1 [17] The base station antenna installed at the height of 30 m in a metropo-
litan area radiates the signal at the carrier frequency f = 1000 MHz. This signal
measured at a distance of 10 km has been attenuated by 160 dB. Compare the measured
path loss with that calculated from the Hata model if the mobile station antenna height
is hMS = 3 m and the antenna is a half-wave dipole.
According to the Hata model we apply expression (3.63) to evaluate the signal path
loss. Therefore,
(L50)dB = 69.55 + 26.16 log 1000 - 13.82 log 30 – a(hMS) +
+ (44.9 - 6.55 log 30) log 10
Deriving a(hMS) for the given system parameters we obtain
a(hMS) = 3.2 (log (11.75 • 3))2 – 4.97 = 2.69 dB
Thus,
(L50)dB = 69.55 + 78.48 - 20.41 - 2.69 + 35.22 = 160.15 dB
and we observe a good agreement with the measured value of signal attenuation.
Example 2 [18] Using the Lee model, evaluate the received signal level measured at a
distance d = 2 km from the base station by the mobile station with the antenna height
hMS = 1.5 m and the antenna gain GR = 2 dBd. The base station radiates the signal
at the carrier frequency f = 1800 MHz at the power level PT = 1 W, using an antenna
installed at the effective height hBS,eff = 30 m with the gain GT = 7.7 dBi. The signal
propagates in a suburban area.
In order to evaluate the received signal level we apply formula (3.51). From Table
3.2 we select the parameters P0 = –54 dBm and 7 = 38.4. To calculate the correction
factor F0 from (3.52), the component factors Fi (i = 1, . . . , 5) have to be found. In order
to find their values we use formulae (3.53) to (3.57). Let us note that the antenna gains
used in F4 and F5 have to be expressed in a linear scale, so GT = 7.7 dBi is equivalent
to GT = 5.9 in the linear scale, whereas GR = 2 dBd = (2 + 2.15) dBi = 4.15 dBi so in
the linear scale GR = 2.6 (let us recall that 0 dBd = 2.15 dBi). Finally, we get
that is F0 = –7.3 dB.
Factor F2 has been calculated in (3.70) recalling that for mobile station antenna
height lower than 3 m the power v = 1. Because the carrier frequency is higher than
450 MHz, the power n in (3.50) and (3.51) is equal to n = 3. Finally, from (3.51) we
get the received power level (PR)dB = –73.8 dBm.

MODELING THE PROPAGATION LOSS 
105
3.5.7 
Estimation of the propagation loss for indoor channels
So far we have considered propagation conditions and related predictions of the signal
power loss for outdoor channels. Prediction of the propagation characteristics inside
buildings is also very important, especially for the design of wireless telephony systems
with base stations inside buildings and for wireless local area networks [23]. For an
indoor channel, the distance between transmitter and receiver is much shorter than for
an outdoor one. The reason for that is not only the geometrical parameters of a building
but also the low transmitter power and high attenuation caused by internal walls and
furniture. These phenomena have an impact on the channel impulse response length, so
channels are characterized by much lower delay spread than the delay spread observed
in typical outdoor channels. Propagation inside buildings which have fewer metal inside
walls and do not have too many hard partitions (heavy walls) usually results in a small
root-mean square (rms) delay spread (usually 30 to 60 ns). Larger buildings with many
metal elements inside and large free space can have an rms delay spread of the order
of 300 ns. Such a long channel impulse response determines the upper limit for the
applied data rate or implies the application of receiver structures capable of dealing
with specific channel properties. Closely related to the channel impulse response is
the power delay profile. Intensive measurements performed at Lund University for the
1800 MHz band have shown that although a particular shape of the power delay profile
depends on the actual objects in the environment, the average power delay profile for
a cluttered environment shows strong regularities. It is well approximated by either
a power function which means that the decrease is logarithmic in the dB scale, or an
exponent function (the decrease is linear in the dB scale) [25]. In open area the power
delay profile is well approximated by the power function, which is caused by a strong
influence of the direct path. Figure 3.16 shows typical averaged power delay profiles
in line-of-sight (LOS), non-line-of-sight (NLOS) and obstructed-line-of-sight6 (OLOS)
transmission.
The indoor channel can be time-varying. The reasons for time variations are the
changes in the mobile terminal location, the change of the antenna orientation if the
antenna is characterized by a non-isotropic radiation pattern, and the movement of
scattering objects such as persons or office furniture and equipment [23].
Analysis of large measurement data has shown that the path loss for an indoor
channel can be estimated by the following formula
L(d) = L(d 0) + 10n log 
+ Xa 
(3.71)
\doj
where Xa is a Gaussian random variable in the dB scale with the variance a2. The for-
mula is analogous to the log-normal shadowing model. For particular carrier frequencies
which are characteristic of wireless telephone or PCS systems, the parameters n and a
summarized in Table 3.3 have been measured for different types of walls and environ-
ments in different buildings [22]. The model of the indoor propagation loss described
6 Obstructed-line-of-sight means that the direct path between the transmitter and the receiver is ob-
structed by a single obstacle.

106 
CHARACTERIZATION OF THE MOBILE COMMUNICATION CHANNEL
.g-lX— 
........ 
........... 
LOS
I 
, 
OLOS
-10- 
------- 
------------- 
NLOS
-20 f
-25
-30
-35
-40
-45
0 
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
300 
350 
400 
450
Excess delay (ns)
Figure 3.16 Average power delay profiles in LOS, NLOS and OLOS conditions measured in
Lund (Source: Digital Mobile Radio Towards Future Generation Systems, COST Action 231,
Final Report, EUR 18957, 1999)
by (3.71) is called a one-slope model (ISM) because it assumes a linear dependence
between the path loss expressed in dB and the logarithmic distance.
The multi-wall model [24] takes into account not only the free space loss but also
the losses caused by signal penetration through walls and floors along the direct path
between the transmitter and the receiver. It has been found that the total floor loss is
a non-linear function of the number of penetrated floors [22]. Therefore, an empirical
factor 6 is introduced [24] and the path loss is described by the expression
,iLw,i + k) f 
Lf 
(3.72)
i=l
where Ls is the free space loss, Lc is the constant loss, kw,i denotes the number of
penetrated walls of type i, kf — the number of penetrated floors, Lw,i — the loss in a
wall of type i, Lf — the loss between adjacent floors, / - the number of wall types, usually
I = 2 (for light and heavy walls). The values estimated on the basis of measurements
of the above variables can be found in [23] .
The third, very simple propagation model is called a linear attenuation model [23].
It is based on the assumption that the access path loss (in dB) is linearly dependent on
the distance (in meters)
L(d) = LFS(d) + ad 
(3.73)
where the constant a in (3.73) is the attenuation coefficient.
Wireless LANs are implemented in bands over 1800 MHz. The bands around 2.5 GHz,
5 GHz, 60 GHz and recently 17 GHz are used for that purpose. Finding the channel

INFLUENCE OF THE CHANNEL ON THE TRANSMITTED NARROWBAND AND WIDEBAND SIGNALS 
107
Table 3.3 Path loss exponent and standard deviation for different types of buildings
Building
Retail stores
Grocery store
Office, hard partition
Office, soft partition
Office, soft partition
Factory LOSa
Textile/chemical
Textile/chemical
Paper/cereals
Metalworking
Suburban home
Indoor to street
Factory OBSb
Textile / chemical
Metalworking
Frequency [MHz]
914
914
1500
900
1900
1300
4000
1300
1300
900
4000
1300
n
2.2
1.8
3.0
2.4
2.6
2.0
2.1
1.8
1.6
3.0
2.1
3.3
a [dB]
8.7
5.2
7.0
9.6
14.1
3.0
7.0
6.0
5.8
7.0
9.7
6.8
aLOS — Line-of-sight. 6OBS — obstructed sight.
characteristics is usually one of the first activities of the system design in a new band.
Intensive measurements are usually conducted (see [26] as the example) or the ray-
tracing method is used to simulate signal propagation in a specific indoor environment
[27]. The results of these activities are statistical properties of the particular indoor
channel which allow construction of the channel models useful in the system simulation
as well as in the transmitter and receiver design.
Propagation models are very wide and important from the practical point of view.
There are several other propagation models used in cellular radio which have not been
described in this chapter, among others the Eglie, Ibrahim and Parsons, and Longley-
Rice models.The interested reader is advised to study the books [11], [16], [19] and
[20].
3.6 
INFLUENCE OF THE CHANNEL ON THE TRANSMITTED
NARROWBAND AND WIDEBAND SIGNALS
So far we have considered physical properties of mobile communication channels only.
We have shown how the multipath propagation influences the channel impulse response.
In a real system the radio channel is only a single block in the transmission chain. We
also have to take into account not only the properties of the channel but the properties
of the transmit and receive filters and the applied signaling rate, as well. Depending on
the transmitted signal bandwidth the channel can influence the signal in different ways.

108 
CHARACTERIZATION OF THE MOBILE COMMUNICATION CHANNEL
In order to clarify this observation let us consider digital transmission at three differ-
ent data rates through the multipath channel. Let the first data rate be 600 b/s, the
second one - 270 kb/s and the third one - 1.2288 Mb/s. The first data rate is typical
for paging systems (see Chapter 4), the second one - for the GSM system (Chapters 7
- 9) whereas the third one is characteristic for the pseudorandom chip data signaling
in the CDMA system IS-95 (Chapter 12). For simplicity, let us consider a two-path
channel model. Besides the desired signal, a single echo signal reaches the receiver. The
latter is delayed relative to the former by TO and is phase shifted by p radians. This
angle can also be expressed as p = 27rf0T0 using the so-called notch frequency f0 and
the delay T0. Therefore, the channel transfer function is determined by the formula
H(f) = a (1 - bejpe-j2irfT0) = a (l 
– 
be-j27r(f–f0)T0) 
(3.74)
The factor a denotes the attenuation of the received signal, whereas 6 describes the
attenuation of the echo path relative to the direct path. Figure 3.17 presents the magni-
tude characteristics | H ( f ) | of the channel for TO = 10 /AS for different signal bandwidths
displayed around 900 MHz. One can easily show that the maxima of attenuation occur
periodically along the frequency axis with the period of 1/T0 = 100 kHz and their
location depends on the frequency f0. The depth of the notches is strictly determined
by the values of b.
Let us analyze the influence of the selective fading channel on the three above men-
tioned types of signals. Let us note that for the first signal within the bandwidth of 600
Hz the channel characteristics are practically constant. If the values of b change, then
the signal level varies approximately equally in the whole signal bandwidth. For this
narrowband signal we observe that the channel is flat fading. The delay between both
paths (TO = 10/zs) is less than 1 percent of the modulation Td = 1/600 s = 1.66 ms. The
two-path propagation practically does not distort the data pulses; however, it causes the
attenuation which is different from that which would exist if the channel were character-
ized by a single path propagation. The signals arriving along each path are practically
unresolvable.
If the data transmission using binary signaling at the rate 270 kb/s is considered,
then the signal bandwidth is much wider and in its range a few channel notches can be
found. Thus, within the signal bandwidth some frequencies are substantially attenuated
while others are not. Such phenomenon is called selective fading. For the binary
transmission at the data rate 270 kb/s the modulation period is equal to 3.7 us so it
is a few times shorter than the channel second path delay TO = 10 us. As a result, the
channel introduces intersymbol interference which appears as time overlapping of the
channel responses to subsequently transmitted data pulses. This phenomenon has to
be compensated using complicated structures and receive algorithms. An example of
such an algorithm applied in the GSM system can be found in Chapter 8.
Finally, the data transmission at the chip rate of 1.2288 Mb/s is wideband. In the
signal bandwidth many maxima and minima of the channel characteristics can be found.
In turn, analyzing the signal in the time domain, the second path delay of 10 us is the
reason for overlapping of the direct path signal by the echo signal delayed by 13 bit
periods. Using specially selected binary sequences it is possible to extract from the

INFLUENCE OF THE CHANNEL ON THE TRANSMITTED NARROWBAND AND WIDEBAND SIGNALS 
109
Figure 3,17 Two-path channel amplitude characteristics (b = 0.99 and b = 0.4, T0 = 10 f0,
f0 = 10 kHz) and the signal spectra of bandwidth: (a) 600 Hz, (b) 300 kHz, (c) 1.3 MHz
received signal the signals arriving along each path separately. In consequence, these
signals can be properly combined in order to maximize the energy of the resulting signal.
The examples shown above are clearly a simplification of real signal propagation
through multipath channels. The existence of more than two paths complicates the
shape of the channel transfer function; however, it does not change the essence of the
multipath channel behavior. Concluding, the radio channel is the reason for flat or
selective fading which is the result not only of the channel physical features but also of
the transmitted signal bandwidth.

110 
CHARACTERIZATION OF THE MOBILE COMMUNICATION CHANNEL
3.7 DIVERSITY RECEPTION
Fading is one of the most severe distortions introduced by radio channels. Let us recall
that fading can be categorized not only in the frequency domain (flat and selective
fading) but also in the time domain (slow and fast fading). There are several methods
to minimize the influence of fading on the system performance. Generally, if it is possible
to receive a few replicas of the transmitted signal over different channels, then there is
a high probability that transmission over at least one of them will result in good signal
quality at the receiver. Appropriate combining of the signals received over different
channels constitutes diversity reception. There are two categories of diversity, explicit
and implicit diversity [28]. The first category is called the explicit technique. Redundant
signal transmission is applied in the diversity technique belonging to the first category.
An example of this is the transmission of the same signal on two appropriately separated
carrier frequencies, which enables the receiver to detect separate signals and to combine
them. In the second category the signal is transmitted only once but thanks to inherent
features of the propagation medium and to applying special reception techniques it is
possible to create multiple channels. The example of exploiting the implicit diversity
is a RAKE receiver which extracts the signals arriving along each path of a multipath
channel and combines them in an optimal way (see Chapter 11).
There are a few types of diversity reception used in several radio communication
systems. They are the following [28]:
• space diversity,
• frequency diversity,
• time diversity,
• path diversity,
• polarization diversity.
In mobile communications diversity can be applied both in a transmitter and receiver.
Therefore the terms transmitter diversity and receiver diversity are also introduced.
*• 
>• Receiver
In
^Transmitter 
t Combiner
•> Receiver
Figure 3.18 Space diversity scheme
Space diversity (Figure 3.18) relies on appropriate combining of the signals received
by at least two antennae which are separated in space. The distance between antennae

DIVERSITY RECEPTION 
111
should be large enough to ensure the fadings occurring in the two channels between the
transmitter and respective receivers to be mutually uncorrelated. Combining the diver-
sity branch signals should be made on the vector basis. Several combining arrangements
are possible from the implementation point of view. Figure 3.19 shows three solutions.
The simplest one is selection combining. The control unit checks the carrier-to-noise ra-
tio in each diversity branch and connects that branch to the output which currently has
the highest value of C/N. In maximal ratio combiner the branch signals are cophased
and weighted proportionally to their level. Thus, the maximum signal-to-noise ratio is
received at the output of the combiner. However, the branch signal amplitudes have to
be estimated. If it is difficult to perform, the branch signals can be summed with equal
gain after having been cophased only. This method is called equal gain combining.
I 
* 
Control 
*1 Weights 
> 
Phase
•f 
> 
unit 
* and phase 
: 
^ estimation
* 
^ 
estimation
:
 
0 ... 
* Weights
i 
Selection 
*
y 
Phase
Out 
^ + ^
(a) 
(b)
Figure 3.19 Several types of combining: (a) selection combining, (b) maximum ratio combining.
(c) equal gain combining
Space diversity leads to substantial performance improvements in mobile communi-
cation systems. The price paid for that is the increased hardware complexity — at least
part of the receiver branch has to be duplicated. Therefore, space diversity is applied
mostly in base stations. Evaluation of the influence of space diversity on the GSM
receiver performance can be found in [10].
Frequency diversity relies on transmitting the same signal on at least two sufficiently
separated carrier frequencies. The frequency separation should be large enough for the
fading processes on both frequencies to be uncorrelated. This diversity scheme requires
additional spectral and hardware resources.
Time diversity is a method which can be used on channels with relatively fast fading.
If the same signal is sent several times in the sufficiently separated time intervals, the
fades in each interval are uncorrelated and repeated signals can be properly combined
at the receiver, provided that not all of them are faded. Sending the same symbols
a few times can be considered as a simple repetition code. As we know, much better
codes exist. In general, an improved version of time diversity, as compared with a simple
repetition, relies on error correction coding with sufficiently deep interleaving. However,
the necessary condition of successful operation of the receiver with time diversity is that
the interleaving spans a longer time interval than the fade duration. If fading were slow,
the interleaver would have to be very large and it would introduce an unacceptably
long transmission delay. The ARQ techniques can be also considered as a kind of time

112 
CHARACTERIZATION OF THE MOBILE COMMUNICATION CHANNEL
Out
*• Receiver 
».
In
> Transmitter 
D 
D
Figure 3.20 Transmitter diversity
diversity. In the ARQ techniques, diversity reception is performed in the form of the
block repetition only if it is required by the receiver sending the NAK message. We
can classify the reception of signals corrupted by intersymbol interference, in which the
receiver decides upon a specific data symbol on the basis of signal samples collected
during appropriately long time interval, as time diversity as well.
Path diversity is realized in spread spectrum systems if the receiver is able to resolve
the received signal components arriving at it along different channel paths. It is possi-
ble if the relative delays among paths are not shorter than a single chip period of the
spreading sequence and if the spreading sequence is white. The path signals extracted
through the correlation with the properly synchronized spreading sequence are subse-
quently cophased, weighted and summed. The last operation is practically a maximum
gain combining. Such a receiver is called RAKE and will be the subject of our analysis
in Chapter 11.
Polarization diversity is usually applied in line-of-sight radio systems as the explicit
technique, namely, the same signal is transmitted and received in two orthogonal polar-
izations. Such an arrangement is not very useful in mobile communications. Instead,
implicit polarization diversity can be applied in base stations. An individual user can
hold the handheld terminal at practically any orientation. Thus, the signal from the
mobile station can be transmitted at varying polarization angles. In consequence, cross-
polarized antennae applied in base stations substantially improve the signal reception
[28].
The techniques described above relate mostly to the receiver diversity. Only the
frequency diversity requires replication of some transmitter blocks and involves trans-
mitter and receiver diversity at the same time. Special arrangement of transmitter
diversity has been proposed as well. The base station transmitter emits the delayed
versions of the same signal from the set of M antennae separated in space [29] (Figure
3.20). Thus, M diversity branches between each transmit antenna and the receiver are
created. If the transmit antennae are sufficiently spaced, each diversity branch channel
fades independently of the others. The mobile station receiver which is able to cope
with intersymbol interference (ISI) collects the combined signal consisting of the atten-
uated and delayed version of the transmitted signal. It is highly probable that not all
the branch signals are attenuated by fading so the combined signal arriving at the ISI
receiver results in the improved receiver performance. Transmitter diversity has also
been investigated for the application in the GSM system [30].

REFERENCES 
113
In this chapter we presented only selected topics associated with mobile radio channel
characterization. This area continuously attracts the attention of researchers and en-
gineers due to the fact that higher and higher spectral bands are adopted for wireless
transmission. Each new band requires conducting channel measurements and build-
ing a new channel model. The literature dealing with channel modeling, propagation
prediction, channel measurements and channel simulation is very rich. Special books
have been devoted to this subject [31], [32]. We have to stress once more that without
the knowledge of channel characteristics and its time variability the design of a high
performance wireless system is not possible.
REFERENCES
1. K. Pahlavan, A.H. Levesque, Wireless Information Networks, John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., New York, 1995
2. W. C. Jakes (Ed.), Microwave Mobile Communications, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
New York, 1974
3. G. Kadel, R. W. Lorenz, "Breitbandige Ausbreitungsmessungen zur Charakter-
isierung des Funkkanals beim GSM-System", Frequenz, Vol. 41, No. 7-8, 1991, pp.
158-163
4. J. G. Proakis, Digital Communications, 3rd Edition, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1995
5. ETSI/GSM 05.05, Radio transmission and reception, March 1991
6. J. H. Wei, "A Statistical Model for Digital Mobile Radio Channel Simulation". The
Radio and Electronic Engineer, Vol. 1. No. 2, April 1991, pp. 12-19
7. J. D. Parsons, A.S. Bajwa, "Wideband Characterisation of Fading Mobile Radio
Channels", IEE Proceedings, Vol. 129, Pt. F, No. 2, April 1982, pp. 95-101
8. W. Braun, U. Dersch, "A Physical Mobile Radio Channel Model", IEEE Trans. on
Vehicular Technology, Vol. 40, No. 2, May 1991, pp. 472-482
9. H. Schulze, "Stochastische Modelle und digitale Simulation von Mobilmnkkanalen",
Kleinheubacher Berichte, Bd. 32, 1989, pp. 473-483
10. R. Krenz, K. Wesolowski, "Simulation Study on Space Diversity Techniques for
MLSE Receivers in Mobile Communications", IEEE Trans. on Vehicular Technol-
ogy, Vol. 46, No. 2, April 1997, pp. 653-663
11. T. S. Rappaport, Wireless Communications, Principles and Practice, Prentice-Hall,
Upper Saddle River, N.J., 1996
12. W. C. Y. Lee, Mobile Communications Design Fundamentals, 2nd Edition, McGraw-
Hill, New York, 1993

114 
CHARACTERIZATION OF THE MOBILE COMMUNICATION CHANNEL
13. Y. Okumura, E. Ohmori, T. Kawano, K. Fukuda, "Field Strength and Its Vari-
ability in VHP and UHF Land-Mobile Radio Service", Review of the Electrical
Communication Laboratory, Vol. 16, No. 9-10, 1968, pp. 825–873
14. M. Hata, "Empirical Formula for Propagation Loss in Land Mobile Radio Services",
IEEE Trans. on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 29, August 1980, pp. 317-325
15. P. E. Mogensen, P. Eggers, C. Jensen, J. B. Andersen, "Urban Area Radio Prop-
agation Measurements at 955 and 1845 MHz for Small and Micro Cells", Proc. of
IEEE Global Commun. Conference (GLOBECOM), Phoenix, 1991, pp. 1297-1302
16. G. K. Stuber, Principles of Mobile Communication, Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Boston, 1996
17. V. K. Garg, J. E. Wilkes, Wireless and Personal Communications Systems, Prentice-
Hall, Upper Saddle River, N.J., 1996
18. K. David, T. Benkner, Digitale Mobilfunksysteme, B. G. Teubner, Stuttgart. 1996
19. M. D. Yacoub, Foundations of Mobile Radio Engineering, CRC Press, Boca Raton,
Fl., 1993
20. W. C. Y. Lee, Mobile Cellular Telecommunications, Analog and Digital Systems,
2nd Ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1995
21. S. R. Saunders, Antennas and Propagation for Wireless Communication Systems,
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Chichester, 1999
22. J. B. Andersen, Th. S. Rappaport and S. Yoshida, "Propagation Measurements and
Models for Wireless Communications Channels", IEEE Communications Magazine,
January 1995, pp. 42-49
23. COST Action 231, Digital Mobile Radio Towards Future Generation Systems, Final
Report, EUR 18957, 1999
24. C. Tornevik, J.-E. Berg, F. Lotse, "900 MHz Propagation Measurements and Path
Loss Models for Different Indoor Environments", Proc. IEEE VTC'93, New Jersey,
USA 1993
25. P. Karlsson, H. Borjeson, T. Maseng, "A Statistical Multipath Propagation Model
Confirmed by Measurements and Simulations in Indoor Environments at 1800 MHz",
Proc. of IEEE PIMRC'94, Amsterdam 1994, pp. 486–490
26. A. Bohdanowicz, G. J. M. Janssen, S. Pietrzyk, "Wideband Indoor and Outdoor
Multipath Channel Measurements at 17 GHz", Proc. IEEE VTC'99 Fall, Amster-
dam, pp. 1998–2003
27. M. Lobeira, A. Armada, R. Torres, J. L. Garcia, "Parameter Estimation and Indoor
Channel Modeling at 17 GHz for OFDM-based Broadband WLAN", IST Mobile
Communication Summit, Galway, October 1-4, 2000

REFERENCES 
115
28. A. Paulraj, "Diversity Techniques", in J. D. Gibson (Ed.) The Mobile Communi-
cations Handbook, CRC Press, IEEE Press, 1996
29. J. H. Winters, "The Diversity Gain of Transmit Diversity in Wireless Systems with
Rayleigh Fading", Proc. of IEEE ICC'94, pp. 1121-1125
30. P. E. Mogensen, "GSM Base-Station Antenna Diversity Using Soft Decision Com-
bining on Up-link and Delayed-Signal Transmission on Down-link", Proc. of IEEE
VTC'93, pp. 611–616
31. J. D. Parsons, The Mobile Radio Propagation Channel, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
New York, 1992
32. J. Cavers, The Mobile Communication Channel, Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Boston, 2000

This page intentionally left blank

4
Paging systems
4.1 INTRODUCTION
Basic features of paging systems have been mentioned in the chapter devoted to the
survey and classification of mobile systems. This chapter contains more precise descrip-
tion of properties, classification and typical configurations of paging systems. Besides
general characteristics we will consider a few examples of paging systems which are
currently in operation.
4.2 
BASIC CHARACTERISTICS OF PAGING SYSTEMS
The ITU-R Recommendations No. 539 and 584 define a paging system as a unidi-
rectional broadcasting radio system which is used to transmit alerting signals or short
numeric or alphanumeric messages, excluding voice messages [1]. In practice, some
paging systems are able to transmit short voice messages as well.
Classical paging systems have the following properties:
• the use a narrow band in the range of a few hundred MHz or the VHF band in
the radio broadcasting range,
• small size of mobile receivers (pagers),
• the lack of confirmation that the message has been received.
The last feature, which is a consequence of the unidirectional transmission, is the
main drawback of classical paging systems.
117

118 
PAGING SYSTEMS
The numeric message is often a telephone number which the message recipient should
call. Alphanumeric messages contain a text, stock market bulletins, or other messages
which can be read on the small liquid crystal display of a pager. The speech signal lasts
for a few seconds and is transmitted after being converted to the digital form. In the
most traditional case a text message is dictated to the paging system operator in the
call center who then sends the digital message to the pager through the base station.
A message can also reach the call center through a modem link or the Internet.
4.3 CLASSIFICATION OF PAGING NETWORKS
Paging networks can have various configurations, coverage area and applications. In
general, paging networks are grouped into the following categories:
• private networks (e.g. based on the ETSI 300 224 standard [2]); such networks
are installed and operate within an institution or a company and their coverage
is restricted to the area of the company,
• public networks used by private users, which can be further divided into the
following subcategories:
— local networks whose range is limited to one city and its vicinity, and
— national networks operating in the whole country.
In order to use the assigned spectrum efficiently and not to distort the operation
of other systems, the paging system has to fulfill a set of requirements. For private
networks the requirements determine the range of applied frequencies, the base station
power level, selected emission parameters such as the allowable level of adjacent channel
interference, the channel separation, stability of the transmitter frequency, the antenna
radiation level and the exploitation parameters in extreme temperatures and extreme
power supply voltages.
Since private networks are small, a single base station covers the whole network
area. In case of particularly large private networks, a few base stations are installed
which operate synchronously on a single carrier. Transmission methods, error detec-
tion/correction and the applied modulation are not standardized and depend only on
the system supplier. The whole network equipment is usually supplied by a single
vendor. The system consists of mobile stations (pagers), a base station and a paging
switching center.
A typical local network uses a single carrier frequency in the whole coverage area, as
private networks do. The base stations mostly work synchronously with high accuracy.
Since the pager can simultaneously receive the same signal transmitted by several base
stations, lack of synchronization among the base stations would cause detection prob-
lems in the pagers. In order to ensure synchronous operation of the base stations, it is
necessary to control and keep transmission delays between the switching center and the
base stations within allowable limits. The delay difference between the signals reaching
the pager from two different base stations cannot be higher than 1/4 of the duration

CLASSIFICATION OF PAGING NETWORKS 
119
of one bit. For a typical data rate and the radio propagation velocity we conclude
that the base stations have to be located in the distances not larger than 8 km and,
in order to avoid mutual coverage from different base stations, their antennae should
not be placed higher than 100 m above the ground. Sometimes the local paging system
designer can avoid the synchronous operation of the base stations. In such cases, the
paging signals are emitted sequentially by subsequent base stations. In consequence,
the system capacity is limited.
Several protocols are applied in paging systems. The most popular protocol up to
date is described in ITU-R Recommendation No. 584 and known as POCSAG (Post
Office Code Standardization Advisory Group). In the recommendation it is denoted as
CCIR Radiopaging Code No.l. It will be described in the next section.
Another protocol, which was developed in the seventies in Sweden, is called MBS
(Mobile Search). Digital messages are transmitted to pagers, using existing FM radio
broadcasting stations. The paging signal is placed around the center frequency equal
to 57 kHz, above the spectrum of the stereo signal. Such a composite signal is fed to
the FM modulator. At the receiver, the pager extracts the paging signal by filtering
it from the FM demodulated mixture of stereo and paging signals, converts it to the
baseband and detects the binary stream containing the message. Figure 4.1 presents
the location of the paging signal on the frequency axis prior to FM modulation or after
FM demodulation.The symbols L+R and L-R denote the sum and difference of the left
and right stereo signals, respectively. The MBS protocol is not widely used nowadays.
X(f) A
Paging signal
f [kHz]
Figure 4.1 Location of the paging signal with respect to the stereo radio signal in the MBS
paging format
Besides the popular POCSAG protocol, a few other more advanced protocols will be
briefly described in this chapter. These protocols allow use of a paging network with at
least a country coverage. They are known as
• APOC (Advanced Paging Operators Code), the protocol developed by Philips,
which is an extension and improvement of the POCSAG protocol,
• ERMES (European Radio Messaging System), the protocol standardized by ETSI,
in which roaming and sending acknowledgement messages are possible,

120 
PAGING SYSTEMS
• FLEX, the protocol developed by Motorola; it is gaining popularity in the USA
and many other countries; in its ReFLEX extension a pager sends back the ac-
knowledgement messages to the message transmitter.
In the following sections we will discuss the POCSAG, ERMES and FLEX protocols.
4.4 
THE POCSAG PROTOCOL
The POCSAG protocol was developed between 1975 and 1978 by an advisory group of
international experts hosted by the British Post Office. This justifies the acronym of
the protocol, explained in the previous section.
In the basic version of the protocol the paging signals are transmitted at the data rate
of 512 bit/s. The modified versions allow operation at the data rates of 1200 and 2400
bit/s. Thus, the allowable number of messages and their length increase. However, the
higher data rate implies increased complexity of the whole system structure and the
necessity for synchronous operation of base stations.
Preamble
576 bits
Batch 1 
Batch 2 
••• 
Batch n
Sync
word
Frame 1
Frame 2 
Frame 3 
. . . 
Frame 8
Codeword 
Codeword
32 bits 
32 bits
Figure 4.2 Time hierarchy in the POCSAG protocol
The transmitted data have a hierarchical structure. The basic data unit is a 32-
bit code word. Two code words constitute a frame. A special 32-bit synchronization
word and 8 following frames create a batch. The batches are transmitted sequentially,
starting from a 576-bit preamble code that is used to wake up pagers which are in a
battery-save mode. Figure 4.2 presents the time organization of the data sequences.
The preamble is a sequence of 576 alternating ones and zeros and is is used by the
pager to acquire the bit synchronization. As we have mentioned, a batch starts with
a synchronization code word which contains a specific binary sequence. The frames
transmit the code words to the addressed groups of pagers. The pagers are divided
into 8 groups. The assignment to a particular group is determined by the three least
significant bits of the pager's individual address. The paging of an individual receiver
takes place only in the frame assigned to its group. There are two types of words placed
in the batch after the synchronization word (see Figure 4.3):

THE POCSAG PROTOCOL 
121
1 
2-19 
20-21 
22-31 
32
a) 
F 
Address 
J 
K 
P
1 
2-21 
22-31 
32
b) 
F 
Message 
K 
P
Figure 4,3 Word formats in the POCSAG protocol: (a) the address word (F = 0, the flag J
determines the receiver function), (b) the information word (F = 1)
• the address word,
• the information word.
The flag F of the address word is set to zero. The address field contains 18 most
significant address bits out of 21 address bits of the individual pager. Two bits denoted
by J describe the pager mode. The address word is supplemented with 10 parity control
bits K and the overall parity bit P.
The flag F of the information word is set to one. The flag is followed by 20 message
bits supplemented with 10 parity control bits K and the overall parity bit P.
Although the address words occur only in the frame belonging to the appropriate
group, the information words sent to the addressed pager directly follow the address
word without taking into account the group structure. After finishing the message sent
to the particular pager a message transmitted to another one starts from the address
word placed in the next free frame belonging to group of the called pager. Transmission
of messages in the form of batches implies that in case of the information sequence not
fully filling the message fields of the given batch, the missing words are replaced by the
stuffing bits.
As we have already mentioned, a 32-bit code word consists of the flag bit, 20 informa-
tion bits, 10 parity control bits and the overall parity bit. All but the last bit constitute
a code word of the (31,21) BCH code generated by the polynomial
g(x) = x10 + x9 + x8 + x6 + x5 + x3 + 1
The parity control bits are the result of dividing the following polynomial
by the generator polynomial (4.1), where (m20, m19, • • • , m
0) are the flag and message
bits.
The messages are transmitted in two formats. The numeric format is exclusively used
to send numbers, such as the telephone number to which a user should call. The digits
have a four-bit BCD format. In this case two bits J describing the receiver function
have the value J = 00. One code word contains five digits. If the word is not fully filled
with digits, the free place is filled with the space characters.

122 
PAGING SYSTEMS
In the alphanumeric mode, when J = 11, the characters are coded according to the
CCITT Alphabet No.5.
At the transmitter the bit stream is represented in the form of NRZ (Non-Return
to Zero) pulses which modulate the carrier using the differential frequency shift keying
(DFSK) [3].
The POCSAG protocol is used in many networks operating in the whole world and
has become a popular protocol in high-volume paging applications. The POCSAG
protocol can support up to 2 million individual pagers. Various carrier frequencies are
used in the paging systems applying the POCSAG protocol, depending on the particular
network operator. For example, the German paging system called "Cityruf" uses the
following carriers: 465.970 MHz, 466.075 MHz and 466.230 MHz [4]. Several other
bands are used for POCSAG paging such as 155, 148, 161, 170 MHz, etc.
4.5 
ERMES — THE EUROPEAN PAGING SYSTEM
The ERMES paging system is the result of a common initiative of the European Union
countries. The work on the common paging standard began in 1987. In 1990 26
operators from 16 countries signed the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) agreeing
to create an entirely new paging standard. The representatives of all countries who
signed the MoU agreed to allocate the frequency range 169.4-169.8 MHz to the new
paging system. In 1992 the European Standardization Institute (ETSI) approved the
standard of the ERMES system, and in 1994 the International Telecommunication
Union (ITU) recommended the ERMES standard to be the first world standard of the
paging system with the capability of international operation and roaming.
The basic targets to be achieved by ERMES were as follows:
• ability of the pager to operate outside its own network and country,
• high information throughput and much higher number of users as compared with
other existing paging systems,
• higher data rates as compared with the systems based on the POCSAG protocol.
• receiver standardization allowing use of the pagers in various ERMES networks.
The ERMES system offers a number of basic services, such as:
• tone paging - there are 8 different alerting tones,
• numeric paging - the maximum length of a numeric message is equal to 16000
digits,
• alphanumeric paging - the maximum length of an alphanumeric message is 9000
characters.
Additionally, transparent data transmission of the blocks not larger than 64 kbits is
offered. Transmission transparency means that the system rhythmically sends the data

ERMES — THE EUROPEAN PAGING SYSTEM
123
stream out of the receiver at the same data rate as that at which the data are fed to the
transmitter. Thus, despite some form of error correction coding typically used in the
transmitter and receiver, the data rate is constant. However, the price paid for that is
variable data quality at the receiver, depending on the current channel conditions. On
the contrary, in non-transparent transmission special means of increasing data reliability
are undertaken (such as ARQ, see Chapter 1), which results in a variable data rate at the
receiver output. The reason for the variable data rate is the necessity of retransmission
of the erroneous blocks. As a result, the achievable error rate is very low and practically
constant.
In accordance with the set of basic services offered by ERMES, the following types of
receivers are defined: tone-only, numeric, alphanumeric and transparent data receivers.
Besides the basic service set, the following supplementary services can be offered
by the system operator: acknowledgements of message reception, group and collective
calls, forwarding a call to another receiver, storing of incoming messages, setting the
call priorities, limiting the area of paging, message encryption and others.
16 
15 
Network 1
PNC
BS
Pager
Internetwork connection using PSPDN
:
Network 2
PNC
Figure 4.4 Architecture of ERMES paging network
The ERMES network structure is shown in Figure 4.4 [5]. Its basic elements are:
• a set of receivers (pagers),
• Base Station System (BS),
• Paging Area Controller (PAC),
• Paging Network Controller (PNC),
• Operation and Maintenance Center (OMC, which is a part of the telecommuni-
cations management network and is not shown in Figure 4.4).

124 
PAGING SYSTEMS
The symbols I1 – I6 in Figure 4.4 denote the interfaces between particular network
blocks and the inter-network interface. The tasks of particular elements are following.
A receiver (pager) receives the signals, demodulates these signals, decodes the receiver
address, decodes the information blocks sent to it and displays them on the screen or
informs the subscriber about the message by tone.
The Paging Network Controller (PNC) is the central unit in the network, managed
by the given operator. Because networks of several operators can work at the same
time, there is a possibility of interconnections among them on the PNC level. This
fact is illustrated in Figure 4.4. Such interconnections are realized using a Public Data
Packet Network (PDPN). The PNC is also connected to the access network from which
it receives the paging messages and to the Paging Area Controllers to which it sends
the received messages. The Operation and Maintenance Center realizes the monitoring
of the PNC and network operation.
The Paging Area Controller manages the operation of the network in a selected
paging area. This area is covered by a few base stations connected to this PAC. The
PAC receives messages from the PNC which are to be sent, orders them in a queue,
organizes them in groups and sets the priorities before transmitting them to a base
station. The PAC also preforms some maintenance functions and cooperates with the
Mediation Device (MD). The task of the latter is to mediate in communication between
the base stations and the OMC.
The base station receives the paging messages from the paging area controller, encodes
them and attaches the synchronization and identification information. The receiver
address and part of the message are secured by the shortened cyclic code (30.18). The
systematic code words are generated using the generator polynomial [6]
g(x) = x12 + x11 + x9 + x7 + x6 + x3 + x2 + 1
In order to spread error bursts caused by the channel conditions the 9-word interleaving
is applied. The binary signal obtained modulates the carrier in the selected channel.
Then the modulated signal is emitted to the mobile receiver.
Binary 
4-PAM 
Pre-modulation 
> 
Frequency 
RF output
data 
* 
mapping 
filter 
modulator
stream
Figure 4.5 4-FSK modulator used in ERMES
In the ERMES system the 4-PAM/FM (4-FSK) modulation is applied. The binary
data are grouped in dibits which determine one of four PAM amplitudes of the pulse
signal which is, after shaping by the pre-modulation filter, fed to the FM modulator
(see Figure 4.5).
The ERMES system can operate in up to 16 channels spaced by 25 kHz in the band
between 169.4125 and 169.8125 MHz. Figure 4.6 shows a single channel along the
frequency axis. Its carrier frequency is located in the middle of the 25 kHz band. The
frequencies f1, f2, f3 and f4 denote the nominal frequencies for each transmitted dibit.

ERMES — THE EUROPEAN PAGING SYSTEM 
125
4-PAM/FM spectrum
A 
A 
A 
A
f
*
25 kHz channel
Figure 4.6 ERMES channel spectrum on the frequency axis
They differ by ±1562.5 Hz or ±4687.5 Hz from the carrier frequency. In consequence,
the frequency division network operation is possible if more than one frequency channel
is used by the network operator. However, time division access is an inherent ERMES
access method due to the time hierarchy applied in the ERMES radio access protocol
shown in Figure 4.7. If the network uses different time slots in neighboring paging areas,
we can describe ERMES as a time divided network.
Sequence
60 minutes 60 cycles
00:01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 
'••• 57 58 59
Cycle
1 minute 5 subsequences
Subsequence
12 seconds 16 batches
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P
Batch
Synchronization 
System information 
Address 
Message
partition 
partition 
partition 
partition
Figure 4.7 The time hierarchy of ERMES
The binary data stream is organized in 60 minute sequences. The emission of se-
quences is performed in synchronism with UTC (Universal Time Coordinated). The
sequence consists of 60 one minute cycles. In turn, each cycle is divided into five subse-
quences. The subsequence lasts for 12 seconds. Due to the synchronism with respect to
UTC, the zero subsequence is placed after the minute beacon of the UTC signal. The

126 
PAGING SYSTEMS
subsequences consist of batches directed to particular receivers or groups of receivers.
There are 16 batches in each subsequence. They are denoted by characters A to P. The
batch is a whole which has to be treated jointly in order to ensure correct reception of
the message sent to a particular subscriber. The batch consists of the synchronization
partition, the system information partition, the address partition and the actual mes-
sage. The binary channel data rate is equal to 6.25 kbit/s. The placement of the batch
in a subsequence determines its affiliation to a particular group.
Pagers also divided into 16 groups are denoted as type A to type P receivers. Their
"membership" in a particular group is determined by four least significant address bits
of the receiver's Radio Identity Code (RIC). The remaining part of the address is trans-
mitted exclusively within the group to which the receiver belongs. In the synchronous
system operation, most of the time the main receiver parts remain in a low-battery
mode (see Figure 4.8). This allows them to save a substantial amount of energy. The
address in a given group can be transmitted more than once, even at different carrier
frequencies used in the system. After decoding its own address the receiver waits for
the message directed to it. This message can be sent in the same batch in its last
partition, in any following batch in the same subsequence or in the next subsequence.
Each batch contains 154 code words except the last one, which has 190 code words. As
we remember, the code word consists of 30 bits.
•= Active batch for a type A receiver
channel 
12 seconds
~0l 
B C D E F G H I J K L M NO P 
B C D
0 3 P I B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P • B C
05 O P I B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P • B
07 N CTP 
B C D E F G H I J K L M 
N O P
09 M NO P I B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P
11 L M N O P I BC D E F G H I J K 
L M N O
13 K L M N O P I B C D E F G H I J 
K L M N
15 J K L M N O P I B C D E F G H I 
J K L M
16 I J K L M N O P I B C D E F G H 
I J K L
14 H I J K L M N O P I B C D E F G HI 
J K
12 G H I J K L M N O P I B C D E F 
G H I J
10 F G~H I J K L M NO Pi 
BCD 
E 
F G H I
08 E F G H I J K L M N O P I B C D E F G H
06 D E F G H I J K L M N O P • B C 
D E F G
04 C D E F G H I J K L M N O P • B 
CD 
E F
02 B CD E F G H I J K L M N O P I 
B C D E
Figure 4.8 Channel synchronization and example of the scanning procedure for a type A receiver

ERMES - THE EUROPEAN PAGING SYSTEM 
127
CC 
OC 
PA 
ETI BAI 
FSI 
CN 
SSN 
BN
Number of bits: 
7 
3 
6 
1 
1 
5 
6 
3 
4
Figure 4.9 ERMES system informatin partition
Figure 4.9 presents the system information partition contained in each batch. Its
field acronyms have the following meaning:
• CC - Country Code,
• OC - Operator's Code,
• PA - Paging Area,
• CN – Cycle Number,
• SSN – Subsequence Number,
• BN - Batch Number,
• ETI 
External Traffic Indicator,
• BAI Border Area Indicator,
• FSI – Frequency Subset Indicator.
As mentioned, the ERMES system can operate on 16 frequency channels. A given
operator offers its services in the channel subset which can consist of a single channel
or a few channels. In consequence, a receiver has to be able to identify the channel
on it will be paged. To perform this task, the receiver scans the channels in order to
detect the frequency subset indicator (FSI) which is contained in the Frequency Subset
Number (FSN) located in its own memory.
In the ERMES system some means have been foreseen to ensure message privacy,
encryption of data transmitted in a transparent channel, subscriber's authentication,
approval of the requested services and appropriate tariffing.
Each ERMES channel offers a capacity which is about five times higher than that of
a traditional paging system. At the data rate of 6.25 kbit/s and assuming the mean
number of calls to one subscriber equals to 0.2 per hour, each channel can support
up to 500000 subscribers receiving numeric messages containing up to 10 digits or up
to 160000 subscribers receiving alphanumeric messages 40 characters long. Very large
addressing capabilities allow receipt of messages from various information networks
concerning special information, e.g. city traffic messages, weather forecast, stock market
information, sport results, etc.
ETSI considered the extension of one-way paging standard onto two-way paging.
Such capabilities will considerably increase the spectrum of offered services. Two types
of functionalities of two-way paging can be distinguished [7]:

128 
PAGING SYSTEMS
• one-way messaging with either a system or a user-controlled acknowledgement of
receipt,
• two-way messaging.
In the simplest case of two-way paging a return channel is created which is used
to confirm the received messages. The first type of confirmation is the system ac-
knowledgement. Its purpose is to enable the system to inform the message sender that
his/her message has been successfully received. Its aim is also to improve the reliability
of paging by retransmission of unacknowledged messages. The acknowledgement also
creates the possibility to improve network management by transmission of a message
in a selected part of the system coverage area only. The last feature can be realized by
sending to the pager the message "where are you?". In response the pager will confirm
the reception with the message "I am in paging area No. n".
The second type of confirmation is the user acknowledgement. This acknowledgement
is initiated manually by the user of a two-way pager after receiving a message. The user
can show his/her acceptance of the received message, his/her disagreement, or he/she
can send back the number of one of the predefined messages, so called canned messages.
The pager or the pager user can also initiate a message transfer. Two types of initiated
messages are possible:
• due to the system call - the pager automatically generates the message to be
known in the network after switching the power on, appearing in the new non-
home network (roaming), after re-appearing in the range of its own network, or
after changing the paging area;
• due to the user call - the user-originated message contains the destination address
and the actual message. The message can be a canned message, a combination of
a canned message and numeric data, or can be a free format message containing
numeric, alphanumeric or transparent data.
The physical aspect of the return channel has not been shown in [7].
4.6 
FLEX FAMILY OF PAGING PROTOCOLS
In the early nineties Motorola developed a one-way paging protocol called FLEX. In
the next years it was joined by the ReFLEX - a two-way protocol and the InFLEXion
- a voice messaging protocol. Since then FLEX has become the industry standard and
is a serious competitor to ERMES. Many countries such as China, Russia and Korea
adopted FLEX as a national paging standard. It is difficult to find a precise description
of the FLEX protocol in the open literature. Therefore, only some general information
will be presented in this section.
The FLEX paging protocol is a synchronous time-slot protocol with the time clock
synchronized to the Global Positioning System (GPS) [8]. Figure 4.10 shows the time
hierarchy of the FLEX protocol. Each GPS hour is divided into 15 four-minute cycles.
Cycle 0 starts at the beginning of each GPS hour. Each cycle is divided into 128 frames.

FLEX FAMILY OF PAGING PROTOCOLS 
129
1 GPS hour= 15 cycles
00 01 : 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 
12 13 14
1 Cycle=128 frames=4 minutes
Frame ! Frame] Frame Frame Frame 
Frame Frame Frame
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
125 
126 
127
1 Frame= 1.875 seconds
Sync Frame Sync 
Block 0 
Block 1 
Block 11
1 
info 
2 
words 0–7 words 1–15 
" 
words 80 - 87
1 Block=
160 ms
Figure 4.10 Time hierarchy of the FLEX paging system
Each FLEX frame consists of synchronization and transmitted data blocks. The frame
starts with a synchronization signal followed by an 11-bit frame information word. This
block allows the pager to identify the frame and cycle to which it is uniquely assigned.
The second synchronization block contained in the frame indicates the rate at which
the data words are transmitted. The second synchronization block is followed by 11
data blocks consisting of 8 words each. Each block lasts for 160 ms. We can easily
calculate that at the data rate of 6400 bit/s each word consists of 128 bits. The words
are the results of error correction coding and interleaving. Similar to the ERMES paging
system, the 2- or 4-FSK modulation is applied. The data rates are 1600, 3200 and 6400
bit/s. The first two rates can be achieved using two-level FSK, whereas the highest
data rate can be realized only with four-level FSK. RF transmission is realized in 25
kHz-channels.
The ReFLEX protocol provides an asymmetrical two-way data message delivery sys-
tem for paging applications [8]. Its frame structure is compatible with the FLEX pro-
tocol. The data and control messages are sent to receivers over a forward channel. The
reverse channel is used for transmitting message acknowledgements and short response
messages from paging terminals equipped with keyboards. The reverse channel also
allows monitoring of the location of the paging devices within a local geographic area.
ReFLEX systems operate in frequency bands which are multiples of 25 kHz. A
single 25 kHz band supports a single FSK control and a message channel. A 50 kHz
forward channel can support up to three FSK control and message channels separated
by 12.5 kHz. The bands of 930-931 and 940-941 MHz have been assigned to forward
channels, whereas the reverse channels work in the frequency range of 901-902 MHz.
The ReFLEX protocol allows the construction of systems consisting of up to 8 forward
control channels.

130 
PAGING SYSTEMS
4.7 
CONCLUSIONS: THE FUTURE OF PAGING SYSTEMS
Let us shortly discuss further possible applications of paging systems. Their simple
structure, in particular of one-way paging systems without acknowledgement, has be-
come a major limitation as compared with two-way communication systems such as
cellular telephony. Short Message Service (SMS) messages have a similar character
to paging messages. Nevertheless, it seems that paging systems are going to further
improve their performance and the service offer and find some market niches. We can
easily imagine persons who do not wish to be embarrassed by a mobile phone and wish
to be free to answer the received message at a convenient moment. Paging systems can
be easily connected to the Internet, allowing sending a copy of e-mail directly to the
subscriber's pager.
Two-way paging is not paging in a strict sense any more; nevertheless, due to ac-
knowledgement capabilities and the possibility to send short messages back to the base
station, many new services are possible. A large class of services is associated with
control applications. We can imagine a pager co-working with a GPS receiver installed
in a car. Such a system can be an effective security system used to block the driving
functions of a stolen car or to transmit its geographic position derived from GPS. Two-
way paging systems with very large addressing capabilities can be applied in remote
meter readings, vending machines and many other remote control and measurement
applications. The non-real time nature of the communications gives very high spec-
trum utilization. Paging provides the highest number of subscribers per channel of any
mobile system [7].
The description of basic paging protocols and systems shows us that in modern paging
systems, despite simple rules of operation, complex techniques of digital transmission
and error correction coding are applied. As already mentioned, paging services are
offered by other mobile communication systems, including personal satellite systems.
Paging systems can survive the strong competition with other systems due to specific
applications and low service prices.
REFERENCES
1. A. Makiedonski, Paging Systems in Poland (in Polish), Przeglad Telekomunikacyjny,
No. 5/6, 1995, pp. 270–280
2. ETSI ETS 300 244, Electromagnetic compatibility and Radio spectrum Matters
(ERM); On-site paging service; Technical and functional characteristics for on-site
paging systems including test methods, March 1998
3. R. J. Horrocks, R. W. A. Scarr, Future Trends in Telecommunications, John Wiley
& Sons, Ltd., Chichester, 1993

REFERENCES 
131
4. B. Walke, Mobile Radio Networks: Networking and Protocols, John Wiley & Sons,
Ltd., Chichester, 1999
5. ETSI ETS 300 133–1, Electromagnetic compatibility and Radio spectrum Matters
(ERM); Enhanced Radio MEssage System (ERMES); Part 1: General aspects,
November 1997
6. ETSI ETS 300 133–4, Electromagnetic compatibility and Radio spectrum Matters
(ERM); Enhanced Radio MEssage System (ERMES); Part 4: Air interface specifi-
cation, November 1997
7. ETSI TR 101 037, Radio Equipment and Systems (RES); Enhanced Radio MEssage
System (ERMES); Two Way Paging system, VI.1.1, July 1997
8. D. R. Gonzales, M.CORE Processor with On-Chip FLEX Decoder for Messaging
Applications, Motorola M.CORE Technology Center, Austin, Texas

This page intentionally left blank

The cellular system concept
In the chapter dealing with classification of the mobile systems we have already men-
tioned that cellular systems can be defined as mobile systems realizing two-way wireless
communication between the fixed part of the system in the form of appropriately lo-
cated base stations and mobile stations moving in the area covered by the base station
system. The coverage area is divided into sub-areas served by the base stations usually
located in their centers. The coverage area of a single base station can be symboli-
cally represented as a regular hexagon and therefore it is often called a cell. Figure 5.1
presents an example of division of the system coverage area into hexagonal sub-areas.
The reason for this division is insufficient system capacity which would characterize the
whole system if its area was covered by a single base station having at its disposal the
same spectrum interval as the system of base stations. Here, capacity is understood as
the maximum number of mobile stations simultaneously served by the cellular system
per Herz and per square kilometer.
Let us consider a mobile communication system which applies FDMA. Let each
mobile station require B Hz for transmitting its signal and let the bandwidth assigned
to the whole system be MB Hz. Each band of the width equal to B Hz can be denoted
as a channel. Therefore, a system with a single base station emitting a high power signal
which covers the whole area provides M channels and can serve only M mobile stations
simultaneously. On the other hand, dividing the whole area into cells and numbering
them as in Figure 5.1 allows for the multiple use of the channels if M channels are
properly distributed among N different cell types (N — 7 in Figure 5.1). We conclude
that the number of mobile stations served at the same time increases considerably, and,
roughly speaking, cellular system capacity increases with respect to capacity of a single
base station system in proportion to the number of a single channel use in the covered
area. The area of a single cell is much smaller than the whole system area, so the
133
5

134 
THE CELLULAR SYSTEM CONCEPT
3 
5 
• — 
7
7
2 
4
6
4 
6 
1 
3
3 
5
7
2 
4
Figure 5.1 Division of the system coverage area into cells
power generated by the base station in a cell is much lower than the power emitted by
a base station covering the whole system area. In consequence, the power of mobile
stations communicating with much closer base stations is also much lower in a cellular
system as compared with a single high power base station system. Let us note that the
cells shown in Figure 5.1 have been numbered in such a way that the distance between
cells denoted by the same number is maximized. This way the interference between
the signals emitted in the same channel is minimized. The phenomenon of interference
from other cells using the same channel as the channel in the selected cell is called
co-channel interference. It is a characteristic feature of cellular systems and is one of
the main factors which have to be taken into account in the cellular system design.
Division of the system coverage area into cells, assignment of a subset of channels
to each cell and the possibility of manipulating the base station power level results in
a flexible system design which takes into account the predicted traffic intensity in the
given area. In the city centers, where there is a high concentration of mobile phone
users, the cells are usually smaller and the channels are more frequently reused. As a
result, a higher traffic per unit area can be served. In turn, in the rural areas, in which
the number of the mobile phone users results, for example, from the highway traffic
only, the cells are larger, they have fewer channels at their disposal and the power of
the base stations is larger. In conclusion, the topography of the traffic generated by
mobile users is taken into account in the mobile system deployment.
Division of the system coverage area into the sets of cells has a few important con-
sequences. The first one, already mentioned, is the existence of the co-channel inter-
ference. The second one is the necessity to ensure automatic transfer of the connection
between the base and the mobile station to the next base station if the mobile station
crosses the border between the neighboring cells. Such a procedure is called handover
or hand-off. 
In order to ensure seamless transfer to the new base station and avoid
multiple transfer to the new base station and back to the old one, a rule of hysteresis

SIMPLIFIED DESIGN OF A CLASSIC CELLULAR SYSTEM 
135
has to be applied. This means that the connection is switched to a new base station if
the level of the signal received by the mobile station from the new base station is higher
by a given threshold value than the level of the signal received from the base station
currently performing the link with the mobile station.
Dynamic transfer of connections of the mobile station with subsequent base stations
requires complex control procedures and measuring the power of the signals generated
by mobile stations and received by base stations or vice versa. If a mobile station
participates in the measurements and in handover decision, which occurs in the second
generation systems such as GSM and IS-136, we call such a procedure a mobile-assisted
handover.
The important consequence of changing location of a mobile station is the necessity of
finding a particular mobile station if there is an attempt to set up a connection with it.
A mobile station whose power supply is on and which remains idle, should periodically
update its location in order to "show its existence" in the system. In an alternative
procedure, a whole group of the base stations page the selected mobile station, knowing
that the searched mobile station remains within the service area of one of them.
The crucial problem to be solved in cellular radio systems is the design of the base
station topography. The base stations have to be properly located and the channel
subsets properly assigned to them in order to ensure a satisfactory quality of connections
in the whole coverage area.
5.1 SIMPLIFIED DESIGN OF A CLASSIC CELLULAR SYSTEM
In this section we will show simplified rules of the cellular system design and channel
allocation. In our considerations, the coverage area of a single base station is approx-
imated by a hexagon. There are a few geometrical figures which ensure full coverage
of a given area without either overlapping or holes. These are equilateral triangles,
squares and hexagons. Hexagons best approximate the circular shape of a base station
coverage in a flat terrain without obstacles and the hexagonal edges well approximate
the borders between cells of the same size. We will hold the simplifying assumption
about the hexagonal shape of the cells. In reality, the base station coverage does not
have a regular circular shape because the coverage is a result of terrain architecture
and obstacles such as houses, trees, etc. The division of the system coverage area into
equal-sized cells is not possible for other than technical reasons, either. In the base
stations deployment we have to take into account many constraints such as the access
to the appropriate terrain locations, possibility to use natural terrain elements such as
towers, high chimneys and buildings. Such elements are rarely located in the centers
of the ideally planned cells. Therefore, planning of cells is a complex process, in which
in modern systems the field measurements are made using specialized equipment. Cells
can be planned with a certain accuracy on a basis of digital terrain map applied by
specialized complex planning software tools which model the propagation of electro-
magnetic waves in the terrain model built upon the digital map. One of the approaches
to modeling the electromagnetic waves propagation is treating the waves as light rays
which reflect and diffract from various terrain obstacles with specified reflection and

136 
THE CELLULAR SYSTEM CONCEPT
Figure 5.2 Geometry in the field of hexagons
diffraction coefficients. This method, called a ray tracing method, requires accurate
data on the covered area and a lot of computational power. Professional software pack-
ages used for propagation modeling and cell planning often take advantage of more
elaborate propagation models than those presented in Chapter 3. A limited number of
measurement data allows for calibration of the propagation models used by the software
package, so the results are more accurate.
Now we will analyze the rules of cell design and channel allocation "on the engineering
level", discussing the factors which have to be taken into account in the design process.
The results of the analysis are close to those obtained from complex evaluation by
simulations and measurements. Let us stress again that in our considerations we assume
the hexagonal shape of the cells and their approximately equal size.
As we know, the key principle of cellular system operation is multiple use of the same
channels in different cells appropriately located in the covered area. The set of N cells
using all available channels is called a cell cluster. In order to analyze the cluster size
and the cluster features we will consider the geometrical properties of a set of hexagons
[1], shown in Figure 5.2. Let the radius of the circle circumscribing each hexagon be R.
Obviously, this is also the distance between the hexagon center and its node. Recalling
the properties of equilateral triangles of the side length .R, we can easily prove that the
distance between two neighboring hexagons is equal to \/3R. Let this distance be the
unit of our distance measure. In a coordinate system in which the angle between the
axes is 60 degrees, the distance between the center of any hexagon and the coordinate

SIMPLIFIED DESIGN OF A CLASSIC CELLULAR SYSTEM 
137
origin is1
(5–1)
where i and j are the coordinates of the considered hexagon center, expressed in
the assumed distance unit equal to \^3R. Expression (5.1) directly results from the
generalized Pythagoras theorem, which states that the squared length D of the edge
opposite to the angle a created by the edges of length u and v is equal to
D2 = u2 + v2 - 2uv cos a 
(5.2)
In the case shown in Figure 5.2 u = 3\/3R, v = 2\/3R and a = 120°. Therefore, i = 3
and j = 2.
Let us treat the cell which is located in the origin of the coordinate system shown
in Figure 5.2 as the reference cell. Let us build a cell cluster around the reference cell.
Other clusters should be placed around this cluster so that the area covered by them
should have neither holes nor multiple coverage. In this context the following question
arises: what is the number of cells in the cluster which ensures compact coverage? The
answer to this question is the result of the following argumentation.
Let the center cells of neighboring cell clusters be located at the distance D (described
by (5.1)) from the center of the reference cell. As we remember, they have the same
set of channels at their disposal as the reference cell has. Each of the clusters can be
represented by a single large hexagon whose area is equal to the sum of areas of all cells
belonging to this cluster. Figure 5.3 illustrates this case. The area of a single hexagonal
cell of the radius R is
(Area)R = ^V3B2 
(5,3)
whereas the area of large hexagons equal to the sum of N areas of hexagons with the
radius R and their respective centers located at the distance D from one another, is
(5.4)
We wish the following equality to be true
(Area)D/^ = N • (Area)R 
(5.5)
Putting (5.1) and (5.4) into (5.5) we obtain the following expression determining the
number N of cells in a cluster
N = i2+j2 + ij 
(5.6)
1 The author hopes that the reader will not mistake the distance D for the antenna directivity denoted
in Chapter 3 by the same symbol.

138
THE CELLULAR SYSTEM CONCEPT
Figure 5.3 Cell cluster approximated with large hexagons
As we see, the number of cells in a cluster is not unrestricted. The cluster can consist
of one, three, four, seven, twelve, etc. cells. In Figure 5.3 there is a cluster of N = 7
cells for which the parameters are i = 2 and j = 1.
On the basis of (5.1) and (5.6) we receive the following important relation
(5.7)
which will be used in our future considerations.
If the system is not properly designed with respect to the number of cells in a cluster,
topographic cell distribution and channel assignment, then it will experience excessive
interference between the channels in different cells which use the same carrier frequen-
cies. As we already know, such distortion is called a co-channel interference. It is a
function of parameter Q defined in (5.7). Parameter Q is called the co-channel inter-
ference reduction factor. If Q increases, then co-channel interference decreases because
the cells using the same channels are more distant from each other or because their size
is smaller. The distance D is a function of the ratio of signal power S to interference
power /. In turn, this ratio depends on the number of interfering cells K0, according
to the formula
S
/
(5.8)
k=1

SIMPLIFIED DESIGN OF A CLASSIC CELLULAR SYSTEM 
139
where Ik is the mean interference power originating from the fc-th cell. Figure 5.4
presents a typical configuration of interfering cells. In case of hexagonal cells, six of
them located in the first tier interfere with the central cell, which is considered as the
reference one. Therefore K0 = 6. We further assume that the influence of the cells
situated in the second tier can be neglected due to their large distance from the central
cell. Let us note that co-channel interference disturbs not only the signal reaching the
base station in the central cell, but also the signals arriving at the mobile stations
currently located in that cell. Assuming that base stations emit signals with equal
powers, the signal-to-co-channel interference ratio calculated at the border of the central
cell is
j = -/-1- 
(5.9)
/ 
K0
7
/—/ 
fc
k=l
As we remember from Chapter 3, the signal power received at the receive antenna
placed at distance d from the transmit antenna is proportional to d –Y. For free space
propagation the power y = 2, whereas 7 = 4 in case of two-path propagation. In
reality, depending on the propagation environment, 7 is in the range between 2 and 5.5.
First tier 
Second tier
Figure 5.4 Space distribution of the interfering cells
Let us note that with the assumption of equal power generated by the base stations,
the signal-to-co-channel interference ratio depends only on the geometrical properties

140 
THE CELLULAR SYSTEM CONCEPT
of the cell distribution, the distances between base stations using the same channels,
and the base station coverage radius.
For simplicity let us assume that for the system shown in Figure 5.4 all distances Dk
are the same and equal to D. Thus, from (5.9) we conclude that
f-r£-¥
and
1/")'
Formula (5.11) sets the relation between the ratio of the distance between the cells
using the same channels and the cell radius, the signal-to-co-channel interference ratio
and the type of environment. In traditional cellular systems the required ratio S/I is
selected to be the value ensuring at least a good mark in a subjective speech quality
test by at least 75 percent of users in 90 percent of the area covered by the system [2] .
In classic analog cellular systems such as AMPS the value of S/I is selected to be 18
dB, which is equivalent to 63.1 on the linear scale. Assuming 7 = 4, from (5.11) we
get Q = 4.41. Simulation results reported in [1] yield Q = 4.6. Because the value of Q
depends on the number N of cells in a cluster according to formula (5.7), then setting
Q = 4.6 in this formula results in N = 7. As we see, if the omnidirectional antennae
are applied, the rough calculations performed so far indicate that the cluster of seven
cells ensures the desired value of co-channel interference reduction factor in the analog
cellular radio.
Figure 5.5 The worst case for co-channel interference if N = 7
Let us consider the worst case shown in Figure 5.5. Assuming 7 = 4 and noting
that the distances between the mobile station located at the cell border (point A) and

SIMPLIFIED DESIGN OF A CLASSIC CELLULAR SYSTEM 
141
all interfering base stations are approximately equal to (D — R), (D — R), (D — R/2),
(D + R/2), D, and (D + R), we get
S = 
_? 
= 
(5.12)
I 
/ 
r>\ —4 
/ 
"\ —4
1 
c~i / -T^K 
T~»\ A 
, 
f r*i 
rr \ 
, 
r~* 
A
-T L) 
-
1
D4 + (<?-l)4+^^ 
v-^ 
+
(O2 –1)'
For Q = 4.6 the value of S/I = 49.56. In the dB-scale this value is roughly equivalent to
17 dB. For precise values of distances between point A and the centers of the interfering
cells we get a slightly better S/I; however, it is still below the required value of 18 dB
[3]. In reality, due to nonideal location of base stations, multipath propagation and
distortions caused by terrain irregularities, this ratio is even worse. Therefore, the pre-
viously calculated value Q = 4.6 is insufficient. Let us stress again that Figure 5.5 and
the associated formula (5.12) illustrate the least advantageous case, because the mobile
station is in the most distant place from the base station in its own cell. Therefore, the
above evaluation is very pessimistic. Nevertheless, such a design approach ensures the
system reliability.
There are two basic solutions to the problem of insufficient value of the co-channel
interference reduction factor Q for the cluster of seven cells and omnidirectional anten-
nae. The first is increasing the number of cells in the cluster. However, if the number
TV gets higher, the number of available channels in a cell decreases. Taking the next
allowable value2 of TV larger than 7, e.g. TV = 12 we have to divide the available chan-
nels into 12 subsets. The second solution is decreasing the co-channel interference due
to the application of sector antennae which emit signals in the 120°-angle. Each cell is
divided into three sectors. Division into a different number of sectors is also possible;
however, it will not be considered here.
Figure 5.6 shows the interfering cells when the sectorized cells are applied. The
areas in which the same subset of channels is used are marked with a grey pattern.
However, only two sectors marked by even darker pattern send the interfering signals to
the central sector denoted by the darkest pattern. As we see, thanks to sectorization,
the number of interfering cells has been reduced to two. Figure 5.7 shows the worst
localization of the mobile station in this case.
The distance between the mobile station and the interfering base station is equal to
D + R/2. Therefore, the signal-to-co-channel interference ratio is
S 
R-4 
(0 + 0.5)4
_ 
_ = w 
; 
(5.13)
2According to (5.6) taking i = 3 and j — 0 we get N = 9; however, for N = 9 we receive an irregular
cell grid.

142 
THE CELLULAR SYSTEM CONCEPT
Figure 5.6 Illustration of co-channel interference in the case of 120°-sector antennae
Mobile station
Figure 5.7 The worst case for 120° sectors
which at Q = 4.6 results in S/I = 25.3 dB. We gain about 7 dB as compared with the
omnidirectional antennae. In practice, cell sectorization is applied in a classic cellular
radio as well as in newer solutions such as GSM or cdmaOne (IS-95).
We have to stress that sectorization not only reduces the number of interfering base
stations but also has a positive impact on the physical properties of the mobile channel.
The channel impulse response delay spread is shorter as compared with that observed
in the cells with omnidirectional base station antennae. Thanks to sectorization the
system capacity increases; however, the achievable gain will not be fully obtained if
mobile stations are not uniformly distributed in all sectors (see Section 5.4). There are
some disadvantages of sectorization as well. These are:

SIMPLIFIED DESIGN OF A CLASSIC CELLULAR SYSTEM 
143
• The sectorized cell requires more base station equipment, in particular in the RF
part.
• Mobile stations moving in sectorized cells more often change channels, which
results in increased control signaling.
• Trunking efficiency decreases. The set of channels assigned to a cell is now divided
among the sectors. The number of the served users will remain the same as in non-
sectorized cells only if the number of users located in each sector is proportional
to the number of channels assigned to each sector.
Figure 5.8 Example of the area covered by clusters with N = 4 and three sectors in a cell, typical
for the GSM [5]
Figure 5.8 presents a typical assignment of sectors in the GSM mobile telephony [5].
Let us note that the number of cells in a cluster is N = 4 and the cells are divided into
three 120°-sectors. The sectors are denoted by characters A, B, and C, whereas the
cells in a cluster are numbered from 1 to 4. The signal in each sector is corrupted by
the signals from two sectors belonging to two different clusters; therefore, the number
of interfering sectors is K0 = 2.
In a digital cellular system, e.g. the GSM, the criterion for selection of network
topology can be the achievable error rate instead of S/I used in the design of analog
cellular telephony. It has been found that, thanks to the applied digital modulation,
the multiple access method, efficient digital speech coding, and error correction channel
coding, the required value of the signal-to-co-channel interference ratio decreases to 9
dB [4], as compared with 18 dB for analog cellular systems. This value is also mentioned
as the minimum in the GSM standard [11].
The next problem to solve in FDMA or TDMA/FDMA cellular telephony is the
allocation of all carrier frequencies used by the system to the cells. Their number used
in a cell or a sector, together with the multiple access method (FDMA or TDMA),

144 
THE CELLULAR SYSTEM CONCEPT
decide upon the number of users who can be concurrently served in a cell. A classic
solution is the assignment of a fixed subset of carrier frequencies to the cells or the
sectors which are denoted by the same number in different clusters.
Before we consider this problem in detail, let us introduce some basic terms used in
the traffic theory. They are necessary for evaluation of the cellular system properties.
5.2 
ELEMENTS OF THE TRAFFIC THEORY APPLIED TO CELLULAR
SYSTEMS
A typical telephone network is usually designed taking into account behavior of its
subscribers. It has been observed that only a small fraction of them use the network
simultaneously. However, the intensity of the network usage can vary in time and
can differ for several subscribers. The network is usually designed with respect to the
expected intensity of its use. Therefore, trunking is applied, which means that a given
number of links remains at the disposal of a far greater number of subscribers. There
is a small assumed probability that a subscriber will not be able to get a connection
due to temporary lack of available links. The only way to set a connection is to repeat
the connection request. The system which works this way is called a loss system. From
the point of view of the subscriber who is not able to connect, the system is blocked.
The probability of this event is called the probability of blocking. More sophisticated
telecommunication systems, called delay systems, in case of the lack of available links
hold the connection requests in a queue and set up the connections gradually when
subsequent links are released.
Traffic considerations related to a classical telephone network and data networks can
be easily extended onto cellular networks. The equivalence of a telephone link is a radio
channel which is meant as a pair of carriers (in case of FDMA systems), a pair of time
slots on the specified carriers (in case of TDMA/FDMA systems), or a pair of spreading
sequences (in case of CDMA systems). Assignment of the radio channels should take
into account the expected traffic intensity. Traffic intensity is a measure of channel
use, expressed as average relative channel occupancy. The measure unit is Erlang. For
example, the mean channel occupancy lasting half an hour in one hour time interval
is equivalent to traffic intensity equal to 0.5 Erlang. The number of call requests is
random and fluctuates within the 24-hour interval. Therefore, the concept of busy hour
has been introduced. The busy hour is the one-hour time interval in which the traffic
intensity is maximum.
The grade of service (GOS) is a measure of access to the trunked system during the
busy hour. In many countries the busy hour for cellular radio systems occurs during rush
hours between 4 and 6 p.m. on Thursdays and Fridays [3]. The grade of service (GOS)
is a quality measure applied to determine the desired probability that a subscriber will
obtain the channel access, given a specified number of channels in the cellular system.
The GOS is one of the basic parameters and benchmarks in the cellular system design
which has to be fulfilled in order to ensure the required system capacity and channel
distribution among cells. The GOS is usually expressed in the form of probability of
blocking i.e. the probability of the event that a subscriber wishing to get a connection

ELEMENTS OF THE TRAFFIC THEORY APPLIED TO CELLULAR SYSTEMS 
145
experiences a lack of free channel or waiting for an available channel is longer than a
certain prescribed time interval.
For the loss systems the probability of blocking is expressed by the following Erlang
B formula
AC
GOS = Priblocking} = — 
_ 
(5.14)
£ Ak
^ "F"
k=0 *"
The formula was derived with the assumption that channel requests have the Poisson
distribution, the time of channel occupancy by a subscriber has the exponential distri-
bution, the number of subscribers is infinite and the number of channels available in
the trunking pool is finite. It was also assumed that channel requests are memoryless,
which means that any subscriber can request a channel at any time. A is the total traffic
intensity and C is the number of channels in the pool. The total traffic intensity can be
calculated by multiplying the (finite) number of subscribers U by traffic intensity Au for
a single subscriber. The latter parameter can be derived as the product of the duration
of a call and the average number of call requests per unit time. As already mentioned,
formula (5.14) was derived at the assumption of infinite number of users. In reality this
number is finite but is a few orders of magnitude higher than the number of channels,
therefore the assumption is a good approximation of reality. The Erlang B formula can
be shown as the family of plots (Figure 5.9) representing the blocking probability as a
function of the total traffic intensity. Each plot is obtained for a particular number of
channels C. The plots shown in Figure 5.9 can be used for a rough design of a cellular
system. Usually we assume the specified grade of service and one of the two parameters:
the total traffic intensity or the number of channels. Setting the value of one of these
parameters, we read out the second one from the appropriate plot.
As we mentioned, there are more sophisticated systems than the loss systems con-
sidered so far. They are often called delay systems. In such systems the calls which
cannot be realized due to the temporary lack of a free channel are held in a queue.
They are successively served as the channels become available unless the waiting time
exceeds the time limit, in which case, they are removed from the queue. Probability of
blocking for delay systems is given by the Erlang C formula; however, we will not quote
it here. The interested reader can find it in [3] or books devoted to telecommunication
switching.
Cellular system designers often rely on computer simulations which take dynamic
effects into account and allow for system verification by investigating more realistic
system models [3].
Let us summarize this section with an example of an introductory design, similar to
one of many interesting examples contained in [3], with data fitted to analog systems
still operating in Scandinavia and Eastern Europe.
Example 1 A certain city agglomeration has an area of 3300 km2 and is covered by
a cellular system. The system applies 7- cell clusters. Each cell has a radius of 6 km.
The bandwidth of 2 x 4.5 MHz is assigned to the system working in the FDMA/FDD
mode. The channel bandwidth is 25 kHz. Assume that the probability of blocking in the

146 
THE CELLULAR SYSTEM CONCEPT
14 18 
25 
60 80
Number of channels 
2 
3 
4 
5 6 
7 8 9 1 0 12 16 20 
% 
40 50 TO 90
0.1 
— 
—- - —
0.01
0.001
0.1 
1.0 
10.0 
100.0
Traffic intensity [Ert]
Figure 5.9 Probability of blocking as a function of the total traffic intensity a varying number
of channels
cellular system is 0.02. Let the average traffic intensity offered by a user be 0.03 Erl.
Recall that it means that a statistical subscriber uses a channel during 3 minutes in the
time interval of 100 minutes.
Let us calculate the number of cells covering the city area. From (5.3) we calculate
the area of a single hexagonal cell. This area is equal to 2.5981R2. For R = 6 km the
area is P = 93.53 km2. 
Therefore, the number of cells needed to cover the city area
is Nc = 3300/93.53 = 35.28 ~ 36 cells. Now let us calculate the number of channels
assigned to a single cell. Because the system has 2 x 4.5 MHz at its disposal and a
single connection requires two 25 kHz channels, therefore for 7-cell clusters the number
of duplex channels in a cell is C = 9000/(50 • 7) ~ 25 channels.
For C = 25 channels/cell and the probability of blocking equal to 0.02, we find from
the plot of the Erlang B formula (Figure 5.9) that the intensity of total traffic, 
which
may be carried in a cell is A — 17.5 Erl/'cell. Therefore, the total traffic carried in the
whole system is A-Nc = 17.5• 36 = 630 Erl. From this value we can deduce the number
of users who can be served by the system. This number is NA = (total 
traffic)/'(traffic
per user) = 630/0.03 = 21000 users. The number of all channels used in the system
can be found by division of the system bandwidth by the bandwidth of the channel pair.
For the assumed data it is 9 MHz/50 kHz = 180 channels. As a result we find that the
number of users per channel is 21000/180 ~ 116 users. The maximum number of users
who can be simultaneously served results from the number of channels in a cell and the

WAYS OF INCREASING THE SYSTEM CAPACITY 
147
number of cells and is equal to C • Nc = 25 • 36 = 900 users. As we see, if all channels
in all cells were occupied at the same time, the system could serve 900/21000 = 4.29%
of all users. We conclude that thanks to the idea of trunking the system resources can
be much smaller than the number of subscribers in the whole system.
A basic complication which has not been taken into account so far is users may
move from cell to cell during a connection. If they cross the cell borders a handover
is required. A new channel in a new cell has to be found and after that the channel
used in the old cell can be released. In consequence, traffic calculations become more
complicated. A possible solution to this problem is to construct a simulation package
which takes into account the movement of mobile stations and handovers. Statistical
properties of the mobile stations movement are different in cells covering urban area
and in those covering the rural terrain crossed by a highway.
5.3 
WAYS OF INCREASING THE SYSTEM CAPACITY
So far we have analyzed the cellular systems with uniformly distributed channels as-
signed to cells of equal size. In reality, the traffic intensity offered by subscribers is
rarely distributed uniformly in the system coverage area. As we mentioned in the intro-
ductory section, cellular systems are able to match the traffic served by the system to
the traffic offered by the subscribers. This is done by smart control of the cell sizes and
channel assignment. However, experience in real systems development indicates that
the demanded capacity can change in time. This is usually caused by the increasing
number of users who signed up to the cellular system subscription and reside in the
given area. Both problems imply the need to increase the system capacity and match
its topography to the distribution of the offered traffic. This task is usually solved by
applying the following solutions:
• cell sectorization,
• cell splitting, and
• using the concept of microcell zones.
In Section 5.2 we showed that introducing cell sectorization decreases the value of
S/I. Therefore, it is possible that the minimum required value of S/I can be achieved
for cell clusters built of a smaller number of cells. For example, we found that for
S/I — 18 dB, required in the analog cellular telephony, the number of cells in the
cluster N = 7 was insufficient if omnidirectional antennae were applied. Therefore,
it was necessary to apply 12-cell clusters. Application of 120°-sectors in the 7-cell
cluster ensured the increase of S/I by about 7 dB, as compared with omnidirectional
antennae. In consequence, we were able to decrease the number of cells in a cluster
to TV = 7 or even N = 4, as long as the value of S/I did not fall below 18 dB.
Thanks to that, the available channels are used more frequently in the same area, which
results in the increase of the reuse factor I/TV and in the system capacity. The price
paid for this is tripling the number of antennae and base stations and more frequent

148 
THE CELLULAR SYSTEM CONCEPT
handovers between cells and sectors, which causes increased control traffic. As we have
mentioned before, sectorization partially decreases trunking efficiency, unless the users
are uniformly distributed in all sectors.
Figure 5.10 Example of cell splitting preserving sectorization
The second way of increasing capacity is splitting a cell into smaller ones [2], [3],
[6]. Cell splitting is usually done by establishing smaller cells in the given locations
of the covered area. The radius of these smaller cells is half the radius of the original
cell. In consequence, the new cell area is four times smaller than the area of cells which
have been divided. Larger cells are used in the area with low offered traffic, whereas
smaller ones are used in places in which traffic is more intensive. Figure 5.10 presents an
example of cell splitting for the sectorized cells. Halfway of the distance between original
cells denoted by number 1, with sectors A, B, and C, a new cell is introduced with the
radius equal to half the radius of the original cell. The sectorization is preserved. Let
us note that locating a new small cell in the indicated place preserves the value of the
co-channel interference reduction factor Q = D/R, because both the distance between
the cells of the same type and their radii decreased twice [2]. As a result of introducing
a new cell, it is possible to apply a lower power level in the base station, such that on
the border of a small cell the received signal power is the same as the power level of
the signal received on the border of the original cell. The same is also true for mobile
stations as well. Because the power of the signal received at distance R from the base

WAYS OF INCREASING THE SYSTEM CAPACITY 
149
station is associated with the transmitted signal power in the formula
PR1= 
k.P T 1.R - y 
(5.15)
where k is the proportionality factor, then assuming the same received power at the
border of small and large cells with the radii R/ 2 and R, respectively, we get the
dependence between the transmitted power in the large cell PTI and the small cell PT2
in the form
/1Y-y
PTI = PTI (•=} 
(5.16)
\^/
For 7 = 4, (5.16) indicates that the transmitted power in a small cell is 12 dB lower
than that in a large cell.
Division of cells into smaller ones requires modification of channel assignment in
large cells located in the neighborhood of .a new small cell. Usually-the process of cell
splitting resulting in the increase of system capacity is performed gradually, so large
and small cells coexist with one another. Then channel allocation for large and small
cells of the same type is the following. The channels used in large cells (e.g. cells
denoted by number 1 or 2 in Figure 5.10) are divided into two groups: the first group
of channels which are also used in small cells of the same type (denoted in Figure
5.10 by number 1 or 2 as well) and the second group which consists of the remaining
channels. The channels belonging to the first group are used in small cells and in the
centers of large cells, denoted in Figure 5.10 by dashed lines, whereas the second group
of channels is used in whole large cells including their external parts. The price paid
for this modification is a higher complexity of base stations. The signals transmitted
in the channels used in small and large cells have to be generated with smaller power
than those generated in the channel used in the large cells only.
In 1991 W.Y.C. Lee proposed another solution to the problem of capacity increase, i.e.
the concept of microcell zones.3 In this solution, some disadvantages of cell sectorization
are avoided, such as frequent handovers between sectors and the decrease of trunking
efficiency.
The original cell is divided into three zones. On the edge of each zone, the zone
transmitters and receivers are located. They are connected by fiber optical or microwave
links with the zone selector and the common part of the base station operating in
the given cell. A mobile station located in the cell is connected with the strongest
zone transmitter and receiver. The pool of channels used in the cell is common for
all zones. Moving the mobile station to another zone in the cell does not cause the
change of the assigned channel. This channel "is taken" by the mobile station to a
new zone. As a result, there is no time-consuming and resource-consuming handover.
However, the main advantage of the concept of microcell zones is decreasing the co-
channel interference by using the zone transmitters with a lower power than the power
3 We should not mistake the microcells applied in the microcell zones concept with microcells used in
cordless telephony and PCS systems. The idea of microcell zones is not equivalent to the placement of
base stations in the tops of cells either.

150 
THE CELLULAR SYSTEM CONCEPT
generated by sector transmitters located in the middle of the cells. Therefore, without
loss of trunking efficiency (all channels are in common use in all zones in the same cell)
we gain the possibility of capacity increase due to decreasing the number of different
cells in the cluster. Lee showed [10] that in the case of the American first generation
system AMPS, the requirement of S/I = 18 dB while using the microcell zone concept
results in decreasing the number of cells in a cluster from N = 7 to N = 4. Smaller
clusters result in 2.33-times increase of the system capacity, with S/I = 20 dB in the
worst case.
5.4 CHANNEL ASSIGNMENT TO THE CELLS
So far we have designed the system regarding the aspects of the required capacity
and grade of service. The next design step is to assign particular channels (carrier
frequencies) to cells or to cell sectors.
Let us consider the rule of distribution of channel frequencies among cells or sectors.
Interchannel interference has a direct impact on our choice. This type of interference
arises between the signals generated in the same cell (or sector) on different frequencies
assigned to this cell (sector). This distortion should be minimized. It can be achieved
by an appropriate choice of channel frequencies in each cell. Interchannel interference
is also strictly associated with the movement of mobile stations in a cell and various
distances of mobile stations from the common base station (near- far effect). 
Due to
nonideal filtration of the channel signals, the sidelobes of the channel used by the mobile
station located close to the base station may filter through the passband of the other
filters separating the channel closely placed on the frequency axis and used by a far-off
mobile station. A similar situation in the opposite transmission direction (from the
base station to the mobile station) is also possible.
For example, if the transmitting mobile station is at the distance which is forty times
longer than the distance from the distorting station using another channel in the same
cell, then the ratio of the desired signal power to the power of interference measured
in front of the receive filter input of the base station receiver, assuming propagation
conditions for which 7 = 4, is
= (40)-y = 40-4 = -64 dB 
(5.17)
If other remedies against this disadvantageous situation were not applied, this ratio
would have to be improved by introducing a receive filter with sharp cut-off and the
large channel separation on the frequency axis.
Let the receive filter have a passband width of B Hz and the slope of 24 dB/oct. Thus,
on the channel filter passband edge spaced by B/2 Hz from the middle of the channel,
the signal is attenuated by 24 dB. Each doubling of the frequency interval introduces 24
dB attenuation. The attenuation of at least 64 dB is achieved at the frequency distance
of 3.18 larger than a single channel bandwidth. In reality, four-channel bandwidth
separation is required. In general, frequency separation Afsep between the channels

CHANNEL ASSIGNMENT TO THE CELLS
151
used in the same cell can be determined from the formula:
— 
where G =
L
(5.18)
where 7 depends on the propagation environment. L is the filter slope expressed in
dB/oct, whereas do and d1 are the distances from the base station to the transmitting
and distorting mobile stations, respectively. In the considered example G = 64/24 =
2.67, so A/sep = 22-67 • (B/2) = 3.18J5. In practice the neighboring channels used in
the same cell have to be separated by 4B Hz.
Besides the described distribution of channel frequencies among the cells, which max-
imizes the frequency separation between channels applied in the given cell and takes into
account carrier frequencies used in the neighboring cells, there are some other means of
minimizing the influence of interchannel interference. These are:
• sophisticated synthesis of transmit and receive filters which effectively attenuate
the sidelobes of the transmitted and received signal spectra, which in turn ensures
the increase of receiver selectivity,
• precise power control of the signal transmitted by the base stations and mobile
stations on each channel.
More sophisticated filter synthesis results in increasing the value of L in (5.18). The
price paid for this is the increased transceiver cost and complexity. The precise power
control has a particular meaning. Thanks to it the signals arriving at the base station
from various mobile stations have approximately the same and permissibly low power
with respect to the S/I requirement or the error probability. All operating cellular
systems apply power control in mobile stations. This is particularly important for
CDMA systems (see Chapters 11 and 12) for which power control decides to a large
extent the effective system capacity.
Table 5.1 Distribution of carriers for a single GSM operator
1A
1
13
25
37
49
61
73
85
97
109
121
2A
2
14
26
38
50
62
74
86
98
110
122
3A
3
15
27
39
51
63
75
87
99
111
123
4A
4
16
28
40
52
64
76
88
100
112
124
IB
5
17
29
41
53
65
77
89
101
113
2B
6
18
30
42
54
66
78
90
102
114
3B
7
19
31
43
55
67
79
91
103
115
4B
8
20
32
44
56
68
80
92
104
116
1C
9
21
33
45
57
69
81
93
105
117
2C
10
22
34
46
58
70
82
94
106
118
3C
11
23
35
47
59
71
83
95
107
119
4C
12
24
36
48
60
72
84
96
108
120
Table 5.1 presents an example of channel distribution for the GSM system with
topology shown in Figure 5.8, on the assumption that a single operator has all 124

152 
THE CELLULAR SYSTEM CONCEPT
carriers at its disposal (see Chapters 7 and 8). In reality, the GSM spectrum is divided
among a few operators and a table similar to Table 5.1, containing the subset of carriers,
has to be prepared for all of them. The rule applied in Table 5.1 is as follows.
Twelve different sectors are included in Table 5.1, starting from symbol IA (j — 1)
and ending with 4C (j = 12). The jih sector (j = 1,... , 12)4 uses the carriers with
numbers jf+12k, (k = 0, . . . , n), where n is the largest integer for which (124—12n)/12 <
1. A similar table for AMPS systems managed by two operators can be found in [3].
So far we have considered distribution of carriers (channels) from the point of view of
interchannel interference minimization. If this channel allocation is done once and kept
constant, this type of assignment is called a fixed channel assignment. Let us recall that
in traditional analog cellular systems a channel is equivalent to a frequency interval with
a carrier in the middle. In TDMA/FDMA systems, a channel assignment is equivalent
to the assignment of a particular time slot on a specified carrier. In CDMA/FDMA
systems, a channel is equivalent to a particular spreading code applied on a specified
carrier.
Fixed channel assignment is the simplest strategy of system resources distribution.
In reality, this strategy can be more cumbersome than in the simplest case of hexagonal
cells with traffic uniformly distributed in the system area. The reason for the increased
complexity is the necessity of taking into account real or expected traffic distribution and
unequal size of cells or sectors. In fixed channel assignment, setting a new connection in
a given cell is possible only if there are unoccupied channels in that cell. In the case of
a temporary lack of available channels, the user suffers from blocking of a connection.
At the same moment there can be free channels in neighboring cells. The number of
call requests may often vary considerably depending on the day, hour, or particular
events. Thus, fixed channel assignment can be an inefficient solution resulting in high
probability of blocking during busy hours. There are, however, more sophisticated
channel assignment methods [6], [8], which take into account a dynamically changing
demand for channels. Figure 5.11 presents the classification of the channel assignment
strategies.
The simple borrowing strategy is an improvement of the basic fixed strategy, which
adds some dynamics to the latter. If all channels permanently assigned to the cell are
busy, a channel can be borrowed from a neighboring cell, provided that this channel
does not interfere with current calls. If the channel is borrowed by the given cell, some
other cells are not allowed to use the same channel because of inter- and co-channel
interference. The mobile switching center supervises the borrowing process, locking
the borrowed channels in the cells located one or two cells away from the borrowing
cell. The switching center keeps a record of free, borrowed and locked channels and
informs appropriate base stations about them. In consequence of the applied strategy,
the probability of blocking decreases to a certain threshold value of traffic intensity.
If the actual traffic exceeds this threshold, the channel utilization degrades because
borrowing a single channel causes locking that channel in about five other cells.
4 In case of the GSM system, if the number of cells in a cluster is N = 4 and each cell is divided into
three sectors, there are 12 different sectors.

CHANNEL ASSIGNMENT TO THE CELLS 
153
Channel assignment methods
fixed 
dynamic
* 
flexible 
*
A
basic fixed
r 
A" 
*•
simple 
scheduled 
predictive
borrowing 
•*
^ 
call-by-call
hybrid 
• • 
optimized
borrowing
with ordering
Figure 5.11 Classification of channel assignment strategies
The hybrid channel assignment strategy improves the properties of the simple bor-
rowing strategy. In this strategy, channels used in a cell are divided into two categories:
the channels belonging to the first category cannot be borrowed and are used only within
the cell, whereas the channels belonging to the second category can be borrowed. The
ratio of channel numbers from both categories is set on the basis of the expected traffic.
Each channel is labeled with respect to the category to which it belongs.
Further improvement of the channel utilization is achieved due to the borrowing with
ordering strategy. In this strategy the number of channels belonging to both categories
changes dynamically with respect to the traffic conditions. The probability of borrowing
is assigned to each borrowable channel and these channels are ordered with respect to
the decreasing value of this probability. The probabilities of borrowing are updated on
the basis of the number of the channel borrowings.
In the dynamic channel assignment strategy there are no channels permanently as-
signed to the cells. The channel is assigned to a particular call on a call-by-call basis.
Decision upon the assigned channel can be made either by the mobile switching center
or by the mobile station. In the first case we talk about centralized control, whereas the
second case is described as the distributed control of the channel assignment process.
The mobile switching center selects the particular channel on the basis of a criterion
minimizing the selected cost function. The cost function depends on the probability of
blocking, the frequency of utilization of the potentially assigned channel, the distance to
the cell currently using the same channel, etc. In the process of channel assignment, the
mobile switching center also takes into account the measurements of the signal received
from a mobile station.
The flexible channel assignment strategies combine the advantages of fixed and dy-
namic channel assignment strategies. Each cell has at its continuous disposal a set
of channels which is sufficient to serve the traffic of moderate intensity. The mobile
switching center manages the remaining set of channels which can be assigned to those
cells in which the current traffic intensity is too high to be served by the permanently
assigned channels.

154 
THE CELLULAR SYSTEM CONCEPT
In the flexible channel assignment with scheduling the assignment of additional chan-
nels is planned in advance, taking into account the time of the day and location of the
cell. The changes in the channel assignment are made at the predetermined moments
at which the traffic achieves extreme values.
In the predictive flexible channel assignment strategy the traffic intensity is measured
in real time and channel reassignment can be made by the mobile switching center at
any moment.
The channel assignment strategies presented so far are only a representation of a rich
set of strategies which can be found in literature. A wide survey of these strategies
can be found in [9] which a particularly interested reader is advised to study. Compar-
ing the two main groups of channel assignment strategies, we can state that there is
a compromise between the achievable service quality (meant here mostly as the prob-
ability of call blocking), implementation complexity, and efficient use of the assigned
spectrum. We conclude from [9] that the simulation and analysis results indicate that
for low traffic intensity dynamic channel assignment strategies are better than fixed
channel assignment strategies. However, the latter show their superiority at high traffic
intensity and the uniform distribution of mobile stations in the covered area. In the
fixed channel assignment, the channels are assigned to ensure the maximum number
of their multiple use. This is not possible for dynamic channel assignment strategies
which have a statistical character resulting from the statistical nature of the call and
channel requests.
REFERENCES
1. V. H. Mac Donald, "The Cellular Concept", Bell System Technical Journal, Vol.
58, No. 1, January 1979, pp. 15–41
2. W. C. Y. Lee, "Elements of Cellular Mobile Radio Systems", IEEE Trans. Vehicular
Technology, Vol. VT-35, No. 2, May 1986, pp. 48–56
3. T. S. Rappaport, Wireless Communications, Prentice-Hall PTR, Upper Saddle
River, N.J., 1996
4. K. David, T. Benkner, Digitale Mobilfunksysteme, B. G. Teubner, Stuttgart, 1996
5. A. Mehrotra, GSM System Engineering, Artech House Publishers, Boston, 1997
6. G. L. Stuber, Principles of Mobile Communication, Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Boston, 1996
7. D. Rutkowski, "The Rules of Cellular Network Construction and their Progress
Perspectives" (in Polish), Przeglad Telekomunikacyjny, No. 4, 1996, pp. 241-249
8. S. Tekinay, B. Jabbari, "Handover and Channel Assignment in Mobile Cellular
Networks", IEEE Communications Magazine, November 1991. pp. 42-46

CHANNEL ASSIGNMENT TO THE CELLS 
155
9. I. Katzela, M. Naghshlneh, "Channel Assignment Schemes for Cellular Mobile
Telecommunication Systems: A Comprehensive Survey", IEEE Personal Commu-
nications, June 1996, pp. 10-31
10. W. C. Y. Lee, "Smaller Cells for Greater Performance", IEEE Communications
Magazine, November 1991, pp. 19-23
11. ETSI GSM 05.05, Radio Transmission and Reception, March 1991
12. A. Wojnar, Land Mobile Communication Systems (in Polish), WKL, Warszawa.
1991

This page intentionally left blank

First generation cellular
telephony - NMT and
AMPS examples
6.1 
FIRST GENERATION CELLULAR SYSTEMS
First generation cellular systems using analog voice transmission came into operation
in the early eighties. The first cellular system, which is still in use, is the American
Advanced Mobile Phone System (AMPS) [4]. Although there are technologically much
more modern systems than AMPS, it is still popular in the USA, Canada, Central
and South America and some other countries, due to its wide coverage. The first
mobile cellular system implemented in Europe was the Nordic Mobile Telephone (NMT)
system. This was the first-generation cellular system which operated in a unified way in
more than one country and allowed mobile communications in the whole of Scandinavia.
It is still used in Scandinavia and some East European countries.
NMT and AMPS are only two examples of first-generation cellular systems. Since
those systems were mutually incompatible, a common digital cellular telephony standard
was proposed in Europe. The other first-generation cellular systems are known as
Total Access Communication System (TACS)1 which was used in the United Kingdom,
Ireland, Spain, China, New Zealand, Hong Kong and other countries, and C-Netz used
in Germany, South Africa and Portugal. A similar system was also established in
France. All cellular analog systems were similarly advanced and worked according to
approximately the same rules. Due to their generally declining tendency they will not
be the subject of a detailed description. However, we will shortly concentrate on NMT
and AMPS systems, as they still retain some popularity. Table 6.1 presents the basic
technical parameters of both systems.
1TACS is a European modification of AMPS.
157
6

158 
FIRST GENERATION CELLULAR TELEPHONY - NMT AND AMPS EXAMPLES
Table 6.1 Basic technical parameters of AMPS and NMT cellular systems
System parameters
Transmission frequency [MHz]
- Base station
- Mobile station
Frequency separation between
transmitter and receiver [MHz]
Spacing between channels [kHz]
Number of channels
Base station coverage radius [km]
Modulation of audio signal
- Frequency deviation [kHz]
Control signals
— Modulation
- Frequency deviation [kHz]
Data transmission rate
of control signals [kbit/s]
Transmitter output power [W]
- Maximum for base station
— Medium for mobile station
AMPS
869–894
824–849
45
30
832
2-25
FM
±12
FSK
±8
10
100
3
NMT 450
463–467.5
453–457.5
10
25
180
1.8–40
FM
±5
MSK
±3.5
1.2
50
1.5
NMT 900
935–960
890–915
45
25
1000
2-20
FM
±5
MSK
±3.5
1.2
25
1
6.2 
NMT ARCHITECTURE
The NMT system was developed jointly by the Scandinavian countries, i.e. Denmark,
Norway, Sweden and Finland. In the first phase of development the system operated in
the 450 MHz band. After some time the system gained so much in popularity that it
was close to saturation. Therefore, it was necessary to assign a new band in the range
of 900 MHz and a new, modified system version denoted as NMT 900 was created.
Originally, the designers assumed existence of the following mobile stations:
• mobile stations installed in vehicles,
• portable mobile stations,
• coin-operated wireless terminals.
These assumptions are specific for Scandinavian countries where one of the reasons
for introducing cellular telephony, and the reason for its enormous success, was low
population density. Technological progress made since the eighties resulted in the re-
placement of the portable mobile stations by handhelds. The system was aimed at land
communications; however, it is possible to use it in short distance maritime communi-
cations along the sea coast as well. It is also used as one of the alternative means of
wireless subscriber access to PSTN (see Chapter 15). The following basic requirements
were defined for the NMT system [3]:

NMT ARCHITECTURE 
159
• automatic setting up and charging of a connection to and from a mobile station,
• the possibility of setting up a connection with any subscriber of a PSTN network
in any country or with any subscriber of the mobile network,
• the cost of a call is charged to the calling subscriber, the cost being calculated on
the basis of the duration of the call and the dialled number,
• from the point of view of a mobile subscriber the system should be similar to a
standard PSTN network in the aspects of the network use, reliability of signaling,
charging and call secrecy,
• the introduction of the NMT system should not require any significant changes in
the PSTN network.
The NMT system consists of three basic group of elements: Mobile Telephone Ex-
changes (MTX), Base Stations (BS) and Mobile Stations (MS).
The MTX is the main control element of the system. It provides the interface with
the PSTN. The interface is possible on the local, transit or international exchange
levels. The preferred level of interface is a transit exchange. The MTX is a specialized
digital switching exchange. Therefore, besides standard connections it allows additional
services such as short dialing, transfer of a connection, etc.
The base stations realize the interface between the fixed part of the system and mo-
bile stations. They are connected with the MTX using four-wire transmission systems
based on wireline or line-of-sight radio links. The areas covered by base stations are
grouped into traffic areas. Each traffic area is connected through the MTX with the
fixed network. It is also possible for the MTX to control a few traffic areas. Such a
configuration is shown in Figure 6.1. The area covered by base stations controlled by a
single MTX is called a service area. Such an area is divided into traffic areas.
Each base station manages a subset of channels assigned to the cell according to
the channel distribution plan. From the system point of view, the following types of
channels exist:
• paging (calling) channel,
• traffic channels,
• access channel (in NMT 900),
• combined paging and traffic channel,
• data channel.
In a typical system arrangement, each base station has a single paging channel, a
single access channel (in NMT 900), a single data channel and a limited number of
traffic channels.
The paging channel is used by the base station for transmission of a continuous
identification signal. Mobile stations located in a given traffic area and remaining in

160 
FIRST GENERATION CELLULAR TELEPHONY - NMT AND AMPS EXAMPLES
Traffic area No. 1
i
Mobile
switching
center
MTX1
Transit
exchange 1
Local
exchange
Traffic area No. 2
Traffic area No. 3
Optional
connection
MIX 2
Mobile
swiching
center
Transit
exchange 2
Local
exchange
Fixed telephone network
Figure 6.1 General architecture of the NMT system
the idle state2 are locked to the paging channel and wait for call requests directed to
them. After the identification of the call request, a traffic channel is assigned to the
mobile station to perform the remaining part of the connection set up and to realize
the call.
Traffic channels are used to perform calls and to manage a part of the call request.
A traffic channel can remain in three different states, marked with special flag signals:
• in a free state - the mobile station can use it to initiate a call request to the base
station,
• in a busy state - the call is currently performed,
2 In the idle state the power supply is switched on but only the parts of the mobile stations necessary
for call request detection are powered.

NMT ARCHITECTURE 
161
• in an idle state - the channel is neither in a free state nor in a busy state.
Let us recall that a link consists of a pair of traffic channels: one channel from base
station to mobile station (downlink] and another channel shifted by 10 MHz and used
for communications in the opposite direction (uplink). A mobile station wishing to set
a connection looks for a downlink channel marked as a free channel. Thus, an uplink
channel shifted by 10 MHz can be used for the call request procedure.
The combined paging and traffic 
channel has the features of both channels. In a
regular mode it is used as a paging channel. However, if all traffic channels are occupied,
it can be temporarily used by selected, high priority subscribers as a traffic channel.
The data channel allows measurement of the power level of the signal of the mobile
station being in the active connection state. The measurement results are used by the
MTX in the handover process.
The access channel is a special channel in the NMT 900 version of the system used
to perform a call request instead of a traffic channel marked "free".
The NMT 450 operates in the FDMA/FDD mode. The frequency ranges for the
downlink are 463-467.5 MHz for NMT 450 and 935–960 for NMT 900. The uplink is
realized in the frequency range of 453-457.5 MHz for NMT 450 and 890-915 MHz for
NMT 900 [5]. Channel carrier separation is 25 kHz, which in the assigned spectrum
allows for allocation of 180 channels in NMT 450 and 1000 channels in NMT 900. Voice
signals are transmitted using FM modulation with 5 kHz deviation [5].
Because the number of channels in NMT 450 was equal to 180, the system design-
ers foresaw that the system capacity would be too small in densely populated urban
areas. Thus, the idea of cell splitting was applied. One of the possible solutions was
a construction of concentric sector cells with the sector angles equal to 60° and the
center located at the point close to the highest traffic density. Around the center the
cells are very small. The cells in subsequent rings have a larger area and theoretically
have a shape of a ring sector. Diversified cell sizes and the base station powers require
a dynamic power level control at the mobile stations in order to minimize interchannel
interference and the near-far 
effect.
All control signals are transmitted directly in the traffic channel using the MSK
modulation (see Chapter 1), at the data rate of 1200 bit/s. When control signals are
transmitted, regular speech transmission is interrupted, which can be heard by the
subscriber and deteriorates the overall transmission comfort. The control signals are
blocks consisting of 16 hexadecimal characters, i.e. they are 64-bit long. In order to
ensure reliable reception, the Hagelberger error correcting code is applied. The code is
designed to correct burst errors which are not longer than 6 bits. The subsequent error
bursts have to be interlaced with error free sequences which are at least 20-bit long.
The applied code ensures error correction of most of the errors due to fading occurring
at a typical mobile station velocity.
The control frame consists of 166 bits and is divided into the following blocks:
• 15 bit synchronization bits (101010101010101),
• 11 frame synchronization bits (11100010010).
• 140 bits containing control data bits and Hagelberger parity bits.

162 
FIRST GENERATION CELLULAR TELEPHONY - NMT AND AMPS EXAMPLES
15 bits 
11 bits 
140 bits
synchronization synchronisation 
Coded information
N, N2 N3 P M, M, Z X, X, X, X. X, X,
information
Figure 6.2 Signalling frame structure in the NMT system
Figure 6.2 presents the control frame structure. The coded information contains
a three digit channel number, a prefix character, a two-digit traffic area number, a
seven-digit subscriber number and three-character user's information.
6.3 
INFORMATION FLOW CONTROL IN THE NMT SYSTEM
The flow control functions often have a big influence on the system performance. They
are associated with connection set-up, handover, paging of mobile stations and their
location update.
Let us consider the system operation at the moment of a network originated con-
nection set-up. The PSTN subscriber wishing to call a mobile subscriber makes a
connection with the MTX. There are two possibilities of setting the path to the mo-
bile station. The first possibility is a connection with the mobile's own MTX, i.e. that
MTX in which the mobile station is permanently registered. The mobile station usually
resides in the service area of that MTX. The data on the current location of the paged
mobile station can be found in the MTX subscriber register. On the basis of these data
the MTX directs the connection to the proper MTX in whose service area the mobile
station is currently located. The current location of the mobile station in the service
area of a particular MTX is marked in its subscriber register. The data of the called
mobile station are finally analyzed in the destination MTX and the latter manages the
final steps of the connection set-up.
The second possibility of path routing is a connection to the closest MTX being the
nearest gateway to the NMT system. This exchange analyzes the form of the called
subscriber number and sends the request to the mobile subscriber's own MTX to find out
the current mobile subscriber location. After reception of this information, the shortest
route to that particular MTX is set up which manages the area in which the called
mobile station is located. Both possibilities of a connection are shown in Figure 6.3 [5].
The standard connection is shown using a solid line, whereas the connection in which
the closest MTX is used is shown by dotted lines. MTX H (Home MTX) denotes the
home location exchange containing the permanent data and data on the current location
of the called mobile station and MTX V (Visited MTX) is the exchange serving the
traffic area in which the mobile station is currently located. MTX G (Gateway MTX)

INFORMATION FLOW CONTROL IN THE NMT SYSTEM 
163
NMT system 
Fixed telephone network
Figure 6.3 Path routing during connection set-up: standard procedure (solid line) and procedure
involving the use of the nearest MTX (dotted line)
denotes the NMT exchange which is closest to the calling subscriber. As we see, the
second method of path routing requires transmission of additional signaling information
between MTXs. In turn, the costs of signal transmission are minimized. This method
can be applied if in the mobile network a numbering plan is applied which allows for
identification of a mobile subscriber at the early stage of the call set-up.
If the mobile station receives the call request containing its own identification number
in the paging channel, it responds in the uplink paging channel. Based on this response,
the MTX identifies the base station which is closest to the mobile station and belongs
to the traffic area in which the mobile station has recently been registered. In turn, the
MTX assigns the number of a free traffic channel to which the called mobile station
subsequently tunes. Prom that moment the paging channel is available for other call
set-ups. If the called mobile station does not acknowledge the call, the MTX generates
a tone or a voice announcement indicating that the called mobile station cannot be
reached. A similar signal is also sent if there is no free channel for the call set-up.
If the mobile station has been identified and a free traffic channel has been assigned
to it, the subsequent call set-up steps follow. The selected base station begins to send
a test tone to supervise the connection quality. In case of NMT 900, the base station
transmits the request for mobile station identification number and its password. The
mobile station uses the assigned traffic channel to send these parameters. If mobile
station identification is positive, the base station sends a command to generate a ringing
signal. After the response of the mobile subscriber (he/she symbolically takes the phone
off the hook) the call is finally realized. The disconnection of one of the subscribers
triggers a signal for release of the assigned traffic channel and the mobile station turns
to the idle mode. In this mode it is tuned to the paging channel of the cell where it is
currently located.
Now let us consider the mobile-originated call request. The necessary condition for
making the call request is the current registration of the calling mobile station in the
cellular network and being in the power-on mode in which the mobile station is tuned
to the paging channel for possible detection of the paging signal. The initiation of

164 
FIRST GENERATION CELLULAR TELEPHONY - NMT AND AMPS EXAMPLES
the mobile-originated call request implies the search of the mobile station for a free
traffic channel. Such a channel is found after monitoring the downlink traffic channels
transmitting a "free channel" marker. In the uplink traffic channel associated with the
first found free downlink channel, the mobile station initiates the exchange of control
signals. It transmits the identification data and the number of the called mobile or fixed
network subscriber. The MTX serving the traffic area in which the mobile station has
issued the call request checks the category of the calling subscriber.
In NMT 900 the mobile station performs the same procedure in the access channel.
Additionally, the MTX checks the subscriber's password. Then a free traffic channel
is assigned to the connection. In case of system overloading, high priority subscribers
(emergency service, police, medical doctors) are granted temporary usage of the com-
bined paging and traffic channel.
During the call the base station sends to the mobile station a continuous tone signal
of the frequency around 4000 Hz (3955, 3985, 4015 or 4045 Hz). The mobile station
reverses this signal back to the base station. The base station evaluates the quality of
the received signal in order to realize the handover procedure or disconnect the call.
The base station informs the MTX about the quality of the received tone signal. If the
tone level is too low, the MTX initiates measurements in the neighboring cells. The
measurement results are the basis for the MTX's decision upon possible transfer of the
connection to a new cell (handover). If the measurement results are no better in any
surrounding cell than those in the current cell, after 20–30 seconds another attempt of
handover is made. If the level of the measured signal falls below a critical value, the
link is released. However, if handover is initiated and a new cell is selected, a new traffic
channel has to be found. After finding it, the MTX transmits the order to the mobile
station to transfer the connection to the new traffic channel in the new cell.
Let us note that during handover the mobile station remains passive. Only the MTX
and co-operating base stations are involved in the measurements, subsequent analysis
of these measurements and the handover decision. This is a serious load for the control
part of the system. In newer systems the measurement and decision processes are more
distributed. Mobile stations take part in them, too.
If the MTX decides to transfer the connection to one of the neighboring cells, it sends
the order to the surrounding base stations to perform the power signal measurement
on that channel which is currently used by the mobile station. For this reason all base
stations are equipped with a monitoring receiver, which is able to measure the power
level of all the system channels. The information obtained from this receiver helps the
MTX to decide to which base station the connection with the specified mobile station
should be transferred. Let us note that handover can occur not only between two cells
in the same traffic area but between two traffic areas or two service areas. In the last
case the change of MTX takes place as well.
The measurement procedure is also ordered to the base station at the beginning of
the call initialization in order to check if this base station is appropriate for a connection
with the given mobile station. This measurement result is also useful in checking if the
mobile station located closely to the base station is not sending the signal whose power
level is too high. If this is detected, the MTX commands the mobile station to decrease
the transmitter power in order to balance the signals received from different mobile

SERVICES OFFERED BY NMT 
165
stations. The measurement procedure is also useful if the connection is transferred to
another traffic channel in the same cell when the currently assigned channel is out of
order or does not ensure adequate quality due to the propagation conditions.
Location update is one of the procedures closely related to the system control func-
tions. As we have already mentioned, if the mobile station is in the idle mode it is tuned
to the paging channel in its cell. This channel transmits the code of the traffic area to
which the cell belongs. If the mobile station changes the location, it tunes to a new
paging channel. In consequence, if the mobile station detects a new traffic area code,
it initiates the call request in order to update its location in the subscriber register of
the home MTX.
If due to mobility the mobile station moves to a new service area which is managed
by another MTX, the registration procedure has to be initiated in the new "visited"
MTX. This is so called roaming. The newly visited MTX sends an information sequence
containing the new location of the mobile station to its home MTX. In response, the
home exchange sends to the new MTX the sequence with the current subscriber status.
In Scandinavian countries a mobile station is equipped with circuits preventing tuning
to base stations from a foreign country.
The system should complete call set-up and handover procedures within the following
time intervals [5]:
• mobile originated call set-up time – 4 seconds,
• mobile terminated call set-up procedure:
— occupation of a paging channel – 1 second,
- occupation of a traffic channel - 1 second,
• call clearing time — 0.75 second
• handover time: 1 second (NMT 450) or 0.3 second (NMT 900).
6.4 
SERVICES OFFERED BY NMT
Services offered by NMT partially follow from the call management performed by elec-
tronic telephone exchanges applied in the NMT system, which have been modified for
operation in this mobile cellular system. In general, the system offers similar services to
those offered by a typical fixed telephone network. Besides a standard voice connection,
there is a list of additional services such as abbreviated dialing, immediate call diversion
or call diversion on no reply from the subscriber, malicious calls tracing, etc. These
services are common for the NMT and fixed networks. However, there are services
specific for the mobile system as well.
The first one called Data Mobile Station is low rate (600 bit/s) data and fax transmis-
sion. As we remember, in a regular connection, the signaling sequences are transmitted
in the traffic channel during interruptions of a voice signal. Such an operation would be
disastrous for data transmission. Thus, data transmission is possible only after switch-
ing off the signaling in the traffic channel, necessary for handover and power control.

166 
FIRST GENERATION CELLULAR TELEPHONY - NMT AND AMPS EXAMPLES
The data transmission service is activated and deactivated by a subscriber and requires
special equipment interfacing between a data or fax terminal and a mobile station pro-
viding the modem interface.
The second service is called Coin Box Mobile Station. This service provides the
mobile station with charging information during mobile-originated calls. It can be
used, for example, by coin-operated mobile terminals.
Other services offered to the subscriber are priority calls, DTMF3 signaling and a list
of additional improvements in the mobile station (push-button dialing, on-hook dialing,
telephone book in the mobile station, last number redial, electronic lock and others).
A very important service offered to the subscribers traveling in vehicles is hands-free
operation.
Transmitter
-4000 Hz 
A
 
A
wt./wy*. 
--------- 
tone
MSK 
Power
modulator 
* • 
level
— -— ~ 
* 
* 
control 
T
Display 
A
— - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
Duplex
- "I—;
Keyboard
Control 
Frequency 
filter
unit 
* 
synthesizer
MSK
Timeout 
demodulator
on/off
^Loudspeaker^ 
Detector* Passband „ Mix6r „ 
Passband « Mjxer •« 
RF
amplifier 
Detector " f i t t e r 
* Mixer " f i t t e r 
Mlxer * 
ampiH
Receiver 
IF2 
Generator 
IF1
Figure 6.4 Block diagram of a typical NMT mobile station
6.5 TYPICAL MOBILE STATION AND BASE STATION DESIGN
A block scheme of a typical mobile station is shown in Figure 6.4. It consists of three
basic parts: a transceiver part, a logical block, and a user interface.
The voice signal received from the microphone is amplified and fed to the FM modu-
lator whose carrier frequency is generated in the frequency synthesizer. This synthesizer
is controlled by the control unit which determines the number of the applied channel.
The modulated signal is amplified by the power amplifier with adjustable gain. The
output signal, after passing through the duplex filter is fed to the antenna. Instead
3 Dual-Tone Multiple Frequency

TYPICAL MOBILE STATION AND BASE STATION DESIGN 
167
of a voice signal, the MSK modulated signal carrying the control commands can be
transmitted. As we have already mentioned, besides the voice or data signals, the mo-
bile station retransmits the test tone received from the base station at the frequency of
around 4000 Hz.
The signal received by the antenna is directed through the duplex filter to the mo-
bile station receiver. First it is amplified and then moved down in two steps to the
intermediate frequency at which the frequency discriminator operates. The detector
output voice signal is fed to the loudspeaker amplifier. If a digitally modulated control
signal is received, it is fed to the MSK demodulator. The test tone is extracted from
the received signal and fed back to the transmitter.
On the basis of the messages received from the base station, the control unit decides
upon the traffic channel number. Depending on the type of transmitted or received
signal, it switches on and off the microphone and loudspeaker amplifiers, and super-
vises the keyboard and display. This unit controls the process of call set-up in the
mobile station, in particular it searches for a free traffic channel. The unit also controls
the process of channel release after completing the call and manages the procedure of
automatic registration of the mobile station in the system.
The base station consists of a certain number of units which are called channel
equipment and the circuits which are common for all the units such as transmitter
combiner, antenna multicoupler, supervisory unit, measurement receiver, RF test loop
and power supply.
The channel equipment comprises a transmitter, receiver and control unit. The trans-
mitter contains a pre-emphasis filter, FM modulator, test tone generator and amplifier.
The maximum transmitted signal power level is equal to 50 W for NMT 450 and 25 W
for NMT 900. The receiver consists of an input amplifier, FM detector, de-emphasis fil-
ter, a stopband filter cutting off the test tone and a measurement circuit supervising the
level of the received signal. The control unit consists of the controlling microprocessor,
a modem communicating with the MTX and a test tone generator. The control unit
participates in the signal transmission between the MTX and the RF part of the base
station. It also controls the self-test loop and performs alert functions and evaluates
the received test tone quality.
A transmitter combiner allows connection of the transmitters of all channel equip-
ments to a common antenna without mutual loading. This block also contains the filters
cutting off the spectrum outside the band of a given channel.
A multicoupler distributes the received signals to the respective receivers. It is per-
formed using passband channel filtration and active amplification of the channel signals.
A supervising block cooperates with the measurement unit, evaluating the level of
the received signals. The measurement results are quantized on 64 levels and this
information is transmitted to the MTX. It can be used to make a decision about possible
handover.
The NMT system which is already outdated played a significant role in introducing
cellular telephony in Scandinavian, East European and many other countries. Now it
has mostly been replaced by GSM. However, it can still be useful in rural areas with

168 
FIRST GENERATION CELLULAR TELEPHONY - NMT AND AMPS EXAMPLES
low population density, in implementing wireless local loops. Thus, huge investments
made in its deployment in the eighties and early nineties are not completely wasted.
6.6 THE OVERVIEW OF AMPS
The Advanced Mobile Phone System was developed in the seventies [4]; however, the first
deployment took place in the Chicago area in 1983. The system gained wide popularity
in the USA, Canada, Mexico, South America, Australia and Israel. It was also installed
in some areas of the former Soviet Union. Although outdated, it is still useful in the
large territory of the North American continent. AMPS was allocated 40 MHz spectrum
in the 800 MHz band by the Federal Communications Commission, later extended by
the next 10 MHz (see Table 6.1 for spectrum intervals). The spectrum allocation is also
shown in Figure 6.5. Typically, due to promoted competition, the spectrum is shared
by two service providers: the nonwireline service provider (denoted by character A)
and the wireline service provider (denoted by B). The extended parts of the spectrum
assigned to each service provider are denoted by A' and B', respectively. Each service
provider has 416 channels at its disposal, including 21 control channels. We have to note
that channel allocations can be different in other countries. In some countries a single
service provider exploits the system, so there is no division of the available channels
between two providers.
Dp-link
824.04 
825.03 
835.02 
845.01 
846.51 
849.00
33 
333 Channels 
(21) (21) 
333 Channels 
50 
83
A' 
A 
B 
A 
B'
Control
channels
Down-link
869.04 
870.03 
835.02 
890.01 
891.51 
894.00
33 
333 Channels 
(21) (2s!) 
333 Channels 
50 
83
A' 
A 
B 
A' 
B'
Control
channels
Figure 6.5 AMPS spectrum allocation
The system uses 7-cell clusters, mostly with 120°-sector antennae, to ensure at least
18 dB of the signal-to-interference ratio. The 30-kHz channels are divided into the
following categories:
• Forward Voice Channels (FVC) - used to transmit voice signals originated in the
fixed network from a base station to mobile stations and to send some control
signals during the call,
• Reverse Voice Channels (RVC) - applied to transmit voice signals and control
signals in the opposite direction,

AMPS RADIO INTERFACE 
169
• Forward Control Channels (FCC) - used to broadcast system information and
paging of the called mobile stations,
• Reverse Control Channels (RCC) - used to carry signaling information from the
mobile station to the base station in the set-up phase of a connection.
A typical base station has eight or more duplex voice channels, a forward control
channel and a reverse control channel; however, the number of voice channels can be as
large as 57 and the number of control channels can be also higher than one. The actual
channel configuration depends on the expected traffic and on specific environment. Each
base station has a control channel transmitter using FCC. This transmitter continuously
sends a digital FSK modulated signal at the data rate of 10 kbit/s, containing system
information such as the System Identification Number (SID) specific for each service
provider and the system status containing power control handling, roaming capabilities,
system ability to process other related standards such as DAMPS4 (IS-54) and NAMPS5
(narrowband AMPS). The system and paging information has the form of overhead
messages, mobile station control messages, or control file messages. In the USA 21
control channels for each service provider have been standardized, so mobile stations
wishing to "enter" the AMPS network and tune to the strongest FCC need to scan
the preset channels only. As we have mentioned, the reverse control channel (RCC) is
mainly used by mobile stations to initiate calls and to acknowledge the received page
messages.
6.7 AMPS RADIO INTERFACE
The details of AMPS radio interface depend on the type of the channel. They are
different for voice channels and control channels. Let us consider signal transmission
on a voice channel first.
The basic function of the voice channel is to perform transmission of a user's voice
signal. This is realized applying FM modulation. Therefore, the transmitter and re-
ceiver blocks in the voice transmitting channel are typical of FM systems (see Figure
6.6).
In the transmitter part, the signal representing voice is received from a microphone
or a PSTN source. Such a signal is filtered and limited in amplitude. Then, it is fed to a
compressor. The compressor is a variable gain circuit which controls the effect of speech
level variability and decreases the dynamic range of the speech signal. It improves
the subjective quality of transmission over distorted channels. The compression is
performed in such a way that a 2 dB increase in input power level produces a 1 dB
increase in output power level. The compressed signal is the subject of pre-emphasis and
amplitude limiting in order not to exceed the specified frequency deviation of 12 kHz in
4DAMPS (Digital AMPS) is a TDMA system in which three users share each 30 kHz channel.
5N-AMPS (Narrowband AMPS) is the modification made by Motorola allowing for the processing of
three calls in a single 30 kHz channel by applying FDMA and 10 kHz band for each user. It is mainly
installed in highly populated areas.

170 
FIRST GENERATION CELLULAR TELEPHONY - NMT AND AMPS EXAMPLES
Microphone 
FHter 
-^L* 
BarKj-
or land 
—*• and —> Compressor 
-> em£*Ts's —> pass 
-
linesource 
"* 
"* 
transtter
(a)
Receiver 
Band-
(b)
Figure 6.6 Tansmitter (a) and receiver (b) blocks in the voice processing chain
the FM modulator. In turn, the signal is fed to the bandpass filter which ensures that
the signal bandwidth is limited to the specified spectral interval. Finally, the signal is
supplemented with the special Supervisory Signal (SAT) performing a similar function
to that of the test tone in the NMT system, and is fed to the FM modulator. The SAT
tone has one of three possible frequencies: 5970, 6000 or 6030 Hz. Only one of them is
applied in a given cell.
In the receiver, specific blocks perform operations parallel to those in the trans-
mitter. After down-conversion to the intermediate frequency, the received FM signal
is discriminated, processed by the de-emphasis filter, bandpass filtered and expanded.
The characteristics of the expander is reciprocal to that of the compressor, so both
operations cancel each other.
Now let us consider data transmission. It is performed at the data rate of 10 kbit/s.
There are two categories of data transmission in AMPS: continuous transmission and
transmission in the form of discontinuous bursts. The first one is applied on forward
control channels. The discontinuous data transmission is performed, similar to the
NMT system, on forward voice channels and reverse control channels. On FVC the
base station sends information concerning call release, handover orders, and mobile
station power control. The method of transmission is called blank-and-burst signaling.
A mobile station realizes a discontinuous data transmission on reverse control channels
(RCC) if it sends a request to set up a connection.
In order to transmit data at 10 kbit/s, the FSK modulation with frequency dis-
crimination at the receiver is applied. The data are line coded using the Manchester
(bi-phase) code. In such a code data bits are represented by a pair of pulses. A binary
one is assigned a bi-pulse 0,1 and a binary zero is represented by a bi-pulse 1,0. Thanks
to that, the maximum of signal energy is concentrated around 10 kHz and the spectra
of voice and data signals, where the latter is transmitted in the burst mode, do not
overlap too much. Thus, the data bursts are barely heard by a user, although during
data burst transmission the voice signal is blanked for a period of 50 ms when a data
burst is sent. However, during data burst transmission on the voice channel, the SAT
signal must be suspended because it would interfere with the data signal.

AMPS RADIO INTERFACE 
171
Digital information is secured by application of forward error correction in the form
of BCH codes. A (40,28) BCH code is applied on forward channels whereas (48,36)
BCH code is used in reverse channels.
Continuous transmission on a forward control channel is organized in blocks of 463
bits. The block starts with a 10-bit bit synchronization sequence followed by an 11-
bit synchronization word. Then BCH encoded words A and B are transmitted in the
interleaved manner in order to avoid correlation of potential errors. Each word has
40 bits and is formed by a BCH code word. Words A and B are directed to mobile
stations having even or odd identification numbers, respectively. 42 bits remaining in
the 463-bit block are so-called busy-idle status bits. They are inserted between the
synchronization sequences and after each block of 10 message bits, as shown in Figure
6.7. They are intended to show the status of the reverse control channel in order to
minimize the probability of collisions which can occur if more than one mobile station
attempts to send a connection set-up request at the same time.
Last word B5
10 Bits 11 Bits
Bit 
| Word
sync 
sync
A 
A 
A
40 Bits
Word A, (40, 28) BCH
10 
11
Bit 
Word
sync 
sync
A 
A 
A
40
Next word A1
A 
A 
A
A
40
Word BR
= Point of busy - idle bit insertion
(after each 10 message bits and after bit and word sync)
Figure 6. 7 Data format for the forward control channel
Data sent on the reverse control channel take the form of packets. On this channel
the mobile station competes to initiate a call. Therefore, the moment of the start of
packet transmission is more or less random. The randomness is limited by monitoring
the busy-idle status bits on the FCC channel. Due to discontinuous packet transmission,
a bit synchronization word is longer than that on the FCC channel. It has 30 bits and
is followed by an 11-bit word synchronization. The next 7 bits make up the so-called
coded Digital Color Code (DCC) word. After the message precursor described above,
the coded words constituting the message follow. The message consists of 1 to 5 words
of 48 bits each, repeated 5 times. The base station performs a bit-by-bit, 3-out-of-5
voting to determine the form of the received 48-bit sequences. These sequences are
finally decoded by the decoding algorithm of the BCH (48,36) code, which corrects one

172 
FIRST GENERATION CELLULAR TELEPHONY - NMT AND AMPS EXAMPLES
error or rejects the message if it remains uncorrectable. The format of the data packet
used on a reverse control channel is shown in Figure 6.8.
30 (bits) 
11 
7 
48
Bit sync 
DOC 
Word A! (48.36)BCH
48 
48 
48 
48
WordA3 
WordA4 
Word Ag 
Word B,
48
Last word A4
Figure 6.8 Data format for reverse control channel
Voice
L (bits long) 
11
Bit sync 
Word 
Word A,
sync 
n
37 
11 
37 
11 
37 
11
Bit sync 
WordAj Bit sync ™ord 
WQftif^ 
Bjtsync Word
11 
37 
11
Figure 6.9 Data format used by packets transmitted on voice channels
As we have already mentioned, data transmission in a blank-and-burst mode also
takes place on voice channels. The format of such a packet is shown in Figure 6.9. The
packet starts with an L-bit long bit synchronization sequence (L = 100 for forward
transmission and L = 101 for reverse transmission) followed by 11-bit word synchro-
nization sequence. Then the message word is sent (40-bit long in forward direction
and 48-bit long in reverse direction) interleaved with the bit and word synchronization
sequences and repeated K times, where K = 11 for forward direction and K — 5 for
reverse direction. Such a large number of repetitions performed in the forward direction
is necessary to achieve high transmission reliability needed for handover handling.

CALL PROCESSING IN AMPS 
173
6.8 
CALL PROCESSING IN AMPS
Knowing some details of the AMPS radio interface, we are able to consider call pro-
cessing performed in the system. As in the NMT system, two cases are possible. The
first one is a mobile terminated call, where the source of the call request is a PSTN
subscriber. The PSTN network issues a call request sending the number of a mobile
subscriber to the AMPS mobile switching center (MSC). The MSC sends the paging
message, which includes the called subscriber's Mobile Identification Number (MIN), to
all base stations. They emit the page on the forward control channels. If the called mo-
bile station is in the idle mode, it is listening to one of these channels. If it receives the
paging message successfully, it acknowledges its reception on the reverse control channel
by sending back to the base station its MIN, its serial number or the Equipment Serial
Number (ESN). This way the MSC learns where the mobile station is currently located.
In turn, the MSC instructs the selected base station to assign the unused voice chan-
nel pair (in forward and reverse directions) to the connection with the mobile station.
The base station also assigns the mobile station a SAT tone and a Voice Mobile At-
tenuation Code (VMAC). The VMAC determines the power which will be used by the
mobile station during transmission on the reverse voice channel. As a result, the mobile
station changes its carrier frequencies to the assigned channel frequencies. In turn, it
starts to retransmit the SAT tone sent by the base station. After receiving it back, the
base station issues the alert signal on the forward voice channel and the mobile station
starts to ring. The reception of the alert message is acknowledged by sending a 10 kHz
Signaling Tone (ST) through the reverse voice channel until the mobile station answers
the call. Finally, the call takes place over the assigned voice channels.
Let us now consider the second case, i.e. a mobile-originated call. If a mobile
subscriber wishes to make a call, he/she enters the called user's number and the mobile
station (which so far has remained in the idle mode) starts transmitting data on the
reverse control channel. The message contains the MIN, Equipment Serial Number
(ESN), Station Class Mark (SCM) and the called subscriber's number. If this message
is received correctly, the data are sent to the MSC in order to verify the registration
of the calling subscriber and the MSC connects the mobile subscriber with the PSTN
subscriber, assigning a pair of voice channels to the base station - mobile station pair.
Handover is the crucial feature of cellular systems. It is also performed in the AMPS.
As in the NMT system, the mobile station behaves to a large extent passively and the
whole procedure is performed by the network. During a connection with the mobile
station, the signal received on the reverse voice channel is periodically measured by the
serving base station. If the signal level drops below a preset threshold or the reception
quality of the SAT tone is insufficient, the MSC uses measurement receivers in the
neighboring base stations to determine which base station receives the signal from the
mobile station at the highest level. If such a base station is found, the connection
with the mobile station is re-directed to it. It is done by assigning a new channel
pair to the connection by a new base station. The mobile station acknowledges receipt
of this message by sending the short ST tone on the reverse voice channel and the
mobile station transmitter turns off. In the meantime the new base station starts to
transmit the SAT tone. The mobile station tunes to the new traffic channels and begins

174 
FIRST GENERATION CELLULAR TELEPHONY - NMT AND AMPS EXAMPLES
to retransmit the new SAT tone. If the new base station detects this tone, the base
station acknowledges correct handover procedure to the MSC and the MSC releases the
old voice channel pair. The full procedure takes approximately 0.2 seconds.
The AMPS has been described without going into details. The reader interested in a
more detailed description is advised to study [7] and [8].
The analog AMPS will be fully replaced by the second generation digital systems
such as DAMPS (IS-54) IS-136 or cdmaOne (IS-95). Due to the fact that in the USA
the second generation systems have not been allocated a new spectrum interval, a
method of harmonized evolution from the AMPS to them has been developed. The
DAMPS system uses the same channels as analog AMPS, assigning them to three users
in a TDMA manner. The IS-95 system is designed to operate in a part of the AMPS
spectrum, applying CDMA mode and using dual mode mobile stations.
REFERENCES
1. R. Steele (Ed.), Mobile Radio Communications, Pentech Press Publishers, London,
1992
2. A. Mehrotra, Cellular Radio Analog and Digital Systems, Artech House, Boston,
1994
3. Nordic Mobile Telephone, Brief System Description, Swedish Post Administration,
Stockholm, 1981
4. Bell System Technical Journal, special issue on AMPS, Vol. 58, No. 1, January
1979
5. D. Westin, NMT: "The Nordic Solution" in D. M. Balston, R. C. V. Macario,
Cellular Radio Systems, Artech House, Boston, 1993, pp. 73–111
6. Z. C. Fluhr, P. T. Porter, "Advanced Mobile Service: Control Architecture", Bell
System Technical Journal, Vol. 58, No. 1, January 1979, pp. 43–69
7. R. V. C. Macario, Cellular Radio. Principles and Design, Macmillan New Electron-
ics, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, 1993
8. J. M. Hernando, F. Perez-Fontan, Introduction to Mobile Communications Engi-
neering, Artech House, Boston, 1999

7
GSM cellular telephony -
architecture and system
aspects
7.1 
INTRODUCTION
In the eighties many different mutually incompatible analog cellular telephony sys-
tems were in use in Europe, such as TACS (Total Access Communication System),
NMT (Nordic Mobile Telephony), C-Netz, Radiocom-2000 and their variants. In con-
sequence, the users were assigned exclusively to their own operator and their mobile
phones stopped operating when leaving the coverage area of their own mobile communi-
cation system.1 As a result of cooperation within the European Union, a special working
group for mobile telephony (Groupe Special Mobile GSM) was established, the task of
which was to specify the objectives and the standards of a common mobile cellular tele-
phony system. Industrial, scientific and R&D organizations from 17 countries, which
signed the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU), participated in the development of
a new system. As a result of common research and discussions a series of standards has
been established covering all the required layers of the OSI (Open Systems Intercon-
nection) reference model. Currently, the GSM acronym stands for Global System for
Mobile Communications which stresses the fact that the application of GSM spans far
beyond the European continent.
We will start the chapter devoted to the GSM system with a description of its general
architecture and we will present its basic radio parameters. Then we will concentrate
our attention on time and logical organization of the radio transmission. We will briefly
present a few examples of the main procedures performed within the system, such as
1NMT is the only exception. It has coverage in the whole of Scandinavia and the users are able to get a
connection through the other NMT operator when leaving their own country to another Scandinavian
country.
175

176 
GSM CELLULAR TELEPHONY - ARCHITECTURE AND SYSTEM ASPECTS
registration of a mobile station in the network and setting up a connection. The aim of
this chapter is to give an overview of the GSM system operation rather than to present
details that can be found in the ETSI/GSM standards or books devoted exclusively
to GSM. Two other chapters devoted to GSM will describe the system on the signal
processing level and will concentrate on data transmission and system enhancements
and modifications meant for high speed data and multimedia transmission.
7.2 
BASIC GSM ARCHITECTURE
A basic scheme of the GSM architecture is shown in Figure 7.1.
PSTN/ISDN/Data Networks
Home Location 
MSC
Register 
HLR
Authentication
Center 
AUC
Equipment Identification
Register 
EIR 
Visitor's Location
GSM 
MSC 
VLR 
Register
Operation 
Switching 
MSC
and Maintenance 
OMC 
Center 
System
A Interface 
BSS
Base Station
Controller
BSC
Ab lnterface 
BTS
BSS 
BTS
Base Transceiver
Station 
_
Mobile Station
Um Interface
Figure 7.1 General GSM system architecture
The area of GSM operation is divided into subareas managed by particular Mobile
Switching Centers (MSC). The MSCs are specialized electronic switching offices sup-
plemented by functional blocks performing tasks that are specific for a mobile cellular
system. Each MSC is connected with a respective VLR (Visitor's Location Register)
database. This is a register containing necessary information regarding mobile stations
that are temporarily located in the area serviced by the local MSC. Apart from the
VLRs, the GSM system that is administered by a particular operator is equipped with
three other databases. They are:

BASIC GSM ARCHITECTURE 
177
HLR (Home Location Register), the database of mobile stations permanently regis-
tered in the system administered by a particular operator,
AUC (Authentication Center), the database that allows checking if the user with the
assigned SIM (Subscriber Identity Module] card (see further paragraphs in this chapter)
is allowed to perform a call,
EIR (Equipment Identification Register), the database of serial numbers of the mo-
bile phones used in the system. The phones that have been lost or stolen are placed on
a black list, which prevents them from being used in the system.
The HLR register is the central database which stores the permanent parameters of
the users and information on their current location. In large systems there can be more
than one HLR. However, the individual user's data is stored only in one of them. The
HLR register contains all the data on the users permanently registered in the GSM
network, which allows the system to establish a connection path to them, even if at
the moment of connection they are temporarily registered in a different GSM network
operated in another country. Thus, the user's record in the HLR contains his/her
status, the Temporary Mobile Identification Number (TMSI) and the address of the
VLR register which is associated with the user's current location area. Among the data
stored for each user, there is a list of additionally booked services and the encryption
keys for digital signal transmission and user's authentication.
The VLR register is, as already mentioned, the database consisting of records de-
scribing mobile stations currently registered in the service area of a particular MSC.
The VLR and HLR registers exchange data concerning the users currently located in
the area served by that VLR. Such an arrangement and information exchange allows
for identification of a current location of a called user by reading information on his/her
current location area in the HLR and routing the connection to that MSC which co-
works with the VLR currently containing the data on the called user. The VLR register
also stores data necessary for initiation of a mobile-originated call.
The mobile switching centers (MSCs) are connected with each other. One or more
MCSs, which are then called Gateway Mobile Switching Center (GMSC), play the role
of a gate to the external networks such as PSTN, ISDN and packet data networks.
Each MSC controls at least one Base Station System (BSS) which consists of a Base
Station Controller (BSC) and a certain number of Base Transceiver Stations (BTS)
or simply Base Stations (BS). The base station consists of a subsystem performing
the basic signal transmission and signal reception functions and of a unit performing
simple control functions. GSM-specific speech coding/decoding as well as the data rate
adaptation are performed here as well. The base stations are usually located in the
centers of the cells that cover a whole system operation area. Within such cells, a
certain number of Mobile Stations (MS) operate with a possibility of changing their
location dynamically. They perform the information exchange with the closest (or the
strongest at their point of location) base station.
The main task of the MSC is to coordinate the call set-up between two mobile GSM
users or between a GSM user and a user of an external network such as PSTN, ISDN
or PSDN (Public Switched Data Network). This task is realized, among others, by
performing the following functions:
• calling the user, setting up and maintaining a connection,

178 
GSM CELLULAR TELEPHONY - ARCHITECTURE AND SYSTEM ASPECTS
• dynamic network resource management in the system area managed by that MSC,
• rerouting of the connection to a new cell served by a base system controller (BSC)
different from the controller which supervised the cell within which the MS has
been operating so far (so-called handover),
• performing the interface with other networks (in case of GMSC),
• encryption of a user's binary stream,
• re-assignment of the BTS carrier frequencies in order to redistribute the network
resources with regard to a particular load of the local part of the network.
Information exchange between MSC and BSS is normalized by defining the so-called
A interface, whereas Abis interface standardizes the data exchange between the base
station controller and its transceivers (BTSs).
The A interface mostly deals with network and switching aspects, for example with
the functions performed by the MSC, HLR and VLR, with management of fixed links,
with network management, controlling and encryption of user data and signaling in-
formation, with management resulting from the necessity of MS authentication and
location updating caused by MS geographical movement and with management due to
calling the users.
The Abis interface is associated with the information exchange related to the radio
transmission, such as the distribution of radio channels, connection supervising, the
queuing of messages before their transmission, carrier frequency hopping control (FH -
Frequency Hopping), if applied, channel coding and decoding, the coding and decoding
of speech signals, message encryption and radiated power control.
The rules of information exchange between BTS and MS are normalized by the
definition of the radio interface denoted by Um. It will be the subject of detailed
considerations in further parts of this chapter.
The Operation and Maintenance Center (OMC) supervises the operation of particu-
lar GSM system blocks. It is connected with all the switching blocks of the GSM system
and performs management functions such as tariff accounting, traffic monitoring, man-
agement in case of failures of particular network blocks. One of the most important
tasks of the OMC is HLR management. In case of large networks there are more than
one OMC and the whole network is managed by Network Management Center (NMC).
The communication between the OMC and the network blocks is realized by a special
communication management network implemented by leased telephone links or other
fixed networks. Message transfer is performed using the SS7 signaling protocols and
X.25 protocol for A and Abis interfaces (see Figure 7.2). Figure 7.2 features some other
interfaces denoted by capitals C, D, E. They are normalized by ETSI/GSM standards
and set the message exchange rules between particular blocks of the signaling network.
These interfaces, although important at the moments of the connection set-up and
connection rerouting between different MCSs, are outside our interest.

BASIC RADIO TRANSMISSION PARAMETERS OF THE GSM SYSTEM 
179
HLR
SP
SP
SP 
SP
E
SIGNALLING SYSTEM (if Le is not able
SS7 to perform a request to HLR)
Transit Exchange
or GMSC
PSTN or ISDN NETWORK
CELLULAR SYSTEM
SP - SS7 Signalling Point
Figure 7.2 Transmission and signaling layers of the GSM network with interfaces among network
elements
7.3 
BASIC RADIO TRANSMISSION PARAMETERS OF THE GSM SYSTEM
Two bands, each 25 MHz wide, have been assigned to the GSM system. The frequency
band between 890 and 915 MHz is used for transmission by mobile stations to base
stations (Uplink) whereas the band between 935 and 960 MHz is used for transmis-
sion from the base stations to mobile stations (Downlink), As we can see, a duplex
transmission is realized in a Frequency Division Duplex (FDD) mode. Both bands are
divided into 124 frequency intervals of 200 kHz each with carrier frequencies in their
centers. Time along each carrier is divided into 8 slots. Thus, multiple access is realized
through assigning the connection a particular carrier frequency (or a sequence of them if
frequency hopping is performed) and a selected time slot. As a result, the GSM can be
treated as a system with TDMA/FDMA multiple access scheme. According to the lat-
ter, a physical channel is a sequence of time slots (denoted by the assigned slot number)
which are placed on the selected carrier. Physical channels are arranged in pairs. Each
pair consists of one physical channel in each direction (uplink and downlink). They are
marked with the same time slot number and their carriers differ by 45 MHz.
Due to frequency planning, a subset of carrier frequencies is assigned to each cell
or its sector in accordance with the general rules presented in Chapter 5. Figure 7.3
presents the frequencies and time slot assignment in the GSM system. Let us note that
the numbering of the time slots is delayed by three in downlink as compared with uplink
transmission. Due to that, a mobile station realizing a connection to a base station in
the assigned time slot never transmits and receives the signals at the same time (as

180 
GSM CELLULAR TELEPHONY - ARCHITECTURE AND SYSTEM ASPECTS
BTS 
,
Carrier pair No. 3 
Downlink
(BS to MS)
Carrier pair No. 2
Carrier pair No. 1 
_ 
_
Uplink
(MS to BS)
45 MHz
Figure 7.3 Frequency and time structure of GSM channels [5]
happens in the first generation analog systems). This way, an electromagnetic feedback
between a mobile station transmitter and receiver is avoided and design requirements
for RF and DSP blocks are not so stringent. Thus, the computational power can be
shared between the transmitter and the receiver.
None of the carriers and time slots are devoted to a particular exclusive use. It means
that the carriers and time slots can be used to perform different functions depending on
the carrier and the current state of the system. For that reason we introduce a logical
channel - a structure performing a particular task in our system.
7.4 
LOGICAL CHANNEL DESCRIPTION
The physical channel assigned to a connection is used for transmission of data packets.
They have a different time structure and meaning. They implement particular logical
channels arranged to organize the information exchange.
In each cell a mobile station finds a particular carrier on which in its zero time slot
the system information important for all the mobile stations located within that cell is
transmitted. In turn, on the associated carrier always shifted down by 45 MHz, in the
zero time slot the mobile stations can declare their need for information exchange with
the system or even their need to set up a call. This carrier pair in their zero slots is
permanently utilized for that purpose so it does not belong to the carrier set for which
slow frequency hopping is realized.
System information is transmitted using a whole series of logical channels in the
zero time slots of the downlink carrier of the above mentioned carrier pair. We will
call it simply a broadcast carrier. In larger cells more than only the zero slots on that
selected carrier are needed for the system information exchange. Thus, the first slots
and sometimes even the second ones of that carrier are used for signaling purposes. In
general, the following logical channels can be listed:

LOGICAL CHANNEL DESCRIPTION 
181
• Broadcast Control Channel (BCCH) — used for transmission of information that
controls the network, a particular cell and the neighboring cells,
• Frequency Correction Channel (FCCH) — applied by the mobile station for tuning
their reference carrier frequency,
• Synchronization Channel (SCH) — used for frame synchronization and identifica-
tion of the base transceiver station, in whose service area the mobile station is
located,
• Common Control Channel (CCCH) — serves for call set-up and other information
exchange procedures. It consists of the following logical channels:
— Random Access Channel (RACH) — used by mobile stations on the uplink
carrier containing the control time slots to declare their need to be connected
with the base station,
— Access Granted Channel (AGCH) — serves to inform a particular mobile
station on the downlink carrier that access to the system is allowed and will
be performed,
- Paging Channel (PACH) — used to call a particular mobile station in the set
of neighboring cells called Location Area.
Transmission of user information and control information associated with it is per-
formed using the following logical channels both in downlinks and uplinks:
• Traffic Channel (TCH) — applied to transmit the user data characterizing speech
or data; there are Full Rate Traffic 
Channels (TCH/F) and Half-Rate 
Traffic
Channels (TCH/H),
• Slow Associated Control Channel (SACCH) — used for transmission of control
data and commands associated with a particular traffic channel. Examples of
such commands are: change the power emitted by the mobile station, prepare for
handover and send reports on measurements done by the mobile station.
• Fast Associated Control Channel (FACCH) — used to send urgent messages asso-
ciated with a particular link realized on the traffic channel.
Before traffic channels in downlink and uplink are assigned to the call to be realized, a
Dedicated Control Channel (DCCH) is implemented. It consists of the following logical
channels:
• Stand-Alone Dedicated Control Channel (SDCCH) - used for information ex-
change preceding a connection, such as user's authentication, localization update
and traffic channel assignment,
• Non-associated version of FACCH used for transmission of short messages.
Application and meaning of all logical channels will be much clearer after the pre-
sentation of the GSM time hierarchy.

182 
GSM CELLULAR TELEPHONY - ARCHITECTURE AND SYSTEM ASPECTS
7.5 GSM TIME HIERARCHY
Time division into eight time slots does not fully describe the time structure of the
GSM system. The smallest time element is a single binary pulse (bit) lasting 3.69 ts,
so the GSM data rate is equal to 270.833 kbps. In each time slot a burst of 148 bits
is transmitted. The only exception is an 88-bit burst used for implementation of a
random access channel (RACH). The length of a typical time slot is equal to 0.577 ms,
which is equivalent to the duration of 156.25 bits. The difference between the effective
burst length and the time slot length is called a guard time. Its existence originates
from the necessary time reservation for switching the transmitter amplifier on and off
at the beginning and the end of the transmitted burst. This time is also needed to
ensure the necessary accuracy of the time alignment of the burst within the slot. The
burst propagation time is non-negligible within the cell area and is proportional to the
distance of the mobile station from the base station.
Hyperframe
2048 superframes
Superframe
0 
50
BCH multiframe
0 1 2 3 
5 0 
T C H multiframe
0123
Frame 
01234567
Time slot
T Information P TS F 
Information T 
G
BitS 
3 
57 
1 26 
1 
57 
3 8.25
Figure 7.4 Time slot hierarchy of GSM system [5]
Eight time slots constitute a frame. In case of traffic channels and the control channels
associated with them, 26 frames create a multiframe. In turn, 51 such multiframes
constitute a superframe which lasts for 6.12 seconds. In case of broadcast channels
and control channels located in the same slots a multiframe consists of 51 consecutive
frames and a superframe is built of 26 multiframes. In both cases 2048 superframes
create the highest level unit of the GSM time hierarchy - a hyperframe. 
It lasts for
3 hours 28 minutes 53 seconds and 760 milliseconds. The system clock returns to its

GSM BURST STRUCTURES 
183
initial state after this time. Such a long period of the GSM system clock results mostly
from the application of a data encryption algorithm using the current frame number to
generate the encryption sequence. Application of a long system clock period prevents
illegal deciphering of the user data and results in the increase of safety and call privacy.
In Figure 7.4 the GSM time hierarchy is summarized.
7.6 
GSM BURST STRUCTURES
Each logical channel is realized by transmission of a specific type of data packet (burst)
in the assigned time slots. As it has already been mentioned, frequency correction,
synchronization and broadcast logical channels are sent in the zero time slot of the
broadcast carrier together with some other specific control channels. In order to realize
all these channels, a normal burst, frequency correction burst and synchronization burst
are emitted. Their structure is presented in Figure 7.5.
Frequency Correction Burst consists of three zero tail bits at the beginning and at the
end of the burst and of 142 zero bits between them. Due to GMSK modulation2 applied
in the GSM system, supplying the modulator with a long sequence of zeros results in
the output of the non-modulated sinusoid shifted by 1625/24 kHz with respect to the
carrier frequency. This sinusoid allows for identification of the broadcast carrier with
the frequency correction channel realized on it. As a result, the mobile station carrier
frequency is tuned allowing for reception of the other broadcast channels.
Synchronization Burst consists of three zero tail bits at the beginning and at the end
of the burst, 64-bit training sequence in the middle of the burst and two portions of 39
encoded system information bits on both sides of the training sequence. The training
sequence is applied to determine the samples of the channel impulse response which are
used in the data detection process. A shorter training sequence of 26 bits is also applied
in the Normal Burst. A longer training sequence of the synchronization burst allows for
more precise channel estimation and more reliable detection of the system information.
Two 39-bit information sequences contained in the burst are used to identify the base
station color code (0 - 7) and the color code of the public land mobile communication
network. It allows identification of the network operator to which a user is assigned.
The system information bits also serve for synchronization within the time hierarchy of
the GSM system.
Let us recall that the system clock period is almost 3.5 hours. The total number of
frames is 26 x 51 x 2048 = 2715648. The frames are numbered from 0 to 2715647. The
current frame number is transmitted in the synchronization burst in a reduced form.
The so-called Reduced Frame Number (RFN) consists of 19 bits describing the state of
three counters, denoted by T1, T2 and T3. They are described by the following equations
in which the Frame Number (FN) is involved:
2 See the next chapter

184 
GSM CELLULAR TELEPHONY - ARCHITECTURE AND SYSTEM ASPECTS
TDMA frame
Time slot
Encrypted bits
Normal burst
I
Zero bits
142
Frequency correction burst
Synchronization burst
Pseudorandom bits
58
Dummy burst
I = Tail bits (3 bits)
Synchronization
bits
Access burst
= Extended tail bits (8 bits)
Pseudorandom bits
58
Guard time
68.25 bit 
8.25 bit
Figure 7.5 GSM burst structures
T1 (11 bits) T1 = F Ndiv(26 x 51)
T2 (5 bits) 
T2 = FN mod 26
T3 (3 bits) 
T3 = (FN mod 51 – l)div(10)
range from 0 to 2047
range from 0 to 25
range from 0 to 4
The frame number FN is derived on the basis of the counters T1, T2 and T3. FN is
needed in the process of data encryption and decryption.
Normal Burst is used to bear several logical channels of the control and traffic type.
As in previous cases, it starts and ends with three zero tail bits. In the middle of the
burst a 26-bit training sequence is placed. On its both sides of this sequence there are
57-bit long information blocks with one-bit flags. The value of the logic flag F indicates
if the information block carries user data or if it contains the sequence of a control
logical channel (SACCH or FACCH).
A system access request issued by the mobile station is realized by sending an Access
Burst. It is shorter than any other burst used in the system. The burst starts with 8

GSM BURST STRUCTURES
185
zero tail bits followed by 41-bit synchronization sequence necessary for identification of
the channel properties and synchronization of the base station receiver. The encoded
message characterizing the connection request is 36-bit long. The burst ends with 3 tail
bits. An exceptionally long guard time is justified by the fact that the mobile station,
when sending its access burst for the first time within a new cell, does not know the
necessary timing advance. When a normal burst is sent, it is necessary to start it
properly early in order to compensate for the propagation time from the mobile to the
base station and place the burst inside the time slot in the receiver. The access bursts
can be transmitted by several mobile stations in the same time slot. In such a case
collisions occur and none of the bursts can be accepted. A mobile station attempts to
send another access burst after a pseudorandom number of frames.
In GSM transmission a Dummy Burst is also applied. Its structure is the same as
that of a normal burst. The only difference is that two 57-bit information blocks do not
carry any useful information, however, they have good statistical properties. Dummy
bursts are placed in those time slots of the broadcast carrier which are temporarily
unassigned to any user. This carrier should have higher mean power than any other
carrier applied within the same cell. Thanks to this fact, this carrier is recognized by
the mobile stations which attempt to activate themselves in the system after switching
on their power. Thus, the dummy bursts serve as a kind of signal stuffing to keep the
mean power of the broadcast channel high enough.
SACCH
T T T T,T 
T T T T TT 
T 
T T T T T T T T T T T T
0 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
14 
16 
18 
20 
22 
24
120 ms - 26 frames
Single full-rate traffic channel (TCH/F)
I
b)
T T T T T T T
H H H H H 
H H
I
0 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
14 
16 
18 
20 
22 
24
120 ms - 26 frames
Two half-rate traffic channels (TCH/H)
Figure 7.6 Multiframe for traffic channels with: full rate traffic channels (TF) (a), half-rate
traffic channels (TH) (b), S0 - SACCH for the first TH, S1 - SACCH for the second TH
Consider now a structure of a multiframe that consists of traffic channels. As we
remember, 26 subsequent frames constitute a multiframe. A pair of users has an access
to the time slot assigned to them in each frame of the multiframe. The logical meaning
of the transmitted bursts in subsequent frames is explained in Figure 7.6.
As we see in Figure 7.6a, a full rate traffic channel is sent in the assigned time slot
during twelve consecutive frames (numbered from 0 to 11). In the twelfth frame a slow

186 
GSM CELLULAR TELEPHONY - ARCHITECTURE AND SYSTEM ASPECTS
a) 
Frame 0 Frame 1 
Frame n 
Frame 50
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
1 2 3 4 5 8 7 
... 
l234567
Direction BS MS 
Even multiframe
Odd multiframe
b) 
Frame 0 
Frame 1 
Frame n 
Frame 50
01234567 
01234567 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Direction MS BS 
Even multiframe
Odd multiframe
Figure 7.7 Multiframe structure of broadcast and control channels for cells with a single carrier
associated control channel (SACCH) is placed. In frames 13 to 24 a full rate traffic
channel is performed again. In the last frame no signal is transmitted in the assigned
slot.
In Figure 7.6b a multiframe organization for half-rate traffic channels is presented.
Due to double effectiveness of speech encoding algorithm as compared with the full rate
channel, two traffic channels are interwoven in subsequent frames. In the twelfth frame
the control channel SACCH associated with the first traffic channel is located. The
SACCH associated with the second channel is placed in the 25th frame.
The frame structure just described is valid for traffic channels transmission both in
the downlink and uplink. Let us stress that transmission of two traffic channels assigned
to neighboring time slots is in fact shifted in time with respect to each other by 97=12x
8+1 slots. In consequence, if a SACCH is transmitted in a particular slot in the twelfth
frame, then the next slot related to the neighboring channel remains empty because its
frame number equals 25.
As we remember, in case of broadcast channels and control channels associated with
them, the multiframe consists of 51 frames. The organization of the multiframe can
take different forms dependent on expected cell capacity expressed in the number of
used carrier frequencies. In the cells where low traffic is expected and a single carrier is
applied, all broadcast and control channels are transmitted in the zero time slot and the
remaining slots are used for users' traffic channels organized as in Figure 7.6. Figure
7.7 presents the control channels' organization in the zero slot. In the downlink the
multiframe consists of five ten-frame blocks and the frame for which in the zero slot no
burst is transmitted. Each ten-frames block starts with a frequency correction channel

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALL SET-UP PROCEDURE 
187
(FCCH) followed by a synchronization channel (SCH). In the first block four broadcast
control channels (BCCH) and four common control channels (CCCH) are subsequently
transmitted. Within the CCCH, the base station realizes a paging channel (PCH) or
access granted channels (AGCH). In the following two ten-frame blocks, FCCH and SCH
channels are followed by four stand-alone dedicated control channels (SDCCH) used
during the call set-up, user authentication and mobile station registration procedures.
The last ten-frame block contains slow control channels (SACCH) associated with the
dedicated channel. Let us note that their data rate is so slow that four SACCH channels
use the last ten-frame block in two subsequent multiframes.
In the uplink the multiframe of the control channels consists mostly of random access
channels (RACH) realized by sending a random access burst from the mobile station
to the base station. In the zero slots of selected frames, stand-alone dedicated control
channels and slow associated control channels are performed. Let us stress once more
that Figure 7.7 shows the organization of control channels for zero time slots. In other
slots regular traffic is carried (see Figure 7.6).
The multiframe structure becomes more complicated for those cells where more car-
rier frequencies are applied due to expected intensive traffic. The time resources pro-
vided by the zero time slot are insufficient to carry the control signals of all mobile
stations that can be served within such a cell. Thus, on the carrier on which the broad-
cast channels are realized in the zero slot, the first time slot is also used for control
purposes. Such a situation is shown in Figure 7.8.
In the downlink in the zero time slots of the broadcast carrier only the following
channels are realized: the frequency correction channel (FCCH), synchronization chan-
nel (SCH), broadcast control channel (BCCH) and common control channel (CCCH)
(Figure 7.8a). In the first slots of the same carrier the stand-alone control channels
(SDCCH) and slow associated control channels (SACCH) are implemented taking into
account organization of even and odd multiframes. In the uplink carrier matched to the
downlink broadcast carrier, the zero time slots are used exclusively to realize random
access channels (RACH) whereas in the first time slots SACCH and SDCCH are placed.
Figures 7.6, 7.7 and 7.8 do not exhaust all the possible arrangements of the control
channels. In case of the cells serving very intensive traffic, even more control channels
are needed. The examples of such control channels configuration can be found, among
others, in [2].
7.7 
DESCRIPTION OF THE CALL SET-UP PROCEDURE
The necessary initial condition to make a mobile station active is to switch its power
supply on. After "power on" the mobile station (MS) realizes a sequence of operations
which are needed to "find itself" in the GSM network. In the first step, the MS looks
for the carrier on which in the local cell the broadcast channel is transmitted. In order
to find this carrier the MS measures the received power of all 124 carriers applied in the
GSM system. The carrier containing the broadcast channel is emitted at a higher power
than any other carrier in the same cell. The MS lists the measured carriers according
to their decreasing power. In the next step, the MS listens to the subsequent carriers

188 
GSM CELLULAR TELEPHONY - ARCHITECTURE AND SYSTEM ASPECTS
a) 
Frame 0 
Frame 1 
Frame n 
Frame 50
0l234567 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
01234567
direction BS MS
C C C C F S C C C C
F S BB SB CCC C F S C C C C C C C C F S C C C C C C C C F S C C C C C C C C i F S C C C C C C i C C
Frame 0 
Frame 1
01234567 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Frame n
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
..
Frame 50
. 
01234567
direction MS BS
R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R J R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R K R R R R R R R R R R R
C) 
Frame 0 
Frame 1 
Frame n 
Frame 50
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
... 
01234567
direction BS 
MS 
Even multiframe
D.D.CVO.O,D1D,DtDtOIDID,D,D,D1D^D4D.D,0,O.D.D.D.O.D.D,D.DrOrOrD,U.A.A.A.A^AiAJ».NA,A,A,A,ArA, I I I
Odd multiframe
d) 
Frame 0 
Frame 1 
Frame n 
Frame 50
01274567 
01234567 
01234567 
... 
01234567
direction MS BS 
Even multiframe
Odd multiframe
Figure 7.8 Multiframe structure for broadcast and control channels using the zero-th and first
time slots
from the list, searching for the frequency correction channel (FCCH). Its identification
is equivalent to finding the zero time slot of the broadcast carrier. The MS carrier
frequency generator is adjusted to that frequency. In the zero time slots of the next
frame, the MS finds other important control channels, as shown in Figures 7.7b or 7.8a.
In the zero time slot of the next frame the MS finds the synchronization channel (SCH)
and decodes the information contained in it, in particular the Base Station Identity Code
(BSIC) and the Reduced Frame Number (RFN). Next, the MS decodes the information
carried by the broadcast control channel (BCCH). That information contains:
• up to 16 carrier frequencies containing BCCH in the neighboring cells that enables
the MS to monitor them for possible selection of the best one when crossing the
cell boundary,

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALL SET-UP PROCEDURE 
189
MS 
BTS 
BSC 
(G)MSC 
VLR 
HLR
Channel 
request
SDCCH assignment
Location update request
Channel 
activation
Activation 
acknowledg
4
Initiation of the user
authentification procedure
MS response containing
authentication parameters
Authentication parameters comparison
New LAI and TMSI assignment
Acknowledgement of new
LAI and TMSI
SDCCH release
Figure 7.9 Simplified typical MS registration in the GSM network
• Cell Global Identity (CGI) - a sequence consisting of the country code, mobile
network code, location area code and cell identity,
• the number of common control channels applied in the cell,
• other parameters, e.g. maximum power that can be used by the MS during
connection set-up, minimum power level required for signal reception in the cell
(information for mobile stations in the idle state), the value of hysteresis that
prevents switching back and forth between cells at cell boundaries in the handover
procedure.
At this moment the passive part of the MS activation in the network is completed. In
order for the MS to be paged or to initiate the call set-up it has to be registered in the
network. In Figure 7.9 a simplified registration procedure is shown. Registration is one
of the reasons why the MS updates its location in the system. Registration takes place
if the number received by the MS from the base station, called Location Area Identity
(LAI), differs from the latest one that has been stored in the MS. The MS location
update also occurs periodically, which allows for monitoring of the MS mobility and its
current status.
When a mobile station starts the location update procedure resulting, for example,
from the initiation of its registration procedure following switching on the power, it
transmits a RACH channel to the base station in which it asks for a channel to be
used for the registration procedure. The BS transfers this request to the base station
controller. The latter responds by sending a command to the base station with the
request to assign a free stand-alone dedicated channel. The BS sends the confirmation
of the reception of this command to the BSC and informs the MS about the SDCCH
assignment using the AGCH channel. In turn, the mobile station requests the location

190 
GSM CELLULAR TELEPHONY - ARCHITECTURE AND SYSTEM ASPECTS
update by sending this request by the newly assigned SDCCH. This request contains
the type of location update to be performed, the Temporary Mobile Subscriber Identity
(TMSI) - a number temporarily assigned to the user in the network, and the Location
Area Identity (LAI). The last two parameters are currently stored in the mobile station.
The MS request reaches the Mobile Switching Center (MSC) and the Visitor's Location
Register (VLR) through the base station and base station controller. If the VLR already
contains the user's TMSI, it updates its data about him/her by noting the start of
his/her activity. If there is no TMSI of the user in the current resources of the VLR. the
Location Area Identity sent by the MS is decoded. The LAI indirectly describes the VLR
that previously served the mobile station. After communication of the current VLR with
the previous one the latter submits the user's parameters to the current VLR, including
his/her International Mobile Subscriber Identity (IMSI) and data necessary for his/her
authentication. If the previous VLR does not contain the required parameters, which
happens at the first entry to the network, the MSC requires the mobile station to send
its IMSI number, using the SDCCH. The MS sends its IMSI through the air only once.
This message reaches the MSC and VLR. The IMSI number determines the address of
the user data in the HLR. It ensures the possibility of retrieval of necessary information
from the HLR user's record needed for user authentication. This information is loaded
to the current VLR. Except for the first registration in the network, the necessary data
about the user are already contained in the current or previous VLR.
Now the authentication procedure can be initiated. It is described in detail in Section
7.9. After acknowledgement of the MS and user authenticity new parameters of the MS
are set. They are: Temporary Mobile Subscriber Identity (TMSI, not in all cases)
and Location Area Identity (LAI). Information about the user is updated in HLR and
VLR. Strictly speaking, the HLR initiates the erasure of the information about the user
from the previous VLR and its transfer to the new VLR. The acceptance of the new
parameters is acknowledged by the MS. The new TMSI has to be sent over the radio
channel to the MS in an encrypted form, so the encryption mode is initiated. As a
result, the BS and MS have to exchange information, using SDCCH assigned to them
once more. This phase of the registration procedure has not been shown in Figure 7.9.
The current TMSI number is valid only during the presence of the mobile station in the
area served by the current VLR. This solution is in fact one of the steps towards call
privacy. The SDCCH channel used for the registration and location update is released
after performing these procedures.
After full synchronization of the MS with the network and its registration, the ini-
tiation of the call set-up is finally possible. The mobile station listens to the common
control channel (CCCH) in order to find a paging channel (PCH) directed to it.
In case of the MS-originated call, the following steps are performed:
• The mobile station sends a random access burst to the base station realizing the
RACH logical channel.
• Three bursts performing the Access Granted Channel (AGCH) realized within the
CCCH channel have to be received by the MS. The AGCH contains the number
of the SDCCH assigned to the mobile station for the call set-up procedure.

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALL SET-UP PROCEDURE 
191
• In case of collision with other mobile stations during transmission of the RACH
channel the RACH has to be repeated up to a fixed number of times after a pseudo-
randomly selected time period. The repeated sending of RACH is done taking
into account two parameters: randomization period TX-INTEGER and allowable
maximum number of retransmissions MAX-RETRANS that are retrieved from
the broadcast control channel (BCCH).
After the reception of the AGCH, the SDCCH is assigned to the MS for the time of
the call set-up. Using that channel, the MS sends a message through the BS to the base
station controller (BSC) informing it about the call set-up request. It also contains the
user's TMSI number. The BSC transfers that message to the MSC switching center,
supplementing it with the cell identification code of the cell where the MS is currently
located. Subsequently, the MSC informs the VLR associated with it about the call
set-up request issued by the MS. In turn, the VLR initiates the MS authentication
procedure (see Section 7.9) and the SDCCH is used once more between MS and BS
to realize it. Positive authentication is followed by starting the encrypted transmission
mode. Subsequently, a new TMSI number assigned to the mobile station is transmitted
to the MS. The mobile station acknowledges its reception. The next message sent by
the MS contains the number of the called user and the type of the requested service.
This message reaches the MSC and VLR. If the requested service is on the list of the
user's subscribed services stored in the VLR, the network sends the message to the
calling mobile station about the start of the call set-up procedure. The MSC assigns a
fixed link to the call and a traffic channel to the MS—BS transmission. As a result of
this procedure, the mobile station receives the following information:
• the number of the assigned time slot,
• the code of one of the eight possible training sequences used in the normal burst
for channel identification,
• the Absolute Radio Frequency Channel Number — the number determining the
particular carrier that will be used during the transmission,
• the Timing Advance parameter (TA) — the number determining the necessary time
advancement of the start of the transmitted burst with respect to the system clock,
ensuring an appropriate time alignment of the burst in the time slot at the base
station,
• the parameters of the Frequency Hopping (FH) procedure if it is implemented.
Subsequently, the mobile station acknowledges the channel assignment. This infor-
mation reaches the MSC. Additional steps of the call set-up are performed if the called
user belongs to the same GSM network, however, these details are beyond the scope of
this chapter.
After setting up the link through the MSC, the GSM gateway MSC (GMSC) and the
switching offices of the public telephone network, the requested PSTN user is called.
After his/her response, the mobile station receives the message about the acceptance
of the call by the called user. From this moment a digital voice or data transmission

192 
GSM CELLULAR TELEPHONY - ARCHITECTURE AND SYSTEM ASPECTS
MS 
BSC 
MSC 
VLR 
HLR 
GMSC PSTN/ISDN
Incoming call
Request of information on the connection route
Information on the connection route
Connection request
Question about location area (LA)
Submitting the current LA
Calling the mobile station
Response to the call
Establishing a route
Figure 7.10 Simplified mobile terminated call set-up
is possible between both users applying the assigned time slot at the assigned carrier
frequency according to the multiframe structure shown in Figure 7.6. We recall that
besides the traffic channel, a slow associated control channel (SACCH) is assigned to
this call. In this control channel the mobile station transmits the following data to the
base station:
• the power of the received signal and quality evaluation of the serving cell,
• the power of the six strongest carriers transmitting the BCCH channel in the
neighboring cells,
• the power of the received signal in the idle slot during the measurement period,
• the time advancement applied by the MS during the measurement period.
In turn, the base station uses the SACCH to transmit the following information to
the mobile station: the description of the neighboring cells, the local cell identity, the
location area identity and control signals for the power level to be applied by the MS.
Let us consider a simplified call set-up of a mobile terminated call. The subsequent
phases of establishing a connection have been shown in Figure 7.10.
In the first step a fixed network user dials the number of a GSM user. The PSTN,
ISDN or public data network switching office (depending on the type of a network
which serves the calling user) issues a call request to the GSM gateway MSC (GMSC).
In order to set up a connection, it is necessary to find the current location of the
called mobile station. For this reason the GSMC sends a request to the Home Location
Register (HLR) that in turn informs the GMSC on the MS location area and current
Visitor's Location Register (VLR) in which the called MS is registered. As a result of
the HLR request, the VLR submits the Mobile Subscriber Roaming Number (MSRN) - a
temporary MS number that is transferred to the GMSC. The GMSC starts to establish
a path to the appropriate MSC. The latter checks in the VLR if the requested service is

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALL SET-UP PROCEDURE 
193
on the list of allowable services of the called user. The MSC also retrieves the current
MS location area from the VLR. In fact, the MSC obtains from the VLR the parameters
of the called MS, such as Location Area Code (LAC) and its TMSI.
Let us note that the location area is served by a whole group of base stations. After
determining this area and checking in the VLR that the mobile station remains at least
in the idle mode, the MSC sends a paging request to all base station controllers (BSC)
operating in the determined location area. It is realized by sending a logical paging
channel on the broadcast carriers of all cells served by the BSCs. As we see, the MS
is searched for concurrently in a few cells. If the mobile station detects the paging
directed to it, it responds by sending the RACK channel to its nearest base station.
Thus, the MS has been localized in a particular cell of the location area. The BSC
assigns the SDCCH channel to the called mobile station and informs the MSC about
that. Prom that moment the MS will respond to the MSC using the assigned SDCCH.
In turn, the base station controller sends the service request to the MSC. The request
contains the cell identity and the temporary mobile subscriber identity. As a result,
the MSC informs its VLR about the response of the MS to the call directed to it.
The VLR initiates the MS authentication procedure that involves the MSC, BSC and
MS. After completing this procedure, the VLR issues a command the MSC to start
data encryption. The latter transfers this command to the base and mobile stations.
After the initiation of data encryption in the MS, a new TMSI number is assigned
to the mobile station for the time of connection. The MS acknowledges reception of
this number and this information reaches the VLR. At this moment the MSC starts
the connection set-up with the selected MS, sending a Set-Up Message to it. The MS
acknowledges the receipt of this message. Then the MSC assigns a fixed link between
itself and the base station controller and requires the BSC to assign a free traffic channel
on the radio link. Thus, a carrier number, a time slot number and a training sequence
are assigned to the connection. The MS sends the acknowledgement of these parameters
that is further transferred to the MSC. At the same time the MS starts to ring and the
MSC is informed about that. The latter starts sending the ringing signal to the calling
user. After accepting the call by the mobile user the actual connection starts.
One of the most interesting features of the GSM system is the possibility of making
a connection with a mobile station located in a foreign country in the area served by
another GSM operator. If there is a formal agreement between the local operator and
the foreign one, it is possible to set up a connection and to receive a call in the foreign
network. This feature is called roaming and is also implemented in other Paneuropean
mobile networks such as TETRA and ERMES.
If the connection request arrives from a fixed network, the GMSC checks the current
location of the called user in the HLR. Let us consider the case when the called user's
mobile station is located in the area covered by another network and is temporarily
registered in it. The address of the mobile station is retrieved from the HLR and sent
to the switching center appropriate for the calling user. That switching center sets
an international connection through the fixed network to the called user operating in
another GSM network.
The call set-up has been described in short, leaving out some details. They can be
found in books exclusively devoted to the GSM, such as [2], [6], [10] and ETSI/GSM

194
GSM CELLULAR TELEPHONY- ARCHITECTURE AND SYSTEM ASPECTS
standards. In the next section we will describe the handover - a very important proce-
dure realized in the cellular networks.
7.8 HANDOVER
Handover is one of the most important control procedures in the cellular network. It
allows for continuing the call when the mobile user crosses the cell boundaries and
moves to a neighboring cell. It is this feature that makes a user really mobile, however,
the handover control signals heavily load the network. The main task of the efficient
transfer of the connection between the cells is to perform it in a very short time. An
efficiently performed handover allows the user not only to continue the call but it is
done so quickly that he/she cannot even notice that it has just been performed. There
are a few types of handover that will be described below. In Figures 7.11, 7.12, 7.13
and 7.14 typical situations where handover takes place are illustrated.
1,2
BSC 
1,2 
1.2
MSC
BSC
BSC
MSC
Figure 7.11 Intra-cell handover
BSC
BSC
BSC
1,2
MSC
1.2
MSC
Figure 7.12 Intra-BSC handover

HANDOVER 
195
The first figure presents the intra-cell handover. This handover procedure is per-
formed in order to optimize the traffic load in the cell or to improve the quality of a
connection by changing the carrier frequency. The remaining figures deal with the situ-
ations when the user moves from one cell to another. In the simplest case (Figure 7.12
— intra-BSC handover) only one base station controller (BSC) is engaged and only the
base stations are changed. In the second case (Figure 7.13) the handover is performed
between two BSCs (intra-MSC handover) and in the third one the procedure implies
rerouting of the whole path changing also the MSC. The latter type of handover is
called inter-MSC handover. This type of handover sets particularly high requirements
on the cellular network and digital transmission is performed in the fixed network that
does not often belong to the cellular system operator. Let us stress that the MSCs can
be located more than 100 km from each other.
BSC
BSC 
2
BSC
1,2
MSC
MSC
Figure 7,13 Inter-BSC handover
BSC
BSC
1,2
MSC
BSC 
MSC
2
Figure 7.14 Inter-MSC handover
Handover in the GSM network differs from similar procedures performed in the first
generation analog networks. In the latter ones the handover procedure is initiated on the
basis of the quality or field strength measurements in the uplink made by the network.

196 
GSM CELLULAR TELEPHONY - ARCHITECTURE AND SYSTEM ASPECTS
This leads to a substantial network load. Additionally, in case of the application of the
analog testing and of distorted control signals, the procedure becomes unreliable.
In the GSM system the measurements are performed both in downlink and uplink.
This implies that the mobile station actively participates in the handover. The quality
and level of the received signals are measured in both transmission directions. The
measurement results are denoted by symbols3 RXLEV-U, RXQUAL-U, RXLEV-D,
RXQUAL-D and DISTANCE. The last value describes the distance between the mobile
station and the base station. Let us recall that the measure of distance is the timing
advance of the burst transmission that enables the burst to arrive within the assigned
time slot at the receiver.
The mobile station performs regular measurements of the 16 strongest carriers trans-
mitting the BCCH. The measurement results of the six strongest carriers are transmit-
ted to the currently assigned base station every 0.48 seconds. The base stations also
perform interference measurements in those time slots that are currently free. The Op-
eration and Maintenance Center monitors current levels of the cell traffic. Their values
can also be used in the handover procedure.
As already mentioned, the procedure of handover is distributed between mobile and
base stations. The mobile station can be the initiator of this procedure. Handover is
not a subject of normalization. In general, it has to be finished within 1 second. When
it lasts less than 100 ms, it is almost unnoticeable to the user. If a handover error
occurs, the connection has to be overtaken by the previous base station. In case of a
transmission breakdown, the radio connection of the MS is re-activated within 4 to 8
seconds, with the base station sending the strongest signal to the mobile station.
7.9 ENSURING PRIVACY AND AUTHENTICATION OF A USER
In the first generation cellular system, ensuring privacy of the call was very difficult due
to the analog nature of the transmitted speech signal. A relatively simple device can
be used for tapping of the calls that are not secured by any type of coding. In digital
cellular systems the task of ensuring call privacy is much easier to achieve due to digital
speech coding transforming the samples of analog speech into the binary stream, data
encryption, scrambling and other known methods of prevention against unauthorized
access to the transmitted information.
The meaning of the protection against tapping and unauthorized access to the digital
network is stressed by the digital cellular network construction. In the public cellular
network there is no path to the called user known in advance due to the nature of radio
interface and user's mobility. It is necessary to verify the user's authenticity in order
to set up a connection with the terminal authorized to be used in the network and to
ensure that the billing will be directed to a proper address.
The following means have been undertaken in the GSM system to ensure transmission
security:
3 RXLEV-U denotes Received Signal Level in the Upper Link, RXQUAL-U - Received Signal Quality
in the Upper Link, D at the end of the remaining abbreviations stands for Down Link.

ENSURING PRIVACY AND AUTHENTICATION OF A USER 
197
• access to the network based on the verification of the user's authenticity,
• secrecy of the transmitted data (speech, data, fax and control signals) due to
encryption,
• anonymity of the users due to the temporary mobile user identity numbers utilized
inside the network.
Another important element ensuring security in the GSM system is the Subscriber
Identity Module (SIM) card. It is an intelligent plastic card with a microcontroller
that constitutes an inherent part of a mobile terminal. The user receives the SIM card
from the network operator. The card contains a list of individual user data, encryption
programs and keys. Due to the possibility of separating the SIM and the mobile phone,
the card can be treated as an additional security means against an unauthorized usage
of the stolen or lost phone. It also allows for usage of the replacement phone during the
repair of the user's own mobile phone. One has to stress that a mobile station consists
of two strictly related parts: a mobile phone and a SIM card.
As already mentioned, the SIM card contains a microcontroller with ROM, RAM
and NVM (Non-Volatile Memory). The ROM stores the programs implementing A3
and A8 encryption algorithms. The first of them is used in the user's authentication
process, whereas the second one is applied for derivation of the key for encryption of
transmitted data. The ROM has the capacity of 4 to 6 kB and cannot be copied. The
RAM is relatively small and its capacity does not exceed 256 bytes. The NVM of the
size 2–3 kB contains individual user's parameters and data, such as:
• Ki — user's authentication key,
• IMSI (International Mobile Subscriber Identity) — 15-bit long user's individual
identification number consisting of the country code, network code and number
of the user,
• TMSI (Temporary Mobile Subscriber Identity) — temporary identification number
assigned to the user after each registration in a new VLR,
• LAI (Location Area Identifier),
• PIN (Personal Identification Number) - 4 or 8-digit code identifying the user with
respect to the SIM card,
• the personal telephone book — a list of telephone numbers entered by the user,
• the list of foreign cellular networks where roaming is allowed,
• the received short messages (SMS).
The SIM card communicates with the phone in the asynchronous serial mode in
half-duplex transmission at the data rate equal to 3.2 kbps in each direction.
The network begins the verification of the user's authenticity during his/her registra-
tion (compare Figure 7.9 and Figure 7.15). The network sends a 128-bit pseudorandom

198 
GSM CELLULAR TELEPHONY - ARCHITECTURE AND SYSTEM ASPECTS
SIM card 
Radio channel
Network
RAND
Ki 
A3
SRES
=?
Y/N
Figure 7.15 Verification of the user authenticity
SIM card
A8
TDMA 
K
frame number
A5
Data
Mobile phone
Radio channel
K, 
RAND
A8
TDMA
frame number
Figure 7.16 Data encryption process
number RAND to the mobile station. In the network and inside the SIM card of the
mobile station the 32-bit electronic signature SRES is derived, using the A3 encryption
algorithm and the individual user's key Ki. The SRES calculated by the mobile station
is transmitted to the fixed part of the network, where both signatures are compared.
If they are identical, the authentication process is completed. In the next step, the
VLR assigns the TMSI and LAI to the user (compare Figure 7.9). Both numbers are
transmitted in the encrypted form to the mobile station and stored in its SIM card.
The individual IMSI number is transmitted only "once in the user's lifetime" in the
system. It occurs when the mobile station registers for the first time in the network
and there is no data regarding it in any VLR register.
As already mentioned, starting from a certain phase of the connection set-up the user
data and control signals are transmitted in the encrypted form. The encryption process
applies a public encryption algorithm called A5, which is a European standard. The
access to this algorithm is limited to the manufacturers of cellular devices. Ensuring
secrecy of the information transfer does not rely only on the very limited access to the
encryption algorithm but mainly on the application of the encryption key that is never
transmitted over the air.

MODIFICATIONS AND DERIVATIVES OF GSM 
199
The A5 encryption algorithm is realized inside the mobile phone. The activation of
the algorithm is initiated by the network. The SIM card derives the key for the data
encryption algorithm, on the basis of the individual key Ki and the RAND number sent
by the network during the authentication process. This is done using the A8 algorithm
stored in the SIM card. On the basis of the derived key Kc and the current 22-bit
TDMA frame number, the A5 algorithm generates 114 bits that are modulo-2 added
to the information bits of the normal burst. Let us recall that the two information
fields of the normal burst contain 57 bits each. In the fixed part of the network the
same operation is performed for the received block of 114 encrypted data bits. When
no errors occur during transmission, the modulo-2 addition of the received block and
the generated encryption sequence results in the recovery of the original data sequence
generated in the mobile station. This way a decryption process is realized. Graphical
representation of the encryption and decryption processes is shown in Figure 7.16.
7.10 
MODIFICATIONS AND DERIVATIVES OF GSM
The basic version of the GSM system was implemented in the early nineties. The first
version of the GSM standard was set after a few years of work of the committee called
Groupe Special Mobile operating within CEPT (Conference Europeene des Postes et
Telecommunications) in 1990. In the same year, due to British request, the work on
adaptation of the GSM standard for the 1800 MHz band was initiated. Simultaneously,
perspectives of system modifications leading to its improved reliability and enlarged
capacity were acknowledged. Attention was also paid to the seamless introduction of
new services. In fact the system evolution and the process of system specification can
be divided into three phases [7]:
• Phase 1 (1991-1994) - the system was operating in its basic version,
• Phase 2 (1994-1995) — the system specification was verified in order to allow future
gradual modifications,
• Phase 2+ (from 1995) - the modifications are being introduced.
One of the GSM modifications that can potentially influence its capacity is introduc-
ing the half-rate speech coding standard. This standard results in a binary representa-
tion of a speech signal at the rate of 6.5 kbps. As we see, this is half of the original data
rate of the output signal generated by the standard 13 kbps speech encoder. The speech
quality is unfortunately diminished, particularly if the connection is set between two
GSM users. In the cascade of speech coders and decoders applied between two users,
the process of double transcoding from GSM to PCM standards and backwards turns
out to be the reason of deterioration of speech quality. On the other hand, a new high
quality speech encoder (Enhanced Full Rate Encoder) has been introduced, based on
the CELP principle (see Chapter 1). The new speech encoder will be shortly described
in Chapter 8. Very often modern handhelds are equipped with speech encoders fulfilling
all three coding standards.

200 
GSM CELLULAR TELEPHONY - ARCHITECTURE AND SYSTEM ASPECTS
The main modifications of the GSM system lead to substantial enhancement of data
transmission capabilities and open wide possibilities of providing new services. They
will be considered in detail in Chapter 9.
One of the most important enhancements of the original GSM system is its 1800
MHz version called Digital Cellular System (DCS 1800) placed in the PCN (Personal
Communications Network) category [8]. The idea of PCN is related to the concept of
wireless network in which a user can receive and initiate a call using a small and light
personal terminal independently of his/her location. DCS 1800 does not fulfill all the
PCN assumptions but it is closer to it than regular cellular networks. DCS 1800 is
primarily devoted to the operation in urban and suburban environments in which the
traffic density is very high. This system targets the mass market. It has turned out
that the GSM 900 technology is so universal that after minor modifications it can be
applied in the 1800 MHz band (or 1900 MHz band in the USA).
Table 7.1 Basic differences between DCS 1800 and GSM 900
Feature
Frequency range
Uplink (MS BS)
Downlink (BS MS)
Number of duplex channels
Frequency interval between uplink
and downlink frequencies
Maximum BS power
Maximum MS power
Minimum MS power
MS classes
Maximum vehicle speed
GSM 900
890–915 MHz
935–960 MHz
124
45 MHz
320 W (55 dBm)
8 W (39 dBm)
0.02 W (13 dBm)
20 W (not implemented)
8 W (car/transportable
phone)
5 W (car/transportable
phone)
2 W (handheld)
0.8 W (handheld)
250 km/h
DCS 1800
1710–1785 MHz
1805–1880 MHz
374
95 MHz
20 W (43 dBm)
1 W (30 dBm)
0.0025 W (4 dBm)
1 W (handheld)
0.25 W (handheld)
130 km/h
The main difference between GSM 900 and DCS 1800 lies in the lower power of the
base and mobile stations, which implies the lower signal range and the smaller size of
cells. The bandwidth assigned to the DCS 1800 is larger than that of the original GSM
900. Up to 374 carrier frequency channels can be assigned to the DSC 1800. Recalling
also the smaller cell size, we can conclude that the DCS 1800 features much higher

MODIFICATIONS AND DERIVATIVES OF GSM 
201
traffic capacity than the GSM 900 system. On the other hand, applying twice as high
carrier frequencies in the DCS 1800 as compared with GSM 900 results in twice as high
sensitivity to the Doppler effect. Thus, the maximum vehicle speed is limited to 130
km/h.
Another essential enhancement of the DCS 1800 is the possibility of roaming inside a
given country. This means that if more than one DCS network operate in a country, a
user can use the resources of a network that is different from his/her mother network if
the latter does not ensure the coverage in the user location. The return to the mother
network occurs automatically if the user enters his/her own network coverage area.
This is impossible in GSM 900 networks due to organization reasons. Mobile operators
exploiting both the GSM and the DCS system offer dual band mobile phones that select
the band automatically without the user's knowledge.
Table 7.1 summarizes the basic differences between DSC 1800 and GSM 900.
There is another promising modification and enhancement of the original GSM 900
system. It has been observed that the first generation systems working in the 450
MHz band gradually lose their customers who move to the second generation system.
After closing the old analog systems the frequency range could be utilized by the GSM
system as well. For this reason ETSI standardizes the GSM system operating in the
bands around 450 and 480 MHz band and called GSM 400. The 850 MHz band can
also be allocated to GSM (GSM 850). The whole network infrastructure will remain
unchanged, however, new software will be required in some network elements. The basic
technical features of GSM 400 are following:
• frequency allocation for GSM 400:
- 450.4–457.6 MHz (uplink) and 460.4–467.6 MHz (downlink)
- 478.8-486.0 MHz and 488.8–496.0 MHz
• frequency spectrum: 7.1 or 7.2 MHz
• duplex separation: 10 MHz
• carrier spacing: 200 kHz
• support of fragmented usage of the frequency band (resulting from NMT 450
frequency variants).
In turn, the frequency allocation to GSM 850 is 824–849 MHz (uplink) and 869–894
MHz (downlink).
As we remember from Chapter 3 the attenuation of the electromagnetic waves de-
pends on their frequency. For GSM 400 the carrier frequencies are twice as low as for
GSM 900. As a result the cell coverage is extended to approximately 67 km. Work is
being conducted on further range extention between 70 to 140 km. GSM 400 will sup-
port all the ETSI standardized capacity enhancing features presently being supported
by GSM 900 and DCS 1800 such as frequency hopping, discontinuous transmission, MS
and BTS power control and adaptive multirate.

202 
GSM CELLULAR TELEPHONY - ARCHITECTURE AND SYSTEM ASPECTS
The structure of the GSM system and its communication procedures show the level of
complexity of a digital mobile cellular system. As compared with the digital wireline
system, the higher level of the GSM complexity results from the necessity of locating
a called mobile station and the possibility of its movement within the area served by
different base stations during a connection. As we will see in the following chapters, the
GSM system is not the last word in the enormous development of mobile communica-
tions. However, the GSM is a subject of intensive modifications that are the element of
seamless transition to the Universal Mobile Telecommunication System (UMTS) that
will also be a subject of our considerations.
REFERENCES
1. R. Steele (Ed.), Mobile Radio Communications, Pentech Press Publishers, London,
1992
2. M. Mouly, M.-B. Pautet, The GSM System for Mobile Communications, 1992
3. K. Kakaes, Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM), Tutorial No. 5,
International Conference on Communications, Geneva, May 23–26, 1993
4. K. David, T. Benckner, Digitale Mobilfunksysteme, B.G. Teubner, Stuttgart, 1996
5. D. Picken, "The GSM mobile-telephone network: technical features and measure-
ment requirements", News from Rohde & Schwarz, No. 136, 1992, pp. 28–31
6. A. Mehrotra, GSM System Engineering, Artech House Publishers, Boston, 1997
7. M. Mouly, M.-B. Pautet, "Current Evolution of the GSM Systems", IEEE Personal
Communications, October 1995, pp. 9-19
8. A. R. Potter, "Implementation of PCNs Using DCS1800", IEEE Communications
Magazine, December 1992, pp. 32-36
9. A. Hadden, "DCS1800: The Standard for Personal Communication Networks",
Telecommunications, June 1991, pp. 61-63
10. G. Heine, GSM Networks: Protocols, Terminology, and Implementation, Artech
House, Boston, London, 1999
11. B. H. Walke, Mobile Radio Networks: Networking and Protocols, John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd., Chichester, 1999

8
GSM cellular telephony -
physical layer
8.1 INTRODUCTION
Speech and data transmission in the GSM and associated control data signaling system
require advanced digital signal processing and modern methods of coding, transmission
and reception applied previously in specialized professional equipment. These require-
ments arise mostly from the available channel bandwidth and the applied signaling rate.
The design of mobile stations is a particularly demanding task. Competition on the
market of mobile phones pushes the producers towards continuous improvement of those
mobile station parameters which are crucial for market success. They are phone size
and weight, time between battery recharging and standby time. Improved parameters
are achieved thanks to the progress in the IC technology and smart division of mobile
station functions between particular blocks, which allows a large part of the transceiver
to stay in the low power mode.
The ETSI standards dealing with transmission aspects precisely define speech coding
and decoding as well as channel coding and applied modulation; however, they leave
freedom in the realization of many algorithms, in particular those applied in the receiver.
In this chapter we will describe the algorithms and blocks realizing subsequent trans-
mit and receive functions.
8.2 CONSTRUCTION OF A TYPICAL MOBILE STATION
Figure 8.1 presents the block scheme of a typical mobile station. Similar blocks can also
be found in base stations, so we will limit ourselves to the description of mobile phone
blocks.
203

204 
GSM CELLULAR TELEPHONY - PHYSICAL LAYER
Sampling
Voice i 
- 
and
A/DlkHz 
^ MUX/ 
^ OMSK . „ x .+ RF
_ . 
TDMA 
"^ 
A 
"^f0
Data 
^ Channel 
».
^ 
^ Interteaver 
P.,
synthesizer
Control channels
Control circuit 
Carrier letocflon
Display •« 
and transmitted/
received signal 
l*vrt a*»»ment 
Ouptaxv
- —»• 
measurements
Keyboard
Channel . 
Deinter" 
Synchronization
decoding 
leaver
FH
^Channel" 
De"rnter-~ 
synthesizer
decoding 
leaver 
-*- 
T
DMUX/ 
Sequential 
RUSK 
T 
RF
•*--• 
detector or 
-» • JrSjj ••-- 
X -« 
J~:
TOMA 
equafeer 
demod 
Sta9e
Speech . 
Channel ^ 
Deintef-
decoder 
decoding 
leaver
Figure 8.1 Block scheme of a typical mobile station
A voice signal is converted to an electrical signal in the microphone and its bandwidth
is limited to 4 kHz by the anti-aliasing filter. It is then sampled with the frequency
of 8 kHz and represented by a sequence of binary symbols, using a 13-bit analog-to-
digital converter. The A/D converter must be linear due to the type of operations
performed by the speech encoder. Let us note that the binary stream at the output of
the A/D converter has the data rate of 104 kbit/s, so it is almost twice as fast as the
binary stream at the output of the 8-bit nonlinear PCM converter. The sequence of
13-bit samples is processed in 20-ms blocks by the speech encoder applying the RPE-
LTP (Regular Pulse Excitation Long Time Prediction) method. The speech encoding
algorithm will be presented later in this chapter. As a result of application of this
algorithm, we receive 260 bits representing each 20-ms block, so the data rate has been
reduced from 104 kbit/s to 13 kbit/s at the encoder output. In the 260 bits of each block
we can determine a binary block of crucial importance for the decoding of the whole
block (class la bits), a block of moderate validity (class Ib bits), and those bits (class
2 bits) whose erroneous detection does not significantly influence the quality of voice
generated by the speech decoder. Such a division of the data block allows application
of non-equal error protection.
In turn, the 13-kbit/s binary stream is the subject of channel coding [2]. Errors in
50 bits of class la are detected thanks to the block polynomial code which supplements
the data block with 3 parity bits. If the parity check performed in the receiver detects
errors in the block, the whole 260-bit block is not taken into account in the speech
decoding process and interpolation of speech samples is performed instead.

CONSTRUCTION OF A TYPICAL MOBILE STATION 
205
The binary block of moderate validity consists of 132 bits. The block built of class
la bits, 3 parity bits and class Ib 132 bits appended with 4 zero bits is convohitionally
encoded using R = 1/2 code of the constraint length equal to 5. As a result, 378 bits
are received, which together with the remaining 78 bits of class 2 constitute a 456-bit
block representing a 20 ms long speech signal. Thus, due to the channel coding the
data rate increases to 22.8 kbit/s. Figure 8.2 presents the scheme of channel coding for
a block of speech signal.
260 bits every 20 ms
j^ 
" 
" "' " 
' "" 
" 
" 
^
Class 1a 
Class 1b 
Class 2
50 bits 
132 bits 
78 bits
CRC 
4tail
50bits 
3 bits 
io*ui» 
bjts
Convotutional code R =1/2,
constraint length L = 5
378 = 2(50+3+132+4)
channel coded bits
•4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
—
456 = 57 * 8 bits transmitted in 8 blocks
i.e. in 4 TCH slots
Figure 8.2 Channel coding of a binary block representing 20 ms of encoded speech signal
In order to realize effective decoding and to spread errors grouped in bursts due to
fading, interleaving is applied. As a result, the bits generated in the coding process
are reordered. In the receiver the reverse process takes place, which recovers original
ordering of the binary stream. In GSM block interleaving is applied. The block of 456
bits resulting from encoding a single 20-ms block is divided into 8 sub-blocks of 57 bits
each. As we remember from the previous chapter, a normal burst used to transmit
traffic channels (TCH) contains two 57-bit blocks transmitting user data. Each of these
two 57-bit blocks transmits a fragment of a different 20-ms data block. The interleaving
process can be summarized as follows.
456 bits representing a 20 ms speech interval are read into an 8-column by 57-row
matrix RAM, filling its subsequent rows. Then the bits are read out in columns. This
way 8 sub-blocks of 57 bits each are formed. Next, the sub-blocks are distributed over
8 successive bursts placed in the assigned time slots. In each burst two 57-bit sub-
blocks are filled with bits from adjacent 456-bit blocks. The bits from sub-blocks 0
to 3 occupy even bit positions, whereas the bits from sub-blocks 4 to 7 are placed in
odd bit positions. This way, the first four bursts contain bits from the current and the
preceding 456-bit data blocks and the last four bursts carry bits from the current and
the following blocks.
Taking into account the relatively time-consuming procedure of speech coding and
decoding (20 ms), channel coding and decoding using the Viterbi algorithm (10-20 ms)

206 
GSM CELLULAR TELEPHONY - PHYSICAL LAYER
and block interleaving/deinterleaving (40 ms), we end up with the non-negligible delay
of 70-80 ms.
In the GSM system the Voice Activity Detection (VAD) has been applied. This means
that besides regular speech coding, the speech encoder checks if the coded signal is really
a speech signal or a noise signal generated by the speaker's environment. During the
speaker's activity both his/her speech and noise are encoded. If the speaker is not active
the binary signal representing the noise is not transmitted continuously. The pause in
the speech signal causing a pause in the signal encoding would imply large fluctuations
in the received acoustic signal level. This effect is very unpleasant for a listener. To
reduce it, the frames describing the surrounding noise are sent in regular time intervals.
They allow for generation of an artificial noise signal at the receiver. This noise, called
a comfort noise, is similar to that arising in the speaker's vicinity. Because the frames
describing noise are sent much more rarely than the bursts containing binary speech
representation, generally the signal-to-interference ratio is improved.
In its standard version, the GSM system supports data transmission at data rates of
2400, 4800 and 9600 bit/s. For each data rate an appropriate convolutional code with
the coding gain between 1/6 and 1/2 is applied. Interleaving is also used; however, in
these cases it is much deeper than in the case of a speech signal. The delay introduced
by the interleaver is not as critical as for speech transmission. On the other hand, a
much lower bit error rate is required, which can be achieved thanks to the application of
strong error correction channel coding and deep interleaving. More detailed information
on data transmission in GSM can be found in Chapter 9.
In the previous chapter we learnt that besides the user data stream, the control data
are sent between base and mobile stations and vice versa. Their errorless detection is
crucial for reliable system operation. In consequence, stronger error correction coding
is applied than in the case of speech transmission. Figure 8.3 presents the scheme of
two-level coding applied for control signal transmission.
184 information bits = 23 * 8 bits
40CRC
184 bits 
bits of 
4 bits
Fire code
Convolutional code R = 1/2,
constraint length L = 5
456 = 2(184+40+4) channel coded bits = 57 * 2 * 4
Figure 8.3 Coding procedure for control data block
The control messages are 23 bytes long. Thus, the data block has 184 bits. The outer
error correcting code is the shortened Fire block code. The Fire code was invented to

CONSTRUCTION OF A TYPICAL MOBILE STATION 
207
correct error bursts of a specified length occurring after appropriately long error-free
intervals. The applied code is able to correct a single burst of length equal to 12 bits.
Due to the coding process the data block is appended by 40 CRC bits. The use of
this burst error correcting code is motivated by the application of the inner code being
a R — 1/2 convolutional code of the constraint length equal to 5. This inner code is
decoded using the Viterbi algorithm explained in Chapter 1. Possible errors contained
in the output bits of the Viterbi decoder are often grouped in bursts. They are the
result of a wrong selection of the path on the code trellis diagram. The four zero bits
appended to the Fire code word allow setting of the encoder state at the end of the
data block. This is very useful in decoding the end part of the 456-bit block.
Encoded data blocks are subsequently interleaved and finally formed into the TDMA
bursts. These bursts are fed to the GMSK modulator which is triggered at the accuracy
of a 1/4 bit length to generate the GMSK signal in the assigned time slot. The moment
of generating the GMSK signal is determined by the synchronization subsystem. The
GMSK signal is subsequently shifted to the frequency range of the assigned channel and
amplified in the RF amplifier. After transferring it through the duplexer it is emitted
by the antenna.
Many processes in the receiver are parallel to those taking place in the transmitter.
In the mobile station receiver, the same antenna which was used for signal transmission
receives the incoming bursts which are shifted by three time slots with respect to the
transmitted bursts. After low noise filtration the burst signal is down-converted to the
baseband. Then, the in-phase and quadrature components are derived from the received
signal. Usually synchronous detection is applied. It means that the GMSK signal is
treated as a linearly modulated signal. Subsequently, the stream of the baseband in-
phase and quadrature samples is processed by the data signal detector. Usually the
Viterbi sequential detector is applied, which uses channel impulse response samples
derived by the channel estimator. This impulse response is calculated from the signal
being the response of the mobile transmission channel to the known midamble contained
in the transmitted burst. The detection algorithm will be described in one of the
later paragraphs. The Viterbi algorithm delivers a stream of binary decisions with the
associated likelihood information. After deconvolution these data are applied in the
soft-decision Viterbi decoder used both in decoding the binary stream representing the
speech signal and in decoding the control data stream. The received data are then
decoded in the outer code decoder and, if this process is successfully completed, the
resulting 260 bits or 184 control message bits are obtained. In case of the speech signal
the data block is delivered to the speech decoder operating as the speech synthesizer.
Its output, after conversion to the analog form, is transferred to the loudspeaker of the
mobile phone. In case of the control data, the message is accepted by the control unit
and appropriate activity is initiated by it.
Similar transmitter and receiver blocks can be found in a base station as well. The
main difference is the source and sink of the speech signal processed by the base station.
In the transmitter, the speech signal is delivered by the fixed network in the form of
nonlinearly quantized 8-bit PCM samples. Therefore, these samples are first converted
into 13-bit linearly quantized binary representation. A similar procedure in the opposite
direction is performed in the receiver, which in the last step generates 8-bit nonlinearly

208 
GSM CELLULAR TELEPHONY - PHYSICAL LAYER
quantized PCM samples and sends them to the fixed network. It has been noticed that
this transcoding process has a negative influence on the overall speech detection, in
particular if the half-rate speech coding is applied.
8.3 CODING AND DECODING OF A SPEECH SIGNAL
As we know from Chapter 1, speech coding is in fact a process of waveform compression.
Instead of generating quantized and processed samples of the input signal, the encoder
determines the quantized parameters of the speech source model, which allows the
receiver to generate the speech signal very similar to that which was the subject of
processing in the transmitter. In the GSM three speech coding standards have been
established:
• Pull Rate speech coding (FR) [3],
• Half Rate speech coding (HR) [4], and
• Enhanced Full Rate speech coding (EFR) [5].
Modern GSM mobile phones contain speech encoders operating in accordance with
all three standards. We will now discuss these standards.
8.3.1 Full rate speech coding
This type of speech coding applies a modified linear prediction RPE-LTP method. The
encoder scheme is shown in Figure 8.4. The input signal sampled in the 13-bit linear
analog-to-digital converter or transcoded from a nonlinear 8-bit PCM to a linear 13-bit
representation is first pre-processed to eliminate possible offset. Then it is processed
by a first order pre-emphasis filter. As we remember, 160 samples represent a 20 ms
speech signal. The samples from the output of the pre-emphasis filter are analyzed to
determine the coefficients of the Short-Term Prediction (STP) filter. This is in fact the
process of LPC analysis. The determined filter parameters are subsequently applied
in the short-term analysis filter to filter the same 160 signal samples. As a result 160
signal samples of the short-term residual signal are obtained. The determined filter
parameters, which are eight reflection coefficients of the STP lattice filter (see Figure
1.8), are transformed to logarithmic area ratios, LARs, because the logarithmically
compounded LARs have better quantization properties than the reflection coefficients.1
The LARs in the quantized form are represented by 36 bits which constitute a part of
the encoder output block.
1lf we denote the ith reflection coefficient as an then

CODING AND DECODING OF A SPEECH SIGNAL 
209
o K r , ^ 
' 
Reflection coefficients
short-term 
coded as Log.-Area Ratios
ana|ysis 
(36 bite/20 ms)
I 
i 
RPE 
parameters
Input signal 
Pre- 
i 
Short-term |(1) 
(2) 
RPE grid 
(47 bits/5 ms)
*•: 
processing 
* 
analysis 
T> + 
* 
selection 
t
processing 
fi|ter 
,^ 
and coding
(3)
:LTP=.ysisr:i.5);dSn|'M»d
Tllter 
positioning
LTP parameters
(9 bits/5 ms)
LTP
analysis
(1) Short-term residual signal
(2 Long-term residual signal 
To radio
(3 Short-term residual signal estimate (40 samples) 
sub-system
(4 Reconstructed short-term residual signal (40 samples)
(5) Quantized long-term residual signal (40 samples)
Figure 8.4 Block scheme of the GSM full rate speech encoder
For further processing, the 20-ms frame of STP residual samples is divided into 4
sub-frames containing 40 samples each. Each sub-frame is processed blockwise by the
subsequent encoder blocks.
Before processing each 40-sample sub-frame, the speech encoder determines the pa-
rameters of the Long-Term Prediction filter, the LTP lag and LTP gain.2 It is done on
the basis of the current sub-frame of the STP residual samples (see signal (1) in Figure
8.4) and a stored sequence of previous 120 reconstructed short-term residual samples
(signal (4) in Figure 8.4). A block of 40 samples of the long-term residual signal (2) is
the difference between 40 estimates of the STP residual signal (3) and the 40 STP resid-
ual signal (1). As a result, a block of 40 long-term residual samples is obtained. After
discarding the last sample, the block is subsequently fed to the Regular Pulse Excita-
tion (RPE) analysis block. The RPE block decomposes the processed block into three
13-sample excitation sequences. It is performed by sample decimation and selection of
the signal grid. Subsequently, the energy of the three decimated sequences is computed
and that sequence which has the highest energy is selected as a representative of the
whole block of the LTP residuals. The selected excitation pulses are normalized with
2See, for example, the lag L and the gain G 3in the LTP filter shown in Figure 1.11.

210 
GSM CELLULAR TELEPHONY - PHYSICAL LAYER
respect to the highest amplitude and quantized. Besides the quantized values of the
excitation pulses the grid offset is also encoded and transmitted to the receiver. This
way 47 bits per each 5-ms frame are derived. These RPE parameters are subsequently
fed to the RPE grid decoding and positioning block which produces 40 quantized long-
term residual samples (5). After adding these samples to STP residual estimates, the
reconstructed STP residual samples are created which constitute the input signal to the
long-term analysis filter. As a result of filtration a new block of 40 STP residual signal
estimates is produced. It will be used in the next sub-block processing.
As a consequence of applying the encoding algorithm, the 20-ms block of 13-bit
speech samples is compressed to 260 bits; thus, the received data rate is 13 kbit/s.
Reflection coefficients
coded as Log.-Area Ratios
(36 brts/20 ms)
RPE grid 
Short 
tenn 
End 
Output signal
RPE parameters 
positioning
Long-term
- --- 
synthesis
filter
LPT parameters
(9 bits/5 ms)
From radio
sub-system
Figure 8.5 Block scheme of the RPE-LTP speech decoder
Figure 8.5 shows the simplified RPE-LTP decoder. It contains the same structure as
the structure of the feedback loop in the encoder. In case of errorless transmission the
output signal of this decoder part reconstructs the sequence of the short-term residual
signal samples. These samples are subsequently fed to the input of the short-term
synthesis filter. The output samples are processed by the de-emphasis filter generating
the reconstructed samples of the speech signal.
8.3.2 
Half rate speech coding
Now let us briefly describe the GSM half rate speech encoder [4]. It applies an analysis-
by-synthesis approach in the version called VSELP which was briefly considered in
Chapter 1. The analysis-by-synthesis procedure is used to find the best code word
characterizing the excitation signal for each 20 ms signal frame. This code word is

CODING AND DECODING OF A SPEECH SIGNAL 
211
found by applying each code word as an excitation for the CELP synthesizer. The
synthesized speech signal is subsequently compared with the input speech signal and a
difference signal is calculated. This difference signal is weighted by a spectral weighting
filter with the characteristics W(z) and a second weighting filter C(z). As a result,
the error signal e(n) is obtained. That code word which ensures the lowest power of
the error signal e(n) is selected as the best code word characterizing the frame. The
characteristics of the weighting filter were chosen to ensure the best subjective human
perception of the synthesized speech signal. The second weighting filter C(z) controls
the amount of error in the harmonics of the speech signal. In Figure 8.6 showing
the general block scheme of the half rate encoder, both weighting filters have been
placed in the branches of the input signal and synthesized signal before the subtracter
comparing the signals from both branches. The filter denoted by A(z) is a so-called
short-term spectral filter, whereas B(z) denotes the long-term filter with the lag L and
filter coefficient ß. In the process of speech analysis-by-synthesis, the encoder calculates
18 parameters characterizing each 20 ms frame. The parameters of a single frame are
represented by 112 bits, which is equivalent to the 5.6 kbit/s data rate on the output,
of the half rate encoder.
Input speech s(n) 
| 
: 
y(n)
* 
C(z) 'r 
•
Determine LPC i 
5 Parameters
coefficients 
f 
* 
* 
* 
;
codebook f - K X ) 
* BW h* 
A(Z) -* 
W<z> [ ^ 
C(Z) 
>:-;
A 
: 
• 
i 
e(n)
* • 
. 
4"* 
' 
. y
Total weighted
error
Find minimum
over L and all I
Find optimal
gains ß and y
9 parameters
4 parameters
Figure 8.6 Simplified block diagram of the GSM half rate speech encoder

212 
GSM CELLULAR TELEPHONY - PHYSICAL LAYER
The half rate speech decoder is a subset of the encoder. On the basis of the received
parameters the same speech synthesizer as that contained in the encoder generates the
synthesized voice.
Because the number of bits representing a 20-ms frame is much lower as compared
with the full rate coding, errorless decoding of these bits is more important for the
speech quality at the receiver. Therefore, a stronger convolutional code is applied than
that used for encoding of the full rate encoder output block presented in the previous
section. Due to convolutional coding and introduction of the block parity check and
some tail bits, the number of bits representing the 20-ms frame increases to 228. This
number is equivalent to the 11.4 kbit/s data rate at the output of the channel encoder,
which is exactly the half data rate at the output of the channel encoder co-operating
with the full rate speech encoder.
The main advantage of the half rate speech encoder is doubling the physical channel
capacity. The same slot can be shared by two half rate traffic channels realized in the
interlaced manner. The reason for applying half rate speech coding was an attempt to
avoid capacity problems in highly populated areas. The consequence of its introduction
is the necessity of using double-standard encoders in mobile phones. The main disad-
vantage of the half rate speech coding is lower speech quality as compared with the full
rate coding.
8.3.3 
Enhanced full rate speech coding
The enhanced full rate (EFR) speech coding has been standardized in [5]. The operation
of the encoder is based on the Code-Excited Linear Predictive (CELP) coding model. In
this model a 10th order linear prediction, or short-term, synthesis filter 1/A(z) is used
(see Figure 8.7). Besides the linear prediction, the long-term, or pitch, synthesis filter
is applied which is implemented using adaptive codebook approach. The long-term
synthesis filter transfer function is given by the formula
1 
1
B(z) 
l
where T is the pitch delay and gp is the pitch gain. In the CELP speech synthesis
model, the excitation signal at the input of the short-term linear prediction synthesis
filter is received by adding two excitation vectors from adaptive and fixed codebooks.
The speech signal is synthesized by fitering the excitation signal in the short-term
synthesis filter. The optimum excitation vector is sought from the codebook using an
analysis-by-synthesis procedure similar to that applied in the half rate speech encoder.
Thus, that code vector is selected for which the power of the weighted error between
the input and synthesized speech signal is minimum. The speech encoder operates
on 20-ms blocks of speech samples. Based on each speech block (160 samples), the
parameters of the CELP model such as linear prediction filter coefficients, adaptive and
fixed codebook addresses and weighting gains are estimated, encoded and transmitted.
The decoder uses the received parameters to synthesize the speech signal in the same
CELP synthesizer as that applied in the speech analysis in the transmitter.

GMSK MODULATION 
213
Adaptive codebook
Fixed
codebook
X
A
X
A
v(n)
s(n)
A(z)
Post-filtering
LP synthesis
filter
Figure 8.7 Simplified block diagram of the EFR encoder
The EFR encoder generates the data stream at the rate of 13 kbit/s. The channel
coding and interleaving are identical to those applied for the RPE-LTP standard en-
coder. The tests have shown that the voice quality achieved through the EFR coding
is much higher than in the RPE-LTP coding. This type of encoder has been mainly
adopted in newly established networks, in particular in PCS 1900 networks in North
America. In newer mobile phones the EFR encoder is one of the possible choices of
voice encoders.
Table 8.1 [6] shows the comparison of GSM speech encoders in the computational
complexity aspect. As we see, the standard encoder is substantially less complicated
than the other two. The required program and data memory are also a few times
smaller.
Table 8.1 Comparison of three GSM speech encoders
Speech Codec
GSM FR
GSMHR
GSM EFR
Maximum Mips
2.5-4.5
17.5-22
17–22
Program and data ROM
4–6 kWords
16-20 kWords
15–20 kWords
RAM
1–2 kWords
~ 5 kWords
~ 5 kWords
8.4 
GMSK MODULATION
As we remember from the previous chapter, the data within a single TDMA burst
are transmitted at the rate of 270.833 kbit/s, whereas the channel spacing is 200 kHz
only. This sets stringent requirements for the applied modulation, with respect not
only to the width of the mainlobe but also to the attenuation of the sidelobes. Another

214 
GSM CELLULAR TELEPHONY - PHYSICAL LAYER
requirement related to efficient use of the nonlinear power amplifier at a mobile station
is preserving the constant signal envelope. This feature is particularly important for
the energy budget of a mobile station.
The GSM standard [7] recommends the application of Gaussian Minimum Shift Key-
ing (GMSK) modulation. Let us recall Chapter 1 in which we stated that GMSK is the
continuous phase FSK modulation with the modulation index h = 1/2, and properly
shaped frequency pulse. Figure 8.8 presents a generic scheme of the GMSK modulator.
s(t)
^ + 
> 
> 
> 
VCO 
K
A
T
Figure 8.8 Block diagram of the GMSK modulator
The binary symbol at the nth timing instant is modulo-2 added to the symbol from
the previous time instant. This is a kind of differential encoding applied in the GSM
modulator; however, it is not an inherent part of the GMSK modulator in a general
case. The resulting symbol, after conversion to the NRZ (Non-Return to Zero) form, is
fed to the input of the filter with the Gaussian impulse response, i.e.
where a = ^/\n2/ (2irBT), BT = 0.3. B is a 3 dB bandwidth of the pulse h(t), and T
is the time duration of a single bit. The effective duration of the filter impulse response
is 4T to 5T. The output signal of the filter excites the voltage-controlled oscillator.
Figure 8.9 shows the power spectral density at the output of the ideal GMSK modulator
(BT = 0.3) normalized with respect to the signaling period T. In a real system the
modulator works only during the burst transmission in the assigned time slot. A certain
technical problem is to ensure sufficiently fast switching of the power amplifier on and off
so that the length of the transient processes meets the GSM standard [7]. The allowable
limits of the transient process during switching on and switching off the power amplifier
are shown in Figure 8.10.
8.5 SEQUENTIAL DATA DETECTION
We have already mentioned that the Viterbi sequence estimator is usually applied in
GSM mobile and base stations. This is a sequential detector, i.e. the data decisions
worked out by the agorithm are made on the basis of the whole data sequence, as
opposed to symbol-by-symbol detectors which generate subsequent decisions based on
each individual data symbol.
At this point we have to recall a few features of a GSM transmission channel which
determine the character of the detection algorithm. As we know, the signal arrives at

SEQUENTIAL DATA DETECTION 
215
S(f-fc)T) [dB]
BPSK 
MSK
-20
-40
-60
-80
-100
GMSK
-120
0 
0.5 
1 
1.5 
2 
2.5 
3
Figure 8.9 Power spectral density of GMSK, MSK and BPSK modulated signals
Level [dB]
A
+4
2"
-30 -f-
-70
or -
-36dBm 
10
^ "^
J^
•MMM» 
- - - 
- - - - - 
- - - MMMMHIM
147 bits
l*-i
| 10 | 
10 i 
10J
8 «-* . 
7056/13 
. *^ .8. K-*!
time slot (7500/13 us)
Figure 8.10 Transient processes during switching the GSM power amplifier on and off
the receiver in the form of reflected and dispersed rays. Particular signal paths have dif-
ferent lengths so the signal echoes have various delays. In particularly disadvantageous
cases the delay between the earliest and latest echo reaches 20 p,s (compare Figure 3.10
in Chapter 3) at the symbol period equal to 3.69 /^s; thus, the phenomenon of intersym-
bol interference is evident. The Doppler effect, being the result of the mobile station

216 
GSM CELLULAR TELEPHONY- PHYSICAL LAYER
movement, is another factor making the detection process even more difficult. The
movement of the mobile station and/or nonstationarity of the elements of environment
cause the channel to be time variant. Fortunately, within a single time slot the channel
variability is moderate even at the highest allowable vehicle speed. The influence of
the channel variability on the system performance is also minimized thanks to placing
the training sequence in the middle of the burst [9] . Eight different training sequences
listed in [9] have been selected to ensure good correlation properties of the samples
of the baseband equivalent GMSK signal (see formulae (1.25) to (1.28) in Chapter 1).
Thanks to them the channel impulse response samples can be estimated according to
the formula
N
j=-N
where yj are subsequent symbols at the output of the receive filter, indexed starting
from the middle of the training sequence and di = dI
i + jdff are GMSK data symbols
associated with the training sequence. Let us assume the baseband equivalent channel
model in the form of a finite impulse response (FIR) filter. It is described by the
equation
N
hj
di-j + 
vi 
(8-3)
where Vi is a sample of additive white Gaussian noise. On the basis of the estimates hi
of the baseband equivalent channel impulse response samples hi (i = — N, . . . , N) the
Viterbi algorithm realizes sequential data detection of the sequence {dn} by searching
for such a data sequence which minimizes the cost function
i=0
N
yi
j=-N
(8.4)
where Nmax is the index of the last burst sample indexed from the middle of the burst.
This way the data sequence following the training sequence is found. Let us note that
the data samples preceding the training sequence are stored in the RAM and they can
be processed identically as the samples following the training sequence in the direction
from the middle to the beginning of the burst. The only difference of the backward
processing is the reversing of the channel impulse response samples.
Figure 8.11 presents a general scheme of the receiver which applies the Viterbi algo-
rithm and the channel estimator. In the Viterbi detector the minimization of the cost
function D is performed sequentially, taking advantage of the channel description in the
form of the automaton characterized by a trellis diagram similar to that featured by
the convolutional encoder (compare Figure 1.18). Because GMSK is a binary modula-
tion, this automaton has 22N states, where 2N + 1 is the length of the channel impulse
response. Actual GSM detectors have 24 = 16 states. The trellis diagram presents

REFERENCES 
217
J Receive 
_ 
V" 
^ 
Viterbi
filter 
detector
* 
Channel response 
hn
^. 
to midamble
* 
Channel estimator
dn 
> 
eq.(8.2)
Known midamble
Figure 8,11 General scheme of the sequential detector applying the Viterbi algorithm
all possible paths from the states at the nth moment to the states at the (n + l)st
moment. Let us recall from Chapter 1 that the shortest path to the considered state
on the trellis diagram at the nth moment characterized by the smallest cost function
D consists of the shortest route to one of the states at the (n — l)st moment and the
path from that state to the considered state at the nth moment. This rule allows for
iterative operation in which the current results (in the form of the shortest paths to
each state at the previous step) can be used in the calculation of the shortest paths in
the next step.
Minimization of the cost function D is the practical realization of the Maximum
Likelihood reception. A GSM mobile station is probably the first product of massive use
in which the Viterbi algorithm used for convolutional code decoding and data sequence
detection found its application.
The detection method described above is a standard solution. Several simplifications
of this method are possible, for example, those described in [10], in which the number
of the trellis states is reduced. The reader interested in GSM terminals is also advised
to study [11]. The reduction of the number of states is particularly important if other
than binary modulation is applied. As we will see in Chapter 9, the enhanced form
of the GSM system updated for high speed data transmission, called EDGE, applies
8-PSK modulation. Thus, the number of trellis states would be 82N. Even for a short
channel impulse response the number of states woud be excessive. Therefore, simplified
detection algorithms have to be applied.
REFERENCES
1. R. Krenz, K. Wesolowski, "Pan-European System of GSM Cellular Telephony" (in
Polish), Przeglqd Telekomunikacyjny, No. 6, 1993, pp. 279-284
2. ETSI EN 300 909, Digital cellular telecommunications system (Phase 24+); Channel
coding (GSM 05.03 V. 8.3.0.) April 2000
3. ETSI EN 300 961, Digital cellular telecommunications system (Phase 24-); Full rate
speech; Transcoding (GSM 06.10, V. 7.0.2), December 1999

218 
GSM CELLULAR TELEPHONY - PHYSICAL LAYER
4. ETSI EN 300 969, Digital cellular telecommunications system (Phase 2+); Half rate
speech; Half rate speech transcoding (GSM 06.20, V. 7.0.1), January 2000
5. ETSI EN 300 726, Digital cellular telecommunications system (Phase 2+); En-
hanced Full Rate (EFR) speech transcoding (GSM 06.60, V. 6.0.1), January 2000
6. S. M. Redl, M. K. Weber, M. W. Oliphant, GSM and Personal Communications
Handbook, Artech House, Boston, 1998
7. ETSI EN 300 959, Digital cellular telecommunications system (Phase 2+); Modu-
lation (GSM 05.04 , V. 7.1.0), January 2000
8. ETSI EN 300 910, Digital cellular telecommunications system (Phase 2+); Radio
transmission and reception (GSM 05.05, V. 8.3.0), April 2000
9. ETSI EN 300 908, Digital cellular telecommunications system (Phase 2+), Multi-
plexing and multiple access on the radio path (GSM 05.02, V. 8.3.0), April 2000
10. K. Wesolowski, R. Krenz, K. Das, "Efficient Receiver Structure for GSM Mobile
Radio", International Journal of Wireless Information Networks, Vo. 3, No. 2,
1996, pp. 117–123
11. Z. Zvonar, R. Baines, "Integrated Solutions for GSM Terminals", International
Journal of Wireless Information Networks, Vol. 3, No. 3, 1996, pp. 147-161

9
Data transmission in GSM
9.1 INTRODUCTION
Cellular systems were first deployed in the early eighties and their basic task was to
transmit voice signals. The increasing demand for data exchange, caused by the progress
in computer networks, created the necessity to offer data transmission as a new service
in cellular systems. First generation systems which transmit voice using analog FM
modulation are not well fitted for data transmission. They ensure relatively reliable
data transmission at the rate of up to 1200 bit/s [1] or do not offer this service in their
standard version at all. Second generation cellular systems are better prepared for data
transmission due to the applied digital technology.
In this chapter we will concentrate on data transmission realized in the GSM system.
Let us recall that the binary data rate in a GSM burst is equal to 270.833 kbit/s. As
we know, this high data rate is the result of the applied TDMA mode in which time
is divided among eight users. We have to recall that the binary stream generated at
the output of the channel code encoder has the data rate of 22.8 kbit/s regardless of
whether voice or data is transmitted. Voice and data should not be differentiated on
the level of burst transmission. Therefore, the organization of data transmission is more
or less associated with the transmission procedures of digitally represented voice.
The GSM standard [2] sets the rate of data transmission at most at 9600 bit/s and
in some special conditions at 14.4 kbit/s. In order to match the data rate with the
rate of 22.8 kbit/s used in data bursts, special error correction codes depending on
the input data transmission rate have to be used. In fact, data transmission blocks
create a parallel chain to the blocks operating in voice transmission. Let us mention
that connecting a modem to the acoustic input of a mobile station would not make any
sense because the voice signal encoder is optimized with respect to human speech arid
219

220 
DATA TRANSMISSION IN GSM
the statistical and spectral properties of the data modulated signal at the output of the
acoustic modem are quite different from the speech signal.
9.2 ORGANIZATION OF DATA TRANSMISSION IN THE GSM SYSTEM
The GSM network can be considered as the access network to other communication
networks such as the Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN), Integrated Services
Digital Network (ISDN), Circuit-Switched Public Data Network (CSPDN) or Packet-
Switched Public Data Networks (PSPDN). Peculiarity of digital transmission in the
GSM network requires a kind of interface which modifies the data stream generated in
the GSM network to the properties of other networks. Therefore, the mobile switching
center (MSC) is equipped with an Interworking Function (IWF) block. The task of this
block is to implement the exchange protocol between the GSM and other networks. Data
rate adaptation, ARQ procedures and acoustic modem functions are the most important
tasks realized by the IWF. Since data exchange between a GSM terminal and the modem
connected to the PSTN can take place in the synchronous or asynchronous mode at the
data rate of 300, 1200, 1200/75, 2400, 4800 and 9600 bit/s, the acoustic modems located
in the IWF operate in accordance with ITU-T V.21, V.22, V.22bis, V.23, V.26ter. V.32
and V.29 (in the case of the facsimile transmission) recommendations.
On the opposite end of the link, a computer or a measurement device connected to
the GSM mobile station is both a source and destination of the data stream. From the
point of view of data exchange, mobile stations are divided into three types which are
differentiated by the location of the Terminal Adaptation Function (TAF) block, which
matches the mobile station to the external data terminal. The types of mobile stations
are the following:
• MTO (Mobile Termination type 0) - a mobile station which is fully integrated and
which does not have any interface to external devices. It can be a simple mobile
station which does not offer data transmission at all or can be a very sophisticated
mobile station integrating the data terminal, fax and regular voice transmission
in a single unit.
• MT2 - a mobile station which features the V.24/RS-232 serial interface, so the
TAF block is integrated with the MS.
• MT1 - a mobile station equipped with the ISDN 64 kbit/s S-interface. In order
to connect a typical terminal with a modem interface (V.24) a special terminal
adapter is necessary.
Figure 9.1 presents the location of TAF and IWF blocks in the GSM transmission
chain.
9.3 
DATA SERVICES IN GSM
In general, the services offered by the GSM system can be divided into two classes:

DATA SERVICES IN GSM 
221
Figure 9.1 Location of Terminal Adaptation Function and Interworking Function blocks in the
data transmission chain in GSM
• Teleservices - the GSM system provides full services within the network; there
is no need for external devices to realize this type of services. The examples of
teleservices are: speech transmission, SMS (Short Messages Service) and facsimile
transmission.
• Bearer services - the GSM implements lower layers of services or realizes the
transport mechanism between access points. Terminal Equipment (TE) such as
a laptop, palmtop or a computer server is necessary on both ends of the link to
implement this kind of services. The bearer services have their own upper layer
protocols. The GSM system only transports the data, without differentiating
which particular service is realized.
From the point of view of this division, data transmission is a bearer service. The
bearer services set different requirements on the network depending on the kind of ser-
vice. As we have already mentioned, the data service can have different rates. Both syn-
chronous and asynchronous data transmission can be applied. The information transfer
can be realized in the form described as Unrestricted Digital Information (UDI) transfer
or it can apply a 3.1-kHz wide acoustic modem signal for information exchange. In the
first case, transmission between the GSM user and ISDN or the packet network sub-
scriber takes place. The acoustic representation of the transmitted data occurs if the
GSM subscriber is linked to a PSTN subscriber or a PSTN is the intermediate network
to which the GSM network is connected. In general, the data transmission link can
connect two individual terminals (point-to-point transmission) or the link can be estab-
lished between a particular terminal and many receiving terminals (point-to-multipoint
transmission). For the data exchange between two terminals a physical link can be real-
ized to transmit data packets exclusively between these two terminals (circuit-switched
transmission) or the packets supplied with the source and destination addresses can
travel through the network, being sent between subsequent network nodes from the
source to the destination terminal (packet-switched transmission). In the standard GSM
system, point-to-point and circuit-switched data transmission is always realized.
The data transmission can be transparent or non-transparent. We say that transmis-
sion is transparent (T) if the link between the terminal equipment, the mobile station
and the IWF block on the other end of the GSM system does not use any procedure of
automatic repetition of erroneous or lost frames or packets. As a result, the data rate
and transmission delay are constant; however, the error rate is variable. Additionally, in

222 
DATA TRANSMISSION IN GSM
the cellular system the data rate increases considerably during the handover procedure.
In consequence, error protection is required in higher transmission layers.
On the other hand, transmission is non-transparent (NT) if the error protection
protocol is applied in the link between the terminal and the IWF block. In the GSM
system the protocol called Radio Link Protocol (RLP) is implemented in the terminal,
mobile station or the TAF block. This protocol is based on the ARQ technique. As
a result, constant high transmission quality is assured; however, the data rate and
transmission delay are variable. The data rate substantially decreases during handover
due to the repetition of the frames which are lost during the change of the serving base
station.
We have to stress that both transparent and non-transparent types of transmission
applied in the GSM system use error detection and correction coding in the physical
layer, as described in the previous chapter.
Table 9.1 lists all the bearer services offered by the standard GSM system. PAD
stands for Packet Assembler/Disassembler block. Using the PAD block is one of the
possible ways to communicate with packet networks through PSTN or ISDN networks.
As we see in Table 9.1, there are 21 different services associated with data transmission,
starting from very slow asynchronous transmission at 300 bit/s and ending with direct
packet access in synchronous mode at the data rate of 9.6 kbit/s.
9.3.1 
Rate adaptation
In all data services the data rate has to be adjusted to the rate of 22.8 kbit/s used
in GSM bursts on the one hand and to the data rate applied in the fixed part of the
GSM network linking BTS, BSCs and MSCs on the other hand. In the latter case it is
advantageous to multiplex the data streams of different users in the 16 or 64 kbit/s link
applied between BSS and MSC. For this purpose the ITU-T V.I 10 Recommendation
[4] has been adapted to GSM. Different adaptation functions are applied depending on
the configuration of the actual data transmission. We will shortly describe them below
[5].
• RAO - the adaptation function used in an asynchronous interface. This function
realizes the transformation of the asynchronous stream generated by the user to
a synchronous stream at the first allowable higher data rate. This operation is
performed by adding or subtracting some stop bits contained in the asynchronous
stream.
• RA1 - the adaptation function used to adapt the data stream to intermediate
rates. Its input is the output of a RAO block or the synchronous data. The block
performs the transformation of the data stream to an 8 or 16 kbit/s stream, using
bit repetitions. The resulting frames contain synchronization bits, control bits
and repeated data bits. Table 9.2 shows transformation of data rates for RAl.
• RA2 - the adaptation function used to convert the data stream at the output of
RAl block to a 64 kbit/s stream (A interface) according to ITU-T V.I 10 Recom-
mendation. 8 kbit/s data bits are placed in the 64 kbit/s data stream as the first

DATA SERVICES IN GSM
223
Table 9.1 Bearer services offered in GSM [3]
Bearer service
No.
21
22
23
24
25
26
31
32
33
34
41
42
43
44
45
46
51
52
53
61
81
Name
Asynch 300 bit/s
Asynch 1.2 kbit/s
Asynch 1200/75 bit/s
Asynch 2.4 kbit/s
Asynch 4.8 kbit/s
Asynch 9.6 kbit/s
Synch 1.2 kbit/s
Synch 2.4 kbit/s
Synch 4.8 kbit/s
Synch 9.6 kbit/s
PAD access 300 bit/s
PAD access 1.2 kbit/s
PAD access 1200/75 bit/s
PAD access 2.4 kbit/s
PAD access 4.8 kbit/s
PAD access 9.6 kbit/s
Packet access 2.4 kbit/s
Packet access 4.8 kbit/s
Packet access 9.6 kbit/s
Alternate speech/data
Speech followed by data
Access
Structure
Asynch
Asynch
Asynch
Asynch
Asynch
Asynch
Synch
Synch
Synch
Synch
Asynch
Asynch
Asynch
Asynch
Asynch
Asynch
Synch
Synch
Synch
Rate
300 bit/s
1.2 kbit/s
1200/75 bit/s
2.4 kbit/s
4.8 kbit/s
9.6 kbit/s
1.2 kbit/s
2.4 kbit/s
4.8 kbit/s
9.6 kbit/s
300 bit/s
1.2 kbit/s
1200/75 bit/s
2.4 kbit/s
4.8 kbit/s
9.6 kbit/s
2.4 kbit/s
4.8 kbit/s
9.6 kbit/s
Information
Transfer
UDI or 3.1-kHz
UDI or 3.1-kHz
UDI or 3.1-kHz
UDI or 3.1-kHz
UDI or 3.1-kHz
UDI or 3.1-kHz
UDI or 3.1-kHz
UDI or 3.1-kHz
UDI or 3.1-kHz
UDI or 3.1-kHz
UDI
UDI
UDI
UDI
UDI
UDI
UDI
UDI
UDI
Attribute
Tor NT
Tor NT
Tor NT
Tor NT
T or NT
Tor NT
T
T or NT
Tor NT
Tor NT
T or NT
T or NT
Tor NT
T or NT
Tor NT
T or NT
NT
NT
NT
Table 9.2 Input and intermediate data rates used in RAl rate adaptation function
Synchronous data rate
bit/s
600
1200
2400
4800
9600
Intermediate rate
kbit/s
8
8
8
8
16
Duplication
(times)
8
4
2
1
1

224 
DATA TRANSMISSION IN GSM
Table 9.3 Transformation of synchronous data rates to data rates before coding on the radio
interface
Synchronous data rate
[kbit/s]
< 2.4
4.8
9.6
14.4
Data rate before coding
on the radio interface
[kbit/s]
3.6
6
12
14.5
bits in each octet, whereas 16 kbit/s data bits are placed in the 64 kbit/s data
stream in the first two octet positions. The remaining bits in each octet are filled
with ones. This inefficient representation of the data stream from the output of
RA1 block in the form of 64 kbit/s data stream can be avoided if multiplexing of
a few 8 or 16 kbit/s data streams is applied. Thus, the multiplexed data streams
are placed in subsequent bit positions in the octets.
• RA1' - the adaptation function which transforms the rates of data received from
the terminal (DTE) to the rates used in a radio interface. The data stream is
supplemented with control bits. The source of data for RA1' is either the output
of RAO or a synchronous stream. Table 9.3 presents data rate transformation
between DTE and radio interface. Let us note that the values of 3.6, 6. 12 and
14.5 kbit/s are related to the data stream before channel coding.
The process of channel coding applied in data transmission services will be described
in the next subsection. Then the motivation for the selection of data rates on the radio
interface will be clear.
Let us illustrate the rate adaptation for asynchronous transparent data transmission.
This is only one example of many possible configurations of data exchange. Figure 9.2
presents the rate adaptation for three input data rates. In case of the synchronous input
data the first step of RAO is omitted.
The asynchronous data stream is turned into a synchronous stream of the first higher
data rate (performed by RAO function). As a result, a synchronous data stream of 2.4,
4.8 or 9.6 kbit/s data rate is received. RA1' function transforms this stream to the
data stream of the rate equal to 3.6, 6.0 or 12.0 kbit/s. Next, channel coding with
puncturing and interleaving matched to a particular data rate is applied, giving the
22.8 kbit/s data stream. This data is packed into the GSM bursts and sent over the
air. On the fixed side of the GSM network the data is decoded to the 3.6, 6.0 or 12.0
kbit/s data stream, respectively. This stream is subsequently transformed into 8 or 16
kbit/s data stream (RAl'/RAl) and it is finally placed in the ISDN octets (RA2).
The non-transparent data transmission is organized similarly. In non-transparent
transmission the highest rates of the radio interface are applied. Let us discuss the
data rate adaptation for synchronous data exchange. In the case of non-transparent
transmission data blocks are protected by the Radio Link Protocol (RLP). which will

DATA SERVICES IN GSM 
225
Figure 9.2 Example of rate adaptation functions applied in asynchronous data transmission in
GSM
be explained later in this chapter. Figure 9.3 presents the subsequent steps of rate
adaptation if a full-rate channel is used in the radio interface. A half-rate channel can
be applied as well, resulting in a lower data throughput. Let us note that the RLP
protocol is applied externally with respect to the channel coding.
Figure 9.3 Rate adaptation functions for non-transparent synchronous transmission using full
rate channel
9.3.2 
Channel coding
Channel coding applied in data transmission depends on the data rate of the radio in-
terface. As we have mentioned above, as a result of RAl' adaptation function we receive
a data stream of the rate 3.6, 6.0 or 12 kbit/s. This data stream can be transmitted
using the full- or half-rate traffic channel. All possible channel coding configurations
can be found in [2]. Below we show only two examples of channel coding procedures
applied in data transmission over GSM.

226 
DATA TRANSMISSION IN GSM
Let us consider 9.6 kbit/s transmission in the full-rate traffic channel. The required
data rate in the radio interface is 12 kbit/s. The DTE delivers data blocks of 60
information bits every 5 ms to the channel encoder. Four blocks (240 bits) are treated
jointly by the encoder. In case of non-transparent transmission, 240 bits constitute a
single RLP frame. The block of 240 bits is supplemented with 4 zero bits and coded
using the 1/2-rate convolutional code defined by the polynomials:
gi(x) = l + z3+z4
g2(x) = l+z + z3+z4, 
(9.1)
so 488 bits are received. Among them, 32 bits are subsequently eliminated by punc-
turing, decreasing the block size to 456 bits. Next, the coded bits are reordered and
interleaved. Finally, the 456-bit block is transmitted using 22 consecutive data bursts.
As the second example, let us consider channel coding applied in data services at the
rate of 2.4 kbit/s and less. The data rate of radio interface is now 3.6 kbit/s. The DTE
delivers 36 information bits every 10 ms. Two blocks (72 bits) are treated jointly by
the coding process. Such 72-bit block is increased by four zero bits and is a subject of
rate 1/6 convolutional coding defined by the polynomials:
g 1(x) = l + x + x3 + x4, g2(x) = l+x 2+x 4, g3(x) = 1 + x + x2 + x3 + x4
g
4(x) = l + x + x3 + x4, g5(x) = l + x 2+x 4, g 6(x) = 1 + z + z2 + z3 + z4 (9.2)
Let us note that g 1(x) = g5(x), g3(x) = g5(x) and gs(x) = ge(x), so the encoded bits
are sent twice. The result of convolutional encoding is a block of 456 bits. Interleaving
and mapping the interleaved bits on a normal burst are performed in the same way as
for a full-rate speech signal.
These two examples show that the level of protection can be very different, depending
on the input data rate and required quality.
9.3.3 
Radio Link Protocol (RLP)
Transparent data transmission requires the application of some kind of data exchange
protocol external to the GSM system in order to ensure high quality of service. Such
a solution may not be feasible due to high time consumption and a large amount of
system resources used because the block chain for transmitting the signaling information
can be very long. The block chain consists of a data terminal (DTE), mobile station
(MS), base station system (BSS), mobile switching center (MSC), interworking function
(IWF) block, the external fixed network and the DTE of the second user. If the second
user is also a subscriber of a mobile system the blocks listed above are again used in
the transmission chain in the reversed order. Therefore, non-transparent transmission
using Radio Link Protocol (RLP) is more advantageous in many cases. If the RLP is
applied, error protection is performed between TAF and IWF blocks using a kind of
ARQ procedure.
The 240-bit RLP frame has a very simple structure. It is shown in Figure 9.4. The
frame starts with a 16-bit header which performs control functions such as establishing
or releasing an RLP link, counting the frames and signaling the presence of erroneous

DATA SERVICES IN GSM 
227
Header 
Information 
FCS
16 bit 
200 bit 
24 bit
•« 
*•« - 
K 
- >•
Figure 9.4 RLP frame structure
frames which have to be retransmitted. The next field has the length of 200 bits and
contains user data. The frame is ended with a 24-bit Frame Check Sequence (FCS)
calculated by dividing the frame contents by the cyclic code polynomial (see Chapter
1).
The RLP protocol works in two modes. The first one, called Asynchronous Discon-
nected Mode (ADM), indicates that no RLP link has been established yet. A necessary
condition which has to be fulfilled before establishing the RLP link is the allocation of
the traffic channel to a given connection. If the RLP is in the Asynchronous Balanced
Mode (ABM), the exchange of numbered frames and their acknowledgement takes place.
Three types of frames appear in the RLP protocol. The first type is called unnum-
bered frame (U) and its header contains, among others, the commands for establishing
and releasing the RLP link. The supervisory frames (S) are used to send supervisory
commands during frame exchange, which inform about the status of the received frame,
the receiver status and the number of the received frame. The third type of a frame
is a supervisory frame combined with information. Its header contains the commands
indicating the numbers of the received and sent frames as well as the status of the
received frame and the receiver.
9.3.4 
Data transmission in the aspect of access to different networks
As we know, the GSM subscriber transmitting data can communicate with the sub-
scribers of several types of networks. The PSTN network is so far the most popular
among them. The ISDN or packet data network can participate in a digital link as well.
We will shortly describe the specific features of the links arranged using the networks
of different types. Figure 9.5 presents the data link arranged with a PSTN subscriber
or a host connected via PSTN to the outside world. Although nowadays the PSTN is
MSC 
IWFj 
PSTN
BTS
DTE 
MS 
BSS 
Modem 
Modem 
DTE
Figure 9.5 Data transmission over GSM and PSTN
very often digital, during the connection set-up it is not known what the properties of
the PSTN link are. Therefore, the GSM network uses the analog modem contained in

228 
DATA TRANSMISSION IN GSM
the IWF block to communicate with a remote DTE. The latter is also connected to
the PSTN through a modem. The IWF modem generates PCM samples of the analog
signal and in this way the modem signal becomes similar to any other speech or acoustic
data signal represented digitally in the PSTN. The types of modems supported by GSM
and used in the IWF block have already been mentioned in Section 9.2.
The ISDN is the second type of network to which the GSM system can be connected.
In this case the link is fully digital so analog modems are not needed any more. The
rate adaptation blocks have to be applied instead, in order to fit the data rate of the
terminal connected with the GSM network to the data rate in the ISDN network. Figure
9.6 illustrates this case.
A>
BSC 
MSC 
™ 
'SDN 
RA
^ / 
(v.110)
BTS
DTE 
MS 
BSS 
DTE
•4 
> < 
> 
•« 
>
Figure 9.6 Data transmission over GSM and ISDN networks
Cooperation of a GSM network with a PSPDN is more complicated. A GSM user can
set up a connection with a packet data network user through the intermediate PSTN
network or can do it directly with the desired PSPDN. In the case of PSTN functioning
as an intermediate network, analog modems have to be used in the IWF and at the
PSTN/PSPDN interface point. Figure 9.7 illustrates the case when the GSM network
and ISDN are interfaced directly. This time modems are not needed. The PSPDN can
be accessed by the Packet Assembler/Disassembler (PAD) block or through a Packet
Handler (PH) which is located inside the PSPDN. The type of the applied block depends
on the protocol which is supported by a mobile terminal (DTE+MS). If the transmission
from the mobile terminal is possible in accordance with the X.32 packet protocol, then
the PH block is applied. If a mobile terminal does not support a packet protocol, the
PAD block has to be used.
The GSM standards normalize the rules of operation of a data link with Circuit-
Switched Public Data Networks (CSPDN) and of the fax transmission as well; however.
we will skip their descriptions. The reader who is particularly interested in this subject
is advised to study the GSM standards or a book such as [3],
9.4 
TRANSMISSION OF SHORT MESSAGES - SMS
Short Message Service (SMS) has become a very popular service offered by GSM oper-
ators. It is particularly attractive to young subscribers due to its low price. From the
point of view of the service type it is classified as a teleservice. The SMS is a kind of
paging with acknowledgement of message delivery. If the SMS recipient is outside the
network range or its mobile station is switched off, the system will store the message
for him/her and will deliver it as soon as the MS reappears in the network. This is the

TRANSMISSION OF SHORT MESSAGES - SMS 
229
a)
BSC
PSPDN
PAD
BTS
DTE 
MS
•4 
+• -4 
>
BSS
e.g-X.28
DTE
b)
PSPDN
BTS
BSS
DTE
X.32
Figure 9.7 Data transmission using GSM and PSPDN: through PAD (a), applying packet handler
(PH) (b)
so called store-and-forward mechanism. The SMS can be delivered in parallel to the
ongoing speech transmission. An individual message is limited to 160 characters which
are mapped into 140 bytes thanks to applying the special alphabet.
_. 
. 
Service i j SMS-GMSC 
MCr
Fixed
 
: 
OMO HA/MO/- 
MSC
SMS-IWMSC
MS
MS
SME
GSM
Network
HLR
VLR
Figure 9.8 Network blocks taking part in the SMS service
Figure 9.8 presents the network architecture for the SMS service. The network ele-
ment which is the source of the SMS message is called Short Message Entity (SME). It
can be a mobile station registered in the same or different network, a computer directly
connected to the SMS Service Center (SC) (owned by the network operator) serving as
the access point to the SMS service, a computer delivering updated news (e.g. current

230 
DATA TRANSMISSION IN GSM
stock market prices) or a computer located in the fixed network (e.g. Internet) allowing
sending of SMS messages as well.
The service center is the most important block participating in the SMS service.
Formally it is not a part of the mobile network; however, very often it is integrated
with the mobile switching center. The tasks of the SC are following. The SC receives
messages from SME and forwards them to mobile recipients. If the addressed mobile
station is not available at the moment, the SC stores the message for a limited period
of time. The SC informs the sender about the successful or unsuccessful SMS message
delivery.
The next block in Figure 9.8 denotes the functions associated with SMS which are per-
formed within the MSC. For mobile-terminated SMS messages the SMS-GMSC (Short
Message Service-Gateway Mobile Switching Center) is applied, whereas for mobile-
originated SMS messages the SMS-IWMSC (Short Message Service-Interworking Mo-
bile Switching Center) is used. The SMS-GMSC receives the messages from the service
center and investigates the network HLR in order to find the mobile recipient of the
SMS message. After finding in the HLR the appropriate MSC serving the location
area in which the called mobile station is currently registered, it directs the message to
this MSC. The MSC delivers the message to the addressed mobile station. The SMS-
IWMSC is a function which allows its own service center (see Figure 9.8) to receive
SMS messages from the MSC which then can be transferred to that service center to
which the receiving mobile station is assigned.
SMS Mobile-Terminated
B i t N o . 
7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
Octet No. 1 
0 
00
1
max 12
max 140
RP, SRI, MMS, MTI
Originating Address
Protocol Identifier
Data Coding Scheme
Service Center
Time Stamp
User Data Length
User Data
Bit No.
Octet No. 1
1
1
max 12
SMS Mobile-Originated
7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
0 
0
RP. SRR, VPF. MTI
Message Reference
1or7
max 140
~ ) Destination Address
Protocol Identifier
Data Coding Scheme
Validity Period
User Data Length
User Data
Figure 9.9 Frame structures for mobile-terminated and originated SMS messages (RP - Reply
Path, SRI - Status Report Indication, MMS-More-Message-to-Send, MTI - Message Type Indi-
cator, SRR - Status Report Request, VPF - Validity Period Format)
Figure 9.9 presents frame structures for mobile-terminated and mobile-originated
SMS messages.
Let us briefly describe the frame used in mobile terminated SMS messages. The first
byte contains some useful flags and a three-bit zero pattern indicating that the message

TRANSMISSION OF SHORT MESSAGES - SMS 
231
is mobile-terminated. The Reply Path (RP) flag indicates that the answer to the re-
ceived message will be paid by the message sender. The Status Report Indication (SRI)
indicates that the message sender wishes to receive acknowledgment of his/her message
delivery. The More-Message-to-Send (MMS) flag indicates that a certain number of
SMS messages is waiting for delivery to the receiving MS. Finally, the Message Type
Indicator (MTI) flag describes the type of message contained in the frame. Other fields
of the frame are more or less self-explanatory. The Originating Address field normally
contains the telephone number of the calling station. The Protocol Identifier shows the
type of protocol which has to be used in order to deliver the SMS message. It is partic-
ularly important when the message has to be sent to the recipient located in another
type of network. The Data Coding Scheme informs what kind of data representation
has been applied in the user data. A standard alphabet needs 7 bits for a character
representation. The Service Center Time Stamp indicates the time at which the SMS
message arrived at the service center. The User Data Length indicates the length of
the user data, counted in the number of characters. The User Data contains up to 160
characters (no more than 140 bytes if the 7-bit character representation is applied).
Similar parameters and flags are contained in the frame used by SMS mobile-
originated messages. The first byte again contains some useful flags and a two-bit zero
pattern indicating that the message is mobile-originated. The Status Report Request
flag states whether the SMS originating station wishes to receive acknowledgement of
the message delivery. The Validity Period flag indicates if the validity period is con-
tained in the transmitted frame. The Destination Address is the telephone number of
the receiving station. The Validity Period indicates the validity of the sent message.
It determines how long the service center should try to send the SMS message to the
recipient.
Let us trace now the SMS message on its way from the originator to the receiving
mobile station. Let the SMS message be generated in one of the possible message
sources (SME), e.g. a mobile station or a specialized computer. The message reaches
the service center where the validity period, priority and the number of messages for the
same recipient are checked. The time stamp is also added. The service center informs
the SMS-GMSC functional block that there is a message for a particular mobile station.
The SMS-GMSC finds in the HLR the MSC serving the area in which the desired
mobile station is currently located. Is subsequently sends the message to this MSC.
The appropriate MSC checks the location area of the mobile station in its VLR and the
base stations belonging to this area page the desired mobile station. The base station
in whose area the mobile station has been found establishes a channel and sends the
SMS message to the mobile station.
The kind of channel established for SMS message delivery depends on the current
status of the mobile station. If the mobile station is outside the network area or if it is
switched off, the message cannot be delivered and attempts to send it till the validity
period expires. If the mobile station is in the idle state, it monitors the common control
channels. Therefore, the SMS is sent using a stand-alone dedicated control channel
(SDCCH) which allows to transmit 184 bit during 240 ms. If the mobile station is in
the active mode (the speech or data transmission is taking place) the slow associated

232 
DATA TRANSMISSION IN GSM
control channel (SACCH) can be applied and the SMS data rate is about two times
lower than in the previous case.
This short description of the SMS does not present all details of this service. More
detailed considerations on the SMS can be found in [3]. The highly motivated reader is
asked to study ETSI standards [6] and [7].
9.5 HIGH-SPEED CIRCUIT-SWITCHED DATA SERVICE - HSCSD
Although the number of different data transmission services in the GSM is quite high,
their main drawback is a slow data rate. The data rate is mostly insufficient for Internet
applications and the connections can be very expensive due to their duration. Therefore,
a lot of effort has been made to improve data transmission capabilities of the GSM
system. Generally, two solutions have been found:
• increasing the data rate with the minimum system modifications - this is realized
by the assignment of several time slots to a single connection, preserving the
circuit-switched communications so, as the result, the link capacity is multiplied.
• better usage of the system resources by application of the packet-switched com-
munications with the possibility of assigning several time slots in a frame for
transmission of a data packet. As a result, substantial system modifications are
required.
In this section we will consider the first, more traditional approach called High-Speed
Circuit-Switched Data Service (HSCSD). Its detailed description can be found in [8]
and [9].
As we have mentioned, the main idea exploited by HSCSD is the co-allocation of mul-
tiple full-rate channels (TCH/F) in a single HSCSD link. Theoretically, if all 8 time slots
were assigned to a single connection, then using a full-rate traffic channel TCH/F9.6
with 9.6 kbit/s data rate we would achieve the user data rate of 8 x 9.6 kbit/s = 76.8
kbit/s. In practice, the maximum data rate of 57.6 kbit/s is received if 4 slots using
TCH/F14.4 channels are assigned to the connection. A typical data rate is 38.4 =
4 x 9.6 kbit/s, if 4 TCH/F9.6 channels are used. All applied channels follow the com-
mon frequency hopping procedure, the same training sequence in the midamble, the
same channel coding, interleaving and rate adaptation; however, they have their own
enciphering keys derived from the same Kc key contained in the SIM. A slow associated
control channel (SACCH) is assigned to each composite channel. Each HSCSD link uses
a single fast associated control channel (FACCH) denoted as Main HSCSD Subchannel
(MHCH). Logically, all the traffic channels applied in the HSCSD radio interface belong
to the same HSCSD configuration and they are treated by the network as one radio
link. This is important for all performed cellular operations, e.g. handover.
Figure 9.10 presents the architecture of the HSCSD. The main modification of the
system is made in the TAF block on the mobile system side and in the IWF block in the
MSC. Both blocks perform the combining and splitting of n composite data streams
(n = 1.2, . . . ,8) transmitted in different traffic channels. Some modifications in the

HIGH-SPEED CIRCUIT-SWITCHED 
DATA SERVICE - HSCSD 
233
(TAP) 
A
J 
A 
: 
*
MSC IWF
i : 
BSC 
__
MS 
u 
BTS 
^ 
A
Figure 9.10 Architecture of the HSCSD
base station system (BSS) are also necessary due to joint handling of traffic channels
involved in the single HSCSD link. In the A interface the composite data streams should
be multiplexed in one 64 kbit/s circuit. Figure 9.11 illustrates this process.
MUX
High
Data
Rate
«
•4
co
§
</)
"^ c
'c '
Ja
o
°
MS
RA
RA
RA
RA
>*
FEC 
FEC
FEC 
-FEC
FEC 
;FEC
FEC 
FEC
BSS
RA
RA
RA
RA
TCH/F
um
3E
O
RA 
O
Figure 9.11 The process of splitting, combining and multiplexing in the HSCSD transmission
When the HSCSD connection is set up, a user's mobile station indicates the maximum
number of traffic channels (Desired Number of Channels - DNC) and the minimum
number of channels (Required Number of Channels - RNC) needed for the realization
of the selected service, the acceptable channel coding, the allowable type of the remote
modem and the values of the fixed network user data rate. If the connection is non-
transparent, the desired radio interface user rate is indicated. The user can modify
his/her needs during the connection if such an option has been negotiated during the
connection set-up. All selected parameters constitute a HSCSD characteristic which is
applied by the network to allocate the network resources to the HSCSD connection.
In the HSCSD service both transparent and non-transparent connections can be
established. A connection can have a symmetric or an asymmetric configuration. For a
symmetric configuration, the same number of traffic channels is assigned to the downlink
and the uplink, whereas in an asymmetric configuration, the downlink uses higher
number of the traffic channels than the uplink. The asymmetric configuration is selected
if the requirements of the user cannot be met in the symmetric configuration. Above
all, the network attempts to fulfill the data rate requirements in the downlink.

234 
DATA TRANSMISSION IN GSM
Table 9.4 The mapping of air interface user rate to the traffic channels for non-transparent
services
Air Interface
User Rate [kbit/s]
4.8
9.6
14.4
19.2
28.8
38.4
43.2
57.6
TCH/F4.8
1
2
3
4
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
TCH/F9.6
N/A
1
N/A
2
3
4
N/A
N/A
TCH/F14.4
N/A
N/A
1
N/A
2
N/A
3
4
In the HSCSD transparent bearer services the X.30/V.110 protocols are applied which
realize three-level adaptation to the user interface. The status of the modem V.24
lines from the GMSC-IWF is now common for several traffic channels, therefore it is
transmitted only in one of them. The released bits are used for numbering the channels
in order to prevent problems with a potential time displacement of the traffic channels.
The non-transparent HSCSD bearer service is based on the RLP protocol. Some
minor changes are necessary in order to handle up to 8 traffic channels by the RLP
block. See [10] for details. Table 9.4 shows the mapping of the Air Interface User Rate
(AIUR) to the full-rate traffic channels TCH/F for non-transparent services [8].
HSCSD was the first major attempt to improve data transmission capabilities of the
GSM system. Due to the assumption about introducing few changes in the system,
the HSCSD remains a circuit-switched system, as the standard GSM is. Therefore,
it is not well suited to the packet traffic which is characteristic for data transmission.
The reservation of more than one time slot during the whole data exchange session
(unless the dynamic system resources have been negotiated) increases the probability
of blocking in a cell. Charging for the HSCSD service is determined by the number of
the used channels and the duration of the session.
9.6 GENERAL PACKET RADIO SERVICE - GPRS
General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) is a major improvement and extension of the
standard GSM system. The reasons for its development were manifold. Data transmis-
sion rates in the existing mobile networks were insufficient and the connection set-up
time was long. The circuit-switched transmission was not well fitted to the bursty and
asymmetric nature of the data traffic, therefore the existing system resources were used
inefficiently. As a result, it was decided that packet-switched transmission should be
applied. Thus, the system users can share the same physical channels and the system
resources can be used much more efficiently due to statistical multiplexing. The con-
sequence of packet-switching is tariffing based on the number of transmitted packets.

GENERAL PACKET RADIO SERVICE - GPRS 
235
The session can last for a long time but the user pays for the transmitted data volume
only.
9.6.1 
GPRS system architecture
In a sense, introducing GPRS results in a network parallel to the GSM network. The
network uses a lot of GSM resources; however, the main network elements are connected
with each other by a separate backbone network, which is based on the IP protocol.
Figure 9.12 presents the basic GPRS architecture. User data and signaling data flowing
through the main network are denoted by solid lines whereas signaling data transmitted
through the signaling network are shown as dashed lines. The main novel elements in
the GPRS network are GPRS Support Nodes (GSN). They deliver data packets and
determine their route between a mobile station and external packet data networks.
EIR
BSS
Gi
GGSN
Gc
Packet
Data
Network
BTS
Um Interface 
GPRS Mobile stations
Figure 9.12 GPRS system architecture
The Serving GPRS Support Node (SGSN) is responsible for delivery and reception
of packets to and from mobile stations in the SGSN service area. It works in the
similar way as a mobile switching center in a regular GSM system. It determines the
route of transmitted packets and transfers them to appropriate nodes. It also manages
MS mobility and is responsible for logical link management. The SGSN performs MS
authentication functions and stores all information about all the GPRS subscribers

236 
DATA TRANSMISSION IN GSM
registered in this SGSN in the location register. Such information contains the index of
the current cell, the current VLR and a subscriber profile consisting of the international
mobile subscriber identity (IMSI) and the address used in the packet network.
The Gateway GPRS Support Node (GGSN) constitutes an interface between the
backbone GPRS network and external packet data networks. This node performs the
conversion of the GPRS packets arriving from SGSN to the appropriate format of the
Packet Data Protocol (PDP), depending on the type of the interfacing network. As a
result, the converted packets are sent out to the destination network. The processing of
packets which arrive from external networks relies on the conversion of the address from
the PDP format to the GSM format and sending the processed packet to the appropriate
SGSN. In order to perform this task, GGSN recalls the stored subscriber profile and the
currently serving SGSN from its location register. GPRS ensures interface with several
external packet networks, therefore different GGSNs are possible. On the other hand, a
single GGSN can send its packets to several SGSNs which operate in their own service
areas.
The HLR register stores data on all the GPRS users registered in their GSM system.
These data include the user profile and the current SGSN and PDP addresses. These
data are updated each time a user registers with a new SGSN.
The MSC/VLR register performs more functions than in a conventional GSM. The
operation of MSC/VLR allows to coordinate the packet- and circuit-switched services.
An example of these services is paging for the circuit-switched call performed by the
SGSN in which data exchange between the MSC/VLR and the SGSN is realized. In the
MSC/VLR register a joint update for subscribers registered for both GSM and GPRS
services also takes place.
A GPRS system allows SMS messages to be sent as well. For that reason data
exchange between SMS-GMSC and/or SMS-IWMSC blocks and the appropriate SGSN
takes place.
All GPRS system blocks are connected with appropriate blocks according to the de-
fined interfaces (see Figure 9.12). As we have already mentioned, all GPRS nodes are
connected using an IP-based backbone network. The transmitted packets are encapsu-
lated by the GSNs and sent to the appropriate network node using the GPRS Tunneling
Protocol (GTP). The GPRS nodes are connected within their own network using intra-
PLMN backbone network. The connection with external PLMN networks is performed
via inter-PLMN backbone networks. As in a conventional GSM, a roaming agreement
between GPRS providers is necessary to make the data exchange between different net-
works possible. Such inter-PLMN network communication is realized through Border
Gateways which protect their own networks against the unauthorized use.
9.6.2 
GPRS physical layer
In a GPRS system the physical layer is very similar to that in a standard GSM; however,
packet transmission and asymmetric traffic require some changes and extensions in this
layer. First of all, the GPRS system allows for multislot operation, in which up to 8 slots
in the frame can be used by a single mobile station. The consequence of the asymmetric
packet traffic is a separate resource assignment to uplink and downlink. The channel

GENERAL PACKET RADIO SERVICE - GPRS 
237
allocation is performed only for the duration of packet transmission or reception. Other
mobile stations can use the same channel between subsequent packet transmissions.
Thus, the rule of capacity on demand is realized. It means that the number of assigned
channels is a function of the traffic load, service priorities and the class of the multislot
operation. The channels can be shared by the standard GSM and GPRS.
PDCH
PCCCH
^ - downlink
A - uplink
1 - bidirectional
Figure 9.13 Logical channels in GPRS
A basic physical GPRS channel is called a Packet Data Channel (PDCH). Several
logical channels are used in the GPRS and their organization is shown in Figure 9.13.
We describe their functions below.
• PDTCH (Packet Data Traffic Channel) is applied to transport user data; one or
more PDTCHs can be allocated to a GPRS terminal,
• PBCCH (Packet Broadcast Control Channel) is used by a base station system to
inform all mobile stations located in the cells about the organization of GPRS
and GSM,
• PCCCH (Packet Common Control Channel) is a common control channel which
is further divided into the following channels:
— PRACH (Packet Random Access Channel) used by a mobile station to re-
quest one or more PDTCHs,
- PAGCH (Packet Access Grant Channel) applied to confirm the allocation of
one or more PDTCHs to the mobile station,
- PPCH (Packet Paging Channel) used by the base station to page the desired
mobile station (MS) and find the cell in which the MS is currently located,
— PNCH (Packet Notification Channel) used to inform the mobile station
about messages in multicast or group calls,
• PACCH (Packet Associated Control Channel) is used to send signaling infor-
mation associated with one or more PDTCHs used by a mobile station; it is
bidirectional

238 
DATA TRANSMISSION IN GSM
Table 9.5 Basic parameters of GPRS coding schemes
Coding
scheme
CS-1
CS-2
CS-3
CS-4
USF
preceding
3
6
6
12
RLC
block
181
268
312
428
CRC
40
16
16
16
Tan
bits
4
4
4
0
Conv.
code output
456
588
676
456
Punc.
bits
0
132
220
0
Code
rate
1/2
2/3
3/4
1
Data
rate
9.05
13.4
15.6
21.4
• PTCCH/U and PTCCH/D (Packet Timing advance Control Channel) is used in
the uplink and downlink to adjust timing advance of the frame clock, thus, frame
synchronization is ensured.
In an attempt to register with a network, a mobile station looks for PBCCH and
later for PCCCH; however, if they are not found, the mobile station will next search
for the BCCH and the CCCH of the conventional GSM, also deployed in the cell.
Logical packet channels applied in the GPRS are mapped onto physical channels
used in the GPRS physical layer, as is done in a standard GSM system; however, there
are some differences which have to be clarified. As we remember, in a conventional
GSM system, the mutiframe consists of 26 frames for traffic channels or 51 frames for
signaling channels. In the GPRS the multiframe is built of 52 frames. The structure of
a GPRS multiframe is shown in Figure 9.14. Four subsequent frames constitute a block.
A block is a unit from the point of view of the applied channel coding. There are 12
blocks in the multiframe (B0-B11). Two frames are idle, two other frames are used to
update the frame timing advance. As we remember, a single GSM normal burst carries
114 bits of user data. Therefore, one block consisting of 4 frames contains 4 x 114 = 456
bits and each coding scheme applied in GPRS results in a 456-bit block.
Frame number.
0 
3 4
7 8
Block 0 Block 1 Block 2
13 
16 17 
20 21 
24 25 26 
29 30 
33 34 
37 38 39 
42 43
Block 3 Block 4 Block 5 I I Block 6 Block 7 Blocks II Block 9! Block
46 47 
50 51
10JBIock1li|
Figure 9.14 GPRS multiframe structure (TA - Timing Advance frame, I - Idle frame)
Two-level channel coding is generally applied in the GPRS. The outer code is a block
code. Some tail bits are usually added at the end of the code word. In turn, this code
word is convolutionally coded and some bits can be punctured in order to the code
length of 456 bits. Table 9.5 presents the basic data concerning four channel coding
schemes applied in the GPRS. The USF (Uplink State Flag) is applied in the downlink
to inform the MS if the uplink channel is free.
The coding schemes CS-l-CS-4 are fitted to different channel conditions. CS-1 to
CS-4 are applied in traffic packet data channels, whereas CS-1 is also used to protect
signaling channels (except PRACH). The choice of the coding scheme depends on the
channel conditions and service requirements. Therefore, CS-1, a strong coding scheme,
is used in poor channel conditions, resulting in 9.05 kbit/s per slot. On the other
extreme, CS-4 can be used in very good channel conditions. No convolutional coding

GENERAL PACKET RADIO SERVICE - GPRS 
239
is applied in this case. Since the resulting data rate is 21.4 kbit/s, therefore, at the
assignment of 8 slots to a user, a 171.2 kbit/s data rate is achievable. Figure 9.15
presents graphically all four coding schemes.
4 
184 bits 
>
MAC header j RLC Data / Control Block
a) 
USF | 5 bits 
176 bits
Fire code
184 data bits 
40 check bits 0000
< 
228 bits 
*
1/2-Rate convolutional code
456 coded bits (1 block)
b)
MAC header
USF ; 5 bits
Pre-
ceding
6 bits
271/315 bits
RLC Data Block
256/304 bits
Spare bits
7/3 bits'
268 / 312 data bits
294/338 bits
1/2-Rate convolutiona! code
558/676 coded bits (before puncturing)
c)
1 
— 
-
MAC header
USF 
5 bits
Pre-
coding
431 bits
RLC Data Block
416 bits
>
7 bits
12 bits
428 data bits
456 bits
16 check bits
Figure 9.15 GPRS coding schemes: CS-1 (a), CS-2/CS-3 (b), CS-4 (c)
Different coding schemes and data rates ensure a whole set of different services
characterized by appropriate Quality of Service (QoS). Quality of service requirements
strongly depend on the applications. In the GPRS system QoS profiles have been de-
fined using such parameters as priority of the service, reliability, delay and throughput.
The throughput specifies the maximum and mean bit rates. Depending on the kind
of service, various probability of packet loss, packet duplication and packet corruption
can be tolerated. Three reliability classes have been defined, characterized by specific

240 
DATA TRANSMISSION IN GSM
Table 9.6 Requirements for reliable classes in GPRS packet services
Class
1
2
3
Probability of
lost
packet
10-9
10-4
10
-'
2
duplicated
packet
10-9
10-5
10-5
out of sequence
packet
10-9
10-5
10-5
corrupted
packet
10-9
10-6
10-2
Table 9.7 Requirements for delay classes
Class
1
2
3
4
128-byte packet
mean
delay
<0.5 s
<5 s
<50s
best effort
95%
delay
<1.5s
<25s
<250s
best effort
1024-byte packet
mean
delay
<2s
<15s
<75s
best effort
95%
delay
<7s
<75s
<375s
best effort
values of the above parameters. Table 9.6 presents the requirements for these reliability
classes. Similarly, three classes are defined with reference to the tolerable delay. Table
9.7 summarizes the requirements for the delay classes.
QoS profiles are negotiable by the mobile user for his/her session depending on the
desired services and the network resources which are currently available.
9.6.3 
GPRS transmission management
Before GPRS transmission starts, some special procedures have to be performed in
order to make the mobile station and network ready for data exchange.
First, a mobile station should register with the SGSN serving the area in which
the mobile station is located. Such a procedure is called GPRS Attach. The network
performs the user authorization, sends the user profile from the HLR to the SGSN and
assigns a Packet Temporary Mobile Subscriber Identity to the user. For some MS classes
the combined GSM/GPRS registration can be performed.
Before performing GPRS Attach procedure, the MS is not visible in the GPRS net-
work and is in the idle state. Due to the network attachment, the MS switches to the
ready state in which it sends information to the SGSN after every movement to a new
cell. As a result, the location of the MS in the ready state is known with the accuracy
of a single cell. In the ready state the MS is able to send and receive packets if an
appropriate initiation of the data exchange is done (see the next paragraph). If the
mobile station does not send or receive packets for some time it goes to the standby
state. The location of the MS in the standby state is traced with accuracy of a cell

GENERAL PACKET RADIO SERVICE - GPRS 
241
group, called Routing Area (RA). In order to send a packet to the MS in this state,
paging must be performed in order to find the cell in which the MS is located.
In order to start data packet exchange with a packet data network, such as an IP or
X.25 network, the MS applies for the address used in this data network called Packet
Data Protocol (PDP) address. Next, a PDP context is created for each session. This
context consists of the PDP type, PDP address of the mobile station, the requested
QoS and the address of the Gateway SGN (GGSN) connecting the GPRS system with
the appropriate data network. The context is stored in several units such as the mobile
station, the SGSN and the appropriate GGSN. This way the mobile station is visible
to the external data network.
Let us consider the communication of the MS with the IP network. The MS sends
packets to the destination host through the GPRS and external networks. The MS
transmits packets through the base station system to the appropriate SGSN. The SGSN
checks the PDP context of the MS, encapsulates the IP packets received from the
MS and sends them through the IP backbone network to the gateway GSN (GGSN)
connecting the GPRS system with the desired data network. The GGSN decapsulates
the packets and sends them further to the data network which overtakes transmission
of the packets to the destination host.
9.6.4 
GPRS services
Data transfer in a GPRS system is performed within the selected bearer or supplemen-
tary services. The bearer services can be divided into two categories:
• the Point-to-Point (PTP) service - a connection between two individual users,
which can be realized in a connectionless mode (using the IP network) or a
connection-oriented mode (using the X.25 network), and
• the Point-to-Multipoint (PTM) service - a connection between one user and a
specified number of other users. The users can be selected by their location in a
specified area (multicast service) or can be addressed according to a specified list
(group service).
SMS is another service offered by the GPRS system. Some other complementary and
non-standard services are also planned.
9.6.5 
GPRS protocol architecture
Figure 9.16 presents the GPRS protocol stack in the transmission plane for the mobile
station, the base station system, the serving GPRS support node (SGSN) and the
gateway GPRS supporting node (GGSN), through which the data is transferred to and
from the external packet data network. The interfaces between the network blocks are
also shown in Figure 9.16.
Let us briefly describe these layers starting from the MS side. Signal transmission,
including modulation and demodulation, is performed within the RF Physical Layer
(RFL). Channel coding, interleaving and detection of physical link congestion are re-

242 
DATA TRANSMISSION IN GSM
MS 
BSS 
SGSN 
GGSN
A
Data
Link
Layer
T
Physical A
Layer T
Application
Network
Layer
(IP, X.25)
SNDCP
LLC
RLC
MAC
7"pTi- ~
RFL 
<
^1 R€
RLC
MAC
PLL
> RFL
- - 
_. 
Re
SNDCP
LLC
*^SSGP 
BSSGP
Network 
Network
Service 
Service
Phy. 
Phy.
Layer 
^. 
Layer
*GTP
TCP/UDP
IP
Data Link
Layer
Phy.
Layer 
^
Network
Layer
(IP, X.25)
GTP
TCP/UDP
IP
Data Link
Layer
Phy.
^ 
Layer
Urn 
Gb 
Gn 
Gi
Figure 9.16 GPRS protocol stack in the transmission plane; Acronyms: SNDCP - Subnetwork
Dependent Convergence Protocol, LLC - Logical Link Control, RLC - Radio Link Control, MAC
- Medium Access Control, PLL - Physical Link Layer, RFL - Physical RF Layer, BSSGP -
BSS GPRS Application Protocol, GTP GPRS Tunneling Protocol, TCP - Transmission Control
Protocol, UDP - User Datagram Protocol, IP - Internet Protocol
alized within the Physical Link Layer (PLL). The access of the MS to the system re-
sources is controlled within the Medium Access Control (MAC) layer. As in the GSM,
the GPRS MAC algorithm is based on the slotted Aloha principle. A reliable link be-
tween the MS and the base station system is established within the Radio Link Control
(RLC) layer. The most important tasks performed in this layer are the segmentation
of the frames created in the Logical Link Control (LLC) layer into RLC data blocks
and performing the ARQ for uncorrectable codewords. The operation of the LLC layer
is based on the High-Level Data-Link Control (HDLC) protocol. The sequence con-
trol, appropriate ordering of packets, flow control, error detection, retransmission and
enciphering are performed within this layer. The Subnetwork Dependent Convergence
Protocol (SNDCP) manages the data transfer between the mobile station and the ap-
propriate GGSN. The protocol multiplexes several possible connections of the network
layer into a single logical connection of the LLC layer and compresses and decompresses
user data and headers. The procedures of the network layer result from the connection
realized by the MS with the appropriate external data network. Finally, the user tasks
(e-mail, web browsing, ftp, etc.) are realized in the application layer.
As seen in Figure 9.16, many layer protocols described so far also occur in the pro-
tocol stacks of the other network elements such as BSS, SGSN and GGSN. BSS GPRS
Application Protocol (BSSGP) is a new layer of the BSS protocol stack, which manages
routing and information at the required QoS between BSS and SGSN. The Network
Service Protocol performs the transfer of data or signaling units, network congestion
indication and status indication. The Network Service protocol is based on the Frame
Relay protocol.

EDGE - ENHANCED DATA RATE FOR GLOBAL EVOLUTION 
243
The data transfer between the SGSN and the GGSN is done through the backbone
IP-network. For this purpose appropriate layers in the SGSN-GGSN interface have
been designed. On the bottom of the protocol stack, the physical and Data Link layers
realize Ethernet, ISDN or ATM transmission. The Internet Protocol (IP) is applied in
the IP layer. Above this layer, Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) or User Datagram
Protocol (UDP) are applied depending on the kind of network applied (X.25 or IP,
respectively). Finally, the GPRS Tunneling Protocol (GTP) is applied to transfer the
user data packet between SGSN and GGSN.
Protocols can also be considered in the signaling plane. The interested reader is
advised to study the tutorial paper [11].
* * *
The GPRS can be considered a major improvement of the GSM system, which takes
into account the increasing demand for data transmission over mobile networks. The
system has been optimized for packet data transmission occurring e.g. in data trans-
mission between individual users and the Internet. As a result of using the GSM radio
infrastructure and applying new specialized blocks such as SGSNs and GGSNs, a new
characteristic has been achieved. It is well fitted to the bursty nature of data transmis-
sion. It is worth noting that tariffing based on the number of transmitted packets has
replaced tariffing based on the duration of the connection used in the regular channel-
switched GSM system.
9.7 EDGE - ENHANCED DATA RATE FOR GLOBAL EVOLUTION
GPRS allows transmission of bursty data in the packet switched mode using more than
one time slot in a frame, if it is desired and possible from the system resources point
of view. However, data rates are still moderate as compared with the wireline Internet
connections. EDGE is the response to the demand for higher data rates. Originally,
EDGE was treated as an extension of the GPRS system. Now this acronym has a
manifold meaning. For GSM, EDGE is the evolution of GPRS and HSCSD to EGPRS
(Enhanced GPRS) and ECSD (Enhanced Circuit Switched Data), respectively. In the
USA, EDGE is the basis for extension of the TDMA personal mobile communication
system IS-136, resulting in the IS-136 HS (High Speed) outdoor component.
EDGE for TDMA is currently realized in two modes, EDGE Compact and EDGE
Classic [15], [16]. EDGE Compact employs a new 200 kHz control-channel structure.
The base stations are synchronized and the system can be implemented in a minimum
spectrum bandwidth of 1 MHz. The packet traffic channels are realized in the 1/3
frequency-reuse pattern. EDGE Classic employs the traditional 200 kHz control-channel
structure typical for the GSM. The carriers containing the broadcast control channel
are used with a typical 4/12 frequency-reuse pattern (see Chapter 5). The minimum
deployment of EDGE Classic requires 12 carriers or 2.4 MHz with guard bands.
Below we concentrate on the European version of EDGE.

244 
DATA TRANSMISSION IN GSM
9.7.1 
Main improvements in the physical layer
EDGE for GSM features some improvements which allow transmission of data packets
at much higher rates as compared with a regular GSM or GPRS. The first improvement
is the application of 8-PSK modulation for higher data rate modes. At lower data rates
GMSK is still used. By retaining the symbol rate of 270.833 kbit/s and the 200 kHz
frequency raster of a regular GSM, three times higher data rate is ensured if 8-PSK
is used, because three bits are transmitted per single data symbol. The 8-PSK signal
applied in EDGE can be described by the equation
{
r Q i 
1
Y^b(k)exp j—k\ p(t - kT)exp \j2vfct] > 
(9.3)
* 
L 8 J 
J
where the data symbols belong to the set
7
(9.4)
1=0
The index / in the data symbol b(k) is determined by the current three-bit block. Bit
block-to-symbol mapping is designed according to the Gray rule. The variable k is
the time index of a data symbol. Let us note that, besides the phase shift controlled
by the information bits, the phase is additionally shifted at each symbol period by
37T/8. Thanks to this, the low levels of signal envelope are avoided and the peak-to-
average power ratio equals only 3.2 dB. In order to fit to the channel spectral width
and retain the shape of the GMSK spectrum, the baseband pulse p(t) is applied. It
is a linearized version of the GMSK pulse shape calculated according to the Laurent
method [12]. The pulse shape shown in Figure 9.17 is similar to the Gaussian curve
and is calculated numerically. As we remember from Chapter 8, for GMSK modulation
the Viterbi maximum-likelihood sequence estimation is usually applied at the receiver.
In case of 8-PSK the number of states in the Viterbi algorithm would be excessive,
therefore, a selected suboptimum sequential algorithm has to be implemented.
«tU
0.30
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
0.5 1.0 
1.5 
2.0 2.5 
3.0 
3.5 VT
Figure 9.17 Impulse response of the EDGE pulse shaping filter used in 8-PSK modulator

EDGE - ENHANCED DATA RATE FOR GLOBAL EVOLUTION 
245
Another feature of EDGE is slow frequency hopping. This feature is optional in a
standard GSM system. Frequency hopping can be interpreted as a form of frequency
diversity which fights against channel fading. It also has a substantial influence on the
level of co-channel interference, and consequently on the overall system capacity. Due
to frequency hopping each encoded block is transmitted on four different carriers.
The next important feature of EDGE is link quality control. Mobile stations inform
the base station about the channel quality. On the basis on this information a decision
is drawn as to which combination of modulation and channel coding should be used. In
the EDGE system two modulations (GMSK and 8-PSK) and nine coding rates can be
applied. Each applicable combination has a characteristics shown as a throughput (per
slot) versus SNR. If switching between the combinations of coding and modulation is
possible, the throughput is maximized. Figure 9.18 illustrates this principle.
Throughput per slot [kbit/s]
A
60 ;.
Throughput for
link adaptation 
f 
2
3
4
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50
SNR [dB]
Figure 9.18 Throughput per time slot for different combinations of coding and modulation
illustration of link adaptation principle [13]
The data burst applied in EDGE has the same format as in a standard GSM system;
however, if 8-PSK is used, 8-level data symbols replace binary symbols. The burst
contains a 26-symbol midamble, 3 tail symbols on both ends of the burst and two
portions of 58 symbols of user data. For 8-PSK it results in 348 information bits per
burst as compared with 116 information bits per burst if GMSK is used. The multiframe
structure used in EDGE is the same as that applied in GPRS. It consists of 52 frames
(see Figure 9.14) in which 12 data blocks are placed. Every 13th frame does not carry
user data and is used for timing advance correction or measurements. Thus, taking
into account all the above mentioned factors, the maximum data rate per carrier (if all
time slots are applied) is 556.8 kbit/s for 8-PSK and 185.6 kbit/s for GMSK. Obviously,
maximum user data rates are lower due to applied channel coding. The used channel
coding rates are ranged between R = 0.38 and R = I.

246 
DATA TRANSMISSION IN GSM
Table 9.8 Modulation and coding schemes in EDGE (EGPRS)
Scheme
MCS-9
MCS-8
MCS-7
MCS-6
MCS-5
MCS-4
MCS-3
MCS-2
MCS-1
Modulation
8-PSK
8-PSK
8-PSK
8-PSK
8-PSK
GMSK
GMSK
GMSK
GMSK
Max.rate
[kbit/s]
473
435
358
234
179.2
141
119
90
70.4
Data code
rate
1.0
0.92
0.76
0.49
0.37
1.0
0.80
0.66
0.53
Header
coding
0.36
0.36
0.36
1/3
1/3
1/2
1/2
1/2
1/2
PDUs/20ms
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
PDU size
[bytes]
74
68
56
74
56
44
37
28
22
Family
A
A
B
A
B
C
A
B
C
Link Quality Control applied in EDGE and realized through adaptive selection of
modulation and coding is fully justified by the information theory results. They show
that in order to achieve maximum throughput, the data rate should be high when good
channel quality (high SNR) is observed and low when the channel is temporarily of a
low quality. We have to stress that such an adaptation is possible if feedback between
receiver and transmitter exists. Table 9.8 summarizes applicable combinations of coding
and modulation schemes. They are divided into three families (A, B and C). The change
of the coding rate can occur exclusively within the same family.
Radio blocks are the smallest transmitted data units within the EDGE system. Each
radio block contains one or two packet data units (PDU). The number of PDUs in a
radio block depends on the selected modulation and coding scheme. The radio blocks
are transmitted after interleaving over four frames, each of which is transmitted on
a different carrier due to frequency hopping. Encoded radio blocks contain 1392 bits
if 8-PSK is used or 464 bits if GMSK is applied. For modulation and coding schemes
applying 8-PSK, the structure of a radio block follows a general scheme shown in Figure
9.19. The structure of uncoded and coded data blocks differs depending on the selected
modulation and coding scheme; however, the general rule shown in Figure 9.19 remains
valid.
In case of non-transparent data transmission, an ARQ method is typically applied.
As we have explained in Chapter 1, a standard ARQ relies on appending CRC parity bits
calculated in the transmitter to a data block. The CRC bits are once more calculated in
the receiver on the basis of the received block. If the calculated bits are the same as the
received ones, the receiver sends positive acknowledgement (ACK) and the transmitter
starts to transmit the next block. In case the CRC bits calculated in the receiver differ
from the received ones, the whole block is eliminated, so the information contained in
the block is wasted and the whole block has to be sent again. Instead of this simple
ARQ rule, the idea of Incremental Redundancy (IR) ARQ can be applied.
IR ARQ relies on reusing the erroneous blocks in repeated error detection. In the
coding process puncturing using two or three different schemes (P1, P2 or P3) is ap-

EDGE - ENHANCED DATA RATE FOR GLOBAL EVOLUTION 
247
Radio Block
•4 
- 
- 
>
SB 
USF Header: 
PDU
Block 
Block 
Conv. 
Convolutional
code 
( code 
code 
rate 1/3 code
Coded SB Coded USF i Coded Header 
Coded PDU
Puncturing
, 
_: 
*. 
**. 
r
Coded SB i Coded USF j Coded Header 
Puncture 1 
Puncture 2
« 
i 
1392 bits 
^|
f 
T
Coded SB Coded USF Coded Header; 
Puncture 1
Interleaving
Frame 1/Carrier 1 
: Frame 2/Carrier 2 j 
Frame 3/Carrier 3 
Frame 4/Carrier 4
20ms
-* 
- -- 
- 
>
Figure 9.19 Example of a format and coding of a radio block for EDGE using 8-PSK modulation
[16]
plied at the output of the convolutional encoder. Initially, the encoded block after P1
puncturing is transmitted. If errors are detected, the bits obtained in the P2 punctur-
ing process are transmitted and the block supplemented with the previously received
bits is decoded again. As we see, the number of parity (redundancy) bits has been
incremented and decoding of a full block results in much better error correction. If all
bits calculated according to all puncturing schemes have been received and errors have
been detected again, the whole process of block transmission is repeated.
Above we briefly described selected aspects of GSM/GPRS extension known as EDGE.
As we have mentioned, the EDGE concept has been intensively investigated for Amer-
ican TDM A cellular telephony IS-136, resulting in a substantial convergence of these
two widely used technologies. In fact, due to high data rates achievable in EDGE, it
is considered one of the third generation (3G) system proposals. We will see in the
near future how the implementation of EDGE in the GSM network will influence the
deployment of UMTS.
REFERENCES
1. J. Jayapalan, M. Burke, "Cellular Data Services Architecture and Signalling", IEEE
Personal Communications, Second Quarter 1994, 44-55

248 
DATA TRANSMISSION IN GSM
2. ETSI EN 300 909 V. 8.3.0, Digital Cellular Telecommunications System (Phase
2+); Channel Coding (GSM 05.03, Release 1999), April 2000
3. S. M. Redl, M. K. Weber, M. W. Oliphant, GSM and Personal Communications
Handbook, Artech House, Boston, 1998
4. ITU-T Recommendation V.I 10, Support by an ISDN of Data Terminal Equipments
with V-Series Type Interfaces, Geneva, October 1996
5. ETSI EN 300 945 V.7.0.3, Digital Cellular Telecommunications System (Phase 2+);
Rate Adaptation on the Mobile Station - Base Station System (MS-BSS) Interface
(GSM 04.21), December 1999
6. ETSI TS 100 901, Digital Cellular Telecommunications System (Phase 2+); Tech-
nical Realization of the Short Message Service (SMS) (GSM 03.40, version 7.4.0.
Release 1998)
7. ETSI TS 100 942, Digital Cellular Telecommunications System (Phase 2+); Point-
to-Point (PP) Short Message Service (SMS) Support on Mobile Radio Interface
(GSM 04.11, version 7.0.0, Release 1998)
8. ETSI TS 101 625, Digital Cellular Telecommunications System (Phase 2+); High
Speed Circuit Switched Data (HSCSD); Stage 1 (GSM 02.34, Version 7.0.0, Release
1998)
9. ETSI TS 101 038, Digital Cellular Telecommunications System (Phase 2+); High
Speed Circuit Switched Data (HSCSD) - Stage 2 (GSM 03.34, Version 7.0.0, Release
1998)
10. B. H. Walke, Mobile Radio Networks: Networking and Protocols, John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd., Chichester, 1999
11. Ch. Bettstetter, H.-J. Vogel, J. Eberspacher, "GSM Phase 2+ General Packet Radio
Service GPRS - Architecture, Protocols, and Air Interface", IEEE Communication
Surveys and Tutorials, http://www.comsoc.org/ tutorials, 3rd Quarter 1999
12. P. A. Laurent, "Exact and Approximate Construction of Digital Phase Modulations
by Superposition of Amplitude Modulated Pulses (AMP)", IEEE Trans. Commun.,
Vol. COM-34, 1986, pp. 150–160
13. A. Furuskar, J. Naslund, H. Olofsson, "EDGE - Enhanced Data Rates for GSM and
TDMA/136 Evolution", Ericsson Review, No. 1, 1999, pp. 28–37
14. A. Furuskar, S. Mazur, F. Muller, H. Olofsson, "EDGE: Enhanced Data Rates for
GSM and TDMA/136 Evolution", IEEE Personal Communications, June 1999, pp.
56–66
15. Ch. Lindheimer, S. Mazur, J. Molno, M. Waleij, "Third-Generation TDM A",
Ericsson Review, No. 2, 2000, pp. 68–79
16. R. Ramesh, K. C. Zangi, "Enhanced Data Rates for Global Evolution: A Tutorial",
Proceedings of a Tutorial Course, IEEE VTC-Fall, 2000

10
CDMA in mobile
communication systems
10.1 
INTRODUCTION
In the previous chapters we presented mobile communication systems which use FDMA
and TDMA access schemes. In recent years Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) was
the focus of attention of industrial and academic research centers, resulting in great de-
velopment in multiple access communications using the spread spectrum technique with
individual spreading sequences applied by the users. Nowadays, CDMA is the dominat-
ing method of multiple access in third-generation (3G) mobile communication systems.
Most of the proposals for IMT-2000 (International Mobile Telecommunications)1 fam-
ily of standards of International Telecommunication Union (ITU) rely on CDMA as a
multiple access method. Therefore CDMA and its advantages and disadvantages have
to be explained.
10.2 MOTIVATION FOR CONSIDERING CDMA AS A POTENTIAL
MULTIPLE ACCESS METHOD
As we remember, analog FDMA systems and digital FDMA/TDMA systems require
frequency planning in order to make possible the multiple use of the same channel
frequencies in sufficiently spaced cells. The distance between the cells which use the
same carrier frequency is finite and multiple frequency use leads to interference among
the mobile stations applying the same carriers in different cells. Multiple use of the
1More information on IMT-2000 and 3G systems is included in Chapter 17.
249

250 
CDMA IN MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
same frequencies is expressed by a frequency reuse factor, which is the reciprocal of
the cell cluster size N. The division of cells into sectors (usually three) does not lead
to improvement of the frequency reuse factor (each sector has a different subset of
the carrier frequencies assigned to the cell); however, as we remember, the application
of directional antennas decreases co-channel interference. The application of disjoint
subsets of carrier frequencies used in neighboring cells/sectors in TDMA and FDMA
systems necessitates rapid switching of the connection from the current base station to
the neighboring one at the moment of crossing the border between the cells. This process
is associated with the necessary change of carrier frequency and is usually called hard
handover. With certain system inaccuracies and imperfections, handover may result in
distortions or even in the loss of a connection.
One of the dominating distortions occurring in mobile communication systems is the
multipath. As we remember, the result of multipath is fading. Flat fading occurs in
narrowband systems, whereas selective fading is observed in the systems using wider
spectrum; however, the spectrum in the systems considered so far is so wide that the
signal components arriving at the receiver have relative delays which are lower than
the reciprocal of the signal bandwidth. Amplitude distortions resulting in intersymbol
interference have to be reduced using complex adaptive equalizers (see Chapter 8).
All disadvantages of FDMA and TDMA systems, i.e.
• limited system capacity,
• hard handover, and
• sensitivity to flat and selective fading
are reasons for investigation of spread spectrum systems with CDMA as the multiple
access method.
10.3 SPREADING SEQUENCES
Before we analyze the basic scheme of the CDMA transmitter and receiver, let us review
the main properties and types of pseudorandom sequences used in spread spectrum
systems.
The spread spectrum systems were originally built for the military. The aim of spread
spectrum systems was to hide the fact that digital transmission was taking place, to
make the transmission difficult to intercept and to make it robust against intentional
jamming. Pseudorandom (pseudonoise) sequences play a crucial role in performing these
tasks. Pseudorandom sequences are fully deterministic periodic digital sequences with
such a long period as compared with the duration of a single element of the sequence that
to an external observer they look random. In fact, they cannot be fully random, because
they have to be replicated in the receiver. In order to imitate noise well, their power
spectrum should be white. As a result, their correlation function should be a peak, i.e.
the symbols of an ideal pseudorandom sequence should be uncorrelated. Since the mean
of a white sequence is equal to zero, the autocorrelation function should be equal to zero
for non-zero arguments. The last property also ensures successful reception, when the

SPREADING SEQUENCES 
251
signal arrives at the receiver in the form of echoes mutually shifted in time. Particular
echoes can be effectively extracted by performing correlation of the composite signal
with the pseudorandom signal which is synchronized with the signal contained in the
desired echo. Summarizing, the white spectrum and the zero-autocorrelation function
are the desired features of an ideal spreading pseudorandom sequence.
Next, the following question arises - what are the required features of spreading
sequences if more users transmit in the same band, as happens in a CDMA system? In
order to differentiate the users, each of them should apply a different sequence which
would allow extraction of the signal of a particular user from the mixture of all signals
arriving at the receiver. Thus, a zero cross-correlation function of different sequences
is a required property. It can be obtained in two ways. In non-military applications
all users apply the same pseurorandom periodic sequences which are uniquely shifted
in time. Efficient generation of time-shifted versions of a given pseudorandom sequence
is a task to solve here. In military applications such an approach is insufficient and
different mutually uncorrelated sequences have to be applied.
Let us review the basic types of pseudorandom sequences used in spread spectrum
CDMA systems. The interested reader is advised to study the excellent tutorial chapter
on theory and application of pseudonoise sequences in [2] and chapters devoted to
pseudonoise sequences in [3] and [4]. Those who know German are advised to study [5].
Let us also recall the fundamental book on pseudorandom sequences by Golomb [6].
10.3.1 
m-sequences
So called m-sequences have gained a lot of interest and have found applications due to
their simplicity of generation. One of the easiest methods of generation of pseudorandom
binary sequences, including m-sequences, is the application of a Linear Feedback Shift
Register (LFSR).
Figure 10.1 shows the example of an LFSR. If the LFSR generator is initialized with
a non-zero content of its N memory cells, out of 2N possible states of the N-stage
register at most 2N — 1 can occur. The zero state has to be excluded because the LFSR
would remain in it permanently. Thus, the period of the generated sequence cannot
exceed 2N — 1. If the period reaches its maximum, the sequence is called a maximal
length sequence or in short m-sequence.
The taps used to calculate the feedback are selected according to a specified poly-
nomial. It can be proved that in order for the LFRS to generate an m-sequence, the
polynomial determining the LFSR structure should be irreducible and primitive. The
polynomial is irreducible if it cannot be factorized using polynomials of a lower order
with the same set of coefficients (binary in our case). The polynomial is primitive if its
root is a primitive element of the extension field GF(2N) (see Section 1.4.4). The poten-
tial polynomials indicating the taps of LFSRs which allow generation of m-sequences
are tabulated. The number of different irreducible primitive polynomials quickly rises
with the increasing order N of the polynomial. The m-sequences feature the following
properties:
• The balance property. In a full period of the m-sequence of length 2N — 1 the
number of binary "Is" is 2N-1 and the number of "Os" is 2 N - l — I.

252 
CDMA IN MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
g(x)=1+x2+x6
Figure 10.1 Example of an LFSR and the autocorrelation function of the bipolar LFSR output
signal
• The run property. There are 2N – 1 consecutive "Is" or "Os"; half of the runs are
of length 1, 1/22 runs are of length 2 and generally l/2k runs are of length k.
Finally, there is one run of zeros of length N — 1 and one run of ones of length N.
• The correlation property. The autocorrelation function of the m-sequence shaped
in the form of a bipolar sequence is equal to — 1 for arguments different from zero,
whereas the peak value of the autocorrelation function is 2N — 1.
The above properties allow us to apply m-sequences in the spread spectrum and
CDMA systems. However, let us note that the autocorrelation function of an m-
sequence is not exactly equal to zero. Although for large values of N its value R(n) = — 1
is very small as compared to R(0] = 2N — 1, the m-sequence is not fully orthogonal
with its shifted replicas. It can create a problem if many mutually shifted sequences
are used in the same area. Their non-perfect orthogonality results in the increase of the
noise level and limits the number of simultaneous users.
From the coding theory point of view an m-sequence can be considered as a single
code word of a linear cyclic code2 (n, k) = (2N — 1,N) known as a maximum-length
code, which is dual to the Hamming code. As we know, in a linear code each code
word can be synthesized as a linear combination of k properly selected code words. In
case of the maximum-length code these k = N code words are observed at subsequent
moments on consecutive positions of the LFSR. Because the code is cyclic, by adding
the outputs of selected LFSR memory cells we are able to synthesize a replica of the
reference code word (m-sequence) shifted by any desired number of cycles. The logical
circuit performing a linear combination of the LFSR outputs giving a time-shifted m-
2 Let us recall that in a cyclic code each code word is a cyclic permutation of another code word.

SPREADING SEQUENCES 
253
sequence is often called a mask. As we will see in the next chapter, this type of circuit is
used in the transmitter and receiver of the IS-95 CDMA system. Figure 10.2 illustrates
the generation of a time-shifted replica of the reference m-sequence using a mask. The
appropriate combination of the LFSR positions is selected by setting the entries of
the vector (m1,m2,... ,m N) to logical "1" or "0". The symbol © denotes modulo-2
addition.
g(x)=1+x2+x6
Reference sequence
T 
IT T 
f 
V V
m, 
m2 m3 
m4 m5 m6
mas 
Y 
Y 
V 
¥ 
T 
* 
Shifted sequence
e 
>
Figure 10.2 Using a mask for generation of the shifted replica of the m-sequence
An implementation problem occurs if the period of the applied m-sequence is much
longer than the number of chips contained in a single information data period. This is
exactly the case in most spread spectrum systems. Therefore, a partial correlation is
performed in the receiver (see the next section) and the values of the autocorrelation
function can differ from those obtained when the autocorrelation function is calculated
over a whole sequence period. If the autocorrelation is calculated, starting at the m— th
moment, on M chips aj of the sequence with the period of length P — 2N — 1, then one
can show [2] that the mean value of the partial autocorrelation function RM(k, m) is
M–1 
( M 
for k = 0
E [ R M ( k , m ) ] = ^ ai+mai+m—k = 
—M 
(10.1)
i=o 
I ~p~ for k # 0
whereas the variance of the partial autocorrelation function is
Var [RM(k, m)] = 
(1 + ^ (l _ f) 
(10.2)
We conclude from (10.1) and (10.2) that for synchronized sequences the partial auto-
correlation gives the exact result; however, for k # 0 the partial autocorrelation may
substantially differ from the full-period autocorrelation value. This fact has to be kept
in mind when we consider distortions existing in real CDMA systems.

254 
CDMA IN MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
10.3.2 
Gold and Kasami sequences
The m-sequences are easy to generate and they possess good autocorrelation properties;
however, the cross-correlation of two different3 sequences of the same length can achieve
relatively high values as compared with the value 2N — I equal to the maximum of the
autocorrelation function of an m-sequence. This property is a serious drawback in
CDMA systems in which users apply different sequences. Gold sequences and Kasami
sequences are the examples of the solutions to this problem.
Gold [7] found that certain pairs x, y of m-sequences of length 2N — 1 exhibit a
three- valued cross-correlation function Rxy(k). The values of are Rxy(k) as follows,
Rxy(k) E {—1, —t(N), t(N) — 2} 
(10.3)
where
2<N+1)/2 + l 
for N odd
2(N+2)/2 + , 
for
... ..
(10.4)
Such pairs x,y are called preferred sequences. The values given by (10.3) are much
smaller than maximum values of the cross-correlation function of any pair of m-sequences
of the same length. The Gold sequences are generated on the basis of a pair of preferred
sequences by taking the modulo-2 sum of the first m-sequence with any cyclic shift of
the second m-sequence. As a result, a new periodic sequence with the period 2N — 1
is achieved. The number of sequences obtained in this way and forming a family of
Gold sequences is 2N + 1 because the number of possible shifts of the second sequence
is 2N — 1 and both preferred sequences without a shift are also included in the family.
Figure 10.3 presents an example of the generator of Gold sequences of length 63. It is
worth noting that Gold sequences are applied in the UMTS system (see Chapter 17).
g1(x)=1+x+x6
T
+ 
*•
A 
Output
>
V 
Y 
T
+ 
+ -4 
• + -4 -
g2(x)=1+x+x2+x5+x6
Figure 10.3 Generator of Gold sequences based on the polynomials g1(x) = 1+x + x6 and
g2(x) = 1 + x + x2 + x5 + x6
Kasami sequences are obtained in the same way as Gold sequences. Let us consider
the m-sequence x of length 2N — 1, where N is an even number. Let us form the
3i.e. generated by the LFSRs determined by different polynomials of the same order

BASIC TRANSMITTER AND RECEIVER SCHEMES IN THE CDMA SYSTEM 
255
sequence y by the decimation of the bits of the sequence x by taking every 2 N / 2 + 1
bit of the sequence x. One can prove that the sequence y is periodic, with the period
equal to 2N/2 — 1. Kasami sequences are obtained by modulo-2 adding of the sequence
x and shifted and repeated sequences y. The number of possible shifts of sequence
y is 2N/2 — 1; therefore, if the sequence x is also included in the family of Kasami
sequences, their number is 2N/2. One can also prove that the autocorrelation and cross-
correlation functions of the sequences belonging to the family take the values from the
set (—1, — (2N/2 + 1),2N/2 — 1} and the Kasami sequences achieve a lower bound on
the cross-correlation of any pair of binary sequences of period n — 2N — I from a set of
M sequences (M = 2N/2 for Kasami sequences).
10.3.3 Walsh sequences
Walsh sequences were given a lot of attention in the seventies when they were treated as
a serious alternative to sinusoidal signals forming the basis for the Fourier analysis. The
reason of the interest was their exact mutual orthogonality. This property is also crucial
for their application in CDMA systems. Unlike m-sequences, the cross-correlation of
two different Walsh sequences of the same length is perfectly equal to zero. Therefore,
Walsh sequences are applied in the CDMA IS-95 system (see the next chapter). The
Walsh sequences can be created by the following recursion of the Hadamard matrices
1
—1
Each sequence is formed by a row of the matrix Hk- Figure 10.4 graphically illustrates
the Walsh sequences of length 64 for k = 5.
Although exactly mutually orthogonal, the Walsh sequences have some drawbacks,
too. The main one is a non-zero value of the cross-correlation function of the Walsh
sequence with its own cyclic shift or a cyclic shift of another Walsh sequence of the
same length. This disadvantage comes out at the CDMA receiver if differently delayed
signal replicas in the form of echoes caused by the multipath arrive at the receiver.
10.4 
BASIC TRANSMITTER AND RECEIVER SCHEMES IN THE CDMA
SYSTEM
As we remember from Chapter 1, in the CDMA access scheme all users share the same
band. Their signals are spectrally much wider than the information data rate makes
it necessary. The reason for that is the use of a spreading sequence of much higher
data (chip) rate than the information data rate. Ideally, the sequences of different users
do not interfere with each other because they are mutually orthogonal. Thus, taking
advantage of this property, through the correlation of the received signal generated
by many users with the spreading sequence uniquely assigned to a particular user, we
extract the interesting signal, zeroing the remaining signals due to the orthogonality
of applied spreading sequences. Mutual orthogonality of spreading sequences is that

256
CDMA IN MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
W3
W4
W5
W60
W61
W62
W63
Figure 10.4 Set of the Walsh functions of length 64
feature which is crucial for the successful operation of the whole system based on the
CDMA scheme.
Figure 10.5 presents generic structures of a CDMA transmitter and receiver [1].
A binary signal representing the user speech or data is the subject of error correction
coding and interleaving. The resulting sequence is multiplied by a pair of pseudorandom
sequences with the chip period equal to Tc. Multiplication by pseudorandom sequences
performs spreading and considerably widens the data signal spectrum. The chip rate of
these sequences is much higher than the data rate of the sequence at the encoder output.
After transforming the spread data sequences into a bipolar form, the bipolar pulses
are spectrally shaped by the filters with the transfer function H(f). Subsequently, both
in-phase and quadrature components are shifted from the baseband to the destination
frequency range, using two modulators with cosinusoidal and sinusoidal carriers.
The received signal S(t) is shifted back to the baseband, using a pair of in-phase and
quadrature demodulators. This way the in-phase and quadrature baseband components
are extracted. Next, both components are filtered by the receive filters H(f) which
perform matched filtering4 at the same time. The filter outputs are sampled with the
4 Assume that a binary stream is transmitted in form of the pulses ±h(t) lasting for T seconds through
the channel introducing an additive white Gaussian noise. It can be proved that the optimal receiver

BASIC TRANSMITTER AND RECEIVER SCHEMES IN THE CDMA SYSTEM 
257
-*i Encoder i> pseudorandom
Pair of binary 
Carrier
sequences 
90
s(t) 
* 
Carrier 
Pair of binary 
| 
dn 
Binary output
>• 
pseudorandom 
Processor 
> Decoder 
*•
Rx input 
90° 
sequences
:
 
T
c 
:
 
:
KX 
H(f) 
> 
>X 
»
Figure 10.5 Basic transmitter and receiver structure for DS / CDMA
period Tc and multiplied by the same pair of synchronized pseudorandom sequences
as those applied in the transmitter. The received samples are subsequently processed
in the block denoted in Figure 10.5 as a processor. Its operation is described^ later in
this chapter. The result of this processing is an estimate of a data sequence dn. After
deinterleaving and decoding the data sequence dn we receive a binary data sequence
which is the estimate of the user data.
The contents of the processor block depends on the channel which is used for CDMA
transmission. If the channel can be modeled as a constant gain with an additive white
Gaussian noise, the processor contains a circuit which integrates the signal in the time
interval of a user data symbol in which the spreading sequences of different users are
mutually orthogonal. This integrator and the device performing multiplication by a
pair of pseudorandom sequences form a correlator (see Figure 1.39 for comparison).
If the channel introduces the multipath, the situation is more complicated. Due to
the high chip rate of the pseudorandom sequence used in the transmitter, the multipath
signal components arrive at the receiver with such large mutual delays relative to the
chip period that the particular path signals can be individually extracted through the
correlation with the pseudorandom signal generated in the receiver and synchronized
with that particular path signal. In this manner we receive signals from different paths
for this signal which ensures the minimum probability of error, is a circuit which correlates the received
signal (the transmitted pulse plus noise) with the reference signal h(t) over T seconds. Equivalently, the
same result is achieved if the pulse corrupted by noise is filtered by a filter with the impulse response
h(T — t) and the filter output is sampled at the moment T. Such a filter is called the filter matched to
h(t).

258 
CDMA IN MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
carrying the same data symbol; however, their attenuations, phase shifts and delays are
different. This phenomenon can be used constructively in spread spectrum systems and
in CDMA systems in particular. We can apply a specific type of a receiver diversity
- a path diversity, which is implemented using a well-known RAKE receiver. Let us
analyze this type of the receiver in detail.
10.5 
RAKE RECEIVER
Let the baseband signal at the output of the demodulator be described by the equation
r(t) = h(T; t ] * s ( t ) + 
v/(t) 
(10.6)
where all functions are complex-valued. The function h(T ; t} characterizes the time
varying multipath channel (including all filters), s(t) is the baseband equivalent trans-
mitted signal and v(t) represents the additive noise. Let us note that the time variable
r reflects the time running from the moment of channel excitation, whereas the time
variable t describes slow changes of the channel impulse response in time. For simplicity,
consider the bipolar transmission in the form
s(t) = 
aiu(t) for 0 < t< T 
(10.7)
where T is the duration of an information data symbol and u(t) is the baseband mod-
ulated signal. One of the possible forms of u(t) is a bipolar spreading sequence. In our
derivation we follow [8].
Let the bandwidth of the signal u(t) be limited to W/2 Hz. Thus, on the basis of
the sampling theorem, this signal can be represented in the following form
u(t)= ^ 
, ( n\s\n 
[irW(t – n / W)}
u(t) = 2^ u(w) 
*W(t — n/W) 
(10.8)
n= 
— 
v 
' 
'
so its spectrum is
f 
1 
°°
U(f) = I F „?.«<*>exp (W–j2 fn\W 
for I" * 
W\2 
(10.9)
I 0 
otherwise
The signal (without noise) received at the output of the time-varying channel with the
transfer function H(f; t) when u(t) is its excitation, is described by the formula
oo
r(t) = 
H(f- t)U(f) exp ( j 2 f t ) df 
(10.10)

RAKE RECEIVER 
259
Using (10.9) in (10.10) we receive
W
where h(T;t] is the impulse response of the time varying channel H ( f ; t } . 
If we inter-
change the variables in (10.11), we get
1
Defining
we receive
r(t)= 
hn(t)u 
(t- 
(10.14)
It is clear from (10.14) that assuming the definition (10.13) the channel impulse response
has the form
oo
h(T;t)= £
n= — OO
Let the effective duration of the channel impulse response be Trn seconds. Thus, the
channel impulse response can be sufficiently well represented by L — [TmW] + 1 coef-
ficients hn(t) (n = 0, . . . , L — 1), that is
L-l
Let us return now to the analysis of the channel output when the signal (10.7) is
transmitted. Let the pulse u(t) last much longer than the channel impulse response. It
means that the responses of the channel to the subsequent signals u(t) practically do
not overlap. The received signal is described by the formula
L–l
r(t) = ]T aihn(t}u (t - ~ }+ v(t) 
for 0 < t < T 
(10.17)
n=0

260 
CDMA IN MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Assuming that the coefficients of the channel impulse response are known, the optimum
receiver is a correlator, with the following signal as the reference signal
L–l
q(t) = ^ hn(t)u (t - ^) 
(10.18)
n=0
The correlator performs the operation
T r(t)q*(t)dt = y/ 
h*(t)r(t)u* (t - ^-} dt 
(10.19)
v 
' 
the change of the impulse r
T. Therefore, the functioning of the receiver can be approximately described by the
formula
n=0 
{
Inspection of expression (10.20) allows us to draw the scheme of the receiver shown
in Figure 10.6. The conjugated version of the pulse u(t) propagates along the tapped
delay line. The tap spacing is l/W and the tap coefficients are hn (n = 0,... , L — 1).
The tap signals weighted by the tap coefficients are correlated with the received signal
r(t). The outputs of the correlators are processed (usually simply added together). On
the basis of the result of this processing the data decision is drawn.
u*(t) 
»^1/W 
* 
*1/W
h0 > X 
n 1*• X 
h,.., *• X
r
>x
r(t)
Y 
T
Processing
Figure 10.6 Scheme of the optimum receiver for a multipath channel if the pulse length is much
longer than the channel impulse response
In spread spectrum systems the pulse u(t) is simply a sequence of pseudorandom
binary symbols (chips) and sampling with frequency W can be approximately replaced

JOINT DETECTION OF CDMA SIGNALS 
261
by sampling with the chip rate l/Tc. 
Prom the implementation point of view such
operation is equivalent to giving the received signal to the input of the tapped delay
line and correlating the tap signals with the conjugated pseudonoise sequence u*(t):
however, to preserve the equivalence, the order of the weighting coefficients has to be
reversed. This version of the receiver is shown in Figure 10.7. It is known as the RAKE
receiver. Path correlators are often called RAKE "fingers". Each "finger" collects the
signal from one path and all of them are optimally combined by being weighted by hi*
(i = 0,... , L — I) and summed. In this respect this receiver performs path diversity
with optimal combining.
r(t) 
••->: Tc t,*.
PN 
• 
t
Processing
Figure 10,7 Basic structure of the RAKE receiver
In practice, due to the implementation reasons, at the chip rate of a few Mchip/s the
number of RAKE fingers is often limited to 3-4. Those taps are selected for which the
power of the signal path is the largest. In order to find them, a special correlator looks
for the strongest paths, sequentially measuring the signal power on the output of each
tap. The presented RAKE structure is optimal and equivalent to the filter matched to
the spreading sequence convolved with the channel impulse response. Other suboptimal
structures differ in the processing of the tap correlator outputs and are applied if the
estimation of the tap weights is difficult.
10.6 JOINT DETECTION OF CDMA SIGNALS
So far we have analyzed the reception of a spread spectrum signal by a single user. Due
to the multipath channel the signal arriving at the receiver is a sum of echoes delayed
by multiples of chip period Tc. Thus, the zero off-peak autocorrelation function of the
spreading signals is important for appropriate operation of the receiver. In that case
RAKE is the optimal receiver.

262 
CDMA IN MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
The situation becomes more complicated if we analyze a CDMA system in which
many users transmit their signals at the same time and in the same band. Thus, the
cross-correlation properties of the spreading sequences applied by various users play a
crucial role in the reception quality of CDMA receivers. 
In real systems the cross-
correlation values are not exactly equal to zero, so the users interfere with each other.
This interference is the basic limitation factor in CDMA systems. Although the RAKE
receiver is no longer optimal in this case, it is often applied. In the reception of a signal
of a specified user the RAKE receiver does not take into account the signals received
from other users. These signals, after appropriate processing, could be eliminated or
used constructively in the detection process.
Let us analyze a simple baseband model of the CDMA synchronous transmission
from K mobile stations to the base station. The analyzed model is illustrated in Figure
10.8. It will allow us to consider the receiver structures which take into account the
signals from all CDMA users. Such receivers are called joint CDMA detectors. The
following considerations on joint CDMA detectors are based on [9] and [10].
"--> 
> Channel 
1 
>
A
U2(i) 
hl(0
 
V(i) 
(u'(
d' 
T 
^ 
V xn(i) 
fT.
> 
> Channel 2
^ 
T 
Xn(i) 
p
4 
A 
Jo
r
1"
• • > !
Channel K
Transmitters 
Channels 
Bank of correlators
Figure 10.8 Model of synchronous CDMA transmission from mobile stations to the base station
Data symbols dn
k (k = 1,... , K), where n denotes the information data symbol time
index and k is the user number, are spread by the sequence uk(i) and transmitted
through the channel with the impulse response h k(i). The sum of the signals generated
by all users and of the additive noise v(i) enters the base station receiver. The signal
of each user is extracted by the correlator applying the reference signal (uk(i) * hk(i))*•
Let us note that this correlator is equivalent to the RAKE receiver. Decisions can be
made on the basis of the correlator outputs yn
k however, due to the partial correlation
of the user signals caused by the multipath channel and imperfect cross-correlation of
the spreading sequences, the samples yn
k contain information not only on the desired
kth user, but also on the remaining users as well.

JOINT DETECTION OF CDMA SIGNALS 
263
We will consider the basic structures which can be applied in joint detection of all
user signals. Under the assumptions valid for the RAKE receiver, stated in the previous
section, we can consider an equivalent system model, in which the spreading sequences
are the convolution of the spreading sequence applied in the transmitter and the kth
channel impulse response
9k(i)=uk(i}*hk(i) 
(10.21)
The reference sequence applied in the kth correlator is gk(i}. Thus, we can treat the
channels as those which introduce gains Ak (k = 1,... , K) only. Denoting the data
symbols and the outputs of the correlators in the vector form as dn = [d n
k,...
and yn = [y1
n,... , yn
k] we can describe the operation of the system with the formula
yn = RgAdn + zn 
(10.22)
where R9 is the cross-correlation matrix of the spreading sequences gk(i), (k = 1,... , /f),
A is the diagonal matrix of the gains introduced by the channels and zn is the noise
vector observed at the outputs of the correlators. On the basis of the vector yn, the
base station detector derives the estimate dn of the input data vector dri. The most
obvious way of finding the data estimates dn =dec(dn) is to left-multiply both sides of
(10.22) by the matrix R–
g
1. As a result we have
dn = R–1
g yn = Adn + R–1
g zn 
(10.23)
The detector which performs (10.23) is called a decorrelating detector [11]. In the ideal
case it zeros interchannel interference. It is often called Zero-Forcing (ZF) detector. The
consequence of its operation is noise amplification, which is expressed by the second term
of (10.23). The decorrelating detector is a linear circuit whose implementation requires
perfect knowledge of the cross-correlation matrix Rg. The scheme of the basic part of
the detector is shown in Figure 10.9.
Matrix
filter
Ri
Figure 10.9 Structure of the decorrelating detector

264 
CDMA IN MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
The Minimum Mean-Squared Error (MMSE) detector is another type of linear de-
tectors. Here the correlator output vector yn is not multiplied by the inverse of the
autocorrelation matrix R–1
g, instead, it is multiplied by the matrix QMSE, which ensures
minimization of the mean-squared error
En = E (dn — QMSEYn)" (dn — QMSEYn) 
(10.24)
TT
In the above formula (.) denotes vector transposition and complex conjugation. One
can show that minimization of En leads to the following form of the matrix QMSE
denoted as QMMSE
QMMSE = [Rg + (N0 /2)A – 2] 
–l 
(10.25)
where No/2 is the power density spectrum of the additive white noise at the receiver
input. Because the MMSE detector takes this noise into account, it generally provides
lower probability of error than the decorrelating detector; however, it is sensitive to the
estimation accuracy of channel gains.
The optimum joint detector operating according to the Maximum Likelihood (ML)
criterion at the assumption that the noise sampjes from the channels are mutually
statistically independent, finds such a data vector dn for which the following expression
is minimized
||y–Rgdn 
(10–26)
where ||a|| denotes the quadratic norm of vector a. Minimization of (10.26) requires
searching for the data vector dn among MK possible vectors (M is the size of the
data alphabet). Although this search can be performed using the Viterbi algorithm, in
many cases such a receiver is computationally too complex and cannot be considered
for implementation. Therefore, suboptimal solutions have to be used. Among them,
subtractive interference cancellation detectors are the most important. They can be
divided into the following types
• the successive interference cancellation (SIC) detector (see Figure 10.10),
• the parallel interference cancellation (PIC) detector, and
• the zero-forcing decision-feedback (ZF-DF) detector (Figure 10.11).
In the SIC detector, the strongest user signal is found and the conventional detector
is used to find the decision upon the carried data symbol. Subsequently, on the basis of
this data symbol, the spreading sequence and channel characteristics, the signal estimate
is regenerated and subtracted from the total received signal. This way, subsequent user
signals are detected and eliminated starting from the strongest and ending with the
weakest one.
The PIC detector estimates and subtracts the interference originating from all users
in parallel. Usually such a detector has a multistage structure shown in Figure 10.10.
In the first stage, tentative decisions are derived using conventional detectors or a

JOINT DETECTION OF CDMA SIGNALS 
265
Stage
1 
d"'1 
Stage 
^
2
Stage
Figure 10.10 Multistage structure used in the successive cancellation detector
decorrelating detector. On the basis of these decisions, interference from all users can
be regenerated and cancelled in the next stage. As a result, better quality decisions
upon transmitted data are generated. This operation can be repeated in the next stages,
gradually improving the performance of the detector.
(C2)-
i Re(*)
Figure 10.11 Zero-forcing decision-feedback detector
The zero-forcing decision-feedback detector combines two operations. The first op-
eration relies on a bank of Whitened Matched Filter (WMF). These filters are based on
the Cholesky decomposition of the correlation matrix Rg = FTF where F is a lower
triangular matrix. In the second operation successive decisions are made and decision
feedback from stronger users is applied for weaker users.
All the detectors described above are computationally complex. Each of them re-
quires the estimation of the correlation matrix, calculation of its inverse or matrix fac-
torization. Despite computational complexity, however, joint detectors will be applied
in several third generation CDMA mobile communication systems.

266 
CDMA IN MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
10.7 
BASIC PROPERTIES OF A CDMA MOBILE SYSTEM
After presenting a survey on spreading sequences applied in CDMA systems and relevant
receiver structures, let us concentrate on the basic features of a typical CDMA cellular
system, which make it attractive from the implementation point of view.
The first attribute which differentiates a CDMA system from FDMA or TDMA
systems is the value of the frequency-reuse factor. In FDMA and TDMA it was 1/7
or 4/12, while in CDMA, it is equal to one. It means that the whole spectrum can be
reused in each cell. That value of the frequency reuse factor has a crucial effect on the
system capacity and is possible due to different almost orthogonal spreading sequences
applied in the neighboring cells. Spreading sequences are not ideally orthogonal due
to the way they are generated and to the channel multipath. Therefore, interference
among users arises. Since the number of users is usually large, the interference appears
as an additive noise which can be tolerated up to a certain level for which the user
data detection quality is still ensured. It is clear that the level of interference arising
from a user is strictly associated with the power level of the signal generated by him.
Therefore, the signal power should be kept at the lowest level which ensures sufficient
reception quality.
The next attribute of CDMA systems follows from the considerations on the signal
level. In CDMA systems a precise power control of user signals is a necessity. If the
power control of the mobile station were not performed, the signal transmitted from
the cell border would have much lower level at the base station than the signal reaching
the base station from the mobile station located near it. It is the well-known near-
far effect. The signal level from different mobile stations has to be the same with the
accuracy of the order of 2 dB, regardless of the distance of the mobile stations from the
base station. Otherwise the level of non-zero cross-correlation of spreading sequences
used by the desired user and the interferer may be comparable with the level of the
correlation peak of the desired user signal. This in turn may substantially deteriorate
the signal detection.
Coarse power control is a procedure in which a signal is transmitted by the mobile
station at the level which is inversely proportional to the level of the signal received
from the base station. Precise power control is realized in a closed loop. The base
station measures the power level of the signal received from the given mobile station
and sends the appropriate command to the latter asking for increase or decrease in the
level of the transmitted signal. The dynamic range of the power control is 80–100 dB
at the maintained accuracy of 2.5 dB. It is necessary to keep these values to obtain
the desired CDMA system capacity. Thanks to precise power control, it is possible to
transmit a signal at the level about 20–30 dB lower than a mean level of the mobile
station signal in an analog system. This is a very advantageous feature of a CDMA
system which ensures lower interference with other users, lengthens battery life and
decreases the radiation level of a mobile station.
Thanks to the RAKE receiver used in a mobile station and application of the same
frequency bands in neighboring cells, the mobile station can receive signals simultane-
ously from two base stations. This case can occur at the border of two cells. Before the
mobile station switches from the current base station to a new one, it can temporarily

BASIC PROPERTIES OF A CDMA MOBILE SYSTEM 
267
be connected to both of them. Such a dynamic process is calledsoft handover. It causes
the handover to be made more smoothly and the reception quality at the cell border
to be higher because the mobile station uses two base stations at the same time. This
effect can be considered as a path diversity reception. It influences the overall system
capacity. Figure 10.12 illustrates this situation.
Histeresis thresholds
Figure 10.12 Illustration of the soft handover in the CDMA cellular system
The main limitation of the CDMA system capacity is the interference generated
by the users with respect to each other. Similar to GSM, the interference level can
be decreased by exploiting the speech activity detection. As we know, typical speech
activity takes up about 35 percent of time. By measuring the user speech activity it is
possible to digitally represent the speech signal by a variable rate data stream which is
matched to the speech activity of the user. Thus, it is possible to control the power of
transmitted signal depending on the current data rate and set it at such a level which
is required to ensure a tolerable level of the error rate.
The next means of improving the system quality and its capacity is the application
of strong error correction coding and interleaving. As we know, using the error correc-
tion coding is sensible if we achieve a positive coding gain, by which we understand a
decrease of the required SNR at the acceptable error rate. In the case of positive coding
gain achieved in the CDMA system, the power level of the transmitted signal can be
decreased, the interference level is decreased too, which in consequence results in the
increase of the system capacity.
A. Viterbi [1] presented an approximate formula to determine the number of users
in a cell which can be active in the uplink connection. The formula has the form
Erl/ce11 
(10.27)
where the variables have the following meaning:

268 
CDMA IN MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
• W/R - the spreading gain factor (W is the system bandwidth, R is the information
data rate),
• Eb / N0 — the required value of the ratio of the signal energy per bit to noise density,
resulting from thermal noise and from the users located inside and outside the
cell,
• / - the power ratio of interference from users outside the cell to the interference
from users inside the cell,
• Gv — the gain achieved due to variable speech activity,
• GA — the gain achieved due to sectorized antennae
• [(1 — r))F] - the loss caused by imperfect power control and variable traffic inten-
sity.
The application of the methods used to improve the system capacity and already
described above, such as frequency reuse, the RAKE receiver and error correction cod-
ing, results in decreasing the denominator in (10.27). Currently achievable values of
the parameters in (10.27) are: Gv = 2.5, GA = 3, Eb / N0 = 5 (7 dB), / = 0.55,
[(1 — 77)F] = 0.75. As a result, the number of users which can be served in the cell is
around Nu ~ 0.73W/ R, which is about five times higher than the number of users in a
traditional FDMA system [1].
10.8 CONCLUSIONS
In this chapter we analyzed the basic features of the mobile communication system
based on CDMA access scheme. We considered the desired properties of the spreading
sequences. Then we derived the optimum receiver for a single user of spread spectrum
signal. Subsequently, we presented basic types of multiuser detectors. Finally, we
analyzed the characteristic features of a CDMA system and we concentrated on main
factors which influence the system capacity. Finally, we quoted the formula for the
approximate number of CDMA users [1].
REFERENCES
1. A. Viterbi, "The Orthogonal-Random Waveform Dichotomy for Digital Mobile Per-
sonal Communications", IEEE Personal Communications, First Quarter 1994, pp.
18024
2. J. S. Lee, L. E. Miller, CDMA Systems Engineering Handbook, Artech House Pub-
lishers, Boston, 1998
3. J. D. Gibson (ed.), The Mobile Communications Handbook, CRC Press in coopera-
tion with IEEE Press, 1996

REFERENCES 
269
4. D. Gerakoulis, E. Geraniotis, CDMA Access and Switching for Terrestrial and Satel-
lite Networks, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Chichester, 2001
5. A. Finger, Pseudorandom-Signalverarbeitung, B.G.Teubner, Stuttgart, 1997
6. S. W. Golomb, Shift Register Sequences, Holden-Day, San Francisco, 1967
7. R. Gold, "Maximal Recursive Sequences with 3-valued Recursive Cross-Correlation
Functions", IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, IT-14, 1966, pp. 154-156
8. J. G. Proakis, Digital Communications, McGraw-Hill, Englewood Cliffs, 1995
9. A. Duell-Hallen, J. Holtzman, Z. Zvonar, "Multiuser Detection for CDMA Sys-
tems", IEEE Personal Communications, April 1995, pp. 46-58
10. S. Moshavi, "Multi-User Detection for DS-CDMA Communications", IEEE Com-
munications Magazine, October 1996, pp. 124-136
11. R. Lupas, S. Verdu, "Linear Multi-User Detectors for Synchronous Code-Division
Multiple-Access Channels", IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 35, 1989, pp. 123-136

This page intentionally left blank

11
Description of IS-95 system
11.1 
INTRODUCTION
In Chapter 10 we showed how a CDMA system operates. In this chapter we will describe
a particular implementation of the CDMA system, i.e. the IS-95 system known also
as cdmaOne. Its air interface is described in the IS-95 standard [1], [2], [3]. In the
early nineties, it became a reference system due to the innovative solutions applied. It
has been used to test many new ideas and it has frequently served as a pattern for
comparisons.
11.2 
FREQUENCY RANGES
The IS-95 system operates in two bands. The Frequency Division Duplex (FDD) method
is applied in both of them. The first band, Band Class 0, had been previously occupied
by the AMPS and these frequency ranges which are now used by IS-95 are no longer
used by the AMPS. Generally, the IS-95 standard allows for mobile stations to operate
both in AMPS and IS-95 (CDMA) mode. The downlink is realized in the frequency
range 824-849 MHz, and uplink in the frequency interval 869-894 MHz. There is 45
MHz difference between both bands. IS-95 can be also deployed in the PCS (Personal
Communication System) 1800-MHz band [2] denoted as Band Class 1. The frequency
ranges are 1930–1990 MHz for downlink and 1850-1910 MHz for uplink. Tables 11.1
and 11.2 present the assigned frequency bands in detail, showing their division between
two possible systems or, in the second frequency range, among six blocks.
271

272 
DESCRIPTION OF IS–95 SYSTEM
Table 11.1 Frequency ranges of Band Class 0
System
A
B
Transmit frequency band [MHz]
Mobile station
824.025–835.005
844.995–846.495
835.005–844.995
846.495–848.985
Base station
869.025–880.005
889.995–891.495
880.005–889.995
891.495–893.985
Table 11.2 Frequency ranges of Band Class 1
Block
A
D
B
E
F
C
Transmit freque
Mobile station
1850–1865
1865–1870
1870–1885
1885–1890
1890–1895
1895–1910
ncy band [MHz]
Base station
1930–1945
1945–1950
1950–1965
1965–1970
1970–1975
1975–1990
11.3 
DOWNLINK TRANSMISSION
In the IS-95 standard downlink and uplink channels are called forward and reverse
channels, respectively. The rules for transmission in downlink and uplink are different,
therefore we describe them separately. Let us start with the downlink.
In transmission from a base station to mobile stations all transmitters are located in
the same place, so they operate in full synchronism. In the downlink transmission the
following physical channels exist
• a pilot channel,
• a synchronization channel,
• paging channels,
• traffic channels.
Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum (DS-SS) transmission at the rate 1.2288 Mchip/s
is applied on all channels. Two pseudonoise sequences of length 215, often denoted
as PNI and PNQ, are used separately in the in-phase and quadrature branches. All
base station transmitters generate the same PN sequence pair; however, the sequences
applied in different cells are appropriately shifted in time with respect to the reference
clock. This time shift identifies a given cell.

DOWNLINK TRANSMISSION
273
Pilot
channel
(all "0")
Walsh
function 0
PN Chip
1.2288 Mchip/s
M- 
>A
Synchronization 
j
channel 
>
1.2 kbit/s :
Paging
channel 
96kbjt/s ;
4.8 kbit/s L
Convolutional
encoder
r=1/2 k = 9
Convolutional
encoder
r=1/2 k = 9
Code
! 
: 
Symbol
r2:4kbit^
 repeBtion
I Code
I symbols | Symbol
 repetition
9.6 kbit/s
Long code
mask for paging
channel p
Modulation
symbols
19.2 kbit/s
Block
interleaves
Modulation
symbols
19.2 kbit/s
Walsh
function p
PNChip
1.2288 Mchip/s
I 19.2 kbit/s
Long PN ;
' 
code 
Decimator
generator 1.2288 Mchip/s
Forward traffic
channel
information bits for
Add frame
quality
information 
bits 
for 
indicaor
userm 
8.6kbit/s 
for 9600 and 
9.2kbit/s !
(172, 80, 40 or 
4.0 kbit/s ! 
4800 bft/S 
4.4kbit/s
16 bits/frame) 
2.0 kbit/s 
' 2.0 kbit/s
0.8 kbit/s 
0.8 kbit/s
Add 8 bit
Code
Convolutional SymbolS
encoder 
9.6 kbit/s r=1/2 k = 9 19.2 kbit/s
4.8 kbit/s ! 
9.6 kbit/s
2.4 kblt/s 
48 kblt/s
1.2 kbiVs 
2.4 kbit/s
Modulation
symbols
Symbol
repetition 
:
19.2 kbit/s
Long code
mask for
userm
control 
800 bit/s
bits
Block
interleaver
Modulation
symbols
19.2 kbit/s 4
MUX ;
LongPN
code 
Decimator
generator 1.2288 Mchip/sl
19.2 kbit/s
Walsh
function n
PN Chip
1.2288 
Mchip/s
My 
.......... 
A
800 Hz
Decimator
l-channel pilot
PN sequence
1.2288 Mchip/s
Q
Q-channel pilot
PN sequence
1.2288 Mchip/s
Baseband
filter
Baseband
filter
cos(2icfct)
A
sin(2nfct)
s(t)
Figure 11.1 Scheme of the base station transmitter of the IS-95 CDMA system

274 
DESCRIPTION OF 15–95 SYSTEM
In the case of sectorized cells these remarks refer to the sectors. The PNI and PNQ
sequences are generated by LFSRs determined by the following polynomials
gI(x) = x15 + x13 + x9 + x8 + x7 + x5 + 1
gQ(x) = x15 + x12 + x11 + x10 + x6 + x5 + x4 + x3 + 1 
(11.1)
As we remember, the LFSR can be applied to generate a pseudonoise sequence of length
2N — 1, (N = 15 in our case), therefore, in order to obtain a period of this sequence equal
to 215, a single zero is introduced after the sequence of 14 consecutive zeros occurring
once in the PN sequence. A pair of sequences generated by the LFSRs determined by
the above polynomials is called a short code.
Figure 11.1 presents the scheme of a base station transmitter. In each cell/sector
up to 64 channels can be used. This number results from 64 Walsh functions applied
to ensure mutual orthogonality of the transmitted channel signals. So far, two kinds
of sequences have been introduced. Applying a particular Walsh function is equivalent
to using a patricular channel in a cell, whereas the time shift of the applied PNI and
PNQ sequences with respect to the common clock marks the cell. For these reasons
the Walsh sequences are frequently called channelizing codes, whereas PNI and PNQ
sequences are spreading sequences.
The pilot channel is associated with the Walsh function W0 (equal to logical zero) and
the synchronization channel is associated with the function W32 Sixty-two channels can
be used by paging and traffic channels. Up to seven paging channels can be established,
which apply the Walsh functions W1 to W7. Unused paging channels can be applied as
traffic channels.
Data fed to the input of the synchronization, paging and traffic channels are the
subject of convolutional coding, repetition and block interleaving. Two rate sets have
been standardized in IS–95A [1]. In Rate Set 1 data rates equal to 1200, 2400, 4800 and
9600 bit/s are applied. In Rate Set 2 the data rates are 1800, 3600, 7200 and 14400
bit/s. Each mobile station has to support Rate Set 1 and can also realize Rate Set 2.
For Rate Set 1, independently of the input stream data rate (equal to 1200, 2400, 4800
or 9600 bit/s), the data rate at the input and output of the block interleaver is 19.2
kbit/s. This is a result of applying the convolutional code of the coding rate R — 1/2
and the constraint length L = 9 (see the encoder scheme in Figure 11.2) as well as bit
repetition applied for data rates lower than 9600 bit/s. The synchronization channel is
an exception because its data rate after symbol repetition and interleaving is 4800 bit/s.
Data from the paging and traffic channels are modulo-2 added to the output sequence
of a pseudorandom generator which produces a data sequence of length 242 — 1 (called
a long code) at the rate of 19200 bit/s, applying the mask assigned to the individual
user or to the paging channel. The task of this operation is to mark an individual
user and to ensure his/her transmission privacy. Each bit of the resulting 19.2 kbit/s
data is represented by the whole period of a Walsh sequence of length equal to 64
symbols in the simple or logically negated form depending on the value of the data bit.
The Walsh sequence functions as a spreading sequence. As a result, we receive spread
spectrum signals at the rate of 19200 • 64 = 1.2288 Mbit/s. Subsequently, for each
channel these signals are modulo-2 added to two pseudonoise sequences PNI and PNQ

DOWNLINK TRANSMISSION 
275
and the resulting dibit determines the phase of the QPSK modulator or, equivalently,
it determines the amplitudes of the in-phase and quadrature component of the QPSK
constellation (see Figure 11.3). After being shaped by the baseband filters, the in-
phase and quadrature pulses are shifted to the destination band by the quadrature
modulators. The signals from each channel are combined, resulting in the composite
signal transmitted by the base station.
90
(x) 
C0(x)
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A
Figure 11.2 Scheme of a convolutional encoder applied in the downlink of IS-95
Q*
(1,0) \« 
, 
+t (0,0)
A 
A
: 
I
(1,1) /* 
*V (0,1)
Figure 11.3 QPSK signal constellation used in IS-95 downlink
In the case of traffic channels, some of the bits characterizing the encoded and in-
terleaved speech binary stream are replaced in the multiplexer by the power control
bits which are sent to the mobile station using this channel. This data stream is a
realization of a power control subchannel. The mean rate of the uncoded power control
symbols is 800 bit/s. A "0" denotes the order to the mobile station to increase its mean
power level by 1 dB, whereas "1" implies decreasing the mean power level by 1 dB.
The position of power control bits within a data frame is determined by the decimated
bits of the long-code generator. Thanks to this, power control bits appear in the data
stream in pseudorandom positions.
If one of the data rates from Rate Set 2 is used on a traffic channel, the transmitter
block sequence differs from that which is shown in Figure 11.1. This part of the scheme
which is concerned with traffic channels should be replaced by the scheme shown in
Figure 11.4. For Rate Set 2, the user data in 20-ms frame constitute 267, 125, 55 or
21 bits; therefore, the input rates are 13.35, 6.25, 2.75 or 1.05 kbit/s. For each 20-
ms frame one reserved bit or flag bit, frame quality bits and an 8-bit encoder tail are
added. The resulting data rates grow to 14400, 7200, 3600 or 1800 bit/s, respectively.

276 
DESCRIPTION OF lS-95 SYSTEM
The application of a convolutional encoder of the constraint length L = 9 and the
coding rate R = 1/2 results in doubling the data rates. For the data rates lower than
28.8 kbit/s, bit repetition is applied to achieve the highest data rate of 28.8 kbit/s. In
order to match this data rate with the constant rate of 19.2 kbit/s in other channel
types and in the channels applying Rate Set 1, 2 bits out of every 6 input bits are
punctured. Other blocks in the traffic channel block chain are the same as for Rate Set
1, therefore they will not be described again.
Forward traffic
channel
Add frame
quality
(267. 125. 55 or 
6.25kbttte
21 bits/frame) 
fTSkbrtfe
1.05kbd/s
fbr9600and
4800 biVs
Convolutional
> 
encoder
7.2kbH/s
3.6 kbit/s
1.8 kbit/s
symbols
28.8kbitfe
14.4 kbit/s
7.2 kbit/s
3.6 kbit/s
Symbol
Modulation
symbols
19.2 kbit/s
Power
control
bits
Walsh
function n
Modulation
symbols
Puncture 2 
Btock
> of every 6 
> intBrtaaver 
*"*
28.8kbft/s 
inputs 
19.2 kbit/s inwleaver 192kbjtfs^
PNCNp
1.2288Mchiprs
K 
^A
LongPN
code
generator
— — 
> Decimator
1.2288Mchip/s
»• Decimator
Figure 11.4 Fragment of the traffic channel structure applied in Rate Set 2
Data carried on the traffic channel are typically the result of QCELP (Qualcomm
Code Excited Linear Prediction) coding1 if speech is transmitted or they originate from
a data terminal if data transmission takes place. The QCELP encoder generates a data
stream at one of four possible rates which result from the user speech activity. The
encoder operates on 20-ms frames. At the highest rate, 160 bits plus an 11-bit parity
block are produced in each frame. The resulting data rate is 8.55 kbit/s. In the case of
three lower data rates, there are 80, 40 and 16 bits in a frame, respectively, therefore
the data rates are 4000, 2000 and 800 bit/s and the channel data rates are 9600, 4800,
2400 and 1200 bit/s. In the case of lower data rates each bit is repeated so many times,
that the final data rate is 9600 bit/s. The repeated bits are transmitted with a lower
power. This way interchannel interference is decreased which has a great impact on the
system capacity.
It is worth noting that two more speech encoders have been defined. They are
the Enhanced Variable Rate Codec (EVRC) and the Algebraic Code Excited Linear
Prediction (ACELP) codec. The first one generates a 8000 bit/s data stream, whereas
the second one produces a 13-kbit/s data stream.
The signal transmitted by the base station is received in the mobile station and is
decoded four times according to four possible data rates at the speech encoder output.
1See the section on speech coding in Chapter 1.

DOWNLINK TRANSMISSION 
277
The sequence which results in the lowest number of errors in the decoding process is
selected as the output binary sequence.
The interleaving applied in IS-95 has a depth equal to 20 ms. In decoding of the
convolutional code, performed in the mobile station, the soft-decision Viterbi algorithm
is applied. It results in the coding gain of about 4.5 dB at the error rate of 10-3.
In the downlink (forward direction) the receiver placed in a mobile station performs
synchronous reception thanks to a pilot channel generated by the base station. The
power of a pilot channel is 4 to 6 dB higher than the power of the traffic channel. The
pilot signal allows estimation of the multipath channel, A three-tap RAKE receiver
selecting the strongest signal paths is used. Other mobile receiver blocks are parallel to
those contained in the base station transmitter and they will not be described here.
The operation of all base stations is synchronized with respect to the system clock
by the Global Positioning System (GPS). This allows application of the same spread-
ing sequences with appropriately selected time shifts. These time shifts are selected
in increments of 64 chips providing 511 possible offsets with respect to the reference
sequence. This allows identification of a particular cell uniquely.
Let us describe the functions performed by particular types of channels in the down-
link.
A pilot channel provides the phase and reference timing for synchronous demodula-
tion performed by mobile stations. As we have said before, the pilot channel transmits
the unmodulated spreading signal which can be used by a mobile station for synchroniza-
tion and channel/sector identification. The pilot signal power measurement performed
in the mobile station is used in the power control loop. Measurements of pilot signals
generated in the neighboring cells are applied in the handover procedure.
The synchronization channel broadcasts the data which allow for fast and reliable
synchronization at the system level. The rate of the transmitted data stream is equal
to 1200 bit/s. The stream carries the Sync Channel Message and padding bits. The
Sync Channel Message contains the system and network identification, the offset of the
cell/sector short spreading code, the long code state at the time specified in time system
parameter, the parameters which allow determination of the current system time and
local time with respect to the reference clock and the data rate of paging channels. Data
transmission on the synchronization channel is organized in frames and superframes.
A frame consists of a Start of Message (SOM) bit and 31 bits of data. Three frames
constitute a 96-bit long superfame, which lasts 80 ms. The Sync Channel Message
can be longer than a single frame, so padding bits are added to fill the data bits of a
superframe. The Sync Channel Message has an 8-bit header determining the message
length, the message bits of a minimum of 2 bits and a maximum of 1146 bits and 30
bits of CRC.
After synchronization acquisition performed using the pilot and synchronization
channels, the mobile station starts to monitor the paging channel. The paging channel
can be assigned up to 7 Walsh sequences (W1-W7). It can operate at the data rate of
4800 or 9600 bit/s. Several messages can be sent on a paging channel, which have a
unified structure. A message contains an 8-bit message-length header, message data of
length between 2 and 1146 bits, and 30 bits of CRC. The messages are divided into 47-
or 95-bit parts which, after adding a one-bit flag, are subsequently transmitted in the

278 
DESCRIPTION OF IS-95 SYSTEM
form of Paging Channel Half-Frames. Eight half-frames form an 80 ms paging channel
slot. A message can use up to 2048 slots. A single paging channel operating at 9600
bit/s can serve up to 180 paging processes. A mobile station monitors the paging chan-
nel assigned to it by the base station. It can do it in a slotted or unslotted mode. In
the slotted mode the mobile station listens to the paging channel during the assigned
page slots only. During the rest of the time the receiver is switched off and the energy
is saved.
A few message types can be sent on the paging channel. They are:
• messages defining the system configuration, such as:
— System Parameter Message, which provides configuration of paging channels,
parameters needed for tuning to the pilot sequence and the number of paging
channels used in the cell. While "entering" the system, the mobile station
listens to the first paging channel where it can find this information.
— Access Parameters Message, which indicates the parameters which have to
be used by mobile stations during transmission to the base station on an
Access Channel.
— Neighbor List Message, which presents parameters of the neighboring cells,
in particular the spreading sequence offset used in them.
- CDMA Channel List Message, which gives the list of CDMA carriers
• paging messages - paging takes place if the base station receives the order to set
a connection with a given mobile station. The paging signal is usually generated
by a few base stations.
• order messages, which constitute a large class of messages ensuring proper system
operation. They are used during mobile station registration, during confirmation
of other operations, etc.
Some other important messages are:
• Channel Assignment Message - used to tell the mobile station to tune to a spec-
ified channel frequency.
• Data Burst Message - used to send data from a base station to the mobile station.
• Authentication Challenge Message - used to transmit data, which are necessary
during the procedure of mobile station authentication.
In IS-95 Traffic Channels work in two rate sets. The Rate Set 1 is always supported,
whereas the Rate Set 2 is optional. Sixty-one traffic channels can be realized with a
single paging channel used in a cell/sector; however, applying seven paging channels
decreases the number of traffic channels to 55.
Traffic channels are used to transmit user speech or data (primary traffic), data
(secondary traffic) 
and signaling information. Due to the fact that a single traffic
channel carries data at the rate equal at most to 9600 bit/s (RSI) or 14400 bit/s (RS2),

DOWNLINK TRANSMISSION 
279
Table 11.3 Parameters of the forward traffic frames
Data rate
bit/s
9600
4800
2400
1200
14400
7200
3600
1800
Frame length
L bits
192
96
48
24
288
144
72
36
Reserved/
flag bit
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
Data bits
D bits
172
80
40
16
267
125
55
21
Frame-quality ind.
Fbits
12
8
0
0
12
10
8
6
Tail
T bits
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
the initial version of the IS-95 system underwent considerable modifications to achieve
higher data rates [3]. It made it possible to use more than one channel in a link.
Therefore the traffic channels applied in a link are called a fundamental code channel
and supplemental code channels. Up to 7 supplemental code channels can be assigned
to a link. The supplemental code channels always operate at the highest data rate
within the rate set. Therefore, if Rate Set 2 is applied, the maximum data rate is
8 x 14.4 = 115.2 kbit/s.
Frame - L bits (20 ms)
R/F
bit
Data
Dbits
Frame-quality
indicator
Fbits
Tail
Tbits
Figure 11.5 Forward traffic channel frame structure (R/F - reserved/forward flag bit)
The user data are transmitted in the form of 20-ms frames. The structure of a frame
is shown in Figure 11.5. The lengths of particular fields depend on the data rate and
are given in Table 11.3.
The frame-quality indicator field contains CRC bits calculated on the basis of the
information bits in the frame. Data bits in a frame can be made up of primary, secondary
or signaling traffic bits separately or a composition of them.
There is a long list of signaling messages transmitted by the base station on a traffic
channel. The signaling messages are sent in the process of authentication, handover,
power control, updating system parameters by sending information on neighboring cells,
alerting, registration, etc. The signaling messages are similar in form to the messages
sent on the paging channel. A message consists of an 8-bit message-length header,
message data (so called message body) of a minimum of 16 bits and a maximum of 1160
bits and a 16-bit CRC block. Padding bits are added to fill the whole frame.

280 
DESCRIPTION OF lS-95 SYSTEM
Code 
Code 
symbols
A*<flha 
rn™oii*no»i •»"—- 
symbols 
symbols 
M _« (Walsh chip)
Accesschannel 
. ^12w 
»^c£tar^ — * S^1*01 
> 
Btoek 
>orthogonV
MMs/frame ~^4^jt 
"&" 
4.8kbWs 
r = 1/3lT=9 
14.4ks/s 
n*eHHon 
28Start ntarto«IBr 28*mymWi 
modutatar
l-channel
sequence
1.2288Mchip/s
4.8 ksfe (307-2 kchip/s)
Baseband
fitter
'i 
' 
1/2PNchip 
t **}
PNChip 
delay - 406.9 ns
1i288Mchlpte 
n 
o—...-.i^ 
Q(t)
^-+ 
>o 
Q»-B82?Bnd 
»•:•:•
Long 
A 
fiter 
A
code
generator 
^ ^ 
81^244)
-^ 
Q-channel
1.2288Mch«p/s
Long
code
mask
Code 
Code 
Code
-- 
-_; 
- symbols 
symbols 
" 
~" 
symbols
Add 
8 
bit 
Convolutional 
Symbol 
3^*
' ""S?* ^kbiuT r=ei«Xlr=9 288^"P-Wion ».«.* 
intoneav*
.., 
4.8kbit/S 
14.4KS/S
. 
2.0kb»s 
2.4kbiUs 
7.2 ks*
0.8kbWs 
0.8kbWs 
12kb»Us 
3.6 ks/s
l-channel
sequence
288ks/s
Frame data
Modulation 
rate 
T 
| 
Baseband 
^ "<»)
symbols 
>+ 
> 
filter 
*":
(Walsh chip) 
™»r 
A
^.ary 
cos(2irfct)
•sas—*ss—£- - ^^^
4.8ks/S 
* 
1.2288MCNCVS 
Baseband 
<X»)
(307.2 kchip/s) 
-—-- 
>t 
-»D 
Q>Ba«e?nd 
>>
Supplemental reverse
uplnk code traffic
channel
frame)
l-channel
ttAfiiftaffWflk
Modulation
i-channel
sequence
1.2288Mchip/s
. J 
I 
Baseband 
K»)
Modulation 
«w
symbols
^^Tary 
(Walsh chip)
1 orthogonal 
^li^T^. 
*" 
1/2 PN chip
_mpduU^ 
48,^ 
'^a^ 
de.ay-406.9n, .
»-+ 
»D 
Q>BafiteTd
Long 
A 
^^
code
generator
i 
Ochannel
a«iuflnca
• 
i 
Q-channel
sequence
1.2288 Mchip/s
Long code
mask
Figure 11.6 Mobile station IS-95 transmitter

UPLINK TRANSMISSION 
281
11.4 
UPLINK TRANSMISSION
Transmission from a mobile station to the base station differs considerably from that in
the opposite direction. Figure 11.6 presents the scheme of a mobile station transmitter.
There are parallel branches realizing Access Channel and uplink traffic channels. Let us
note that as in the downlink (forward) transmission, besides a fundamental code traffic
channel, up to seven supplemental code channels can be realized at the maximum data
rate. The sequence of functional blocks for a single supplemental channel is shown in
Figure 11.6. Let us note that the carrier phase for the ith channel is shifted by the
angle ^ with respect to the reference phase.
The same short spreading sequence 32768 chips long is applied in the uplink (re-
verse), and in the downlink transmission. All mobile stations in the cell apply the same
time shift of the spreading sequence. The signals from different mobile stations are
differentiated thanks to the application of a long pseudorandom sequence generated at
the rate of 1.2288 Mchip/s using an individual mask which is unique for a given mo-
bile station. The modulo-2 summing of the data sequence and the spreading sequence
additionally improves transmission privacy.
A binary sequence characterizing the digital signal is encoded using a convolutional
code of the coding rate R = 1/3 and the constraint length L = 9. The coded sequence
is a subject of block interleaving in the time interval of 20 ms. The resulting output
sequence generated at the rate of R = 28.8 kbit/s, is grouped into 6-bit blocks which
constitute the address of one of 64 mutually orthogonal Walsh sequences. As a result,
a stream of Walsh sequences at the rate of R = 307.2 kbit/s is achieved. Subsequently,
the data sequence is fed to the data burst randomizer. The operation of this block
depends on the current data rate generated by the voice encoder. If the user activity is
low and the speech encoder generates data at the rate lower than 9600 bit/s, the data
bits are repeated and the burst randomizer gates off some of them in a pseudorandom
fashion. This way the power of the generated signal is minimized. The resulting data
sequence is spread using PNI and PNQ short spreading sequences. After a binary-
to-bipolar conversion and pulse shaping, it is used in the quadrature branches of an
OQPSK modulator (see Chapter 1). OQPSK modulation allows for more efficient use
of the mobile station power amplifier.
A similar scheme to that in Figure 11.6 can be drawn for Rate Set 2 uplink transmis-
sion; however, instead of the R = 1/3 code the R = 1/2 convolutional code is applied,
so the data rates are 14.4, 7.2, 3.6 and 1.8 kbit/s.
Besides regular primary traffic (voice data stream), secondary traffic (data stream) or
signaling can be sent in a 20-ms frame. Multiplexing of several streams can take place
in two different ways. In the blank and burst mode, signaling data replace primary data.
In the dim and burst mode, primary and signaling/secondary traffic are placed in the
same frames.
There exists a long list of messages, which can be carried by an uplink (reverse)
traffic channel. The messages are sent in a signaling part of a typical frame. These
messages are associated with power measurement reports and power control, handover,
authentication and several other orders.

282 
DESCRIPTION OF lS-95 SYSTEM
In the Access Channel data are transmitted at 4800 bit/s. The access channel is
used by a mobile station to initiate a call, to update the location of the mobile station
and to respond to a paging issued by a base station. Each access channel is associated
with one paging channel, so up to seven access channels can be established. Most of
the functional blocks applied to realize an access channel are the same as for a traffic
channel so they will not be described here.
The access channel message structure is similar to the structure of messages sent on
the synchronization channel. It has an 8-bit message-length header, a data block of
minimum 2 bits and maximum 842 bits and a CRC block of 30 bits. The messages are
placed in 20-ms frames. Because the data rate on the access channel is 4800 bit/s, 96
bits are contained in a single frame. A frame is composed of 88 data bits and 8 encoder
tail bits or it can contain an access channel preamble consisting of 96 zeros. An access
channel preamble and a sequence of access channel frames form an access channel slot.
Transmission within a slot begins with a short random delay to distribute transmission
start times of several mobile stations using different access channels. When a mobile
station uses the access channel for first time, it sends a sequence of probe messages at
increasing power level until the appropriate power level for this mobile is determined.
Apart from the case when two mobile stations use the same access channel and the
same time shift of the pseudorandom sequence, the base station is able to receive signals
from a few mobile stations. However, in order to limit the system load caused by access
channels, the base station limits the number of simultaneous users of access channels.
Controling the access to access channels is performed by sending the access parameters
messages on the paging channel.
One of the most important control procedures performed in an IS-95 system is the
mobile station registration. In this procedure the mobile station informs the base station
on its location and status. There are various kinds of registrations:
• registration at power-up or at the moment of changing from an analog AMPS or
alternative system to the digital CDMA system,
• registration at power-down, which indicates that the mobile station is no longer
active,
• periodic registration due to timer expiration,
• distance-based registration performed when the mobile station has moved further
than a certain distance from the place where it registered previously,
• zone-based registration performed after entering a new system zone (equivalent
to a location area}7
• registration caused by the change of some of the mobile station parameters.
• registration requested by the base station,
• registration ordered by the base station after successful use of the access channel
by the mobile station.

POWER CONTROL 
283
Other important procedures are authentication and message encryption. A mobile
station maintains an enciphering key and a set of shared secret data. The mobile station
adds an 18-bit authentication signature to origination, page response, registration and
data burst messages sent on the access channel. The shared secret data can be updated
in response to an order from the base station. Enciphering user data can be switched
on after the appropriate command (Privacy Mode Command) is issued by the mobile
switching center.
11.5 
POWER CONTROL
As we have already mentioned, power control is crucial for operation of a CDMA system.
Various power control mechanisms are applied in the IS-95 system.
In the open loop power control, a mobile station measures the power received from
the base station by attempting to set the level of the received signal in the automatic
gain control (AGC) block. The transmit power of the mobile station is then determined
from the following equation [4]:
mean output power [dBm] = —(mean input power) [dBm] + offset power + parameters
(11.2)
The offset power level depends on the band in which the system operates and is equal
to -73 dB for 800-MHz band and -76 dB for 1800-MHz band. The parameters used
in (11.2) are transmitted on the synchronization channel and depend on the cell size,
receiver sensitivity and the effective radiated power.
Let us note that the above method of power control is not very precise because
frequency division is applied in the duplex transmission and up- and downlinks are
separated by 45 MHz in the 800 MHz band and by 80 MHz in the 1800 MHz band.
Therefore, the power level received by the mobile station only partially characterizes
the uplink path loss. In particular, power control in the open loop is not able to
compensate for short-term fading in the uplink. In order to cope with this problem the
base station measures the received power from the mobile station and sends appropriate
power control commands. Each 20-ms frame is divided into 16 power control groups.
Each group is equivalent to 6 bits of the uplink sequence or one Walsh symbol used in
the uplink orthogonal modulation. The signal-to-interference ratio is measured in each
power control group, then it is compared with the reference SIR value and a decision
is made if the power of the mobile station should be increased or decreased. As we
have already mentioned, the power control bits are sent by replacing the transmitted
bits in pseudorandom frame locations indicated by the decimated long pseudorandom
generator. The dynamic range of the closed loop power control is ±24 dB. If the open
loop is taken into account, then the joint dynamic range is ±32 dB for the 800-MHz
band and ±40 dB for the 1800-MHz band. The final goal of the system physical layer is
to ensure the required transmission quality measured by the tolerable level of the error
rate. Therefore, the reference SIR is adjusted to meet this goal in a given cell.

284 
DESCRIPTION OF IS-95 SYSTEM
Power control within a small dynamic range is also performed in the downlink. A
base station gradually decreases the transmitted power in the 15- to 20-ms periods,
until the frame error ratio measured by the mobile station exceeds an acceptable limit.
11.6 
SIMPLIFIED CONNECTION SET-UP
Let us consider a mobile originated connection set-up. Let us assume that the mobile
station is registered and its power is switched on.
First, the user dials the called user number and presses the "send" key. The mobile
station sends an origination message to the base station using an access channel. The
base station assigns the mobile station to the traffic channel using a paging channel
and sends the called user number to the mobile switching center. After the MSC has
completed the connection set-up, the mobile station is assigned to the reverse traffic
channel and starts to transmit on it. As a result, the forward traffic channel and the
mask of the long code used for ensuring data privacy are assigned to the connection.
The call flow for a mobile terminated call is the following. When a mobile system
receives the call, it starts to set up a connection. The mobile station is searched by
sending paging messages on the paging channels in the location area, i.e. in the cells or
sectors in which the mobile station is probably located. After reception of a page the
mobile station responds using the access channel and is assigned to a traffic channel.
After full initialization of the traffic channel the base station sends special information
causing the mobile station to ring. When the user answers the call, the base station is
informed about his/her answer.
11.7 
ENHANCEMENTS OF IS-95B FOR HIGH-SPEED DATA
As we have already mentioned, high data rates up to 115.2 kbit/s can be achieved
in the IS-95 system without changing its physical layer, if more Walsh sequences are
assigned to a link. Thanks to that, new services can be offered, such as database
access, file transfer and electronic mail [5]. Most of these services generate bursty
traffic. Therefore, IS-95B enhancements have been introduced to allow for high-speed
data packet transmission. In packet transmission traffic in the forward and reverse
link is asymmetric. In the forward direction the fundamental code channel and up to
seven supplemental code channels are assigned to the link for the duration of a burst.
In the reverse direction each supplemental channel is assigned a different pseudonoise
sequence mask corresponding to a different pseudonoise sequence shift. Each mask is
derived from the fundamental sequence mask. Each assigned channel is used at full data
rate. Power control for all supplemental code channels is based on the fundamental code
channel.
All this makes it possible to define the high-speed packet data service option. The
service is established between the Interworking Function (IWF) and the mobile terminal
(see Figure 11.7). During the negotiation procedure, the mobile terminal specifies its
high-speed data capabilities understood as the number of parallel channels which can

ENHANCEMENTS OF IS-95B FOR HIGH-SPEED DATA 
285
Fundamental code channel
PDN 
V> IWF
1 
Supplemental
BS 
code channels
^r MS
*
Figure 11.7 System configuration for high-speed packet data transmission (IWF - Interworking
Function, PDN - Packet Data Network)
be applied in the up- and downlink. On the other hand, the base station specifies the
maximum number of Walsh sequences which can be assigned to the negotiated up- and
downlink. During packet data service realization, a mobile terminal can remain in two
states:
• Active state - in which a traffic channel is assigned to the mobile station and
the link and Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP) between the mobile terminal and the
IWF is established,
• Dormant state - in which no RF or system resources are assigned to the connec-
tion, but the user's registration for packet data service and the PPP are main-
tained.
The mobile station realizing a packet data service remains in the active state for
a certain period of time after sending a data burst in expectation of sending another
burst. If the timer expires while waiting for the next data burst, the mobile terminal
goes into the dormant state.
Let us briefly consider an uplink burst scenario [5]. Let the mobile terminal remain in
the dormant state. If new data appear for transmission, the mobile terminal goes into
active state. If the amount of data exceeds a predefined threshold, the mobile station
requests supplemental code channels. This request is sent on the fundamental code
channel. In response, the base station sends a message on the fundamental code channel
in which it specifies the burst length, the number of supplemental code channels to be
used and the starting moment of the burst. The mobile station can ask for an extension
of the assigned burst before it ends. If there is no more data to send, the mobile
station issues a message requesting zero supplemental code channels. In response, the
radio resources are released and can be used by other users. A similar procedure can
be described for the opposite direction. This time the IWF initiates the supplemental
code assignment.

256 
DESCRIPTION OF lS-95 SYSTEM
The architecture and the operation of the IS-95 system have been briefly sketched in
this chapter. Details on realization can be found in the standards [1], [2] and [3]. It is
worth noting that the system description of IS-95 conforms to the TR45/46 reference
model [6], so almost all system entities have the same names as those applied in the
GSM system description. Readers who are more interested in the operation of the IS-95
system and general rules of CDMA systems, are advised to study [7] whereas those who
are interested in the system details may read [8].
Despite system complexity, the CDMA became the main technique applied in the
proposals for third generation systems. Many solutions applied in IS-95 and patented
by their inventors created a basis for the systems known as cdma2000 and UMTS.
However, we have to realize that due to the limited spectrum resources, spectrum
expansion existing in CDMA cannot be always applied, in particular if the data rates
have to be very high. Therefore, other techniques, e.g. OFDM (see Chapter 1). have
to be employed.
REFERENCES
1. TIA/EIA IS-95 A, Mobile Station-Base Station Compatibility Standard for Dual
Mode Spread Spectrum Cellular System, 1995
2. ANSI J-STD-008, Personal Station-Base Station Compatibility Requirements for
1.8 to 2.0 GHz Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) Personal Communications
Systems, 1995
3. TIA/EIA IS-95B, Mobile Station-Base Station Compatibility Standard for Dual
Mode Wideband Spread Spectrum Cellular System, 1998
4. T. Ojanpera, R. Prasad (eds), WCDMA: Towards IP Mobility and Mobile Internet
Artech House, Boston, 2001
5. D. N. Knisely, S. Kumar, S. Laha, S. Nanda, "Evolution of Wireless Data Services:
IS-95 to cdma2000", IEEE Communications Magazine, October 1998, pp. 140–149
6. TIA TR-46, Reference Model, 1991
7. J. S. Lee, L. E. Miller, CDMA Systems Engineering Handbook, Artech House Pub-
lishers, Boston, 1998
8. V. K. Garg, IS-95 CDMA and cdma2000 Cellular/PCS Systems Implementation.
Prentice-Hall PTR, Upper Saddle River, N. J., 2000

Trunking systems
Trunking systems are the type of mobile communication systems which fulfill the need
for communication between mobile vehicles of specialized government and public ser-
vices such as police, emergency services, fire departments, and transport companies.
Usually such services and companies use private communication systems called Private
Mobile Radio (PMR).1 In a conventional PMR system, each radio channel is perma-
nently allocated to a given group of users. Due to the lack of appropriate channel
management, it happens that despite the existence of free channels the users assigned
to a congested channel cannot access the communication network. Such systems are
sometimes called conventional dispatch systems.
12.1 THE IDEA OF TRUNKING
In order to rationalize the use of frequency channel resources, the idea of trunking,
similar to trunking in traditional wireline systems, has been introduced. It relies on the
possible assignment of a specified number of channels to all system users. The channel
is allocated to a particular user dynamically for the time of connection. In consequence,
we improve the use of channel resources, we can improve call privacy and service offer.
Figure 12.1 presents the idea of trunking in comparison with a conventional dispatch
system. Let us note that the number of users currently served in the trunking system
is equal to the number of channels. The number of users waiting for a connection is
much smaller than in a conventional dispatch system. Obviously, the trunking system
1ln the literature the abbreviation PMR is sometimes explained as Professional Mobile Radio [!}.
287
12

288 
TRUNKING SYSTEMS
requires channel management and ability of a mobile station to quickly synthesize the
selected channel frequency.
Conventional dispatch system 
Trunking system
Channel management
V
*—- 
A 
•* 
A
Users waiting 
Users waiting
for service Sefvedusere 
^ service 
Served users
H 
- channel in use 
- free channel
Figure 12.1 Channel assignment in a conventional dispatch system and in a trunking system
Let us note that thanks to the lack of a particular channel assignment to the given
group of users, the system reliability is substantially improved. If a single channel is
defective, it slightly decreases the whole system capacity without cutting off a whole
group of users from access to the system, as would happen in a conventional dispatch
system. At the moment of temporary loading of all channels, the trunking system does
not reject the calls but queues the waiting users. The duration of a call can be limited
by the system, which improves the effectiveness of connections.
Thanks to the fact that a channel is dynamically assigned to the user pair and during
the connection another mobile station cannot use the same channel, in a certain sense
the call is more private. In case of analog systems, further security improvements are
rather difficult.
The peculiarity of trunking systems which distinguishes them from cellular systems
at least partially results from the type of users. The characteristic feature of generated
traffic is frequent connections of a dispatcher with mobile users (a fleet of vehicles).
Sometimes many users are connected with the dispatcher simultaneously. On the other
hand, connections with a PSTN are relatively rare. Trunking systems are fitted to
specific types of calls or connections. These are:
• individual calls,
• group calls with connections to all users in a group,
• calls to a PSTN user (for selected users),

MPT 1327 STANDARD 
289
• alarm and alert calls,
• direct calls to public services,
• short digital messages,
• data transmission messages.
The characteristic feature of traditional trunking and dispatch systems is a duo-
simplex mode applied in mobile stations. Base stations operate in duplex mode. During
a call, the pair of users is assigned a pair of frequency channels (in up- and downlink).
A mobile station is able to use only a link in one direction at a time. The base station
receives the signal from a "talking" user on one frequency and transmits to the "lis-
tening" user on the other frequency. Due to this kind of use of channel resources, it is
possible to realize the group calls without selection of individual numbers of the group
members.
Trunking systems can be owned by a single company or can be public. The appli-
cation of Public Access Mobile Radio (PAMR) is particularly advantageous from the
point of view of spectrum efficiency and system organization. Participating companies
have their own subnetwork within the PAMR network for their exclusive disposal. The
companies do not need to have a licence for the use of the assigned frequencies. The
network operator holds such a licence for all used frequencies.
12.2 
MPT 1327 STANDARD
There are a few standards of analog trunking networks. Some standards are owned
by companies (e.g. Motorola, Ericsson), others are public. In the second half of the
eighties a whole family of standards has been established by the British Ministry of
Post and Telecommunications. The most important is the signaling standard which
describes the data exchange protocol between a base station and mobile stations and is
described by the symbol MPT 1327 [2]. Many leading companies have offered trunking
systems based on this protocol. Other standards associated with MPT 1327 are listed
below.
• MPT 1317 specifies signaling.
• MPT 1318 is a memorandum on the trunking efficiency.
• MPT 1343 specifies the operations of the terminal equipment and defines the
functions of system control and access to the traffic channel.
• MPT 1347 specifies the base station, describes the functions of the fixed network
of the system and formulates the directives on the allocation of identity numbers.
• MPT 1352 specifies testing procedures to verify compatibility of mobile stations.
The MPT 1327 standard defines the random access to the system, so-called Dynamic
Framelength Slotted ALOHA. The frames generated by mobile stations have variable

290 
TRUNKING SYSTEMS
length which is a multiple of time slots. If a frame is contained in a single time slot,
then the next time slot can be applied by another mobile station in order to set up the
connection. If the frame is longer than a time slot, then the mobile stations wishing to
set up the connection select a free time slot randomly.
The connection set-up is supervised by a Trunking System Controller (TSC). It con-
trols the frame length with respect to collisions between access attempts made by several
mobile stations. Transmission of signaling data between the TSC and mobile stations
takes place in the control channel. The standard specifies the digital transmission with
MSK modulation at the data rate of 1200 bit/s. A control message is transmitted to
mobile stations in the control channel with the period of 106.7 ms. The message al-
ternately contains two control sequences of length equal to 64 bits. The first control
sequence is the Control Channel System Codeword (CCSC) and the second one is the
Address Codeword (AC) (see Figure 12.2).
CCSC
(64)
time slot
AC
(64)
CCSC
(64)
AC
(64)
CCSC
(64)
AC
(64)
CCSC
(64)
AC
(64)
. SYS CCS SYNC CRC
0 (15) 
(16) 
(16) 
(16)
COM
(47)
CRC
(16)
Figure 12.2 Structure of messages transmitted on the MPT 1327 control channel
The message starts with a CCSC word. It consists of a one-bit start flag equal to "0",
15 system identification bits (SYS - System Identity), 16-bit Code Completion Sequence
(CCS), 16-bit preamble (SYNC) and 16-bit parity block CRC. This block contains the
value C4-D7//, so the contents of the CCS word is so selected that the calculation of the
CRC results exactly in the value of C4D7H- The preamble is used in synchronization
and contains the word AAAAu •
The address codeword starts with the flag bit "1" followed by the Codeword Message
(CDM) containing 47 information bits. The whole message is completed with a 16-bit
parity block CRC.
The codeword message can have various meanings. It can be the information from
the controller containing the number of a time slot in which the random access to
the system can be realized. It can be the call sent by the system to mobile stations
in expectation of the answer declaring the mobile stations to be ready to accept the
connection, the order sent to the mobile station to switch from the control channel to
the specified traffic channel or to switch from one traffic channel to another. It can also
be a broadcast message indicating the system status. The codeword message can be also
issued by a mobile station and can contain a connection request, or acknowledgement
that the mobile station is ready to realize a call. The meaning of messages sent on the
control channel is the following:

MPT 1327 STANDARD 
291
• ALOHA (ALH) - a message sent by the trunking system controller inviting ini-
tialization of a connection. The message ALH(n) indicates that the connection
set-up is possible in the next n time slots.
• AHOY (AHY) - a message generated by the trunking system controller in ex-
pectation of the acknowledgement that a mobile station is ready to set up a
connection,
• REQUEST (RQS) - a request for connection set-up issued by a mobile station,
. ACKNOWLEDGE (ACK) - an acknowledgement of RSQ or AHY message,
• GO TO TRAFFIC CHANNEL n (GTC) - a message requesting the mobile station
to switch from the control channel or from the current traffic channel to the traffic
channel n,
• BROADCAST (BCAST) - a broadcast message containing system information.
PABX
CP
PABX
PSTN
PABX
PSTN
MX
CP
MXB BS
r^jB 
• '
O&M
CP 
BS 
BS
Figure 12.3 Trunking network ACTIONET [3]
An example of a trunking network functioning according to the MPT 1327 standard
is ACTIONET by Nokia [3] (see Figure 12.3). This system can operate in a few different
configurations. The simplest configuration consists of a number of mobile stations and
a switching center (MBX) deployed jointly with the base station. This way a simple
small private company network can be built.
The basic configuration features a mobile switching center (MX), one or a few base
stations and a number of mobile stations. Larger configurations consist of a few mobile

292 
TRUNKING SYSTEMS
switching centers (MX) and base stations, a few control points (CP) or dispatch centers
connected to a mobile switching center (MX). Such a network is usually connected with
a PSTN or an internal PABX (Private Branch Exchange).
The main task of a mobile switching center MX in a local network is to provide
automatic connection set-up between two mobile users, between a mobile and a fixed
user of an PABX, and between a mobile and a fixed user of a PSTN exchange. The
control point (CP) is a telephone console consisting of a keyboard, microtelephone and
alphanumeric display.
If the trunking network covers a large area, an additional element integrating the
local parts of the network is applied. It is a system exchange (SX). Its main blocks are
doubled for high system reliability. In the case of a large network, the data update in
the mobile station register can be necessary if some mobile stations leave their home
MX service area. Very large networks consisting of a few independent traffic areas
are also possible. It is assumed that mobile stations remain within their own traffic
areas and traffic concentrates within these areas as well; however, there is a need for
information exchange between traffic areas. Very large networks are equipped with
additional blocks called System Roaming Handler (SRH) - the database of the current
users' location, and Call Information Handlers (CIH) - the database of realized and
attempted connections, used for tariffing purposes.
Typically, the links between particular mobile switching centers are implemented us-
ing a PSTN network. Each mobile switching center is equipped with the Operation and
Maintenance Center (OMC). The OMC manages the system and equipment configu-
ration and undertakes appropriate action in case of system failures or due to security
reasons.
Generally, trunking networks based on the MPT 1327 protocol are characterized by a
simple technology and service, and wide availability of equipment. They have, however,
some disadvantages: poor spectrum efficiency, low frequency reuse factor, relatively
low security of speech signals, high cost of the devices improving speech security, large
network costs due to assignment of a single traffic channel to each carrier and low data
transmission rates.
12.3 
EDACS - AN EXAMPLE OF A PROPRIETARY TRUNKING SYSTEM
STANDARD
The Enhanced Digital Communication System (EDACS) [4] has been developed by
Ericsson. The company holds an exclusive right to build the network infrastructure and
user equipment. The system was built to work mainly with security services, therefore
it has some special features which are essential for these applications. It features a short
access time (< 250 ms) and the possibility to transmit voice and data transmission on all
channels. It improves the system reliability because the control channel can be located
on any carrier. Because the system is applied in public security services, a special
emergency call request initiated by pushing a single button is introduced. Thus, with
the highest priority the mobile station is assigned the first free channel. The emergency

TETRA - A EUROPEAN STANDARD OF A TRUNKING SYSTEM 
293
call request is signalled to other mobile stations by a special sound (beep) and display
of the identity of the mobile station sending the alarm.
The EDACS has narrowband and wideband versions. In the first one the channel
separation is 12.5 kHz, whereas in the second one it is 25 kHz. EDACS can realize
communications in four modes:
• analog voice transmission,
• encrypted digital voice transmission (in the wideband version of EDACS) (Voice
Guard) at the data rate of 9600 bit/s,
• data transmission (4800 bit/s in the narrowband version or 9600 bit/s in the
wideband version of the system),
• connection with a PSTN.
As we know, group calls are the basic way of communications in trunking systems.
Group calls realized in EDACS have the following properties:
• blocking double transmission - a single user transmits to the group and the re-
maining users have to listen,
• possibility of searching the groups - the users can search many traffic groups,
• identity display - the identity of the currently transmitting mobile station is
displayed on the screen of other mobile stations belonging to the same group.
• automatic addition to group - a mobile station is automatically added to its group
after switching power on or after appearing in the system coverage area.
The system can operate in several configurations, depending on the size of the cov-
ered area. The basic configuration has a single base station. The configuration on level
1 supports full trunking, on level 2 the system is supplemented with electronic control
of the dispatcher's console, on level 3 the data transmission is supported. The configu-
ration on level 4 allows for wide area coverage and the simulcast principle is applied -
several base stations transmit and receive simultaneously.
The wideband version of EDACS can operate in the frequency ranges 136–174, 403–
515 and 806–870 MHz. The narrowband system operates in the range 894-941 MHz.
The EDACS trunking system, with its gradual extensions and service enhancements,
has been intended by Ericsson for smooth transition to the second generation trunking
system TETRA.
12.4 TETRA - A EUROPEAN STANDARD OF A TRUNKING SYSTEM
Due to the already listed disadvantages of analog trunking systems and their mutual
incompatibility, in the early nineties the European Community undertook to define a
new digital trunking system standard. As a result, a series of ETSI standards have

294 
TRUNKING SYSTEMS
been specified, which define Terrestrial Trunked Radio (TETRA).2 In fact, two families
of standards have been worked out. They are:
• Voice plus Data Standard (V+D),
• Packet Data Optimized Standard (PDO).
The V+D standard specifies the second generation digital trunking system, whereas
the PDO standard family defines a packet data radio system.
TETRA has the following features:
• two- to four times higher spectral efficiency as compared with analog systems,
• better frequency reuse,
• much higher voice security due to the application of digital voice encoding with
possible encryption,
• voice quality independent of the received signal power in a wide power level range,
• high rate of data transmission,
• possible cell sectorization.
12.4.1 Services offered in TETRA
The TETRA system offers a wide range of services in circuit- and packet-switched
modes. The services are divided into two categories: teleservices and bearer services,
similar to GSM. Within teleservices five different voice connections are offered:
• individual call - a point-to-point connection between two individual users,
• group call - a point-to-multipoint connection between a calling user and the group
of users distinguished by their group number; transmission is performed in a half-
duplex mode,
• direct call - a direct point-to-point connection between two users (mobile stations)
without using a base station; at least one mobile station has a connection to the
base station on a channel different from that used in the direct call,
• acknowledged group call - a point-to-multipoint connection between a user and a
group of users distinguished by their group number; the called users acknowledge
their presence in the connection,
• broadcast call - a point-to-multipoint connection in which the called users can
only listen to the calling user.
2 Formerly Trans-European Trunked Radio.

TETRA - A EUROPEAN STANDARD OF A TRUNKING SYSTEM 
295
The following bearer services are offered in the V+D type of TETRA operation:
• 7.2-28.8 kbit/s circuit-switched, unprotected speech or data transmission,
• 4.8-19.2 kbit/s circuit-switched, minimally protected data transmission,
• 2.4–9.6 kbit/s circuit-switched, highly protected data transmission,
• connection-oriented point-to-point packet transmission,
• connectionless point-to-point packet transmission in a standard format,
• connectionless packet transmission in a special format (point-to-point, multipoint,
broadcast).
The last three services are also offered in the PDO mode of TETRA.
Due to possible applications of TETRA (e.g. in the public security sector) additional
services have been established, some of which are listed below:
• user's authentication, performed by the dispatcher,
• discreet eavesdropping of a conversation by an authorized user,
• priority call with interruption,
• setting up call request priorities,
• call holding, connect-to-waiting - the user can suspend the current call in order
to take another call and later come back to the first call,
• identification of a calling user,
• short number addressing,
• dynamic creation and modification of user groups.
12.4.2 
General architecture of TETRA
Figure 12.4 presents the TETRA reference standard and the interfaces placed between
appropriate system blocks [8]. Figure 12.4 shows the types of stations used in the
TETRA system, the control blocks and registers and possible connections with external
networks.
A Mobile Station comprises a block called Mobile Termination which denotes the
radio telephone and a block called Terminal Equipment which allows the user to trans-
mit data.
A Line Station functions like a mobile station; however, it is connected to the switch-
ing and management infrastructure over the ISDN line. A line station can be used in a
company network as a dispatcher's station.
The Switching and Management Infrastructure (SwMI) contains base stations, the
main switching center (MSC), local switching centers (LSC) with location registers (LR)
and the operations and maintenance center (OMC).

296 
TRUNKING SYSTEMS
Mobile station
Mobile 
14 
Terminal
Termination 
Equipment
Direct Mode
Mobile Station
Direct Mode
Repealer
A 
>
Direct Mode
Mobile Station
TETRA1
Direct Mode
Mobie Station
16'
II
Switching and Management Infrastructure
Line station
Tine 
12
Terminal
14
Terminal
Equipment
Remote control facilities
BTS
Network
Management
Subscriber
Management
.
LSC 
MSC
LR 
LR
Local 
OMC
Facility
Gateways
A 
A~A 
A
Network
Management
15
15 
Transit
Network for 15 
u
13 
Transit
Network for 13
Mobile Station
performing
gateway function
A
II
•< 
T
TETRA2
Gateways
A 
A 
A 
A
T 
T T 
*
PSTN ISDN PDN PTN
V 
T 
T 
V
PSTN ISDN PDN PTN
Figure 12.4 The TETRA reference standard with interfaces
Let us stress the possibility of establishing direct connections between mobile stations
without using the network infrastructure. A number of interfaces between network
elements exist. They are listed in Table 12.1.
Table 12.1 Types of interfaces applied in TETRA
Interface notation
11
12
13
Interface function
Radio air interface
Line station interface
Intersystem interface
Interface notation
14
15
16
Interface function
Terminal equipment interface
Network management interface
Direct mode radio interface
12.4.3 
The TETRA physical layer
The following parameters of the TETRA physical layer have been standardized:
• frequency channel width equal to 25 kHz,
• four voice/data channels in the TDMA mode transmitted on each carrier with the
interleaved control channel,
• direct mobile-to-mobile user calls possible within a limited distance between the
mobile stations and with some technical limitations,

TETRA - A EUROPEAN STANDARD OF A TRUNKING SYSTEM
297
• frequency ranges in Europe:
- uplink: 380-390 MHz, downlink: 390–400 MHz,
- uplink: 410-420 MHz, downlink: 420–430 MHz,
- uplink: 450-460 MHz, downlink: 460–470 MHz,
- uplink: 870-888 MHz, downlink: 915-933 MHz,
• user terminals: handhelds, portable, vehicle-mounted or fixed with a possibility
of a computer connection (data modem at the rate of 4800 bit/s),
• assignment of more than a single time slot to transmit data at rates up to 28800
bit/s (net) in a 25 kHz channel.
Let us briefly describe the TETRA physical layer [5]. We will analyse the following
aspects:
• burst structure and multiplexing of logical channels,
• coding, sequence reordering, interleaving and scrambling,
• differential encoding and modulation.
1 hyperframe = 60 multiframes =61.2 s
I 
2T3
I 5
60
1 multiframe = 18 TDMA frames = 1.02 s
i i i 2 i 3 i 4-nn 
i
1 TDMA frame = 4 time slots s 56.67 ms
l' 1 I 2 i 3 TT1
1 time slot = 510 bits = 14.167 ms
MS 510
1 subslot = 255 modulation bits a 7.08 ms
1
25S 
1 2 
3 
4
1 modulation bit duration = 250/9 us = 27.78 us
Figure 12.5 Time hierarchy of TETRA

295 
TRUNKING SYSTEMS
As we have already mentioned, the system operates in the TDMA mode with four
physical channels on each carrier separated from the neighboring carriers by 25 kHz.
The basic time unit is a time slot. It lasts for 14.166 ms (85/6 ms). Within a time slot
a binary sequence is transmitted at the rate 36 kbit/s. Thus, 510 bits, or equivalently,
255 four-level data symbols are placed in a time slot. Figure 12.5 presents the time
hierarchy of TETRA.
The hyperframe is at the top of the hierarchy. It lasts for 61.2 s and it is divided
into 60 multiframes. The duration of each multiframe is 1.02 s and each imiltiframe
consists of 18 frames. The eighteenth frame is a control frame. Each frame has a
duration of 56.67=170/3 ms and is divided into four time slots. The uplink slots can
be further subdivided into two subslots. The bursts which carry information sequences
are transmitted within a single time slot. The types of bursts will be described by the
end of this chapter.
In TETRA three types of physical channels are defined. These are:
• Control Physical Channel (CP) which transmits exclusively control messages. One
of the control physical channels is defined as the Main Control Channel (MCCH),
whereas the others are called Secondary Control Channels (SCCH). The carrier
transmitting the main control channel is called the main carrier. The MCCH is
always transmitted in the first time slot on the main carrier.
• Traffic Physical Channel (TP) which mostly carries traffic channels.
• Unallocated Physical Channel (UP) which carries broadcast or empty messages.
Logical channels are assigned to the physical channels according to one of the follow-
ing modes of operation:
• transmission modes:
- Downlink Continuous Transmission Mode (D-CT),
- Downlink Carrier Timesharing Mode (D-CTT),
— Downlink Main Control Channel Timesharing Transmission Mode
(D-MCCTT),
— Multiple Slot Transmission Mode (MTS),
• control modes:
- Normal Control Mode (NCM)
— Minimum Control Mode (MCM).
The D-CT mode is mandatory for mobile stations. It means that a mobile station
has to be able to co-operate with the base station if the latter works in this mode. The
NCM mode is obligatory for all TETRA equipment. All mobile stations should be able
to operate in the minimum control mode.

TETRA - A EUROPEAN STANDARD OF A TRUNKING SYSTEM 
299
In the D-CT mode base stations apply continuous downlink bursts (see Figure 12.9
showing the burst structure used in TETRA). The transmission on the main carrier is
continuous, although it can be discontinuous on other carriers.
In the D-CTT mode a carrier frequency can be shared by several cells. Each of
the physical channels of this carrier (realized in four possible separate time slots) can
be assigned to different cells. In this case a base station uses discontinuous downlink
bursts.
In the D-MCCTT mode the main control channel is jointly used by different cells.
Each frame of this channel is independently assigned to these cells.
The MTS mode is characterized by possible allocation of two to four physical channels
to the same link. The aim of this allocation is to increase the data rate or to transmit
mixed binary streams of voice and data.
The NCM mode requires the assignment of the main control channel (MCCH). A full
range of control functions is ensured. In the NCM mode TETRA services are performed
in a limited form. In this mode all physical channels of every carrier used by the system
carry traffic channels.
Interleaver 
;- * 
Scrambler \ > 
Multiplexer
Burst
builder
(1) information bits 
(6)l
(2) encoded bits
(3) interleaved bits
(4) scrambled bits
(5) multiplexed bits
(6) modulation bite
(7) modulation symbols
Figure 12.6 Block diagram of a TETRA transmitter [5]
Let us describe a block chain which prepares the signal for radio transmission. It is
shown in Figure 12.6.
The bit stream received from the speech encoder or data terminal is subjected to
channel encoding (block or convolutional), possible reordering, interleaving and scram-
bling. The type of the applied error correction code and interleaving depends on the
type of the logical channel. The details of this type of processing are different for each
logical channel type and can be found in Figure 12.7. The abbreviations in Figure 12.7
denote:

300 
TRUNKING SYSTEMS
SCH/HD.
BNCH. STCH
4 Ms)v
(30, 14)
RMoode
)bits)
T
scrambling
T_
(30 bits)
(60 bits) 
(288 Ms) 
(1*4 bits) 
(432 bits)
T 
V 
Y
(«
(12C
(12C
(76, 60)
block code
4 tail bits
4 tal
bits
4tai
bits
) bits) 
(292 bits) 
(148 bits)
V 
T 
*
RCPC code
R=2/3
RCPC code
R=292/432
RCPC code
R=148/432
bits) 
(432 bits) 
(432 bib)
V 
w 
V
(120,11)
block
interleave
pfitertravs
overN
blocks
interleave
overN
blocks
bits) 
(432 bits) 
(432 bits)
T
V 
V
scrambling
scramblffig
scrambling
(12
(14
(216
4 Ms) 
(92 Ms)
* 
V
(140, 124)
block codo
4 tail Ms
(108,92)
nock ocxto
4Mbfe
4 Ms) 
(112 Ms)
T 
T
RCPC code
R»2/3
RCPC code
R=2/3
Ms) 
(168 Ms)
V 
V
(216.101)
block
interleave
(168.13)
block
interleave
(432 bits) 
(216 bits) 
(168 Ms)
f 
jy_ 
...T.
(120 Ms) 
(432 bits) 
(432 bits)
scrambling
T
(432 bits)
scramolvig
scrarnbing
V 
T
(216 Ms) 
(168 bits)
(268 bts)
(432 bits)
Figure 12.7 Error correction coding, interleaving and scrambling applied in several TETRA
(V+D) logical channels
• shortened RM code - (30,14) Reed-Muller code,3
• RCPC code - Rate-Compatible Punctured Convolutional Code (see Chapter 1)
realized in TETRA in two steps:
- coding using the rate-1/4 16-state mother code
— puncturing of selected bits in order to receive the desired coding rate.
The encoded and interleaved bits are multiplexed and fitted into the information
fields of appropriate type of bursts used to realize a specified logical channel. The
resulting binary data stream is differentially encoded and fed to the modulator.
As opposed to the rather complicated GMSK modulation applied in GSM, the
TETRA system uses the so-called 7T/4-DQPSK modulation. It is a version of a dif-
ferential quadrature phase shift keying. The binary rate is assumed to be 36 kbit/s.
3 Reed-Muller codes (RM) are binary block codes which are equivalent to cyclic codes extended by a
parity bit checking the parity of all code word bits. The (30,14) shortened RM code is derived from
the (32,16) RM code by setting two information bits to zero and not transmitting them.

TETRA - A EUROPEAN STANDARD OF A TRUNKING SYSTEM 
301
The binary stream is sliced into dibits which determine the phase shift with respect
to the previous modulation period. These phase shifts can be ±vr/4 or ±3?r/4. Fig-
ure 12.8 presents the signal trajectories for all possible dibit combinations when digital
symbols are shaped by the baseband filter of the square-root raised cosine characteristic
with the roll-off factor equal to 0.35. Despite the fact that the modulation does not
have a constant envelope, its variability is limited and it never reaches zero. This is
an advantage with respect to nonlinear distortions generated by the nonlinear power
amplifier applied in mobile stations. 7T/4-DQPSK modulation has been already used in
American TDM A cellular and PCS standards IS-54/136 [6]. The TETRA standard [5]
Figure 12,8 The in-phase and quadrature components of the 7r/4 — DQPSK modulation with
the square-root raised cosine filter applied in TETRA
also defines a set of channel frequencies for up- and downlink directions. In general, the
frequencies of the nth downlink and uplink channels are expressed by the formulas
Fup,n = Fup,min + 0.001G + 0.025(n - 0.5) [MHz] n = l , 2 , . . . , 7 V
Fdw,n = Fupjmin + D 
[MHz], n=l,2,...,N
where Fup>n, F^w.n are the nth channel frequencies at the uplink and downlink transmis-
sion, respectively. G is the guard period given in kHz and D is the frequency separation
between uplink and downlink bands.
The TETRA standard defines the classes of mobile and base stations, the level of
intermodulation distortions and out-of-band unwanted emission. Ten classes of base
station power levels have been set, starting from 40 W and ending with 0.6 W, which is
equivalent to the power level per carrier between 46 and 28 dBm. In turn, the mobile
stations belong to one of four power classes 30, 10, 3 and 1 W, which is equivalent to
the nominal power level of 45, 40, 35 and 30 dBm.
As in the GSM system, a logical channel is a logical communication link between two
or more link participants. Let us explain the types and tasks of the logical channels
applied in TETRA.
The logical channels can be divided into two categories. They are:
• traffic channels carrying binary sequences representing voice or data in circuit
switched mode, and

302 
TRUNKING SYSTEMS
• control channels transmitting signalling messages and packet data.
There are a few types of traffic channels, such as:
• Speech Traffic Channel (TCH/S),
• circuit mode traffic channels at the net data rate 7.2 (TCH/7.2), 4.8 (TCH/4.8),
and 2.4 (TCH/2.4) kbit/s.
Higher data rates than those listed above are possible by allocating more time slots
to the same link. This way 9.6, 19.2 or 28.8 kbit/s can be achieved.
There are five categories of control channels.
• Broadcast Control Channel (BCCH) is a uni-directional channel for common use
by all mobile stations. 
It transmits general information useful for all mobile
stations. It is further subdivided into:
— Broadcast Network Channel (BNCH) distributing network information to
mobile stations,
- Broadcast Synchronization Channel (BSCH) broadcasting information nec-
essary for time and scrambling synchronization in mobile stations.
• Linearization Channel (LCH) is used for linearization4 of the base station trans-
mitters (BLCH — Base Station Linearization Channel) as well as mobile station
transmitters (Common Linearization Channel - CLCH).
• Signalling Channel (SCH) is shared by all mobile stations; however, it may trans-
mit messages to a single mobile station or to a group of them. In each base station
at least one signalling channel is established. The signalling channel is divided
into the following categories:
— Full Size Signalling Channel (SCH/F) — a bidirectional channel transmitting
full size messages,
— Half-size Downlink Signalling Channel (SCH/HD) — used for transmission of
half-size messages from base to mobile stations,
— Half-size 
Uplink Signalling Channel (SCH/HU), same as above; however,
used in the uplink direction.
• Access Assignment Channel (AACH) is a downlink channel, which, when trans-
mitted on a physical channel, indicates the allocation of the uplink and downlink
slots.
• Stealing Channel (STCH) is associated with the traffic channel. It uses part of
the traffic channel capacity to transmit fast signalling information.
4Linearization is related to the power amplifier of a mobile station, which due to a limited source of
energy and required power efficiency has to work in a nonlinear range of its characteristics. Due to
non-constant envelope modulation used in TETRA, one can apply a predistorter, which distorts the
signal before amplification in such a way that after passing through the amplifier the signal remains
undistorted.

TETRA - A EUROPEAN STANDARD OF A TRUNKING SYSTEM 
303
1 time slot = 510 modulation bits = 255 modulation symbols
subslot 1 = 255 bits = 127.5 symbols
subslot 2 = 255 bits = 127.5 symbols
Control uplink burst (SSN1 or 2)
• 
34
Ramping
I &PA
linearization
4
tail
bits
84
scrambled
bits
30
extended
training
sequence
84
scrambled
bits
4
tail
bits
15
guard
period
Linearization uplink burst (SSN1)
i 
34 
4
' Ramping 
tail 
216scramW
i 
&PA 
bits 
Block
•linearization
0.94ms .
< 
>
240 
1
Ramping & PA 
1
linearization 
1
Normal uplink burst
«"*" 
tracing 
216 scrambted bits
sequence 
BIOCK *
15
guard
period
Phase adjustment 
Phase adjustment
i 
Normal continuous downlink burst
12
bits
2
bits
216 scrambled bits
Stock 1
14
scr.
bits
Training sequence
22
training
sequence
16
scr.
bits
216 scrambled bits
or PA linearization
Block 2
2
3itS
10
bits
Broadcast
block 
Training sequence
Phase adjustment 
P"888 adjustment
Synchronization continuous downlink burst
12
bits
2
bits
80
frequency
correction
120 scrambled
synchronization bits
Block 1
38
synchronization
training
sequence
30
scr.
bits
216 scrambled bits
or PA linearization
Block 2
2
bits
10
bits
Training sequence
Training sequence
Training sequence
Phase adjustment
10
linearization |_^_,
2
bits
2
bits
|
216 scrambled bits
Block 1
14
scr.
bits
22
training
sequence
16
scr.
bits
216 scrambled bits
Block 2
2
bits
2
bits
"i
8!
bitsl Guard
m'^m period
Training sequence
Phase adjustment
0.28 ms
Training sequence 
_. 
.. .
Phase adjustment
Synchronization discontinuous downlink burst
Ramping
earization JJf?
2
bits
1
80
frequency
correction
120 scrambled
synchronization bits
Block 1
38
synchronization
training
sequence
30
scr.
bits
216 scrambled bits
Block 2
2
bits
2
bits
Phase adjustment
Training sequence
Figure 12.9 Burst structures in TETRA (V+D)

304 
TRUNKING SYSTEMS
As we have already mentioned, transmission in the TETRA system is, as in GSM,
performed using data bursts. A burst represents physical contents of the time slot or the
time subslot. There are six types of bursts. They are shown in Figure 12.9. We clearly
see a similarity of TETRA bursts to most of the GSM bursts described in Chapter
7. As in GSM, training sequences are placed in the middle of the burst. Due to a
smaller number of time slots in a frame, the bursts are longer and they transmit higher
numbers of bits as compared with GSM bursts. They also realize additional functions,
in particular those associated with broadcasting. Let us note again a power amplifier
linearization or frequency correction performed within the synchronization burst.
* * *
The information presented on the Terrestrial Trunked Radio (TETRA) dealt mostly
with its services, types of connections and its physical layer. Higher layers of the system
remained beyond the scope of this short survey. The interested reader is advised to study
the TETRA standards or read the chapter devoted to TETRA in [7]. An overview of
different trunked radio systems can be found in [8].
REFERENCES
1. J. G. Gibson (ed.), The Mobile Communications Handbook, CRC Press, Inc. and
IEEE Press, Boca Raton, Fl., 1996
2. MPT 1327, A Signaling Standard for Trunked Private Land Mobile Radio System,
1988
3. E. Juszkiewicz, "ACTIONET — A Nokia Trunking System", Przeglad Telekomunika-
cyjny (in Polish), 1995, pp. 265–270
4. "EDACS - A Modern Radio Trunking System", Ericsson, 1996
5. Draft ETS 300 392–2, Radio Equipment and Systems (RES); Trans-European
Trunked Radio (TETRA); Voice plus Data (V+D); Part 2: Air Interface (AI),
Second Edition, December 1999
6. L. J. Harte, A. D. Smith, Ch. A. Jacobs, IS-136 TDMA Technology, Economics,
and Services, Artech House, Boston, 1998
7. B. H. Walke, Mobile Radio Networks: Networking and Protocols, John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd., Chichester, 1999
8. N. J. Boucher, The Trunked Radio and Enhanced PMR Radio Handbook, John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., New York, 2000

13
Digital cordless telephony
Cordless telephony is worth consideration not only due to its meaning for the wireless
access to a communication network but also because of some special applications, e.g.
in a Wireless Local Loop (WLL). The latter topic will be the subject of Chapter 14.
Wireless telephony enables the user to realize a connection between a handset (mo-
bile station) and a base station connected to a PSTN or to a Private Branch Exchange
(PBX). The range of wireless phones is usually limited to a few hundred meters and it
is assumed that a mobile user moves at pedestrian speed. There are several standards
of wireless telephony, denoted by the abbreviations: CT1, CT2, CT3, DECT, PACS
and PHS. CTi stands for Cordless Telephony, DECT denotes Digital Enhanced Cord-
less Telecommunications. PACS stands for Personal Access Communications System,
and PHS denotes Personal Handyphone System. These two latter systems operate in
America and Japan, respectively. They will be briefly described later.
Wireless phones are applied in the simplest form in many homes and offices. They
differ in technical solutions, complexity level and cost. Many of them feature analog
duplex voice transmission with FDD and frequency modulation. In practice, a mobile
station operates with a single base station and the number of cordless phones in the
range of a single base station is low. The information channel is not protected against
eavesdropping. In the most primitive solutions an external phone can interfere with or
can replace our own phone. In better solutions, at the moment of the connection set-up
the mobile station or the base station searches the channel frequencies checking if they
are not occupied by another transmission in close vicinity. The next improvement is
the application of a password exchange between the mobile station and the base station
in order to prevent a connection with an external phone.
In 1984 most of the European countries accepted the CT1 standard of analog cord-
less telephony; however, the CT1 system was unreliable and did not ensure call privacy.
305

306 
DIGITAL CORDLESS TELEPHONY
Table 13.1 Basic parameters of CT2, DECT, PACS and PHS
System
Bandwidth [MHz]
Frequency range [MHz]
Carrier spacing [kHz]
Access method
Duplex method
Number of carriers
Channels/carrier
Number of channels
Modulation
Handover
Speech coding
Two-way call request
Data rate [kbit/s]
Cell radius [m]
Frame duration [ms]
Peak output power [mW]
CT2/CAI
4
864–868
100
FDMA
TDD
40
1
40
BFSK +
gauss, filter
72 kbit/s
no
ADPCM
no
32
30–100
2
10
DECT
20
1880–1900
1728
FDMA/TDMA
TDD
10
12
132
GMSK
1152 kbit/s
yes
ADPCM
yes
32
30–200
10
250
PACS
U.S. PCS band
U.S. PCS band
300
TDMA/FDMA
FDD
16 pairs/ 10 MHz
8/pair
-
TT/^DQPSK
384 kbit/s
yes
ADPCM
yes
32
2.5
200
PHS
23
1895–1918
300
TDMA/FDMA
TDD
77
4
308
7T/4-DQPSK
384 kbit/s
yes
ADPCM
yes
32
5
80
This gave an impulse for introduction of digital speech encoding which, in consequence,
substantially improved the technical abilities of cordless telephony. As a result, the
CT2 standard was defined. It was supplemented by the Common Air Interface (CAI)
standard formulated by the British Ministry of Post and Telecommunications. In 1989
this interface was described in the British standard MPT 1375 and in 1991 was stan-
dardized by ETSI. It allowed for cooperation of cordless phones and base stations from
different vendors. Besides CT2, the CT3 standard was introduced by Ericsson in which
some drawbacks of CT2 were avoided; however, it never gained importance because of
the introduction of the DECT as the European standard of cordless telephony. Table
13.1 summarizes the basic parameters of CT2/CAI, DECT, PACS and PHS.
13.1 CT2 STANDARD
As we have already mentioned, CT2 was a British initiative, directly associated with the
service called Telepoint. This service was introduced in the UK in 1989 and it did not
gain much interest among subscribers; however, it became quite popular in Hong Kong
and Singapore. The Telepoint systems were characterized by very small, inexpensive,
low power (around 10 mW) mobile stations. They could be used in commercial and
city centers, airports and railway stations in the radius of about 200 m from the base
station. Telepoint was able to set up the uplink connection only. Moreover, it was not

CT2 STANDARD 
307
able to perform handover. In newer implementations of CT2 systems, two-way calling
and intercell handover are possible [1]. Additionally, new features such as advanced
location tracking have been introduced.
Figure 13.1 CT2 transmission mode
In the CT2 standard the 4-MHz band in the range between 864.1 and 868.1 MHz is
used to realize 40 channels with carrier spacing equal to 100 kHz. During a connection
a single carrier is assigned to a single user pair. User data streams are sent in the time
division duplex (TDD) mode (see Figure 13.1). The binary data rate is 72 kbit/s. The
frame structure applied in CT2 is shown in Figure 13.2.
2 ms (144 bits)
4 
— 
- - 
- - - - - 
— 
- • • - 
- - 
>
BS->MS 
MS +BS
4.5J2! 
64 
2 3.5
G |Di 
B-channel 
D G
G - guard time
D - control channel
Figure 13.2 Frame and slot structure applied in CT2 (together with Multiplex 1.4 format)
The frame consists of a block transmitting the data stream from the base station to
the mobile station and a block transmitting the data in the opposite direction. The
frame lasts for 2 ms. Each data block (slot) transfers 64 bits of user information and
4 bits of control information divided into 2-bit portions. The neighboring blocks are
separated by guard periods lasting for 3.5 and 4.5 bits, respectively. Summing all bits
transmitted both in uplink and downlink blocks in the frame and adding the duration
of guard periods, measured in bits, we receive 144 bits within a 2-ms frame. This value
results in the 72 kbit/s data rate. The data stream modulates the carrier according
to the BFSK (Binary Frequency Shift Keying) modulation with Gaussian shaping of
frequency pulses. At the carrier spacing equal to 100 kHz, the spectral efficiency is 0.72
bit/s/Hz. A binary signal representing speech is received using the ADPCM encoder in

308 
DIGITAL CORDLESS TELEPHONY
accordance with ITU-T G.721 Recommendation (see Chapter 1). The speech quality is
comparable to that achieved for 64 kbit/s PCM encoding.
Signaling in CT2 is organized in three layers. Layer 1 signaling is performed to
initiate a two-way radio link, select a radio channel and configure the multiplexing of
three types of channels used in different phases of the link. The B-channel is used for
transmission of speech or data. The D- channel performs control and signaling purposes
and the SYNC channel is used to ensure bit and burst synchronization. All these
channels are properly multiplexed within the CT2 frames. The lower part of Figure
13.2 shows the so-called Multiplex 1.4. In Multiplex 1.2 only 2 bits of the D-channel
are applied in a burst and the guard time on each burst end is lengthened by 1 bit.
Multiplex 1 is used in the information (speech or data) transfer phase after setting up
the connection and acquiring synchronization.
1 ms (72 bits)
3 116 bits Preamble 
OHM/SYNC word 
16 bits 3
_G.!___D__ 
10 bits 
24 bits 
D 
G
Figure 13.3 Organization of the CT2 burst in Multiplex 2
Multiplex 2 (see Figure 13.3) is applied during the connection set-up between the
base station and a particular mobile handset. The base station uses the D-channel to
send its identity to the called mobile handset and uses the SYNC channel to establish
synchronization with it. The CHM word carries the so-called channel marker and is
used to establish a channel. Setting up the channel is acknowledged by the SYNC word
having special forms for the mobile handset and for the base station, respectively.
Multiplex 3 is used in the mobile-originated connection set-up. The mobile handset
pages the base station for 10 ms by sending the preamble, its own identity and the
identity of this base station the handset wishes to set a connection with. In the next
period of 4 ms the handset listens and waits for its own identity and the SYNC message
sent by the base station. The detection of these messages will allow the mobile handset
to fully synchronize with the base station and to switch to the multiplex 2 format in
the data exchange with the base station.
Layer 2 signaling is devoted to the control channel protocols for error detection and
correction, message acknowledgement, link maintenance and link end-point identifica-
tion [2]. Layer 2 packets are composed of a 64-bit address word and a sequence (from
0 to 5) of data code words, each 64 bits long. These packets are transmitted on the
D-channel. If there is nothing to transmit, an idle D-channel is realized in which al-
ternating zeros and ones are sent. Transmitting the packet messages is preceded by
sending a synchronization pattern.
Finally, Layer 3 signaling is responsible for error-free transmission of telephony mes-
sages over the radio link. The messages refer to the mobile handset keypad, its display
or PBX access.
The CT2 standard, although not the newest one, is still attractive in some special
applications such as a wireless local loop. It can be successfully applied in residential

DECT SYSTEM 
309
applications, as well as in wireless PBX systems which ensure communications within
company premises, warehouses, etc.
13.2 DECT SYSTEM
The DECT system is, like GSM, a result of the activity of the ETSI standardization
committee. DECT has been described in a series of standards called Common Interface,
which include: system overview [3], physical layer (PHL) [4], medium access control
layer (MAC) [5], data link control (DLC) layer [6], network layer (NKW) [7], identities
and addressing, security features, speech coding and transmission, public access profile
and approval test specification (check other standards in the EN 300 175 and 176 series).
Like CT2, DECT realizes radio access to fixed networks in the areas of dense com-
munication traffic. It consists of a set of small and inexpensive radio handsets, which
are able to perform connections with base stations located in the vicinity (see Table
13.1). The DECT technology can be used in the following systems:
• residential systems,
• small business systems characterized by a single site and a single cell,
• large business systems characterized by multisite and multicell structures,
• public cordless access systems,
• wireless access to local area networks (WLAN),
• wireless local loops.
13.2.1 DECT architecture
The structure of a DECT system is based on microcells with the radius of a few hundred
meters, in which the mobile handsets - Portable Parts (PP) communicate with the base
stations - Fixed Parts (FP). The DECT system tolerates the movement of a mobile
handset up to the speed of 20 km/h. Figure 13.4 presents the basic architecture of this
system. Besides fixed and portable parts, the system contains the DECT Fixed System
(DFS) which controls a number of FPs. The access to one of external networks is
performed through the Interworking Unit (IWU). A simple Data Base (DB) cooperates
with the DFS in order to manage the users' connections.
A particular DECT configuration depends on the size of the system and on its ap-
plication. In residential systems there is a single base station (FP) and a few mobile
handsets (PP) operating within the cell. Wireless private branch exchanges as well as
Telepoint systems can work with a few base stations, as shown in Figure 13.4. Finally,
large and/or distributed systems can have a few Subsystem Control Units (SCU) man-
aging a number of base stations. The SCUs are connected with each other through the
backbone ring network [11]. The DFS supervises the operation of the whole system.
Figure 13.5 presents a possible application of the DECT system in a Wireless Private
Branch Exchange (WPABX) [8]. The WPABX contains not only a central processing

310
DIGITAL CORDLESS TELEPHONY
pp
pp
pp
Base stations-
Radio Fixed
Parts
FP
interface
DPS •«• IWU
PSTN
ISDN
X.25
X.400
pp
Mobile stations - Portable Parts
Figure 13.4 Typical configuration of a DECT system
WPABX
CPU
« 
I
v FP
-a^ / 
.
Analog
interface
ISDN
PSTN
interface
interface
External
analog
interface
DECT >
interfaceK
- DECT
interface!1
: DECT
interface
FP
FP
i
*•' FP 
d
' *
Figure 13.5 Typical configuration of the WPABX [8] (with permission of Alcatel Telecommuni-
cations Review)
unit but also a number of interfaces with networks and equipment other than DECT.
Through the base stations (FPs) each DECT interface controls the set of mobile hand-
sets (PPs) operating in the FP coverage areas.
13.2.2 
DECT physical layer
Basic technical data of the DECT physical layer are presented in Table 13.1 and they
will not be repeated here; however, let us note that DECT operates in TDMA/TDD

DECT SYSTEM 
311
Figure 13.6 DECT transmission mode
mode (see Figl3.6). Twelve duplex channels are placed in a 10-ms frame divided into
24 time slots. The first twelve slots are used in the downlink, and the next twelve slots
are applied in the uplink. Due to the applied time structure of packets placed in the
slots, the data rate in DECT transmission is high and equal to 1152 kbit/s. The data
stream in a single transmission channel realized in a particular time slot on the selected
carrier is much slower. It is equal to 32 kbit/s in the traffic channel (so called B-field)
and to 6.4 kbit/s in the A-field used for control and signaling. Figure 13.7 presents the
structure of a typical DECT packet. Besides these packets, the DECT standard includes
short physical packets which are 96-bit long, packets which are contained in a DECT
half slot (180-bit long) and long packet lasting for 900 bits and requiring a double slot.
A frame divided into 24 time slots constitutes one unit of the DECT multiframe. The
multiframe consists of 16 frames and lasts for 160 ms.
One packet is transmitted in a time slot which lasts for 0.417 ms. This time is
equivalent to 480 bits. A packet contains 420 bits, so the time needed for 60 bits is
in fact a guard time. The guard time is used, as in GSM, to inhibit packet alignment
inaccuracies within a time slot and to ramp on and off the handset's power amplifier.
420-bit packet starts with a 16-bit preamble and a 16-bit synchronization sequence. The
next 388 bits are divided into a 64-bit control and signaling field (A-field) and a 320-bit
information field (B-field). The packet ends with a 4-bit CRC block which checks the
parity of the whole packet. Due to the crucial meaning of the control and signaling
field for the system reliability, the A-field has an 8-bit header, a 40-bit data block, and
a 16-bit CRC block. This block is a result of the applied BCH (63,48) error correction
code supplemented with the overall parity bit. This code is able to detect up to 5
random errors, all error bursts up to the length of 16 bits and all error patterns with an
odd number of errors. Depending on the phase of the current multiframe, the control
and signaling block sends several messages associated with the MAC layer operations.
They are:
• Identities Information - in which the base station sends its identity to the mobile
handsets,
• System Information and Multiframe Marker which is sent once in a multiframe
for acquisition of synchronization by mobile handsets, and contains information
on the base station,

312 
DIGITAL CORDLESS TELEPHONY
10ms
•*- - 
- 
- 
-
FP^PP 
.. , 
PP*FP
1 231567891011121 23if56789101112
32 
64 
320 
4 
60
Sync 
/Wield 
B-fieM 
PC 
G
8 
40 
16
H 
A-fieW information 
CRC
320 bits without protection
64 
16 
64 
16 
64 
16 
64 
16
Data CRC Data CRC Data CRC Data CRC
Figure 13.7 DECT packet structure: H — Header, PC - Parity Check, CRC — Cyclic Redundancy
Check, G — Guard Time
• Paging Information in which the base station sends its broadcast service and some
MAC layer information,
• MAC Control Information used for connection set-up, its maintenance and ter-
mination and handover requests,
• Control Information of Higher Layers.
The B-field can be protected by the forward error correction (FEC) code or can
remain unprotected (see Figure 13.7). If FEC protection is used, user data are divided
into four 64-bit blocks. Each of them is supplemented with a 16-bit CRC block.
Binary data are transmitted on the radio channel using GMSK modulation with
BT = 0.5.1 Such a signal is demodulated in a non-coherent receiver without an equalizer
attempting to remove the influence of the channel multipath. Because the duration of
a single bit at the data rate of 1152 kbit/s is 0.868 ps and a receiver without an ISI
equalizer can tolerate the signal delay spread of about 10 percent of a symbol duration,
therefore the delay spread cannot be larger than 200–300 ns. This value is related
to about 100 m difference in the length of different signal paths. These conditions are
fulfilled for many types of environment and for the cell radius of about 200 m. Otherwise
1Let us recall that B is a 3-dB bandwidth of a filter with a Gaussian characteristics, T is a single bit
duration.

DECT SYSTEM 
313
the locations of the base stations have to be carefully planned2 and sectorized antennas
can be introduced. Base station antennas should have the antenna gain of about 22
dBi [9]. The carrier-to-interference ratio C/I should be at least equal to 10 dB.
In DECT systems intra- and intercell handover is possible. It is assumed that the time
interval between two handovers should be at least 3 seconds. It prevents unnecessary
channel and cell changes, which otherwise could happen bacause of dynamic channel
assignment implemented in DECT. The handover is performed at the above limitations
if another signal than that from the current base station is received at higher power or
another channel ensures higher link quality in the same cell [10].
13.2.3 
DECT MAC layer
Medium Access Control layer is very important for the overall functioning of the DECT
system. Its main tasks are following:
• system resources control,
• multiplexing of signaling channels,
• error protection.
The first task of the MAC layer consists in creating, maintaining and releasing radio
bearers by allocating and releasing physical channels. The control of system resources
is performed through realization of Dynamic Channel Allocation (DCA) and through
the possible assignment of more than one time slot in a frame to a given connection.
As we remember from Chapter 5, fixed statistical channel assignment relies on such
permanent allocation of the channels to the mobile communication system cells, which
takes into account the expected traffic density in the particular cells. However, in the
systems exploiting pico- and microcells temporary situations can occur in which the
number of mobiles in a given cell exceeds the cell capacity determined by the number
of allocated channels, while in the neighboring cells some channels remain unused.
The dynamic channel allocation removes the above disadvantage. The channels are
dynamically assigned to the cells, taking into account the needs of the users. However,
this is not a completely free allocation because continuous monitoring of the interference
level is necessary in order to determine if the distance between different cells using the
same channel is not too short.
Each base station (FP) sends a marker called a beacon signal which means that at
least one channel of the base station is active. In this channel system information and
base station identity are broadcasted. If a mobile handset (PP) remains in the idle state,
it tunes to the strongest base station and listens to the paging messages from all active
radio channels. A mobile handset wishing to set up a connection searches the channels
until it finds a beacon signal. In the same channel in the time slot in which uplink
transmission takes place, the mobile handset sends a set-up request message in which
2It does not mean that channel frequencies have to be planned, as is done in a classic cellular telephony.
In DECT systems the dynamic channel assignment is performed (see Chapter 5).

314 
DIGITAL CORDLESS TELEPHONY
it asks for allocation of the carrier and of the time slot in which the signal exchange
is currently proceeding. The base station (FP) responds in the same channel (in the
downlink time slot). Due to the TDMA mode applied in DECT, the mobile handset
has enough time for systematic search of other channels during the connection in order
to find a channel featuring the required value of C/I. It eventually requests permission
to switch to a new channel within the same cell or within a new one. As we see, due to
the activity of a mobile handset in searching for a new channel, the distributed dynamic
channel allocation is applied in the DECT system.
The second task of the MAC layer, i.e. the signaling channel multiplexing, relies
on the control of transmission of the appropriate signaling messages in the .A-field
of the packets. The signaling channel multiplexing is related to the number of the
current frame within the multiframe structure. The third task of the MAC layer - error
protection - was presented while describing the DECT packet structure.
It is worth noting that it is possible to assign more than one slot to a single connection
in the DECT system (multislot assignment). The number of time slots allocated in the
uplink and downlink can be different. This allows application of the DECT standard
in LANs.
13.2.4 DECT/GSM interworking
As we have already mentioned, the DECT systems are installed not only in a residential
areas or in private companies but also in public places characterized by particularly
high traffic density, such as airports, railway stations or city centers. However, it is also
possible to apply DECT in co-operation with a cellular system, in particular with the
GSM. It is possible if dual-mode GSM/DECT mobile stations are used. A dual-mode
phone operates as a GSM phone in places where the GSM system is accessible or if
the subscriber moves at a high speed. In the traffic spots covered by DECT in which
the GSM system is not able to serve all subscribers, a dual-mode phone can switch to
the DECT mode. In the area covered by GSM, the DECT-islands can be additionally
placed. Figure 13.8 presents DECT/GSM interworking architecture. The DECT fixed
system (DFS) is connected via the Interworking Unit (IWU) with the mobile switching
center (MSC). The interface between the IWU and MSC is a GSM A-interface. The task
of the IWU is to translate the DECT system mobility management protocol and the call
control protocol into the appropriate GSM protocols. The reverse process takes place
as well. The DECT DFS block is seen by the GSM MSC as a base station controller.
The cooperation of both systems has been standardized by ETSI by defining the GSM
Interworking protocol. In the joint DECT/GSM system data transmission and SMS
services are provided.
13.2.5 
Description of a typical DECT handset
In this paragraph we will present a block diagram of a typical DECT terminal based
on the design shown in [8].

DECT SYSTEM 
315
Figure 13.8 DECT/GSM interworking architecture
The transmit/receive section of the DECT handset can be divided into two parts:
the RF part and the control and baseband DSP part. The block diagram of a mobile
handset is shown in Figure 13.9.
4 . : 
• 
J 
»- 
Packet 
i 
•*! 
~,..w.v 
, 
^ 
^ 
gpp
; 
Audio 
1 ADPCM 
^ assembler/dis- 
modulator 
4
^! front-end ^ 
codec 
< 
\ assembler (MAC) N ] 
t 
Power
A 
A 
A 
control
• 
A 
A 
A 
T
Switch
a, 
T 
K Frequency
o 
™ synthesizer
; 
«
 
: <geK--- - i
£ g| 
Controller
*"! 
] 
^ 
Frequency ^ 
< BPF < 
* 
r* BPF <
D 
discriminator
L 
LNA
A
HPA - power amplifier
BPF - bandpass filter
LNA - low noise amplifier
». - active/sleep mode
Figure 13.9 Block diagram of a typical DECT handset
In the transmit part the analog voice signal is converted to a digital form in a 13-bit
linear A/D converter operating at the frequency of 8 kHz. Next, digital voice samples
are encoded using an ADPCM encoder (see Chapter 1). This process results in the data
stream of 32 kbit/s. The data bits are packed into 320-bit B-fields of the DECT bursts
in the packet assembler block. The bursts are supplemented with the signaling and
control messages carried in the A-field. The bursts formed in this way are transferred
to the transmit RF part. The binary data stream is shaped by the Gaussian filter and
controls the frequency modulator. In consequence, a GSMK signal is generated which
is shifted to the final frequency range of 1880–1900 MHz. This signal is amplified and
sent through the circulator or the active switch to the antenna.

316 
DIGITAL CORDLESS TELEPHONY
The signal received by the antenna is directed to the receive section where it is filtered
and then amplified in a low noise amplifier. Subsequently, it is down-converted to the
first intermediate frequency, it is filtered and converted to the second intermediate
frequency. The received signal is then processed in a noncoherent demodulator, mostly
in a frequency discriminator.3 The recovered TDMA burst is processed in a logical
circuit, in which signaling and control signals, and the 320-bit block representing speech
signal are extracted. The obtained signal is given to the ADPCM decoder, and after
conversion to the analog form, it is sent to the handset speaker.
Transmit and receive sections are supervised by the controller which manages trans-
mission protocols, signaling, controling the RF part and controling the user interface -
the keypad, display and beeper. Let us note that there are signals which activate and
deactivate transmitter and receiver blocks, control the transmitted power level and se-
lect the synthesized carrier frequency. Controling the sleep mode of particular handset
blocks is an important issue with respect to the length of the time interval between
subsequent battery loadings.
13.3 
PERSONAL ACCESS COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM (PACS)
The PACS (Personal Access Communications System) is a counterpart of DECT in
America. The PACS standards are mostly based on the Bell Communcations Research
wireless communications system (WACS). There are three versions of PACS:
• the version denoted mostly as PACS, which operates in a FDD mode in the
licensed Personal Communications System (PCS) bands 1850–1910 and 1930-
1990 MHz,
• the version known as PACS-UB, which operates in a TDD mode in the unlicensed
band 1910–1930 MHz in the same way as the PACS system for the licensed band,
• the PACS-WUPE (Wireless User Premises Equipment) based on the Japanese
PHS system (see the next paragraph).
The basic system parameters were listed in Table 13.1. PACS has similar advantages
as DECT. It features small, inexpensive base stations (RP - Radio Ports) with a small
coverage area, low-DSP-complexity and low-power small mobile handsets, the capability
to provide telecommunication network access whose quality, privacy and reliability are
the same as in wireline access. PACS has been optimized for services provided in indoor
environment, and high density traffic environments. As a result, it is a cost-effective
solution in high traffic areas. The simplicity of the applied radio protocol allows for
easy integration of the PACS unit with any celullar mobile station used in America,
such as AMPS, IS-95, IS-136 or PCS 1900.
Figure 13.10 presents a simplified PACS architecture. The PACS handsets (Sub-
scriber Units - SU) communicate with the base stations called Radio Ports (RP) in the
3It is not the only demodulation method applicable in DECT; however, it is the least expensive one.

PERSONAL ACCESS COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM (PACS) 
317
A-interface 
P-interface
* RP
T ;
RP
» 
-
RP
C-interface
RPCU
Telcom
switch
or PABX
^sw
t
AM 
I > HLR/
VLR
SS?
N-interface
SS7
Switched
network
-PSTN
-ISDN
- Cellular
-PCS
Figure 13.10 Simplified PACS architecture; RP — Radio Port, RPCU — Radio Port Control Unit,
AM - Access Manager
TDMA/ FDD mode. RPs are connected to Radio Port Control Units (RPCUs). The
link between an RP and RPCU is realized using a primary level of PCM hierarchy (T1
in America at the rate of 1.544 Mbit/s or El in the countries in which PCM-30/32 is
applied), or a High Speed Digital Subscriber Line (HDSL). The radio ports which op-
erate basically as radio modems are powered from the local exchange company supply
voltage through HDSL. This way the need of a local power supply is eliminated. The
radio ports (RPs) and PACS handsets (SUs) have been designed to be as simple as
possible to decrease power consumption, among others. The peak transmit power of a
PACS handset is 200 mW, whereas the average power is 25 mW. Most of the electron-
ics and intelligence is contained in RPCUs. The Access Manager (AM) is a unit which
performs network-related tasks such as: searching the remote databases due to visiting
users, assisting at the connection set-up and call delivery, coordinating link transfer
between different RPCUs in case of handover and management of the radio ports. The
access manager can be a stand-alone unit, it can be attached to the RPCU or it can be
associated with some other network elements.
The PACS radio transmission is organized in 2.5-ms frames consisting of 8 time slots
(see Figure 13.11). The fifth slot of each frame is used by a System Broadcast Channel
(SBC) in which the system information is transmitted at the rate of 16 kbit/s. On
the physical SBC three logical channels are realized: the Alerting Channel (AC) used
to alert the PACS handsets to incoming calls; the System Information Channel (SIC)
applied to broadcast system information (identities, timers, protocol constants) and the
Priority Request Channel (PRC) used by handsets to request emergency calls.
A single time slot has a duration of 120 bits so the data rate is 384 kbit/s. Out of 120
bits, 80 bits carry user information in the form of Fast Channel (FC). The remaining
40 overhead bits of the downlink burst are used for the following purposes:
• 14 bits of a synchronization pattern,
10 bits of a Slow Channel (SC) applied for an additional synchronization pattern,
indication of word errors, signaling messages or subscriber data,

318 
DIGITAL CORDLESS TELEPHONY
1 frame = 2.5 ms
Tin 
2! 73 
'4MT
Downlink 
SBC
__ 
.__.. 
_....__. 
^
Sync SC 
Information (FC) 
CRC
control
1 frame = 2.5 ms
•4 ------------- - 
>
01 
" 2 1 3 ] 4 Ff]6 
' 7 '
SBC
Uplink
12 ~2T"TO 
80 
15 1
Guard DC SC 
Information (FC) 
CRC •+ 
Reserved
Figure 13.11 Downlink and uplink PACS frame structure (SBC - System Broadcast Channel)
• 15 CRC bits for error detection,
• 1 bit for power control of a handset.
Similarly, the burst in the uplink is organized in the following way:
• 12 bits of guard time,
• 2 bits needed for a reference symbol in differential encoding of 7T/4-QPSK modu-
lation used in PACS,
• 10 bits of a slow channel,
• 80 bits of user pay load,
• 15 CRC bits,
• 1 bit for future applications (reserved).
Let us note that the number of 80 bits per frame results in the data rate of 32 kbit/s
for a single user. It is a sufficient data rate to realize 32 kbit/s ADPCM speech coding.
The PACS system also provides subrate channels at the rates of 16 and 8 kbit/s. Two
or more slots in a frame can also be aggregated to give throughputs higher than 32
kbit/s.
An interesting feature of PACS transmission is the diversity used both in handsets and
base stations (radio ports). At the handset (SU) preselection diversity is applied. The
handset performs diversity measurements which are possible due to continuous downlink
transmission. As a result, prior to an incoming burst, it can choose the antenna which
ensures higher performance. In the uplink, the base station full selection dual-receiver
selection diversity is applied. Due to it the base station selects the signal from that

PERSONAL HANDYPHONE SYSTEM (PHS) 
319
receiver which gives a higher quality signal. Additionally, switched transmitter diversity
is also applied in the handset and in the radio port. Both units inform each other if the
previous burst contained any errors. If the errors have occurred, the transmitter selects
the other diversity antenna for sending the next burst.
Besides the physical layer, the PACS standard defines a series of functions performed
by the system which are necessary to realize the radio access and network functions.
The first group of functions is associated with the radio link maintenance and asso-
ciated measurements. In order to keep the link quality during a call, the power control
of the handsets and appropriate measurements are performed. Besides the radio signal
strength, the SIR is estimated and the occurrence of bit errors in a slot is monitored.
On the basis of these measurements several kinds of handover, called Automatic Link
Transfer (ALT) in PACS, can be applied. The automatic link transfer can take place
within the same frame by selecting a new time slot, or a new base station (RP). Depend-
ing on the unit which supervises the current RP and a new RP, the handover procedure
can be more or less complicated. The simplest procedure is the link transfer between
RPs managed by the same RPCU. The transfer between two RPs which belong to two
different RPCUs and access managers is the most complicated procedure.
Another function which has to be performed by the system is associated with mobility
management. After power on or after moving from one registration area into another,
the handset registers with the visited location register (VLR). The VLR informs the
user's HLR about his/her current locations. De-registration of the user can take two
forms. In the first one, the handset is de-registered from the VLR if it has not registered
again within a determined time period. The second form relies on periodical sending
a polling message to the handset. The latter has to answer within the predefined time
period, otherwise it is de-registered.
Other functions performed in PACS are associated with user authentication and
enciphering data over the radio link. Service functions supporting call origination from
the handsets, call delivery to them and some supplemental services are also realized in
PACS.
PACS frequency planning is performed for base stations (radio ports) automatically
without manual frequency planning. The applied automatic frequency assignment is
called Quasi-Static Autonomous Frequency Assignment (QSAFA). This procedure is
performed within the radio port control unit (RPCU) which manages a number of radio
ports. The procedure is iterative and relies on measurements made by transceivers in
the radio ports [12].
13.4 
PERSONAL HANDYPHONE SYSTEM (PHS)
Personal Handyphone System (PHS) is the Japanese counterpart of DECT and PACS.
Its basic parameters are presented in Table 13.1. The applications of PHS are similar
to those of DECT, CT2 and PACS. Figure 13.12 presents different PHS configurations
for home, office and public systems. Note that PHS is connected to the ISDN network:
however, completely stand-alone PHS networks are also possible. The PHS system
offers voice transmission with ADPCM 32 kbit/s coding, group 3 fax at 2.4-4.8 kbit/s

320 
DIGITAL CORDLESS TELEPHONY
and duplex modem transmission at 2.4 to 9.6 kbit/s. Additionally, there exists the
capability of data transmission at 32 and 64 kbit/s.
Home
Um-interface
_ 
BR-interface
ISDN
* 
exchange
Office 
* 
~ 
CS 
PABX
PR-interface
— * 
* Vo 
ISDN
Public 
J 
Co 
exchange
(for PHS)
l-interface 
A
Figure 13.12 PHS applications (CS - Cell Station, PS - Personal Station, US - User Station, BR
- basic rate, PR - primary rate, I - CS-to-digital network interface for PHS)
The allocated spectrum (1895–1918.1 MHz) is partitioned into 77 frequency channels,
each of width equal to 300 kHz. Out of 77 frequencies, 40 frequencies are allocated
to public services, whereas the remaining 37 carriers are devoted to home and office
applications. The digital transmission is organized in the TDMA/TDD mode. Four
duplex channels are carried in one frame. The first four slots are devoted to downlink
transmission, whereas the remaining slots are used for uplink transmission. Figure 13.13
presents the frame organization together with the contents of the frame for traffic and
control channels.
1 TDMA frame = 5 ms
><, 
PS>CS 
*
5
6
7
Communication physical slot
4 ~ 2 ~ 6 1 6 
4 
t6 
160 
16 
16
RSSPR u,2!*f Cl SACCH 
Information 
CRC Guard
Control physical slot
4! 2
RISS
62
PR
32
Unique
word
4
Cl
42or70 
62or34
Header 
Information
16
CRC
! 16
! Guard
240 bits = 625 us
figure 13.13 PHS time slot and frame formats

PERSONAL HANDYPHONE SYSTEM (PHS) 
321
The slot duration is equivalent to 240 bits. Each slot starts with 4-bit ramp time
(R) in which the handset (Personal Station - PS) or the base station (Cell Station -
CS) switches on its transmitter. Next comes a 2-bit start symbol (SS) which serves
as a reference symbol for the 7T/4-DQPSK demodulation. The preamble located in
the next field is used for updating the slot synchronization. The unique word is a
binary sequence known in advance, different for down- and uplink and control and
communication physical slots. It is used to detect appropriate channels and to help,
together with the CRC block, in error detection. The CI (Channel Identifier) field
contains information on the type of the logical channel transmitted within the slot.
The information field carries the user data sequence. In the case of control physical
bursts this field is preceded by the header which contains the addresses of CS or CS
and PS stations. The burst is ended with 16 CRC bits. The rest of the time slot is a
guard time which lasts for 16 bits.
*• BCCH (Broadcast Control Channel)
Common 
•* PCH (pa9in9 Channel)
* 
CCH 
i v'u"""u" -*4-* CCCH (Common Control Channel) 
>
(Control Channels) 
> SCCH (Signaling Control Channel)
* UPCH (User Packet Channel)
V 
InHiwiHnal 
> SACCH (SlOW ACCH)
irramauai 
>. ACCH (Associated Control Channel) *
;> FACCH (Fast ACCH)
TCH
(Traffic Channel)
Figure 13.14 PHS logical channel structure
A number of different logical channels have been introduced in PHS. Their structure
is shown in Figure 13.14. They are:
• Traffic Channel (TCH) — a bidirectional, point-to-point channel serving for trans-
fer of user information,
• Broadcast Control Channel (BCCH) - a downlink channel broadcasting control
information from CS carrying channel structure, system information and system
restrictions,
• Common Control Channel (CCCH) - a control channel used for transmission of
control information necessary for call set-up, divided into:
— Paging Channel (PCH) — a downlink channel serving for sending paging
information for PSs in the cells belonging to the same paging area,
— Signaling Control Channel (SCCH) - a bidirectional, point-to-point channel
transmitting information necessary for call connection,
• User Packet Channel (UPCH) - a bidirectional, point-to-multipoint channel used
for control information and packet data (such as SMS if the PS does not have a
call in progress),

322 
DIGITAL CORDLESS TELEPHONY
• Associated Control Channel (ACCH) - a bidirectional channel, asociated with the
TCH, which carries control information and packet data used for call connection;
divided into slow (SACCH) and fast (FACCH) channels.
Sending broadcast and control information is organized in the form of the so-called
downlink Logical Control Channel (LCCH) which has a superframe structure. In each
nth frame the cell station (CS) transmits an LCCH slot. The superframe consists of
m LCCH slots. Within the superframe the BCCH, PCH, SCCH and optionally UPCH
channels are transmitted. The broadcast control channel is sent in the first LCCH
slot of the superframe. For the uplink no superframe structure is determined. The
personal stations start their transmission from sending SCCH slot to the cell station in
accordance to the slotted Aloha principle.
As we have mentioned, the PHS system co-operates with digital networks (see
Figure 13.12). This allows the user to take advantage of their signaling capabilities
in several functions performed by the network which are related to user mobility, such
as maintaining location information for all personal stations operating in the system,
registration, authentication (supplementary service) and incoming call delivery.
Due to limited space, the description of CT2, DECT, PACS and PHS is very superficial.
Much more information on DECT and PHS can be found in [11]. The highly motivated
reader is advised to study the standards describing the PACS and PHS systems, e.g.
[13], [14] and [15].
REFERENCES
1. I-ETS 300 131, Radio Equipment and Systems (RES); Common air interface spec-
ification to be used for interworking between cordless telephone apparatus in the
frequency band 864.1 MHz to 868.1 MHz including public access services, November
1994, Second Edition
2. R. Pandya, Mobile and Personal Communication Systems and Services, IEEE Press,
New York, 2000
3. EN 300 175–1, Digital Enhanced Cordless Telecommunications (DECT); Common
Interface (CI); Part 1: Overview, V.l.4.2, June 1999
4. EN 300 175–2, Digital Enhanced Cordless Telecommunications (DECT); Common
Interface (CI); Part 2: Physical Layer, V.l.4.2, June 1999
5. EN 300 175–3, Digital Enhanced Cordless Telecommunications (DECT); Common
Interface (CI); Part 3: Medium Access Control (MAC) Layer, V.l.4.2, June 1999
6. EN 300 175–4, Digital Enhanced Cordless Telecommunications (DECT); Common
Interface (CI); Part 4: Data Link Control (DLC) Layer, V.l.4.2. June 1999

REFERENCES 
323
7. EN 300 175-5, Digital Enhanced Cordless Telecommunications (DECT); Common
Interface (CI); Part 5: Network (NKW) Layer, V.I.4.2, June 1999
8. V. Werbus, A. Veloso, A. Villanueva, "DECT — Cordless Functionality in New
Generation Alcatel PABXs", Electrical Communication, 2nd Quarter 1993, pp. 51-
57
9. K. David, T. Benkner, Digitale Mobilfunksysteme, B. G. Teubner, Stuttgart, 1996
10. S. Ghaheri Niri, R. Tafazolli, B. G. Evans, "Wide Area Mobility for DECT", Proc.
of GLOBECOM'96, pp. 1119-1125
11. B. H. Walke, Mobile Radio Networks: Networking and Protocols, John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd., Chichester, 1999
12. A. R. Noerpel, Y.-B. Lin, H. Sherry, PACS: Personal Access Communications Sys-
tem - A Tutorial, IEEE Personal Communications, June 1996, pp. 32-43
13. ANSI J-STD 014, Personal Access Communication Systems Air Interface Standard,
New York, 1998
14. ANSI J-STD 014 supplement B, Personal Access Communication System Unlicensed
(version B), New York, 1998
15. Research and Development Center for Radio Systems, Personal Handyphone Sys-
tem, RCR Standard, version 1, RCR STD 28, Tokyo, December 1993

This page intentionally left blank

14.1 
INTRODUCTION
Deployment and exploitation of many new mobile communication systems, in particular
digital systems, in which call privacy and security are technically feasible, have shown
new possibilities of implementation of a local loop. Local loop1 is the most expensive
part of a public telephone network. In order to improve the access to telecommunication
services, many countries, including some East European and developing countries, need
to invest heavily in the telecommunication infrastructure. Connecting the subscribers
with a fixed network, although not difficult from the engineering point of view, requires
large funds and is time-consuming. Development of telecommunication infrastructure
in low-populated areas can be economically unreasonable. In such areas a telecommu-
nication operator cannot expect much profit because the traffic is very low.
Wireless Local Loop (WLL) technology [1], [2], [3] which has been introduced in
recent years, solves a lot of problems associated with fast and inexpensive access to the
telecommunication network. Because of a wireless character of communication, WLL
does not incur large labor costs and time-consuming investments. The time needed for
installment of a wireless local loop is very short. The telecommunication network can
be quickly deployed in the desired area, even if the destination network will be wireline
or if the network is only temporarily needed. The above advantages are particularly
important in rural areas. Falling prices of the radio equipment resulting from the
economy of scale in cellular systems give an additional impulse for the development of
the WLL technologies.
1In a traditional PSTN a local loop (subscriber loop) is a pair of copper wires connecting a subscriber
phone with a switching center.
325
14
Wireless local loops

326 
WIRELESS LOCAL LOOPS
The WLL technologies make the competition on the telecommunication market much
easier. In many countries the telecommunication network is state-owned or owned by
a single company. A local loop is the most difficult barrier in the way of breaking the
monopoly of a telecommunication operator. Wireless local loop technologies are an
important tool in demonopolizing the telecommunication market.
In this chapter we will overview several WLL technologies based on the PMP (Point-
to-Multipoint) technique, cellular radio and cordless telephony. In this respect we will
show new applications of the systems already described before.
14.2 
PMP SYSTEMS
The PMP systems are not an example of mobile communication systems applied in
the local loop implementation; however, we will describe them for completeness of the
topic.
The PMP systems have been known for many years. Their basic feature is the
transmission of digitized speech using PCM 64 kbit/s or ADPCM 32 kbit/s coding.
Let us consider a typical architecture of such a system using ALCATEL 9800 shown in
Figure 14.1 as an example [4].
2 Mbit/s, V5.2
two-wire link
S12/E10 
p 
DCW 
RSN
Exchange ____..___. XBS 
4
wireline connections
PCTKI 
RSC
Kb IN 
RST
RST
WBT
WBT
l
i r-
WBT 
'
wireless connections
Figure 14.1 PMP system architecture on the example of Alcatel 9800
The system is connected with the PSTN through a central station (XBS). The central
station is connected with the central radio station (RSC), which transmits and receives
signals in the TDM A mode from the radio end stations (RST) or radio relay stations
(RSN). If directional antennas are applied, the distance between line-of-sight antennas
of the end station and the central station cannot be longer than 50 km. The relay
stations are used if the distance between the central station and the end station exceeds
this value or there are terrain obstacles which do not allow for mutual visibility in a
single hop. The signals received by the end station are distributed to the subscribers

PMP SYSTEMS 
327
using copper local loops with standard telephone sets connected to them. ALCATEL
9800 also supports wireless local loop connections applying the DECT technology. The
length of a wireless local loop cannot exceed 5 km.
Generally, the PMP systems ensure the links with the PSTN with the quality close to
that achieved in a fixed network. Let us note that thanks to PCM or ADPCM coding of
the transmitted signal, binary signals are regenerated in the relay stations which operate
in the same way to the repeaters applied in PCM networks. This way the quality
deterioration associated with the number of hops is avoided. Thanks to a standard
PCM or ADPCM coding of an acoustic signal, voiceband modems can be applied as
in a conventional telephone channel. Binary streams representing PCM or ADPCM
samples are transmitted without error protection, although the latter can be applied.
Thanks to the digital form of a transmitted signal, it cannot be easily eavesdropped
using typical analog equipment, as occurs in analog cellular radio. Due to coding and
the frame structure which are compatible with PCM systems, it is possible to create
the basic ISDN access2 (2B+D) link or to set separate data transmission channels.
Thanks to the PCM time structure and the desired compatibility with a fixed network,
typical PMP systems ensure 30 or 60 PCM 64 kbit/s links. Thus, the PMP system
with 30 PCM links is equivalent to 2.048 Mbit/s PCM 30/32 system. Assuming the
probability of blocking equal to 0.01 and the mean intensity of traffic generated by a
single subscriber equal to 0.05 Erl, the system can serve about 400 subscribers.
Transmission in the PMP systems is organized in packets. In the downlink packets
are transferred in the TDMA mode. In the opposite direction the end stations transmit
packets in a time division multiplex mode on a different carrier frequency. The length of
packets sent by a given end station depends on the number of the subscribers connected
to it and on the current traffic generated by them. Due to the time division multiplex
mode, the end stations have to be synchronized. Very often the access method applied
in the channel is Demand Assigned Multiple Access (DAMA).
The PMP systems use frequency ranges dedicated to the fixed access. They are
usually allocated by the national institutions responsible for frequency management.
Typically, the assigned bandwidth for a single link is about 2 MHz in each direction
when the frequency division duplex method is applied. However, with respect to rural
wireless local loops a frequency band around 500 MHz should be allocated to PMP
systems. In the 1-3 GHz band the following frequency ranges are recommended by [5]:
• 1.350 1.375 GHz band paired with 1.492–1.517 GHz band for low capacity Point-
to-Point and Point-to-Multipoint systems,
• 1.375-1.400 GHz band paired with 1.427-1.452 GHz band for low capacity PP
and PMP systems,
• 2.025–2.110 GHz band paired with 2.200-2.290 GHz band for traditional multi-
channel, multi-hop radio relay systems and for modern access radio applications,
2In the basic ISDN access a subscriber uses two 64kbit/s duplex channels (S-channels) for his/her
applications and one 16 kbit/s duplex control channel (D-channel). This results in a standard 144
kbit/s transmission.

328 
WIRELESS LOCAL LOOPS
• 2.520–2.593 GHz band paired with 2.597-2.670 GHz band for PP and PMP sys-
tems for single and multi-hop applications.
There is an opinion that the PMP systems do not use the allocated spectrum very
efficiently. Another drawback is high cost of directional antennas and the necessity to
ensure that they are mutually visible.
14.3 
APPLICATION OF CELLULAR TECHNOLOGY IN WLL
Massive production of cellular transmission equipment caused its price reduction. There-
fore, it makes the cellular technology attractive for application in wireless local loops.
There are examples of application of known cellular telephony standards such as NMT
450, TAGS, AMPS, GSM and IS-95 in the design of WLL.
Application of the cellular technology in the WLL results in the simplification of the
system design as compared with cellular telephony, because subscribers do not move.
Handover and roaming in another network do not occur, so the network layer of the
system is substantially simplified. However, the end station (equivalent to the mobile
station in cellular telephony) has to be equipped with a standard interface which allows
connection of a regular telephone set to it. The quality of the WLL and the offered
services strongly depend on the applied technology. Generally, cellular systems used in
the implementation of the WLL are particularly useful for realization of simple telephone
services in large low-populated areas. The reason for that is a large radius of a cell (up
to a few tens of kilometers) and limited cell capacity.
The WLL systems based on the analog cellular technology suffer from all limitations
which occur in the mobile version of that technology. The quality of the voice signal
is lower than in a conventional wireline telephony and it further decreases when the
distance between the base station and the end station gets closer to the cell range
limit. The voice signal remains practically unprotected. Call privacy can be ensured
using an expensive analog vocoder. Data and Group III fax transmission in a voice
channel are possible at the rate up to 4.8 kbit/s. Despite the drawbacks and limitations,
however, several system are offered for low-populated areas. It is worth noting that the
application of analog cellular technology in WLL allows further utilization of the already
existing equipment and to get some investment return despite the fact that most of the
users have already moved to much more modern digital systems.
It is possible to use GSM technology in WLL implementation. The above mentioned
simplifications of a cellular system remain valid for GSM as well; however, the service
offer is broader and link security is much higher than in analog systems. Application of
GSM in WLL will be attractive if the tariffing of stationary calls is set on the competitive
level as compared with the calls to/from mobile users.
The IS-95 system which was described in Chapter 11 has been modified for appli-
cation in WLL as well. The WLL systems based on the IS-95 technology have been
offered by Qualcomm (QCTel) and Motorola. The structure of such systems does not
differ too much from IS-95. The QCTel system consists of the base station controller,
base stations and the subscriber units. The subscriber units are telephone sets with
an integrated radio part, stations equipped with the interface allowing connection of a

APPLICATION OF CELLULAR TECHNOLOGY IN WLL
329
standard telephone set to them, and coin-operated telephones. The speech signal is en-
coded using QCELP technique resulting in the 13.2 kbit/s data stream in each channel.
Supplementary services such as Group III fax transmission and data transmission with
the rate up to 14.4 kbit/s are also offered.
The base stations apply directional antennas and divide the covered area into sectors.
The number of sectors is not higher than nine. In each sector up to 45 calls can be
realized at the same time. Assuming the mean traffic intensity per subscriber equal to
0.1 Erl, the probability of blocking equal to 0.01 and setting the upper value of traffic
intensity in a sector on the level of 35.6 Erl, 334 subscribers can be served in one sector.
This results in 2700 subscribers who can be served in the coverage area of a single base
station. The cell radius can reach up to 50 km.
Besides the WLL systems directly based on the IS-95 technology, there are systems
using CDMA technique which are specially designed for realization of a WLL. Air Loop
of Lucent Technologies [6] is the example of such a system. Figure 14.2 presents the
architecture of the Air Loop system.
Telephone
exchange
CATU
2 Mbit/s
G.703
OMC
CTRU
CTRU
CDMA
I 
CDMA
CTRU
CDMA
Figure 14.2 Air Loop system architecture
The telephone exchange is connected to the Central Access and Transcoding Unit
(CATU). The CATU ensures analog or digital interface with the telephone exchange,
it controls the call set-up, realizes data encryption and speech coding and processes
data for control and monitoring purposes. It also realizes the interface with a set of
Central Transmitter/Receiver Units (CTRUs) - the equivalents of base stations. One
of the most important functions performed by CATU is speech transcoding from the
PCM 64 kbit/s format to the ADPCM 32 kbit/s or LD-CELP3 16 kbit/s formats. The
links between CATU and CTRUs can be realized in a wireline or wireless technique.
The CTRU transmits and receives signals to/from the end stations in the CDMA
mode. The range of CTRU is up to 6 km without visibility of end stations and can
3LD-CELP is the acronym of Low Delay Code Excited Linear Prediction.

330 
WIRELESS LOCAL LOOPS
reach up to 15 km for line-of-sight transmission. The subscribers can also be connected
to CTRU using a wireline link.
The end station in the Air Loop system is called Network Interface Unit (NIU) and
consists of the Subscriber Transmit/Receive Unit (STRU) and Intelligent Telephone
Socket (ITS). The STRU is integrated with the transmit/receive antenna. It is typically
installed outdoors and connected to the ITS placed indoors. The ITS supports a basic
rate ISDN (BRI) access (2B+D) or the access to two analog lines. There is a version
of ITS which allows for the connection of eight analog lines. The configuration of the
subscriber link in the form of an analog or ISDN link is controlled by software by the
OMC. The analog interface can be connected to a standard telephone set, a Group III
fax machine, a telephone modem with the data rate up to 19.2 kbit/s or with a public
telephone set.
The Air Loop system operates using the CDMA principle in the frequency range
between 3.6 and 4.0 GHz. The frequency interval between uplink and downlink is equal
to 110 MHz. In a 10 MHz channel (uplink or downlink) typically 24 ISDN (2B+D)
channels are placed. In another configuration one 80 kbit/s link and sixty 32 kbit/s
links or one hundred and twenty 16 kbit/s links are located in a 10 MHz channel.
Assuming the mean traffic intensity per subscriber equal to 0.05 Erl, the probability
of blocking equal to 0.01, and the omnidirectional base station antenna, the base station
can serve up to 4060 subscribers. On the basis of the above description we can conclude
that the Air Loop system is aimed at ensuring the ISDN or PSTN network access in
medium-sized and medium-populated areas. A relatively large bandwidth requirement
is a certain drawback of the Air Loop system. On the other hand, the system ensures
call privacy thanks to applying speech coding and the spread spectrum technique.
The systems presented so far, which are based on cellular technology or its derivative,
have a relatively large range and a limited capacity. It is reasonable to use cellular
technology to implement WLLs in systems which are losing subscribers and in the cells
whose capacity is too big for the real needs.
14.4 
CORDLESS TELEPHONY IN THE REALIZATION OF WLL
Cordless telephony standards have been also applied in the realization of wireless local
loops. There are solutions using CT2, DECT and PACS as the basis of the wireless
local loop system. We will concentrate on the application of the DECT standard.
As we know, the DECT system has been optimized for urban and suburban envi-
ronments with high traffic density [7]. The nominal range of the DECT base station
is around a few hundred meters if the omnidirectional antenna is applied and the sub-
scribers can move. However, if the end stations are stationary and directional antennas
are used, the range of DECT base stations can be extended to 5 km. The range is
limited by the structure of the TDMA frame and the propagation time which has to
be contained in the guard time of a DECT burst, which is equivalent to the duration
of 60 bits [8]. In the case of terrain obstacles or if the range extension is necessary, the
DECT Wireless Repeater Station (WRS) [9] can be applied. In this manner the range
is further extended by 5 km.

CORDLESS TELEPHONY IN THE REALIZATION OF WLL 
331
DAN
RNC
PSTN
exchange 
WMf: 
_ot 
J 
FA(J
l%ijI
sit1 
__^l_
(FAU
RSNM
DAN
Network management 
, 
<£>
system 
Mi, 
'^A 
* FAU
.-Hi 
^
(i| | K
WRSl
DAN
WRS 
I FAU
WRS
WRS
Figure 14.3 Architecture of the wireless loop system based on the DECT standard
Figure 14.3 presents the architecture of the WLL system based on the DECT stan-
dard. The Radio Network Controller (RNC) is connected with the set of base stations
DANs (DECT Access Nodes) using 2 Mbit/s link realized by the radio relay systems or
by wired connection. The DANs contain a set of directional antennas usually mounted
in such a way that joint omnidirectional coverage is obtained. Subscribers are equipped
with the Fixed Access Units (FAUs), which allow for connection of one or several tele-
phone lines and which communicate with the base station (DAN) through a directional
antenna.
The application of the WRS has been standardized by ETSI [9]. The WRSs can be
applied in different ways. If several directional antennas are applied, they can be used
to ensure coverage in the area which otherwise would not be accessible for the system.
The WRS can also be equipped with a directional antenna for the communication with
the base station (DAN) and the omnidirectional antenna for the communication with
the end stations (FAUs) establishing a picocell environment. In a typical application
the WRS is used with two directional antennas to extend the range of the system.
Owing to the general features of the DECT, the wireless local loops based on this
standard are a particularly economic solution, if the WLLs are deployed in small, densely
populated areas in which average or high traffic intensity is expected.
Our short survey of wireless local loop technologies shows that the WLL has become an
attractive means of fast and economic realization of basic subscriber services in rural
areas, in which the telecommunication infrastructure is poor or requires high investment

332 
WIRELESS LOCAL LOOPS
costs, or in a densely populated urban environment in which modification of the existing
telecommunication infrastructure can also be very expensive. The WLL technologies
are also a tool of demonopolization of the telecommunication market. The selection of
the appropriate WLL technology depends on many factors, in particular on the size of
the area of the WLL system deployment, the expected density of the telecommunication
traffic and the expected demand for more sophisticated services than a standard speech
transmission.
REFERENCES
1. W. Webb, Introduction to Wireless Local Loop, Artech House Publishers, Boston,
1998
2. D. C. Cox, "Wireless Loops: What Are They?", International Journal of Wireless
Information Networks, Vol. 3, No. 3, 1996, pp. 125–138
3. W. C. Y. Lee, "Spectrum and Technology of a Wireless Local Loop System", IEEE
Personal Communications, February 1998, pp. 49–54
4. A. Adolski, "Fast and Inexpensive - ALCATEL 9800" (in Polish), TELECOM Fo-
rum, Special Edition, December 1996, pp. 8–9
5. ERC/Recommendation T/R 13–01, Preferred channel arrangements for digital ter-
restrial fixed systems operating in the range 1-3 GHz, Montreux, 1993
6. E. Juszkiewicz, "AT&T Air Loop - A High Capacity Access System", (in Polish).
Przeglad Telekomunikacyjny, No. 8, 1995
7. S. Kandiyoor, P. van de Berg, S. Blomstergren, "DECT: Meeting Needs and Cre-
ating Opportunities for Public Network Operators", Proc. of International Confer-
ence on Personal Wireless Communications, New Delhi, February 1996, pp. 28–32
8. J. Henry, M. H. Kori, "DECT Based Rural Radio Local Loop for Developing Coun-
tries" , Proc. of International Conference on Personal Wireless Communications.
New Delhi, February 1996, pp. 44–46
9. ETS 300 700, Radio Equipment and Systems (RES); Digital European Cordless
Telecommunications (DECT); Wireless Relay Station (WRS), March 1997

15
With the collaboration of Rafal Krenz, Hanna Bogucka and Wojciech Lasecki
15.1 
INTRODUCTION
This chapter is devoted to personal satellite communications. This is a relatively new
type of mobile communications. We will begin by placing personal communication sys-
tems against the background of land mobile communication systems. Then we will
classify the types of satellite communications. The main part of the chapter is devoted
to the description of the most important personal satellite communication systems. The
author is aware of the unstable situation in the area of personal satellite communica-
tions, which has a serious impact on the final configuration of the systems and the
actuality of their description in this book.
Considerations on future communication systems have led to the concept of Univer-
sal Personal Telecommunications (UPT). According to this concept, several communi-
cation networks such as fixed networks, land mobile and mobile satellite networks will
cooperate with each other, creating a common integrated system which supports a wide
selection of personal services. Each user is recognized by a single subscriber number
independent of the network which he/she currently uses. Personal satellite communi-
cation systems play an important role in the UPT concept. The aim of these systems
is to ensure the access to the telecommunication network anywhere on the earth, in
particular in these places which are not covered by any other communication network
such as PSTN or land mobile communication networks.
333

334 
SATELLITE MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Table 15.1 First generation mobile satellite systems (DL - downlink, UL - uplink, APR - Auto-
matic Positioning Reporting
Organization
INMARSAT
INMARSAT
INMARSAT
INMARSAT
INMARSAT
INMARSAT
Qualcomm
ALCATEL
Qualcomm
Standard
(introduction)
A (1982)
B (1993)
C (1991)
M (1992/93)
Aero (1992)
AERO-C
AERO-L
AERO-H
D (1995)
OmniTracs
(1989)
EutelTracs
(1991)
Services
(coverage area)
speech trans., telex
fax, data trans,
(world)
speech trans., telex
fax, data (X.25)
telex and data trans,
store & forward
APR (world)
speech trans.,
fax, data trans,
(world)
speech trans.,
fax, data (world)
data trans.,
store & forward
two-direct, data
exchange
data trans., fax (G.3),
speech trans.
paging
two-way short mess.,
APR (North Am.)
two-way short mess.,
APR (Europe)
Transmision
rate (bit/s)
analog FM,
up to 9.6 kbit/s
data transfer from
term, up to 64 kbit/s
16 kbit/s (speech)
24 kbit/s (data)
600 bit/s
6.4 kbit/s (speech)
up to 4.8 kbit/s
600 bit/s
600 bit/s
10.5 / 4.8 kbit/s
N.A.
5-15 kbit/s (DL)
55–165 kbit/s (UL)
5–15 kbit/s (DL)
55–165 kbit/s (UL)
Applications
ships, oil
platforms,
transportable
terminals
gradual repl. of
INMARSAT A
small vessels,
yachts, vehicles
briefcase
terminals,
small boats
commercial
and private
airplanes
messaging,
remote control
long-haul
transportation
long-haul
transportation
15.2 FIRST AND SECOND GENERATION OF MOBILE COMMUNICATION
NETWORKS
The main task of the first and second generation mobile satellite systems [2], [25],
[14] was to guarantee communication with ships and trucks travelling on long distance
routes. The non-military and commercial service market has been dominated by IN-
MARSAT (International Maritime Telecommunication Satellite Organization). The
subsequent versions (A, B, C, M and aeronautical) of INMARSAT systems are pre-
sented in the first five rows in Table 15.1 [2].

PERSONAL SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS 
335
As we see, the INMARSAT A, introduced in 1982, transmits voice using analog FM
modulation, supports telex, facsimile and data transmission services from any place on
the earth. The terminals are installed mainly on ships and oil platforms. INMARSAT
B, which started to operate in 1993 replaces INMARSAT A and offers the same services
in digital technique for similar groups of subscribers. The voice signals are transmitted
at the rate of 16 kbit/s.
INMARSAT C has been in operation since 1991. Its main task is world-wide data
transmission with the rates not exceeding 600 bit/s. The system offers store & forward
telex and data services and Automatic Positioning Reporting (APR). The terminals are
installed mostly on board small ships and vehicles.
The next version of the system, INMARSAT M, was introduced in 1992/93 and
features more advanced speech coding at the rate of 6.4 kbit/s and data transmission
at the rate of 2.4 kbit/s. The terminals are the size of a briefcase.
The aeronautical type of INMARSAT (1992) is devoted to communication with civil-
ian aircraft.
In the late eighties, in the USA Qualcomm Inc. started to exploit the OmniTracs
satellite system. A similar system, called EutelTracs, was introduced in cooperation
with ALCATEL in 1991 in Europe [4]. Both systems are used to transmit short messages
in uplink and downlink transmission directions and they support the APR services for
mobile terminals. Both systems use the Ku band (12/14 GHz).1
All the systems mentioned so far use geostationary satellites which hang above the
earth at the height of about 35780 km, on the equatorial orbit. The systems are
characterized by large cost of terminals and offered services. The terminals and services
are expensive, which limits the number of potential subscribers.
Second generation mobile satellite systems are characterized by substantially lower
terminal cost, further progress in digitalization of signals and lower service prices. Most
systems have limited coverage, e.g. ESA (European Space Agency - Europe) or DoCoMo
(Japan). They usually operate in the L band. They mostly offer speech transmission
and data and facsimile transmission at low rates. Like the first generation systems.
they are used by a limited number of subscribers or they are specialized for maritime
or aeronautical applications.
15.3 
PERSONAL SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS
As we have mentioned, the concept of universal personal communications assumes that
a subscriber is accessible in any place on the earth through any network under a unique
number. The personal satellite communication network is one of the networks which
allow the subscriber located in any place of the globe to access a telecommunication
network using a handheld terminal and to establish a link with at least one satellite.
Figure 15.1 presents the configuration of a satellite system in the network of wireless
telecommunication systems.
1The appendix at the end of the chapter lists the frequency ranges of particular bands.

336 
SATELLITE MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Satellite system
cell
Picocell
Figure 15.1 Location of the satellites systems among wireless systems
The systems operating in picocells (usually indoors) constitute the lowest layer of the
mobile communication hierarchy. Wireless telephony working in microcells (e.g. city
centers, airports, large supermarkets, etc.) is the next layer of the hierarchy. Classic
cellular systems operating in macrocells process the traffic of moderate density, but
allow for transmission to/from a fast moving terminal. The satellite system is superior
to all the above systems. It can be used if there is no access to other telecommunication
systems, e.g. in a sparsely populated area or if the serving system is temporarily over-
loaded. Therefore we can treat satellite systems as a supplement of cellular systems, but
not as their replacement. The capacity of satellite communication systems is naturally
much lower than the capacity of land mobile communication systems.
The handheld form of a mobile terminal implies serious consequences for the design
of a whole satellite system. The power budget of the handheld is very tight due to its
small energy source. One of the decisive factors in the commercial success of a handheld
is the length of standby time after which the battery needs to be re-loaded. Due to
health reasons a handheld kept during the connection close to the user's head cannot
radiate too much power. An additional factor which can affect the commercial success
of the system is the time delay in the transmission of human voice. A too long delay
caused mainly by long propagation time to and from the satellite creates discomfort for
the users. The length of the delay can also have a serious impact on the efficiency of
block data exchange performed with the application of the ARQ method (see Chapter
1). Long propagation delay would require very large data buffers.
The above mentioned factors allow for differentiation of several types of satellite
systems with respect to the location of their satellites. Taking into account the height
of their orbits we divide the satellite systems into the following classes [3]:
• LEO (Low Earth Orbit) are the systems using satellites on low circular orbits. The
satellites are nonstationary. Each of them is visible by the terminal antenna for a
few minutes, several times during twenty-four hours. The orbit height is between

PERSONAL SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS 
337
700 and 1500 km. Due to the low orbit radius, at least 40 satellites are necessary
to ensure full earth coverage. The number of cells seen on the earth surface and
moving due to the movement of satellites is equal to 3000 or more. The signal
delay caused by the propagation to and from the satellite is no longer than 50 ms.
The large number of cells results in a relatively large system capacity per spectrum
unit. Unfortunately, the cost of the system per area unit is high. Low delay giving
comfort in speech transmission is particularly advantageous. 
To launch LEO
satellites into the appropriate orbits, rocket systems with moderate parameters
are required; however, due to a high number of satellites, a high number of missions
is necessary to place all of them in their orbits. The construction of the systems
using LEO satellites requires a precise orbit design, which involves adjusting their
positions in time. Due to short visibility periods of LEO satellites, the handover
is relatively frequent. While the satellite travels over the horizon, its distance
from the terrestrial terminal changes in a relatively large range, which implies
providing complex automatic gain control in the satellite. The Doppler effect is
also meaningful.
• MEO (Medium Earth Orbit), also called Intermediate Circular Orbit (ICO) are
the systems with the satellites located at the height between 10000 and 15000 km
over the earth surface. Due to a higher orbit, the satellite beams cover a larger
area of the earth, so the required number of satellites is lower (between 10 and
15). The number of cells in MEO systems is about 800. Higher orbits result in
higher propagation delay equal to about 150 ms. The negative consequence of
fewer cells is the decrease of the frequency reuse if the FDMA or FDMA/TDMA
are applied, which in turn leads to lower system capacity. The lower number of
satellites implies lower system cost.
• GEO (Geostationary Earth Orbit) are the systems with geostationary satellites
located in the equatorial plane in orbit with a height of about 35780 km. Only
34 satellites are needed for the coverage of the earth up to 75° of latitude. The
propagation delay is longer than 300 ms. The number of cells depends on the
number of beams radiated by a satellite; nevertheless, their number does not
exceed 800. The capacity calculated per spectrum unit and the system cost of
the GEO systems in comparison to the LEO systems are much lower. The GEO
systems apply the well-tested space technology. The Doppler effect is negligible.
On the other hand, in order to launch the GEO systems, expensive rocket systems
are required. Due to the equatorial orbit, for the terminals located above 50° of
latitude, the elevation angle2 is so small that the signal is additionally attenuated
by the higher layers of the atmosphere and the multipath effect occurs. Due to the
orbit height, the GEO systems require high power radiation. The latter feature
means that handhelds cannot be used in the GEO systems, therefore systems are
eliminated from personal satellite communications.
Figure 15.2 illustrates the orbit location of three types of satellites considered above.
2 The elevation angle is the angle between the line of horizon and the direction line to the satellite.

338 
SATELLITE MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Figure 15.2 Several orbit constellations used in satellite mobile communication systems
Besides the division of the satellite systems with respect to their orbit height, we
can also divide them according to the size of the satellites. From that point of view we
categorize the satellite systems in the following way:
• large GEO satellites,
• large LEO/ICO satellites,
• small LEO satellites, further divided into:
— LEO minisatellites weighing 100–750 kg,
— LEO microsatellites weighing 50–100 kg.
The number of existing or planned satellite systems is quite high. In the next sections
we will concentrate on personal satellite systems and representatives of future systems
planned for multimedia and Internet access.
15.4 
SERVICES OFFERED BY PERSONAL SATELLITE SYSTEMS
The list of basic services offered by personal satellite systems is the following:
• speech transmission,
• data transmission,
• paging,
• electronic mail.

DESCRIPTION OF THE MOST IMPORTANT PERSONAL SATELLITE SYSTEMS 
339
Additional services offered by particular systems will be described when a given
system is analyzed. In order to ensure commercial success of personal satellite commu-
nication, the system should offer:
• full global coverage,
• possibility of using inexpensive handheld terminals,
• low tariffs at the system introduction and low unit cost of access to the satellite
and cellular systems,
• reliable connection to the PSTN,
• possibility of establishing direct connection between satellite system subscribers.
As we will see, not all of the planned or already introduced systems fulfill the above
requirements. Generally, this segment of the mobile communication market is not as
successful as land mobile cellular systems.
15.5 
DESCRIPTION OF THE MOST IMPORTANT PERSONAL SATELLITE
SYSTEMS
As we have already mentioned, the personal satellite market is undergoing constant
changes and the systems which have not been introduced yet can still be modified, so
the information contained below is to certain extent tentative.
15.5.1 Iridium
The Iridium system is one of two systems applying a combination of FDMA/TDMA. Its
name comes from the element Iridium. One atom of Iridium has 77 orbiting electrons.
At first, 77 satellites were to be used in the system. Later, after optimization of the
constellation resulting in cost reduction, the number of 66 satellites appeared to be
sufficient to ensure reliable communication.
The concept of Iridium [9], [13], [18], [17], [10] appeared first in 1987 and was
presented to the public by the Motorola Corporation in 1990. The companies from
many countries including Russia and China participate in the Iridium consortium. The
Iridium satellites have been placed in six orbital planes inclined at 86° with respect to
the equatorial plane. Thus, the satellites rotate almost between the geographic poles. In
each orbital plane 11 evenly spaced satellites rotate in the circular orbit at the altitude
of 780 km. The satellites located in the neighboring planes rotate in the same direction
but are shifted in phase. Figure 15.3 presents the configuration of a few satellites and
a part of their trajectories. The satellites which rotate in the first plane and the last
(sixth) plane are the exception, because they rotate in opposite directions. The angular
distance between orbital planes is equal to 31.6°, only the angular distance between the
sixth and first plane is equal to 22°. The satellite constellation was selected according
to the rule developed by Adams and Rider [ 1 ] .

340 
SATELLITE MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
X
X
X
X 
X
X
X
X
* 
X
x 
- # - 
x
X
X
X
X
X
x 
x
X
X
X
Figure 15.3 Communication between neighboring Iridium satellites [8]
Each satellite can communicate and route the traffic to two satellites from the same
orbit: the preceding one and the following one, and two satellites from each neighboring
orbits. The intersatellite links operate in the 23 GHz band and use four antennas.
Therefore at any given moment, four intersatellite connections can be maintained by a
given satellite, although there are six satellites located in its direct vicinity (see Figure
15.3).
The Iridium system was designed to perform communication with terrestrial networks
using up to 250 gateways and two network control stations. Such a system provides
sufficient redundancy to ensure reliability; however, 15 gateways are sufficient for the
system operation. Each gateway has two tracking antennas communicating in the 20/30
GHz band with the currently active satellite and with the forthcoming satellite. The
Iridium subscriber is connected with a PSTN through one of the earth gateways.
Intersatellite links allow for setting up a connection between two Iridium subscribers
without using a terrestrial network. In a connection between an Iridium terminal and a
terrestrial network subscriber, intersatellite links are used to minimize the route in the
terrestrial network. The connection "goes down" to the terrestrial network through the
gateway closest to the terrestrial subscriber. Figure 15.4 presents the general concept
of the system with intersatellite links.
As we have already mentioned, the propagation delays in the Iridium system are
relatively low. A single path delay between the satellite and a terrestrial terminal is
between 2.6 and 8.2 ms. However, the joint delay introduced by the system is much
higher, because the binary stream must be placed within the TDMA frame structure,
and bacause all signal processing operations must be performed (e.g. speech encoding
and decoding). The joint delay between the terrestrial terminal and a satellite reaches
about 90 ms and is equal to about 9 ms in each intersatellite link.
Each satellite has three phase-array antennas3 with 16 spot beams giving a total
number of 48 spot beams creating cells on the earth surface. The cell diameter is about
3 See Chapter 18 on adaptive antennas

DESCRIPTION OF THE MOST IMPORTANT PERSONAL SATELLITE SYSTEMS 
341
, 
Traffic channels
1 
on intersatellite links 
'
Signaling 
Signaling
'+• information 
+ information
Earth station + 
Earth station +•
switching system 
switching system
A
Subscriber A 
' ", 
lnt®rfe.ce *ith, 
Subscribers
Subscriber« 
terrestrial networks
Figure 15.4 General concept of the Iridium system [11]
700 km. Among 66x48 = 3168 possible cells only 2150 cells are active. This is due
to the fact that some of them are switched off in the polar areas in which the satellite
orbits get closer to each other and cell overlapping is larger. The switching of the cells
on and off requires a unified algorithm and a unified criterion. Each satellite has a
look-up table which determines the moment of switching on and off at the change of
0.1° of latitude.
Because the Iridium system applies FDMA/TDMA as a multiple access method, the
same channels can be used repeatedly. In Iridium a cell cluster consists of 12 cells. The
satellite beams generated by the satellite antenna arrays are periodically concentrated
on each cell for a prescribed time duration. At these moments, transmission from and
to the subscribers located in that cell is performed in the TDD mode. Uplink and
downlink transmission between a subscriber and a satellite is performed in the L band
using QPSK modulation at the data rate of 50 kbit/s. The assigned frequency range
for the uplink and downlink transmission is 1621.35-1626.5 MHz. The transmission is
organized in 90-ms frames which consist of a paging and signaling channel, and four
uplink channels followed by the associated downlink channels. The system bandwidth
is divided into 124 carriers. Since there are 12 cells in a cluster and the satellite has 48
spot beams, each frequency is reused four time per satellite. Thus, theoretically 1984
connections could be established by a satellite; however, due to energy limitations 1100
connections can be realized at the same time.
The satellite connection with the gateways is performed in the K/Ka band, i.e. from
19.4 to 19.6 GHz in the uplink and from 29.1 to 29.3 GHz in the downlink direction.
Intersatellite links are realized in the band between 23.18 and 23.31 GHz.
The basic service is speech transmission. For that purpose the speech encoder gen-
erates the data stream at the rate of 4.8 or 2.4 kbit/s. As in GSM, the user activity
detection is performed to reduce the co-channel interference. Besides speech transmis-
sion, data transmission is offered at the rate of 2.4 kbit/s. Recently Iridium also offers

342 
SATELLITE MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
direct access to the Internet at the rate of 10 kbit/s, independent of the PSTN. Other
services such as paging, fax transmisison, SMS and position reporting are also listed.
The assumed error rate is 10–2 for speech signal and 10–5 for user data. The user
terminals are dual-mode. In a typical situation the terminal is connected to the land
mobile network. If the latter is not accessible, the Iridium network is used.
In June 2001, Iridium is the only personal satellite communication system which has a
truly global coverage. Other systems do not allow for transmission near the poles. Some
systems are still in the deployment phase. This advantage of Iridium did not protect the
system against financial problems which showed that a good and innovative technical
solution is not enough to achieve commercial success. The services were very expensive,
the phones were quite big and the investors had not foreseen the enormous progress
of land mobile networks which took away a lot of potentional customers of Iridium.
However, the system has recently been put back in operation by Iridium Satellite LLC.
The prices of services have gone down and this time Indium targets customers from US
military, maritime, aviation, oil and gas, mining, construction, forestry, government,
non-governmental organization/relief, and the yachting/leisure segment [6].
15.5.2 GLOBALSTAR
The GLOBALSTAR system [19], [15], [24], [12] was the initiative of Loral Communica-
tions. The system concept differs from that of Iridium in many aspects.
The reseach on the selection of LEO orbits showed that two approaches to setting
their positions are possible:
• the orbits are located in the polar planes, which allows for full earth coverage,
• the orbits are located in the planes properly inclined with respect to the equatorial
plane.
The first approach was applied in Iridium. The second approach has been used
in GLOBALSTAR. The satellites will cover the area of the earth surface up to the
determined latitude. The coverage of the GLOBALSTAR system has been set between
±70° of latitude. The northern part of Greenland, Spitzbergen and the islands of
Northern Canada remain outside the system coverage. Figure 15.5 presents the planned
coverage map of GLOBALSTAR [19].
To ensure high transmission quality, the satellite elevation angle must be sufficiently
large [19]. The value of this angle determines the transmission channel quality on the
path between the satellite and a terrestrial terminal. For the elevation angle between
0° and 20°, the satellite channel has similar properties to the terrestrial mobile channel
and suffers from the multipath phenomenon. For the elevation angle between 20° and
40° the multipath occurs due to diffuse reflections only. For higher elevation angles
the channel quality is gradually improving. High quality transmission can be achieved
above 70° of elevation.
In order to obtain good propagation properties, the orbits inclined at 52° have been
selected. The satellites rotate in eight planes with the phase shift of 7.5° between each
two successive planes. The rotation period is equal to 114 minutes. Figure 15.6 presents

DESCRIPTION OF THE MOST IMPORTANT PERSONAL SATELLITE SYSTEMS 
343
Figure 15.5 The planned coverage of GLOBALSTAR [19] (with permission of Alcatel Telecom-
munications Review)
Average elevation [degrees]
60
50
40
30
20
10 I
0
Latitude [degrees]
Figure 15.6 Average elevation of an active satellite as a function of latitude [19] (with permission
of Alcatel Telecommunications Review)
the average elevation of an active satellite as a function of latitude. We see that up to
the latitude equal to 60° the average elevation is quite high (not lower than 35°). A
minimal elevation of the satellite seen by a terrestrial terminal is 10°. An important
feature of the satellite constellation selected in GLOBLSTAR is simultaneous visibility
of two satellites, which improves the system reliability.
The orbit altitude in GLOBALSTAR is equal to 1389 km. Due to higher altitude
than in Iridium, a smaller number of satellites is necessary. Six satellites and one
spare satellite rotate on each of eight orbit planes, so 48+8 satellites are located on the

344 
SATELLITE MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
orbits. The satellite coverage area is divided into 16 cells. The cells are organized in a
concentric manner with a single cell in the center, 6 cells in the first ring and 9 cells in
the second ring. The minimum and maximum values of propagation delay are equal to
4.63 and 11.5 ms, respectively.
information 
formation
Earth station + 
Earth station +
switching system 
switching system
Subscribed 
SubsofcerB
Figure 15.7 General concept of the GLOBALSTAR system [11]
GLOBALSTAR differs from Iridium in the general concept of the system as well. The
GLOBALSTAR system works according to the bent-pipe principle. Bent-pipe is a signal
relay scheme in which a signal from a terrestrial terminal is sent to a satellite, which
relays the signal back to the Earth with minimal processing. This way the subscriber
is connected via the satellite with the closest earth station. That station realizes the
connection through a terrestrial network (see Figure 15.7). The satellite in the middle of
the picture indicates that the connection between the GLOBALSTAR earth station and
the station of another subscriber can be partially set using another satellite system. In
consequence, the satellite part of the GLOBALSTAR system has to be transparent from
the point of view of the remaining parts of this system. This transparency implies the
necessity of creating the gateway infrastructure connecting GLOBALSTAR to public
networks. The density of the gateways has been estimated to be one station per one
milion km2, which is equivalent to one station in a middle-sized European country. At
such gateway density intersatellite links are not required. If gateways are built in each
middle-sized country, the local network operators will not be omitted and thanks to
the data bases contained in the gateways they will be able to monitor the traffic and
establish the tariffs according to their own rules.
GLOBALSTAR applies the CDMA [7] in the transmission layer between a terminal
and a satellite (and vice versa). GLOBALSTAR and a few other systems use the

DESCRIPTION OF THE MOST IMPORTANT PERSONAL SATELLITE SYSTEMS 
345
common band assigned to personal satellite communications at WARC'924. Such a
system must be robust against interference arising from other systems operating in
the same band. The bands allocated to GLOBALSTAR and other potential CDMA
personal satellite systems are 1610–1621.35 MHz for the uplink and 2483.5–2500 MHz
for the downlink between a terrestrial terminal and a satellite. In the link between
gateways and satellites the following bands are used: 5.091-5.25 GHz for the uplink
and 6.875–7.055 GHz for the downlink.
The trasmission methods applied in GLOBALSTAR are very similar to those used
in the cellular CDMA IS-95 system, therefore they will not be repeated here. We will
only summarize the main transmission parameters.
The speech is digitally encoded at the rates 2.4, 4.8 or 9.6 kbit/s. Its allowable error
rate is 10–3. Data transmission rates range between 2.4 and 9.6 kbit/s and the max-
imum bit error rate is 10–6. Besides voice and data transmission the GLOBALSTAR
system offers the Short Messaging Service (SMS) and the facsimile service. The two
latter services depend on the GLOBALSTAR service provider.
Let us consider a simplified procedure of the connection set-up in the GLOBALSTAR
system [19]. After power on, the subscriber terminal attempts to find a terrestrial
cellular network. If the attempt is successful, the terminal registers in the network
and can use it for its own connections. If the attempt fails, the terminal tries to
register in the satellite network. It looks for access channels and sends to the satellite a
request for the CDMA channel assignment and registration. The mobile terminal also
transmits its International Mobile Subscriber Identity (IMSI) to the Satellite Station
Controller (SSC). In turn, the mobile terminal is located by one of the gateways within
the satellite footprint. Next, the earth station performs subscriber's authentication,
retrieving the data from the Home Location Register (HLR) in which users' records are
stored. After successful authentication and location, the subscriber receives information
concerning the registration with the SSC. After receiving this message, the mobile
terminal synchronizes with the signaling channel of the gateway where it is registered.
The gateway sends the mobile terminal registration message to its HLR. Prom that
moment the mobile terminal is treated in the same way as a terminal of the land mobile
network associated with the GLOBALSTAR system. We can describe this status as the
integration of the GLOBALSTAR with the terrestrial network. The currently offered
phones are two-mode or tri-mode. In Europe the users can apply the phones connecting
with GSM 900 and GLOBALSTAR, whereas in the USA the phones are able to register
with CDMA-800 (IS-95), AMPS-800 and GLOBALSTAR.
The configuration of the GLOBALSTAR network is based on the configuration of
land mobile cellular networks. Thanks to a short delay introduced by the satellite
system, the protocols and signaling systems used in the cellular networks can be applied
without modifications. The interfaces are also similar to those in cellular systems. These
interfaces are:
• the air interface between the mobile terminal, the satellite and the ground station.
4WARC - World Administrative Conference, now WRC - World Radiocommunications Conference is
an international periodic conference at which common rules of using the spectrum are established.

346 
SATELLITE MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
PSTN
ISDN
MSC
GSS
Network
SS7
signaling
MAP
HLR
AU
VLR
GSM network system
SOCC
GSS - Ground Station Subsystem
SG 
- Standard Gateway
SOCC - Satellite Operation Control
Center
MSC - Mobile Service Switching Center
HLR 
- Home Location Register
VLR 
- Visitor Location Register
NCC - Network Control Center
Satellite radio and control system
Figure 15.8 Simplified architecture of the SSC in GLOBALSTAR [19] (with permission of Alcatel
Telecommunications Review)
the interface between the SSC and the switching center (MSC) of the land mobile
public cellular system,
the interface associated with the data exchange protocol between the MSC and
the data bases used in the management of mobile terminals.
Figure 15.8 presents a simplified architecture of the satellite station controller (SSC)
connected with a part of a land mobile cellular network, e.g. GSM. We see that the
appropriate ground station of the GLOBALSTAR system communicates with the MSC
through the ground station subsystem. In order to perform the subscriber authenti-
cation, the MSC exchanges data with the HLR, VLR and AU registers. The route to
PSTN is possible through the MSC. The PSTN can also serve as the network connecting
with another SSC and the terminal registered with it.
In June 2001, the GLOBALSTAR system was already in operation, although it did
not reach full coverage. Several vendors offered dual- and tri-mode mobile handsets,
fixed phones and special phones for maritime applications.

DESCRIPTION OF THE MOST IMPORTANT PERSONAL SATELLITE SYSTEMS 
347
15.5.3 ICO
The international consortium INMARSAT joined the race in the area of personal satel-
lite communications by starting the so-called Project-21. In 1995 a special company
called ICO Global Communications was founded. In 2001 the system was introduced
by the New ICO company and in the summer of 2001 was in the deployment phase.
The New ICO system consists of a space segment and a dedicated ground network.
The main task of the system is to provide global IP services, including connection to
the Internet, data, voice and fax transmission [16]. The system will operate in three
modes:
• circuit-switched mode based on the GSM standard
• packet-switched mode based on GPRS
• Internet protocol mode.
The space segment will consist of 10 active satellites and two spare satellites. They
will be located in two mutually perpendicular orbits inclined at 45° to the equatorial
plane. The satellites will operate in MEO/ICO orbits at an altitude of 10390 km. The
satellites will be located in the orbit in such places that from every point on the Earth
at least two satellites will be visible. Thanks to a relatively high altitude, the period
of the orbit circulation is approximately equal to six hours and the average period of
visibility of a single satellite is equal to about one hour. The minimum elevation angle
for a mobile station is 10°. As a result, handover will be rare. The consequence of
the MEO/ICO orbit selection is the propagation delay which is higher than for LEO
systems; however, it does not exceed 48 ms for a single path.
The satellite system has the same bent-pipe architecture as GLOBALSTAR. Recall
that the satellites act like mirrors reflecting signals from the earth. The assigned fre-
quency band for the uplink is 1980-2010 MHz. The downlink will be placed in the
2170–2200 MHz band. The links from earth stations to a satellite and from a satellite
to an earth station will use the 5.15-5.25 GHz and 6.975-7.075 GHz bands, respectively.
The satellites will communicate with terrestrial networks through the ICONET which
is the dedicated terrestrial network. It is planned that ICONET will be based on the
Internet Protocol. The ICONET will be built of 12 appropriately located Satellite
Access Nodes (SANs - see Figure 15.9) connected by high-speed links. Six SANs will
simultaneously act as Telemetry, Tracking and Control (TT&C) stations. They will
control the positions of satellites and will be managed from the Satellite Control Center
(SCC) located in England.
The main task of an earth station (SAN) is to provide an interface between the
satellites and terrestrial networks and to perform routing through the ICO network.
The earth stations are equipped with the following elements [16]:
• five antennas and the associated equipment to communicate with the satellites,
• packet-switched and circuit-switched equipment to perform routing through the
ICONET and to interface with land mobile and wireline networks,

348 
SATELLITE MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Service link 
Supply link
1.9 / 2.1 GHz 
10 satellites 
and TT&c
in 2 orbits 
5/7GHz
+ 2 spare satellites
SAN **_
T
T
GW
GW
PSDN
GW 
PSTN/ISDN
PLMN
SAN
SCC
NMC
ADC
ICONET 
public switched networks
User plane 
Satellite plane 
(12 mutually 
Gateways 
and
connected SANs) 
land mobile networks
Figure 15.9 General architecture of the ICO system
• appropriate registers necessary for mobility and service access management,
• equipment necesssary to realize voice, facsimile and data messaging services,
• GPRS equipment which will direct traffic and store data and support several IP
services.
It is expected that the future air interface of the New ICO system will support data
rates up to 144 kbit/s and the communication protocols will be similar to those used
in terrestrial networks. The New ICO system will directly cooperate with the GSM
system without any special technological developments. It is expected that the New
ICO system will be equipped with interworking functions which will enable the users
of the New ICO system to roam in networks other than GSM. In the packet mode
operation the New ICO system will support services similar to those offered by GPRS.
The general information on the New ICO system presented above differs in some
aspects from what was available in the open literature a few years ago [22], [26]. Origi-
nally, the ICO system was mainly aimed at speech transmission and a limited rate data
transmission with the maximum rate of 64 kbit/s at a connection with a fixed terminal.
Currently its main task is IP networking.

FUTURE WIDEBAND ACCESS SYSTEMS 
349
15.6 FUTURE WIDEBAND ACCESS SYSTEMS
Two systems which will be described below are not personal satellite communication
systems in the strict sense. Their main task, like that of New ICO, is to interface
with Internet and broadband networks, although voice transmission is on the service
list as well. The systems shortly discussed below are examples of broadband satellite
transmission projects.
15.6.1 
Teledesic
When the Teledesic company was founded in 1990 and the initial system design was
completed (1994), the concept of Teledesic system was very futuristic. The aim of
Teledesic is to build a global, broadband Internet-in-the-Sky™ network of fiber-like
quality. In 1997 the Federal Communications Commission granted a licence to Teledesic
and World Radiocommunications Conference designated the necessary spectrum. The
start of the system operation is planned for 2005 [23].
Teledesic consists of a space segment and a ground segment containing terminals,
network gateways and network operations and control centers. The space segment is
in fact a satellite-based switch network whose main task is to provide reliable links
between terminals.
The space segment will initially consist of 288 operating satellites (plus some spare
satellites) rotating on 12 LEO orbits inclined at 40° to the equatorial plane. The
altitude of the orbits will be equal to about 1375 km. In the earlier system versions the
planned number of satellites was 840 and the inclination of their orbits was also different
[8]. Due to broadband links which will be established between the terrestrial terminals
and satellites, a large bandwidth is required. Therefore the communication between
terminals and satellites will take place in the Ka band. The 18.8-19.3 GHz band is
devoted to the downlink, while the 28.6–29.1 GHz band will be applied in the uplinks.
In these high frequency ranges rain and line-of-sight obstacles seriously degrade wave
propagation. Therefore the operating satellites have to be located at high elevation
angles. The high elevation angle, the high system capacity required and the assumed
satellite altitude result in a large number of satellites in the Teledesic constellation.
Teledesic will be optimized for service to fixed-site terminals; however, maritime
and aviation applications will also be supported, so transportable terminals will also be
operating. Typically, a terminal will support data transmission at rates up to 64 Mbit/s
in the downlink and up to 2 Mbit/s in the uplink. Two-way data transmission at the
rate of 64 Mbit/s is also planned for broadband terminals. The terminals will connect
the end-user with other Teledesic users, or will interface with several networks operating
with IP, ISDN, ATM and other protocols. Therefore, the Teledesic network will interface
with Internet and will be used in multimedia communication, LAN interconnections,
corporate intranets etc. [23].
The applied methods of multiple access follow the concept of the system as a packet
network. Within a cell, the system resources are shared using Multi-Frequency Time
Division Multiple Access (MF-TDMA) on the uplink and Asynchronous Time Division
Multiplexing Access (ATDMA) on the downlink.

350 
SATELLITE MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
The Teledesic network will be equipped with network Constellation Operations Con-
trol Centers (COCC) and Network Operations Control Centers (NOCC). The COOCs
manage the satellites, their deployment, replacement of fault satellites by the spares and
de-orbiting. The NOCCs perform several network administration and control functions.
The Teledesic satellites contain switches on board. The Teledesic network is a packet-
switched network. In this respect it is similar to an ATM network; however, the packets
in Teledesic are longer than the 53-byte ATM cells.5 Each packet consists of a header
containing the destination address and sequence information, an error control field
checking the validity of the header and a payload carrying user data. Transmission
within the whole network is performed in the packet form. The change of the data
format takes place in the terminals. Each packet is transmitted individually to the
destination on the basis of adaptive packet routing algorithm which aims at minimizing
the packet propagation delay and its variability. Let us recall that the LEO satellite
network rotates with respect to the terrestrial terminals, which makes the network
dynamic. The packets can arrive at the destination out of sequence along different
paths, so they have to be reordered and buffered in order to ensure the appropriate
quality. The switching between the satellite nodes will take place in space. Intersatellite
links will be implemented between the satellites located in the same and adjacent orbits.
The large number of satellites (and switches) and their interconnections will create a
kind of mesh network which will be more tolerant to faults and will feature a natural
adaptivity to traffic fluctuations and node congestion.
15.6.2 
Skybridge
The Skybridge system is an initiative of Alcatel [5], [20], [21]. It will provide high speed
access to the world's fiber optic backbone networks. In this respect the Skybridge
system will attempt to fill the gap between fast development of fiber optical networks
and the lack of possibilities of accessing them by many users despite the existence of
the ADSL and cable modem technologies. The Skybridge designers estimate that their
system will ensure broadband access to over 20 million users over the world. Skybridge
will support multimedia applications over broadband Internet, video telephony, video
conferencing, electronic commerce, telecommuting, distance learning, telemedicine, cor-
porate networking, remote access to LAN, POTS (Plain Old Telephony Service) and
live entertainment.
Skybridge will apply 80 LEO satellites plus several spares which will be located in
the circular orbits in a so-called Walker constellation. The orbits with four satellites in
each of them are contained in 20 planes inclined by 53° to the equatorial plane. The
altitude of the orbits will be equal to 1469 km. For transmission between satellites
and terrestrial terminals Skybridge will apply frequencies in the Ku band between
10 and 18 GHz. This band is also used by terrestrial microwave systems and GEO
satellite systems; therefore, special means preventing interference between Skybridge
and those systems have been planned. Among others, the Skybridge satellites cease
5Let us recall that in Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) terminology an ATM cell is a 53-byte long
packet constituting a basic transmission unit.

FUTURE WIDEBAND ACCESS SYSTEMS 
351
transmission to a given cell when an earth station recognizes that their transmission
direction is close to the GEO systems' pointing direction. In consequence, for each
gateway a non-operating zone is defined. It includes the satellite positions which would
create interference with GEO systems. Thus, transmission from these directions will be
realized by other earth stations.
The architecture of the Skybridge system can be divided into two segments:
• Space segment which includes the satellite constellation, the Satellite Control Cen-
ter (SCC), the Tracking, Telemetry and Command (TT&C) ground stations and
two mission control centers,
• Telecommunication segment which consists of gateways and Skybridge user ter-
minals, which connect end users with broadband networks.
Each Skybridge satellite can create a number of spot beams of the diameter equal
to 700 km. Thanks to the use of active antennas the beams are maintained pointed
towards the terrestrial gateways located in a given spot beam for a prescribed period
of time. Traffic transmitted by a subscriber terminal in a particular beam is directed
towards the gateway in the same beam (and vice versa).
Up to 200 gateways are planned for the deployment necessary to ensure global cov-
erage. The gateways will connect the Skybridge network with Internet servers, narrow-
and broadband terrestrial networks or leased lines [21].
User terminals consist of the antenna equipment and the interface to the external
multimedia equipment. Antennas used by residential users will be mounted on roofs
and will have a diameter of 50 cm. Thanks to them a subscriber will be able to receive
data at the rate of up to 20 Mbit/s and transmit data at up to 2 Mbit/s. A certain
number of interfaces will connect the terminal to several PCs. The terminal will operate
in the session-based data mode to handle Internet traffic.
Business (professional) terminals will apply 80 to 100 cm antennas and will transmit
and receive data streams at the rates 3 to 5 times higher than residential user termi-
nals. Thanks to a modular structure of professional terminals, they will receive up
to 60 Mbit/s. Professional terminals will typically be connected to a Private Branch
Exchange (PBX) or a Local Area Network (LAN). Two resource management modes
will be supported: a standard mode in which n x 64 kbit/s links for telephone and
videotelephone traffic will be created, and data mode based on sessions for Internet or
intranet traffic [20].
Skybridge network will apply ATM (Asynchronous Transfer Mode) transmission. As
we know, in the ATM network data are transmitted in 53-byte long packets (cells). This
unified way of transmission simplifies radio resource management, the required quality
of service can be maintained and interworking with other networks is possible.
The capacity of the Skybridge system [20] is determined by several factors, i.e. the
access to a wide frequency band, frequency reuse in different cells, multiple satellite
visibility which can be used in high traffic areas, statistical multiplexing of different
types of traffic and efficient use of satellite and terminal power. In each cell, the 750-MHz
band can be used in the downlink and the 300 MHz band will be devoted to the uplink
transmission. This asymmetry results from typical asymmetric traffic encountered in

352 
SATELLITE MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
broadband multimedia networks. The Skybridge designers declare [20] that a cell will
be able to support commercial traffic at up to 1 Gbit/s per satellite with up to 770
Mbit/s for professional traffic and up to 310 Mbit/s for residential traffic. Maximum
traffic which can be handled by a gateway will be up to 3 Gbit/s due to the fact that
up to three satellites are seen by the gateway. Generally, the whole system will be able
to support up to 215 Gbit/s traffic.
* * *
In this chapter we concentrated on the most important satellite systems which mainly
serve mobile users. We described three personal satellite communication systems and
overviewed two projects aimed at broadband access which can revolutionize the access
to the Internet and telecommunication networks in general. However, careful obser-
vation of deployment of several systems and the financial problems associated with
this deployment show that the satellite segment of mobile communication systems is
probably the most difficult and risky for investors. Let us hope that despite enormous
progress of land mobile systems the satellite communications will become a meaningful
part of integrated comunication systems in the future.
REFERENCES
1. W. S. Adams, L. Rider, "Circular Polar Constellations Providing Continuous Single
or Multiple Coverage Above a Specified Latitude", The Journal of Astronautical
Sciences, Vol. 35, No. 2, April-June, 1987
2. F. Ananasso, F. Delli Priscoli, "The Role of Satellites in Personal Communication
Services", IEEE J. Selected Areas in Commun., Vol. 13, No. 2, 1995, pp. 180–195
3. K. D. Carl, S. Ritterbusch, "GEO-MEO-LEO: satelittengestiitzte Systeme fur PCS",
IK, Berlin, No. 46, 1996, pp.45–50
4. J.-N. Colcy, R. Steinhauser, "EUTELTRACS the European Experience on Mobile
Satellite Services", Proc. of Intern. Mobile Satellite Commun. Conference, 1993.
pp. 261–266
5. J. Couet, D. Maugars, D. Rouffet, "Satellites and Multimedia", Alcatel Telecom-
munications Review, Fourth Quarter 1999, pp. 250–257
6. K. Dawson, "Iridium Returns from the Dead", http://www.commweb.com, March
29, 2001
7. R. De Gaudenzi, T. Garde, F. Giannetti, M. Luise, "An Overview of CDMA Tech-
niques for Mobile and Personal Satellite Communications", Proc. of EMPS'94,
1995, pp.78–104

REFERENCES 
353
8. P. P. Giusto, G. Quaglione, "Technical Alternatives for Satellite Mobile Networks".
Proc. of EMPS'94, 1995, pp. 15–27
9. J. L. Grubb, "The Traveller's Dreams Come True", IEEE Communications Maga-
zine, November 1991, pp. 48–51
10. J. E. Hatlelid, L. Casey, "The Indium System: Personal Communications Anytime,
Anyplace", Proc. of Intern. Mobile Satellite Commun. Conference, 1993, pp. 285–
290
11. J. Huber, "Mobile/Personal Satcoms System Alternatives - Satellite and Network
Aspects", Proc. of EMPS'94, 1995
12. J. B. Lagarde, D. Rouffet, M. Cohen, "GLOBALSTAR System: An Overview",
Proc. of EMPS'94, 1995
13. R. Leopold, "Low-Earth Orbit Global Cellular Communications Network", Proc.
of IEEE Intern. Conference on Communications, 1991, pp. 1108–1111
14. J. Lodge, "Mobile Satellite Communications Systems: Toward Global Personal
Communications", IEEE Communications Magazine, November 1991, pp. 24–30
15. P. Monte, F. Way, S. Carter, "The GLOBALSTAR Air Interface: Modulation and
Access", Proc. of COST 227/231, 1993, pp. 108–118
16. The New ICO System, http://www.ico.system/home.htm
17. S. R. Pratt, R. A. Raines, C. E. Fossa, M. A. Temple, "An Operational and Per-
formance Overview of the IRIDIUM Low Earth Orbit Satellite System", IEEE
Communications Surveys, http://www.comsoc.org/pubs/surveys, Second Quarter
1999, pp. 2–10
18. M. A. Pullman, K. M. Peterson, Y. Jan, "Meeting the Challenge of Applying Cel-
lular Concept to LEO Satcom Systems", Proc. of International Conference on
Communications, 1992, pp. 770–773
19. D. Rouffet, "GLOBALSTAR: a Transparent System", Electrical Communication,
First Quarter 1993, pp.84–90
20. D. Rouffet, "Skybridge: System Description", Alcatel Telecommunications Review,
Fourth Quarter 1998, pp. 269–275
21. P. Sourisse, "Skybridge: Global Multimedia Access", Alcatel Telecommunications
Review, Third Quarter 1999, pp. 228–237
22. G. Symeonidis, P. McDougal, "Inmarsat and Mobile Satcoms in the 21st Century",
Proc. of Telecom '95, Geneva 1995
23. Teledesic. Technology Overview, http://www.teledesic.com/tech/tech.htm

354 
SATELLITE MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
24. R. Wiedeman, A. Viterbi, "The GLOBALSTAR Mobile Satellite System for World-
wide Personal Communications", Proc. of Intern. Mobile Satellite Commun. Con-
ference, 1993, pp. 291–296
25. P. Wood, "Mobile Satellite Services for Travellers", IEEE Commun. Magazine,
November 1991, pp. 32–35
26. W. W. Wu, E. F. Miller, W. L. Pritchard, R. L. Pickholtz, "Mobile Satellite Com-
munications" , Proc. of the IEEE, Vol. 82, No. 9, September 1994
27. M. Amanowicz, "Satellite Personal Communication Systems", Telecommunications
Review, (in Polish), No. 5-6, 1995, pp. 248–255
Appendix
Table A.I 
Frequency ranges of electromagnetic waves used in communication systems [27]
Frequency range
2 Hz–30 kHz
30 kHz–300 kHz
300 kHz–3 MHz
3 MHz-30 MHz
30 MHz–300 MHz
300 MHz - 3 GHz
3 GHz-30 GHz
30 GHz–300 GHz
Wavelength
108-104
104- 103
103- 102
102-10
10-1
1-10"1
10-1- 
10-2
10-2- 
10-3
Meaning
Very low frequency (VLF)
Low frequency (LF)
Medium frequency (MF)
High frequency (HF)
Very high frequency (VHF)
Ultra high frequency (UHF)
Super high frequency (SHF)
Extremely high frequency (EHF)
Table A.2 Subbands of SHF and EHF ranges [27]
Subband notation
L
S
c
X
Ku
Ka
K
W
Frequency range [GHz]
1-2
2-4
4–8
8–12
12-18
18–27
27–40
40–100

16
Wireless Local Area
Networks
16.1 
INTRODUCTION
In typical Local Area Networks (LANs) the network elements such as servers, terminals,
printers and other peripherals are connected by a system of copper of optical fiber wires.
Such a network consists of stationary nodes, terminals and the wireline infrastructure.
Each network extension or reconfiguration requires additional wiring which is both
time-consuming and costly. It is obvious that terminals cannot move.
Wireless LANs (WLANs) opens new possibilities for LAN users, which are mainly
terminal mobility and easy reconfiguration. In general, wireless LANs have the following
advantages [1]:
• Flexibility — WLAN nodes can communicate with each other within the network
coverage area without major limitations in terminal locations. The terminals do
not need to remain visible to each other. Walls and other typical obstacles in
an indoor environment are mostly penetrated by electromagnetic waves if their
frequency is not too high.
• Simplified planning - The network planning is related to the radio part; however,
configuration of a network, in particular for ad hoc networks, is not necessary.
• Possibility of a temporary network configuration - Wireless communications open
a possibility to construct a local network which is needed temporarily only (e.g.
during large international exhibitions, sport contests, etc.).
• Robustness to external conditions — Due to the lack of connecting wires and the
frequent use of WLAN terminals connected to laptops or other portable devices
355

356 
WIRELESS LOCAL AREA NETWORKS
which can work without external power supply, the WLANs are not easily affected
by extreme situations.
WLANs also have some disadvantages. Most of them are the result of using a radio
channel as a signal propagation medium. The main disadvantages are the following [1]:
• Lower transmission quality as compared with wireline LANs - the error rate
in a radio channel is of the order of 10-3-10-4 or even worse. FEC or ARQ
techniques are necessary to achieve higher quality. For comparison, the error rate
for transmission over an optical fiber channel is at most 10-10. Wireless channels
are often time-varying and limited spectrum is at the disposal of a particular
system. Spectral limitations and possible interference from other systems are a
serious drawback of WLANs.
• Local regulatory restrictions - Several countries impose different spectral restric-
tions. This in turn imposes limitations on worldwide WLAN solutions.
• Cost of wireless equipment - it is still much higher than of the equivalent equip-
ment for wireline networks.
• Lower safety and security - information transmitted on the radio channel can be
intercepted much easier than in wireline LANs. An inappropriately used WLAN
can be a source of interference for other sensitive devices such as medical equip-
ment.
Wireless LANs rarely work independently of other networks. Typically, wireless
transmission is used to access a wireline network. In other cases there is some kind of
gateway between a WLAN and other networks, e.g. the Internet. Therefore, one of the
features of WLANs which is highly desired is easy interoperation with other networks
and WLAN transparency with respect to user applications.
16.2 TYPES OF WLANS
WLANs can be categorized according to several criteria such as the type of radio trans-
mission, the frequency range applied (infrared or radio) or the multiple access. Here we
will apply the criterion based on the network configuration. According to this criterion,
we will divide WLANs into infrastructure-based wireless networks and ad hoc wireless
networks.
Figure 16.1 presents the basic idea of infrastructure-based wireless network. The
WLAN of this type features a wireline infrastructure which connects it to other wireline
networks. Important elements of this type of network are network Access Points (APs)
which interface the wireless terminals with the wireline network infrastructure. In most
cases transmission is performed only between access points and wireless terminals, so
two network terminals communicate via the appropriate access points. As we see, the
APs work like base stations in a cellular system. The access point performs most of the
transmission control procedures, leaving simple processing to wireless terminals. That

TYPES OF WLANS 
357
Figure 16.1 Example of the infrastructure-based network configuration
kind of network organization allows for easy access control and for collision avoidance.
It can be realized if the access points manage the access to the radio channel.
The infrastructure-based wireless networks are not fully flexible because of the exis-
tence of a fixed part of the network. In turn, a second type of WLANs, called an ad
hoc network, does not have this disadvantage, see Figure 16.2.
Figure 16.2 Structure of WLAN ad hoc network
Ad hoc wireless networks do not have any wired infrastructure. Wireless terminals
not only connect the subscribers to the network but also function as network nodes.
They can communicate with each other if they remain in the range of each other. The
communication range can be extended if the wireless terminals are able to forward the
message received from one station to another. The ad hoc network concept implies
increased terminal complexity. A wireless terminal not only receives and transmits
messages but also works as a network node. It has to compete for the network resources
within multiple access procedures, it has to route the transmitted packets and set their
priorities. In reality, a compromise between these two wireless network structures often
occurs.
There is a selection of radio technologies, available data rates, ranges and possible
applications of the WLANs. Below we will briefly describe the basic properties of the
most important WLAN standards such as IEEE 802.11, HIPERLAN Type 1 and Type 2.

358 
WIRELESS LOCAL AREA NETWORKS
We will also consider the Bluetooth interface. More detailed information can be found
in the books specially devoted to WLANs, such as [2] and [3] or in the appropriate
chapters of [1] and [4].
16.3 HIDDEN STATION PROBLEM
Wireless transmission in WLANs can create some problems if the coverage areas of
different parts of WLAN partially overlap. Let us consider an example shown in Figure
16.3a.
Station B remains in the range of stations A and C; however, the distance between
stations A and C is so large that neither of them can detect whether the other one
is transmitting. Let station A transmit to station B. Station (7, using the CSMA/CD
(Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Detection) access mechanism, finds that
the medium is free and starts to transmit to station B, too. In this manner a collision
occurs. Both stations transmit to station B till the end of their packets without realizing
that their packets cannot be received correctly. In this respect the waste is twofold.
Firstly, a collision has occurred. Secondly, the time of a whole packet has been wasted.
We say that station C is hidden for station A. A similar example can be considered for
infrastructure-based WLANs (see Figure 16.3b). If two neighboring access points wish
to transmit to a station located in the overlapped area and their transmission is not
coordinated by the wired part of the system, a similar collision can occur.
(a) 
(b)
AP_ 
• 
AP
Figure 16.3 Illustration of the hidden terminal problem in ad hoc (a) and infrastructure-based
WLANs (b)
The hidden station (node) problem can be partially avoided by ensuring the channel
sensing range to be much greater than the receiving range (see Figure 16.4a). This
method has been applied in HIPERLAN/1. Another solution is the application of
a MACA (Multiple Access with Collision Avoidance) scheme shown in Figure 16.4b.
In order to start transmission from station A to B, station A sends a Request to Send
(RTS) packet first. The RTS packet contains the addresses of transmitting and receiving
stations and the duration of the future transmission. Station B answers to station A
with a Clear to Send (CTS) packet, which is also heard by station C. It contains the
addresses of the sender and recipient and the duration of transmission, so station C

HIPERLAN TYPE 1 
359
realizes that the medium will be occupied for the given period of time and it will not
try to access the channel before that time. Collision can still occur if stations A and
C send the RTS packets concurrently; however, these packets are much shorter, so
the wasted time is much shorter, too. This method of overcoming the hidden station
problem can be applied as an option in IEEE 802.11 WLANs (see Section 16.5).
Sensing range
/ v 
Transmission range 
...
(a) 
(b)
> 
RTS
~ 
" 
, 
'' 
. 
. 
. 
.^.
CTS
B
Figure 16.4 Avoiding a hidden station problem using different sensing and transmission ranges
(a) arid a MAC A scheme (b)
The hidden station problem can be much easier avoided if spread spectrum techniques
are used in the physical layer. It is sufficient that both transmitting stations send their
pseudorandom signals (using direct sequence or frequency hopping methods) to the
receiving station in different phases to achieve (almost) orthogonality of the signals
from both stations, so one of them can be detected using the correlation method or the
RAKE receiver.
16,4 
HIPERLAN TYPE 1
The HIPERLAN Type 1 (High Performance Local Area Network) (HIPERLAN/1) stan-
dard was established by ETSI in 1996 [5]. It is the first of four ETSI standards deal-
ing with wireless network access. The other are HIPERLAN/2 [6], HIPERACCESS
(Wireless ATM Remote Access) [8] and HIPERLINK (Wireless ATM Interconnect).
HIPERLAN/1 standard provides an ISO 8802 [9] compatible interface. The WLANs
conforming to the HIPERLAN/1 standard can work in both network configurations
described above.
HIPERLAN/1 network operates in the 5.15–5.3 GHz band, divided into five fre-
quency channels. Table 16.1 lists the carrier frequencies of all channels. The HIPER-
LAN/1 terminals can move at the maximum speed of 1.4 m/s. Transmitted traffic can
have an asynchronous or isochronous form. The terminal range is 50 m. The maximum
data rate is about 23.5 Mbit/s. Figure 16.5 presents the reference model for HIPER-
LAN/1 networks. In turn, Figure 16.6 shows the HIPERLAN communication model.

360
WIRELESS LOCAL AREA NETWORKS
Table 16.1 Carrier frequencies of HIPERLAN/1 channels
Channel No.
0
1
2
3
4
Carrier frequency [MHz]
5 176.4680
5 199.9974
5 223.5268
5 247.0562
5 270.5856
Data link
layer
Physical
layer
Medium access control
(MAC) sublayer
Channel access
control (CAC) sublayer
Physical (PHY) layer
Figure 16.5 Reference layer model for HIPERLAN/1
A
MSDU
MSAP
HIPERLAN MAC
service
HMPDU
HCSDU
HCSAP
HCPDU
HIPERLAN MAC
protocol
HIPERLAN CAC
service
HIPERLAN CAC
protocol
HMPDU
HCSDU
HCSAP
HCPDU
Data burst
HIPERLAN Physical
*• Data burst
protocol
Figure 16.6 HIPERLAN communication model [5]
The MAC sublayer performs several functions which help to organize the operation
of the HIPERLAN/1 network. The higher layers produce MAC service data units
(MSDU), which enter the MAC layer through the MAC service access point. Due to
the application of the HIPERLAN MAC protocol, HIPERLAN-MAC protocol data
units (HMPDU) are created.

HIPERLAN TYPE 1 
361
The Channel Access Control (CAC) sublayer contains a protocol which determines
which nodes are allowed to transmit and specifies the access priorities. This layer of-
fers a connectionless data transfer service to the MAC sublayer. Thus, the HMPDU
constitutes a HIPERLAN-CAC service data unit, which enters the HIPERLAN-CAC
layer through HIPERLAN-CAC service access point (HCSAP). Due to the CAC pro-
tocol, the HIPERLAN-CAC protocol data units (HCPDU) are formed and finally they
constitute a payload of a physical data burst.
The physical layer protocol specifies transmission, reception and channel assessment
techniques. The data bursts are transmitted between two stations (nodes) over the
radio channel according to the HIPERLAN physical protocol.
There are a lot of similarities between the communication model philosophy and the
layered structure typical for the OSI reference model shown in Chapter 1 in Figure 1.50.
16.4.1 HIPERLAN/1 MAC sublayer
The first function performed by the MAC sublayer is MAC address mapping, which
allows differentiation of the terminal's own HIPERLAN network in the area where more
networks can operate. The standard defines internal address structures. The address
of a HIPERLAN station consists of two parts. The first part defines the network name
and the second part determines the station identification. Within the address mapping
function, IEEE-MAC addressing into HIPERLAN addressing is also performed.
The MAC sublayer also ensures communication security by defining the encryption-
decryption algorithm. The algorithm requires an identical key and a common initial-
ization vector for data encryption and decryption. The encryption and decryption are
performed by modulo-2 addition of the sequence of user data to the sequence generated
by the properly designed pseudorandom generator initiated by the key and the initial-
ization vector. In order to achieve high security, the initialization vectors and the keys
should be frequently changed.
The next function of the MAC sublayer is the addressing of MAC service access points
(MSAP). According to the reference layer model, the HIPERLAN offers MAC services
performed between MAC service access points (the "sender" and the "recipient"). The
MSAPs are addressed using a 48-bit LAN-MAC address. Compatibility with the ISO
MAC service definition is also ensured.
The MAC sublayer also manages data forwarding. Some HIPERLAN/1 terminals can
operate as a relay for the packets sent between terminals which are beyond their common
range. The forwarding can have unicast (point-to-point) or multicast/broadcast (point-
to-multipoint) form. The relay stations maintain routing tables and a list of multipoint
relays. The routing table maintained by a given relay station contains the addresses of
the relay nodes which are the closest to that station on the way to a possible destination.
In consequence, the transmitted packet carries the destination address and the next-hop
relay address.
The last function performed by the MAC layer is power conservation understood as
a power-saving mechanism in the stations which are supplied by battery power sources.

362 
WIRELESS LOCAL AREA NETWORKS
16.4.2 HIPERLAN/1 CAC layer
The most important part of the Channel Access Control (CAC) sublayer is the protocol
called Elimination Yield Non Pre-emptive Priority Multiple Access (EY-NPMA). It is
a version of the Carrier-Sense Multiple Access (CSMA) protocol with prioritization.
Let us imagine that several terminals wish to send a packet simultaneously. Only
one of them can do it, otherwise a collision occurs. In the EY-NPMA protocol the
process of obtaining the channel access is divided into three phases. Time is divided
into channel access cycles. Each cycle starts with the channel access synchronization
(CS). The synchronization is followed by the prioritization phase. The time of this
phase is divided into five 168-bit slots starting from the slots of the highest priority
(p = 1). If the terminal (HIPERLAN node) has the priority p, it senses the channel for
the first p — 1 slots. If the channel remains idle, the node sends an access pattern (PA
- priority assertion). If the node finds that the channel has already been occupied by
the station with a higher priority, it does not send its access pattern and waits for the
beginning of the next access cycle.
More than one station can have the same priority; therefore, the next phase of the
access algorithm is necessary which is called the contention phase. It is further divided
into the elimination phase and the yield phase. The elimination phase is divided into
0 to 12 slots lasting for 212 bits each. Each terminal which has not been eliminated
in the prioritization phase sends an elimination burst. Its length is random, between 0
and 12 slots. The probability of continuation of the burst in the next slot is equal to
0.5, so the length n of the elimination burst has the probability distribution
0.5n+1 for 0 < n < 1 2 
,,_,.
o.5» 
forn=12 
(1(U)
After sending its elimination burst, each station senses the channel during a 256-bit
long interval of elimination survival verification (ESV). A station gives up competing
for the channel access, if during this interval the channel is occupied by another station,
which is sending a longer burst. These stations which have survived this phase, i.e. all
which have sent the longest bursts, take part in the yield phase. The yield phase lasts
for up to ten 168-bit slots. Each station participating in this phase senses the channel
during n slots (0 < n < 9). The probability that the given station senses the channel
for n consecutive slots is
PY(n) = 1/10 
(16.2)
If the station has not detected any activity in the channel during the listening, it
immediately starts to transmit its data burst, so the transmission phase begins. If the
station has detected the signal of another station during channel sensing, it is eliminated
from the channel access competition and waits till the beginning of the next access cycle.
Figure 16.7 illustrates the competition for the channel access between four stations
denoted as A, B, C and D. It is assumed that the priority of stations A, B and C is
p = 4. Station B survives all the phases of the EY-NPMA protocol and finally transmits
its data burst. Let us note that despite quite a complex procedure, collision can still
occur.

HI PERL AN TYPE 1 
363
Prioritization 
Contention 
Transmission
phase 
phase 
phase
Elimination 
Yield
CS 
Transmission
detected
ESV
Data burst 
ACK
A
Transmission
detected
Transmission
detected
Figure 16.7 Illustration of EY-NPMA protocol
16.4.3 
HIPERLAN/1 physical layer
Transmission on the radio channel is performed using a non-differential Gaussian Mini-
mum Shift Keying (GMSK) with a normalized filter bandwidth-time product BT — 0.3
(see Chapter 1). Let us recall that B is a 3-dB signal bandwidth and T is a modulation
period. Due to the channel multipath, the high data rate (23.5294 Mbit/s) and the ap-
plication of a frequency pulse with a Gaussian shape, which lasts for several modulation
periods, intersymbol interference occurs. This type of distortion is minimized by the
application of an adaptive equalizer. Typically, in HIPERLAN/1 a decision-feedback
equalizer (DFE)1 is employed. Besides the high data rate applied in GMSK modulation,
a low data rate is used mostly for control and signaling purposes. To perform these
tasks, the FSK modulation at the rate of 1.4705875 Mbit/s is applied. In order to de-
crease the error rate, the HIPERLAN/1 standard specifies BCH (31,26) error-correction
code used in the physical layer. This code is able to correct a single error, to detect two
random errors, all error bursts not longer than 5 bits and most of the error bursts longer
than 5 bits. Each data block is interleaved across sixteen codewords. This implies that
the data block has 16 x 26 = 416 bits. After BCH encoding the block is 496-bits long.
Figure 16.8 shows the data packet format applied in HIPERLAN/1.
Figure 16.8 presents one of the two types of bursts specified by HIPERLAN/1. They
are the following:
1The decision-feedback equalizer is a type of equalization structure applied in the receiver. It uses a
linear filter and a decision-feedback filter. The first one shapes the joint channel and filter character-
istics, so that the intersymbol interference (ISI) at its output originates from the past data symbols
only. Then, based on the past, already decided symbols, the decision-feedback filter synthesizes the ISI
originating from these symbols and subtracts it from the sample being the subject of the current data
decision.

364 
WIRELESS LOCAL AREA NETWORKS
1.47 Mbit/s 
23.5294 Mbit/s
transmission 
transmission
Low rate Synchronization 
c^^^^ 
Coded data
information 
aJ™-£™™'JB 
(496 bits) 
(496 bits)
(4OU DltS)
< 
i
1 to 47 blocks of coded data
User data 
Sanity check 
Check
(37 octets) 
d*> assort*) 
(2octete>
Figure 16.8 HIPERLAN/1 data packet format
• LBR-HBR data burst (shown in Figure 16.8), which consists of two parts: the low
bit-rate (LBR) part and the high bit-rate (HER) part
• LBR data burst, i.e. the burst consisting of a low bit-rate part transmitting the
identification of a receiver.
The bursts are used to transmit user data, to acknowledge their correct reception, to
participate in the channel access procedure, etc.
HIPERLAN/1 has been the initiative of the European Community and ETSI. How-
ever, other IEEE WLAN standards exist, which are worth consideration.
16.5 
IEEE 802.11 WLAN STANDARDS
IEEE 802.11 WLAN standard results from an IEEE initiative to make a wireless exten-
sion of the existing LAN standards of the 802 series. The project started in 1990 and
resulted in the publication of the standard in 1997. Figure 16.9 presents the IEEE 802
standard family showing the location of particular 802 standard versions in comparison
with the first two OSI layers.
The standard describes the WLAN physical layer and the MAC layer. Three different
transmission methods in the physical layer have been standardized. In two of them the
Industrial, Scientific and Medical (ISM) band (i.e. 2.4000–2.4835 GHz) is used. It is
available with some limitations all over the world. The third method applies infrared
(IR) technology. All of them co-operate with the same MAC layer. The higher layers
are common to other IEEE 802 networks, as Figure 16.9 shows.
Let us consider possible IEEE 802.11 architectures. The WLANs can be configured as
ad hoc and structure-based networks. The Basic Service Set (BSS) is the fundamental
building block of the IEEE 802.11 architectures [11]. It is a set of stations which
can communicate with one another and remain under control of a single coordination
function explained below. An ad hoc network containing an isolated set of stations
remaining in the common range is a good example of an independent BSS.

IEEE 802.11 WLAN STANDARDS
365
IEEE 802.3
CSMA/CD
(Ethernet)
IEEE 802.2
Logical Link Control (LLC)
IEEE 802.4 I IEEE 802.5
Token Bus 
Token Ring
DLC layer
(OSI No.2)
T
*'
Physical layer
PHY 
(OSI No. 1)
wireline 
wireless
Figure 16.9 IEEE 802 standard family with two first OSI layers
Figure 16.10 presents the locations of the basic service sets (BSSs) in an infrastructure-
based network. Let us note that the access points are connected by the distribution
system (DS) and the latter can in turn be connected to the external IEEE 802.x net-
works through an interworking unit called a portal Thanks to the integrated operation
through the distribution system, the access points provide range extension and terminals
from different BSSs can communicate with each other. This way an Extended Service
Set (ESS) is formed. The distribution system works as a backbone network and can
be built of any wireline or wireless networks such as IEEE 802.x, a metropolitan area
network with fiber distributed data interface (FDDI) or another IEEE 802.11 network
[11].
Figure 16.10 Architecture of the infrastructure-based IEEE 802.11 network
Before we consider the operation of the 802.11 WLANs, let us introduce the basic
reference model [2]. Figure 16.11 shows its subsequent layers. The physical layer is
divided into two sublayers. The lower one is called the Physical Medium Dependent
(PMD) sublayer. It is related to the physical channel, and realizes transmission and
reception including modulation and coding. The second sublayer is called the Physical

366 
WIRELESS LOCAL AREA NETWORKS
Figure 16.11 IEEE 802.11 reference model
Layer Convergence Procedure (PLCP) sublayer. Its main task is mapping the MAC
sublayer protocol data units (MPDUs) into a packet format used by the PMD sublayer.
Its second task is carrier sensing, whose result is transferred to the MAC layer. In the
MAC layer the access mechanism based on CSMA is performed. Another task of the
MAC layer is the fragmentation and encryption of data packets.
The physical sublayers are "supervised" by the physical layer management. This
block maintains a physical layer management information base and supervises the adap-
tation of the physical layer to different link conditions. The MAC sublayer also has its
management block. The MAC sublayer management is responsible for synchronization,
power management and association and reassociation procedures. The station manage-
ment defines how the physical layer and the MAC management sublayer cooperate with
each other.
16.5.1 IEEE 802.11 physical layer
As we have mentioned, in the basic IEEE 802.11 version three different physical layers
have been standardized. We will briefly describe each of them. We will discuss the
modulation types and the packet format applied in each type of radio interface. Gen-
erally, packets sent over the channel consist of three parts: the PLCP preamble, the
PLCP header and the MAC packet data unit (MPDU); however, each interface uses
different preambles and headers. The basic data rate applied in each type of interface
is 1 Mbit/s. The enhanced data rate of 2 Mbit/s is also allowable.
16.5.1.1 DS-SS physical layer In this type of physical layer in the air interface the
Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum (DS-SS) technique (see Chapter 1) is applied. As we
remember, in the DS-SS technique the user data are represented by a sequence of pulses
(chips) of much higher rate than the original data bits. In this way the signal spectrum
is spread along the frequency axis. In the IEEE 802.11 DS-SS interface the 11-chip
Barker code2 is applied as the spreading sequence. After spreading the data signal and
using the result as the signal modulating the carrier at the rate 11 Msymbol/s according
2The Barker code used in the IEEE 802.11 interface is formed by the sequence +1, -1, +1, +1, -1, +1,
+1, +1, -1, -1, -1.

IEEE 802.11 WLAN STANDARDS 
367
to DBPSK or DQPSK scheme,3 the signal bandwidth is roughly 22 MHz. In order to
deploy BSSs which partially overlap or work in close vicinity of each other, their center
frequencies must be separated by at least 30 MHz. The maximum transmit power is
1000 mW (EIRP) in the USA and 100 mW (EIRP) in Europe.
128 bits 
16 bits 
8 bits 
8 bits 
16 bits 
16 bits
SYNC 
SFD Signal Service Length CRC
*4 
- - 
*
1 Mbit/s DBPSK Barker
2 Mbit/s DQPSK Barker
5.5 or 11 Mbit/s CCK
Figure 16.12 DS-SS PLCP packet structure
The DS-SS PLCP packet format is shown in Figure 16.12. The PLCP part is always
transmitted at the rate of 1 Mbit/s. 1 or 2 Mbit/s data rates can be applied for the
payload transmission. The fPLCP part of the packet has a number of fields with the
following functions:
• Synchronization bits are used for synchronization, gain setting, frequency offset
compensation and energy detection
• Start Frame Delimiter (SDF) is used for frame synchronization
• Signal bits carry information of the data rate (1 or 2 Mbit/s) used in the payload
field
• Service bits are reserved for future use
• Length bits describe the length of the payload (MPDU) field
• CRC bits are used for header parity control.
The PLCP part of the packet is followed by the payload carrying MAC packet data
unit (MPDU) of the length between 1 and 2048 octets.
In 1998 the IEEE 802.11 working group introduced a physical layer extension allow-
ing transmission of data packets at the rate of 11 Mbit/s or at the fall-back rate of 5.5
Mbit/s, preserving the same chip rate and bandwidth of the DS-SS physical layer stan-
dardized so far. Instead of the 11-chip Barker code applied with DBPSK or DQPSK
modulation, the Complementary Code Keying (CCK) was adopted in the payload field
[13].
3 Let us note that for Differential Binary Phase Shift Keying (DBPSK) the phase difference between
two consecutive symbols carries information about a single bit, whereas in the case of 
Differential
Quadrature Phase Shift Keying (DQPSK) each of four possible phase differences is mapped into two
bits.

368 
WIRELESS LOCAL AREA NETWORKS
Complementary codes were invented by M. J. E. Golay [14]. A sequence x of length
N is said to be complementary to another sequence y of the same length, if the following
condition on the sum of the correlation functions is fulfilled [15]:
27V
The CCK codewords used in the IEEE 802.11 physical layer extension are described
by the expression
c= 
jvi+Va+Va+Vi 
eJvi+V3+V4 
eJVi+V2+V4 
_gJvi+¥>4 
(164)
where y?i, </?2, <^3 and (f>± are the QPSK phases. The choice of all four QPSK phases
indicates that each CCK codeword consisting of 8 complex chips carries information
on 8 bits. Because the chip rate is equal to 11 Mchip/s (as in the basic version of the
DS-SS physical layer), the final data rate is 11 Mbit/s. Let us note that the phase
f\ is present in all the code elements in (16.4) and it is used for differential encoding;
therefore, the receiver can apply differential decoding. For the fall-back data rate of 5.5
Mbit/s, 4 bits are mapped onto the CCK 8-chip codeword. Two bits determine one of
four CCK code subsets and two remaining bits are used for rotation of the codeword
by one of four possible value of the phase (f>\ .
In the DS-SS version of the physical layer the radio interface ensures high data rates
and high range; however, the DS-SS RF products cost more and use more power than
the FH-SS technique used in IEEE 802.11 WLANs.
16.5.1.2 
FH-SS physical layer The Frequency Hopping Spread Spectrum physical in-
terface is characterized by high distortion immunity, high system capacity, low power
use, medium range and low cost of the RF part [3]. The FS-SS system operates in
the ISM band. For the purpose of this system 79 hopping frequencies with the raster
of 1 MHz have been defined in the USA and Europe and 23 frequencies have been
selected for Japan. As in the DS-SS radio interface, the transmit power is equal to
1 W (EIRP) in the USA and 100 mW (EIRP) in Europe. The data are transmitted
using the Gaussian-shaped FSK modulation4 on the carriers determined by the hop-
ping pattern. For the basic rate of 1 Mbit/s the modulation is two-level, whereas for
2 Mbit/s four level GFSK is applied. Both applied GFSK modulations have the same
root-mean-square deviation from the carrier frequency. The spectrum of the signal is
fitted to 1 MHz bandwidth. The hopping has to occur at a specified rate. In the USA
the lowest hopping rate is 2.5 hop/s. The access points determine the applied hopping
rate. A mobile terminal detects the hopping rate during the process of association with
a given access point. The hopping patterns are descibed by the 802.11 standard. They
4Gaussian-shaped FSK modulation is similar to GMSK modulation considered in Chapter 1. The main
difference is the value of the applied modulation index h.

IEEE 802.11 WLAN STANDARDS 
369
have been selected to minimize the use of the same frequency channel by different BSSs.
80 bits 
16 bits 
12 bits 
4 bits 
16 bits
. |._.
SYNC 
SFD 
PLW 
PSF 
CRC
4 
- 
>4 
- 
- 
*•
PCLP preamble 
; 
PCLP header
.
'
.
.
.
. 
> 4 
-
1 Mbit/s 2-GFSK 
1 Mbit/s 2-Gf SK
2 Mbitfs 4-GFSK
Figure 16.13 
PLCP packet format for FH-SS physical layer
The FS-SS packet format differs from that used in the DS-SS radio interface. It is
shown in Figure 16.13. Again, the packet consists of the PLCP preamble, PLCP header
and the payload (MPDU). The fields of the preamble and the header are as follows:
• Synchronization is 80-bit long and is used for synchronization of the receivers and
signal detection by the Clear Channel Assessment (CCA) process
• Start Frame Delimiter (SFD) indicates the start of the frame
• PLCP-PDU Length Word (PLW) shows the number of bytes in the payload,
including the 32-bit CRC field at the end of the payload field
• PLCP Signaling Field (PSF) indicates the data rate (1 or 2 Mbit/s)
• CRC is the parity check of the header.
16.5.1.3 
Infrared physical layer The third type of the physical layer standardizes digital
transmission using infrared technology (IR). Digital signals are sent using infrared rays
of the wavelength in the 850 to 950 nm range and Pulse Position Modulation (PPM).
Two data rates equal to 1 and 2Mbit/s are standardized. For the lower data rate,
transmitted bits are grouped in 4-bit blocks. The content of a block determines in
which of the 16 slots the infrared pulse is transmitted. Thus, a 16-PPM is applied. For
2 Mbit/s the data stream is divided into 2-bit blocks and each of them determines in
which of four possible slots the infrared pulse is radiated. Figure 16.14 illustrates the
modulation process for 1 and 2 Mbit/s. The pulse duration is 250 ns for both data
rates. Because the peak power of the signal is equal to 2 W, the mean power is equal
to 125 mW at 1 Mbit/s and 250 mW at 2 Mbit/s.
The PCLP packet format is presented in Figure 16.15. We will explain only that
field which is specific for this type of interface. This field is called DC Level Adjustment
field. It contains a pattern which enables the receiving station to set the DC level of
the signal.
The IR interface is the cheapest of all 802.11 physical interfaces and it does not need
any frequency regulation. It is also resistant to eavesdropping. However, it has the
lowest range among all 802.11 physical interfaces. It also has to operate indoors as
ceilings are needed which could reflect the infrared signals.

370 
WIRELESS LOCAL AREA NETWORKS
Data
1Mbit/s 
0
1
16-PPM
•
012 
3 4 5 6 7 89 
10 11 12 13 14 15
< -------- - ..... - 
- - - - - - - 
.......... 
*
Symbol period
Data
2Mbit/s 
1
1
0
1 
0
0
1
0
0 . 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 
0 . 1 2 3 
0 . 1 2 3
Symbol period
Figure 16.14 Illustration of Pulse Position Modulation (PPM) for 1 and 2 Mbit/s transmision
in the IR physical layer
57-74 slots 4 slots 
3 slots 
32 slots 
16 slots 
16 slots
5YNC 
SFD 
Length 
CRC
PCLP preamble 
PCLP header
1 Mbit/s 2-GFSK
Figure 16.15 PLCP packet format in IR physical layer
16.5.2 
IEEE 802.11 MAC sublayer
The MAC sublayer is located above the physical layer in the IEEE 802.11 reference
model. Its main tasks are: channel allocation, protocol data unit (PDU) addressing,
frame formatting, error checking, and fragmentation and reassembly of data blocks.
Two basic operation modes of IEEE 802.11 WLAN are possible from the point of view
of the MAC sublayer:
• a contention mode in which all WLAN terminals wishing to transmit a packet
compete for the access to the channel,
• mixed mode in which the contention mode (used during the contention period
(CP)) is periodically changed to the contention-free mode (realized during the
contention-free period (CPF)).

IEEE 802.11 WLAN STANDARDS 
371
The first mode is realized in ad hoc networks. The second one requires a point
coordinator (PC) which controls the access to the channel through polling the terminals
during contention-free periods. A BSS access point (AP) performs the function of the
PC.
There are three types of MAC frames. Management frames are applied for timing
and synchronization, authentication and terminal association and disassociation with
the given access point. Control frames are applied in handshaking and acknowledgment
procedures which take place mostly during contention periods. Finally, data frames are
used to transmit user data and optionally can also contain polling and acknowledgment
blocks during contention-free periods.
Frame Duration i Address Address Address i Sequence Address 
n *
! control 
ID 
1 
2 
3 
control 
4 
Uata
Figure 16.16 IEEE 802.11 MAC frame structure
Transmission in the MAC sublayer is organized in the form of MAC frames. Figure
16.16 shows a typical structure of the IEEE 802.11 MAC frame. The MAC frame is
divided into the following fields:
• Frame control field, which determines the protocol version and the type of the
frame (management, control or data frame). It also indicates whether the frame is
fragmented and what the meaning of the address fields is (if the frame is directed to
the distribution system (DS), arrives from it or whether the source and destination
are mobile terminals or APs).
• Duration ID field, which determines the period of time during which the channel
will be occupied. It is also used in the channel reservation mechanism (described
below).
• A dress fields 1 to 4, which indicate the source and destination of the transmitted
frame and are interpreted depending on the frame control bits determining the
address meaning.
• Sequence control field, which contains a frame sequence number and is used to
avoid frame duplication which would occur due to the acknowledgement mecha-
nism.
• Data field, which carries data of the length up to 2312 bytes.
• CRC field, which is 32-bit long and is used for the ARQ (acknowledgement)
procedure.
In the contention mode in which all stations compete for the channel, the so-called
Distributed Coordination Function (DCF) is the basic channel access method. The DCF
is based on CSMA (Carrier Sense Multiple Access] with collision avoidance. The carrier

372 
WIRELESS LOCAL AREA NETWORKS
sensing is performed on two levels: at the physical layer interface (physical carrier
sensing), and at the MAC sublayer (virtual carrier sensing). Physical carrier sensing
detects other active WLAN terminals by measuring the signal power level and analyzing
the received packets. In order to perform virtual carrier sensing, the duration ID field of
a MAC frame carrying request to send (RTS), clear to send (CTS) or data is used. The
terminals in the same BSS read the duration ID field and set their Network Allocation
Vector (NAV).The NAV is a kind of timer. It determines the period of time in which
the channel is busy. The channel can be sensed again after the NAV period increased
by the so-called Interframe Space (IPS) time period. This idle period is used to set
the priorities of the terminals. There are three types of IPS periods differing in length:
short IPS (SIPS), point coordination function IPS (PIPS), and DCF-IFS (DIPS).
Figure 16.17 presents two typical situations in the contention mode, i.e. when
RTS/CTS frames are not applied (Figure 16.17a) and when they are applied (Fig-
ure 16.17b). In the first case the source station, which previously obtained the right
to transmit, sends a data packet. Other stations read the MAC frame and detect from
the Detection ID field how long the channel will be busy. Therefore, they can set their
NAV timers for the appropriate time period. The contention window starts after the
additional DIPS period. The stations competing for the channel choose a randomized
backoff time after which they sense the channel. The station which has selected the
shortest backoff time finds the channel idle and starts to transmit data.
In the second situation, the source and destination terminals exchange the RTS and
CTS packets first. The stations which are in the source terminal range set their NAV
timer already after reading the RTS frame, which contains the Detection ID field as
well. Other stations which are located in the range of the destination terminal set their
NAV timer after detection of CTS. Some other stations start to count down time to
the next possible channel sensing from the moment of start of the data packet. Let
us note that the pair of source-destination terminals do not need to compete for the
channel access till the acknowledgement of the data packet is received. If the packet
is incorrectly received and has to be repeated, the source terminal has to contend for
the channel again together with other stations which wish to send their packets. The
Contention Window (CW) is set individually for a terminal up to a maximum value.
If in an unsuccessful attempt to obtain channel access a specified backoff time was
selected, in the next attempt the randomized backoff time is selected from the range
limited by the previously selected value. In turn, if collisions occur, the contention
window is doubled to increase the granularity of the backoff time selection and decrease
the probability of selection of the same backoff time by more than one terminal.
A similar channel access procedure is performed if the data packet (MSDU - MAC
Service Data Unit) is large and requires fragmentation. After gaining the channel
access, the source terminal sends consecutive fragments of the MSDU acknowledged by
the destination terminal. Both terminals do not need to compete for the channel access
till the whole MSDU block has been transmitted.
The method of collision avoidance described above ensures fair access to all competing
terminals; however, this mechanism does not guarantee a minimum delay of packet
delivery to the terminals supporting time-bounded services [11].

IEEE 802.11 WLAN STANDARDS 
373
(a)
Source
terminal
DIFS
am*
SIFS
Destinatian
terminal
Other
station
ACK
DIFS
>*".;,< "
Access not allowed
Contention
window
(b)
Source
terminal
DIFS
SIFS 
SIFS
Destination
terminal
cm:
Other
station
Access not allowed
ACK
Contention
window
Figure 16.17 Transmission of MAC packet data unit without using RTS/CTS frames (a) and
using CTS/RTS frames (b)
Besides the contention mode, in the infrastructure-based networks the terminals can
periodically operate in the contention-free mode in which the point coordinator per-
forms polling. Time is divided into contention-free repetition intervals which consist
of contention-free periods (CFP) and contention periods. Let us consider the network
operation during a CFP.
The point coordinator (PC) senses the channel and waits for the end of the current
transmission. After detection the end of transmission, the PC waits for PIFS seconds

374 
WIRELESS LOCAL AREA NETWORKS
Point
coordinator
Station"!
Station 2
Stations
^
* *"
ACK
] -
 
L
Contention-free period
Figure 16.18 Example of the contention-free period
Contention
period starts
and starts transmission of the beacon frame. Let us note that the PIFS period is shorter
than DIFS period, therefore the PC starts to transmit earlier than any other station
could do. The beacon frame is used for synchronization and timing. After reception of
this frame all terminals set their NAV timers for the whole contention-free period. SIFS
seconds after the end of the beacon frame the PC sends one of three possible frames: CF-
Poll, Data or Data+CF-Poll frame. Only the polled terminal can respond to the polling
after SIFS period by sending an ACK frame or a Data+CF-ACK frame. The polled
station can direct its frame to another station which answers using a CF-ACK frame,
too. After PIFS seconds the point coordinator starts polling and sending data again.
The contention-free period finishes with the CF-End frame. Figure 16.18 presents an
example of a single contention-free period, in which the access point-to-terminal and
station-to-station transmission take place.
16.6 
IEEE 802.11 AND HIPERLAN STANDARDS FOR 5 GHZ BAND
Continuation of work on even higher data rates applied in WLANs led to the next IEEE
802.11 physical layer extension and the establishment of a new ETSI standard called
HIPERLAN Type 2 [6], [7]. This was partly possible due to the fact that new bands
in 5 GHz range were assigned to WLAN applications. Tables 16.2 and 16.3 present the
frequency bands and power limits for US IEEE 802.11 and HIPERLAN/2 applications.
Two acronyms contained in Table 16.3 have the following meaning:
• DFS (Dynamic Frequency Selection) is a method of dynamic adaptive selection
of carrier frequency, applied to avoid interference from other users,
• TPC (Transmit Power Control) denotes the RF power adjustment to ensure reli-
able communication between HIPERLAN access point (AP) and the most distant

IEEE 802.11 AND HIPERLAN STANDARDS FOR 5 GHZ BAND
375
Table 16.2 US 5.2 GHz Unlicensed National Information Infrastructure (UNII) band
Frequency band
[GHz]
5.150 - 5.250
5.250 - 5.350
5.725 - 5.825
Maximum output power
minimum of
50 rnW
250 mW
1000 mW
4 dBm+10log10 B
11 dBm+10log10 B
17 dBm+10log10 B
Note: B is the -26-dB emission bandwidth in MHz
Table 16.3 HIPERLAN/2 frequency bands
Frequency band
5.150 - 5.350
5.470 - 5.725
RF power limit
200 mW mean EIRP
1 W mean EIRP
Comments
Indoor use only and implementation
of DFS and TPC
Indoor and outdoor use and
implementation of DFS and TPC
terminal located in the area managed by this AP, as well as between two HIPER-
LAN devices (in the uplink or direct link).
It is worth mentioning that the MAC layer of the IEEE 802.11 WLAN terminal work-
ing in the 5 GHz band is the same as that which was already described in the previous
section; however, the layers above the HIPERLAN/2 physical layer are different and
will be briefly described. The physical layer in both IEEE 802.11 and HIPERLAN/2 is
very similar, therefore we will concentrate on HIPERLAN/2 only.
HIPERLAN/2 is designed to work in two configurations: business environment and
home environment. The HIPERLAN/2 for business environment is an access network
which consists typically of several access points (APs) connected by a core network.
Each AP serves a number of mobile terminals associated with it. The coverage areas of
neighboring APs may partially overlap. Roaming between the coverage areas managed
by different APs is also possible.
The second type of the HIPERLAN/2 network is typical for home environment. In
that environment an ad hoc network is typically created. Such a network can consist
of a few subnetworks equivalent to cells in a cellular access system. Each subnetwork
operates at a different frequency and has a central controller which is dynamically
selected from HIPERLAN/2 terminals operating in this subnetwork.
HIPERLAN/2 can operate in the following modes:
• Centralized mode, in which access points are connected to the core network; com-
munication between a mobile terminal and another device (e.g. another mobile
terminal) is always performed via the access point to which the mobile terminal
is associated.

376 
WIRELESS LOCAL AREA NETWORKS
• Direct mode, in which terminals exchange traffic directly between each other; how-
ever, this exchange is managed by a central controller (CC). The central controller
can be connected to a core network and can operate in both centralized and direct
modes.
16.6.1 HIPERLAN/2 physical layer
In the HIPERLAN/2 physical layer the following operations are performed. The stream
of protocol data units (PDUs) received from the Data Link Control layer is first scram-
bled, then FEC encoded. Subsequently, the code words are interleaved and after par-
titioning the data stream into short data blocks the mapping onto data symbols is
performed. The data symbols modulate the subcarriers of the Orthogonal Frequency
Division Multiplexing (OFDM - see Chapter 1) signal. After forming a burst and shift-
ing the signal into the RF band, the OFDM burst is transmitted over the radio channel.
Scrambling is performed by modulo-2 adding the PDU sequence to the output of the
properly initialized linear feedback shift register (LFSR) determined by the polynomial
p(x) = x1 + x4 + I. N bits of the scrambled PDU sequence are supplemented with 6
tail bits. This block is a subject of FEC coding. The FEC coding consists of the rate
R — 1/2 convolutional coding and two-level puncturing. The convolutional code has the
constraint length L = 7 and is determined by the generator polynomials g1 = 133OCT
and g2 = 17lOCT- The first level puncturing following the convolutional encoder is only
applied to a part of the PDU train. The second level puncturing is performed on the
output bits from the first level puncturing in cases of 9/16 and 3/4 coding rates. Next,
the encoded bit stream is a subject of block interleaving.
As we remember, in OFDM the data stream is divided into a set of parallel lower
rate data streams which modulate particular subcarriers. As a result, the signaling
rate is much slower and the multipath effect can be contained in the first part of the
OFDM data symbol which is not used in the detection process. Particular subcarriers
are densely located on the frequency axis and their signals are mutually orthogonal in
the prescribed time periods (see details in Chapter 1). Table 16.4 summarizes OFDM
parameters of the HIPERLAN/2 signal.
By selection of the FEC coding gain and modulation formats applied in each sub-
carrier we can achieve a whole range of data rates. Table 16.5 presents achievable bit
rates at the selected coding rates and modulation types.
The spectrum assigned to WLANs in the 5 GHz band is effectively used by placing
the OFDM channels on the frequency axis with a 20 MHz carrier raster. The spectrum
of a single OFDM channel is at least 16.25 MHz wide (see Table 16.4). The carrier
frequencies in the lower band are 5.180, 5.200, ..., 5.320 GHz and the mean EIRP
power of the generated signal is 23 dBm. In the upper band assigned to HIPERLAN/2
in Europe the carrier frequencies are 5.500, 5.520, 5.540, ..., 5.700 GHz. The OFDM
spectrum is evenly distributed around a carrier frequency.
Let us recall that OFDM modulation is usually performed digitally by the IFFT
(Inverse Fast Fourier Transform) algorithm. At the beginning of a received block a
cyclic prefix is added. It is the replicated end-part of the IFFT output vector.

IEEE 802.11 AND HIPERLAN STANDARDS FOR 5 GHZ BAND
377
Table 16.4 The values of OFDM parameters applied in HIPERLAN/2
Parameters
Sampling rate fs = 1/T
Symbol part duration TU
Cyclic prefix duration TCP
Symbol interval Ts = Tv + TC p
Number of data subcarriers NSD
Number of pilot subcarriers NSP
Total number of subcarriers NST
Subcarrier spacing Af = 1/TU
Spacing between the two outmost subcarriers
Value
20 MHz
64* T = 3.2 ^s
16 * T = 0.8 fj,s
(mandatory)
80 * T = 4.0 fis
8 * T = 0.4 /LXS
(optional)
72 * T = 3.6 /jts
48
4
52
312.5
NST * A/ =
kHz
16.25 MHz
Table 16.5 
HIPERLAN/2 data rates determined by the coding rates and modulations
Modulation
BPSK
BPSK
QPSK
QPSK
16QAM
16QAM
64QAM
Coding rate
1/2
3/4
1/2
3/4
9/16
3/4
3/4
Nominal bit rate [Mbit/s]
6
9
12
18
27
36
54 (optional)
The receiver blocks reflect those applied in the transmitter. After having been re-
ceived from the antenna and after down-conversion, the signal is subsequently converted
to the digital form. Next, the cyclic prefix is removed. The remaining block of samples
is processed by the FFT algorithm, which performs block correlation with the reference
subcarriers. The resulting vector is equalized and its elements are fed to the decision
devices which find the most probable data symbols. After demapping the bit represen-
tation of each data symbol is obtained and the resulting bit stream is deinterleaved and
FEC decoded. Finally, an JV-bit long PDU train is recovered.
Transmission of digital data is organized in OFDM packets. Each packet starts
with the preamble consisting of a certain number of short OFDM training symbols,
followed by a few long training symbols. During transmission of regular information,
four subcarriers are used as pilots, e.g. they transmit known data symbols. The pilots
placed at the beginning of a packet are used for automatic gain control, for initial
frequency correction and timing acquisition. The pilots used inside a packet are applied
to adjust the phase offset and residual frequency offset. More information on pilots in
HIPERLAN/2 can be found in [7]. Similar considerations on the preambles in the IEEE
802.11 OFDM packet are presented in [13] and [15].

378 
WIRELESS LOCAL AREA NETWORKS
16.6.2 
HIPERLAN/2 data link control layer
The Data Link Control (DLC) is the layer situated on top of the physical layer. Its
functions are divided into medium access control and radio link control.
MAC frame 
MAC frame
MAC frame 
MAC frame
BC - phase 
DL - phase 
DiL - phase 
UL - phase 
RA - phase
Figure 16.19 HIPERLAN/2 MAC frame format
In HIPERLAN/2 medium access control is based on the TDMA/TDD principle.
From the point of view of MAC functions, time is divided into MAC frames which are
2 ms long. Each MAC frame consists of several phases shown in Figure 16.19. Their
names and tasks are as follows:
• Broadcast (BC) phase - carries the broadcast control channel (BCCH) and frame
control chanel (FCCH). The BCCH contains general information and status bits
giving detailed broadcast information in the Downlink phase (DL). The FCCH
indicates the structure of the current frame.
• Downlink phase - carries information directed from the AP or central controller
(CC) to the specified mobile terminal or contains some broadcast information.
• Uplink phase - contains information sent by a mobile terminal to the AP or CC.
• Direct Link (DiL) phase - carries data directly between the involved mobile ter-
minals under control of the AP or CC.
• Random Access (RA) phase - is used to transmit RCH (random access) channels
which are applied for transmission of control information, assignment to the AP
or CC and handover.
The lengths of the MAC frame phases are flexible. Within the DL, DiL and UL
phases short and long protocol data units (PDU) are transmitted. The long PDUs are
54-byte long and contain user data and control information. The short PDUs are 9-
byte long and contain only control information, carrying ARQ messages or information
related to radio link control.
In the random access phase the RCH channels are realized by 9-byte packets trans-
mitting radio link control messages and resource requests. The slotted Aloha is the
random access method applied in the RA phase. Collisions are avoided thanks to using
a binary backoff procedure controlled by the mobile terminals. The AP determines the
number of RCH slots applied in the MAC frame.

BLUETOOTH 
379
The HIPERLAN/2 DLC layer also performs error control. Let us differentiate this
type of error control from the FEC coding applied in the physical layer. Error control
in the DLC layer relies on the selective repeat ARQ scheme (see Chapter 1).
Within the DLC layer several Radio Link Control (RLC) functions are performed.
The first one is the Association Control Function, which realizes the following tasks:
association of a MAC ID to a terminal and negotiation of the link capabilities, en-
cryption key exchange (optional) and refresh, authentication, and beacon signaling in
the AP/CC and disassociation. Another function is the Radio Resource Control which
performs the following tasks: dynamic frequency selection, measurements performed by
mobile terminals, reporting the measurements to the AP, frequency change perfomed
by the AP and its associated mobile terminals, power saving procedure, transmit power
control, handover and checking if the mobile terminal "is alive". Finally, DLC Connec-
tion Control (DCC) function deals with the connection set up, release or modification.
The DCC function also allows a mobile terminal to join or leave a multicast group.
Finally, the Convergence Layer adapts the core network to the HIPERLAN/2 DLC
layer [6].
As we have already mentioned, the MAC layer of the IEEE 802.11 WLAN based on
the OFDM transmission is the same as the MAC layer cooperating with the remaining
four physical layers in which a single carrier transmission is used. Therefore, we did
not consider it twice. The minor differences betwen the physical layer of HIPERLAN/2
and IEEE 802.11 are listed in [13].
16.7 BLUETOOTH
Bluetooth [17], [18], [16] is a universal radio interface operating in the ISM band. It
provides ad hoc wireless connectivity between portable electronic devices located in
a short range from each other. The Bluetooth radio system is not a wireless LAN,
although its philosophy is similar to it in many aspects. Therefore, we are describing
Bluetooth in the chapter devoted to WLANs.
Bluetooth is named after Harald Blatand, a Danish Viking king who lived in the
early Middle Ages. Bluetooth is a result of a special interest group (SIG) formed by
Ericsson in 1998 and promoted by Ericsson, Intel, Nokia and Toshiba, who formed a
consortium. Many other leading communication and microelectronic companies joined
the consortium. Bluetooth aspires to be a de facto standard for wireless radio interface
used for communication between mobile phones, laptops, headsets, printers, projectors
and many other devices of home or office use. Bluetooth is aimed to replace a web of
cables connecting these devices by ad hoc wireless connections.
In order to perform this task, Bluetooth should fulfill the following requirements:
• The system should operate worldwide. From this point of view, the use of a
worldwide available and licence-free frequency band is a prerequisite. Such a band

380 
WIRELESS LOCAL AREA NETWORKS
is the ISM band, presented in the considerations on IEEE 802.11 WLANs. Let us
recall that it ranges between 2.400 and 2.4835 GHz in the USA and Europe (with
some exceptions in Prance and Spain) and from 2.471 to 2.497 GHz in Japan.
• The connection should support voice and data. It is an important requirement
if headsets or multimedia devices are to be connected using this interface. This
requirement determines the types of provided connections.
• The radio transceiver should be small, inexpensive and should operate at low
power. This feature would enable to place the Bluetooth interface in a mobile
phone, a headset, a personal digital assistant, or in any other battery-operated
device.
The character of the connected devices and their mutual location indicates that a
lot of ad hoc connections will coexist in the same area without being coordinated with
one another. We can expect that a lot of small subnetworks with a limited number
of terminals (devices) will operate in close vicinity. This fact and the available free
band in which the system operates determine further technical requirements. First of
all, the system should be immune to other systems using the same band and resistant
to the interference from the connections made by other Bluetooth users. The lack of
coordination between the connections indicates that spread spectrum technique has
to be applied. The frequency hopping (FH) spread spectrum fulfills all the above
mentioned requirements. It also makes it possible to build low-cost and low-power
transceivers. In consequence, it has been selected as a transmission method in the
Bluetooth interface.
In Bluetooth frequency hopping with time division duplex (FH/TDD) transmission
is applied. Time is divided into 625-^ts slots. The system band is divided into 79
one-MHz frequency channels. During each time slot the signal occupies one of these
channels according to the selected hopping pattern. In consequence, there are 1600 hops
per second. The direction of transmission alternates from slot to slot. In the USA and
most European countries all 79 channels are used in the frequency hopping process. In
France, Spain and Japan the available bandwidth is smaller, so only 23 hop frequencies
are applied.
Each slot is used to send a packet. The packets are transmitted from the master to
the slave or vice versa. A basic Bluetooth subnetwork is called a piconet. A piconet is
established by the first station which initializes transmission to another device. Such a
station becomes a master and performs this function till it switches off or moves outside
the range of stations constituting the same piconet. The other stations in the piconet
work as slaves. The overall number of stations creating a piconet cannot exceed eight.
Transmission in a subnetwork takes place exclusively between the master and the slaves.
The master coordinates the access to the channel on the basis of the polling principle,
so the transmission is contention-free. The slave station whose address was contained
in the master-to-slave packet sent in the preceding slot transmits to the master station.
Piconets can partially overlap and a particular station can participate in a few of them
at the same time or it can temporarily move to another piconet. A station can be a
master in no more than one piconet. A configuration of overlapping piconets is called
a scatternet.

BLUETOOTH
381
A piconet which is established by a given station is determined by a Bluetooth FH
channel. The FH channel is defined by the master station identity and its system
clock. The identity determines the hop sequence, whereas the system clock indicates
the hop phase. All slave stations belonging to the same piconet have to synchronize
to the master station by adding an appropriate offset to their own clocks. Different
piconets have different hop sequences. The sequences have been carefully selected to
ensure their good statistical properties and immunity to mutual interference. At the
same time their number should be large enough so they are not fully orthogonal. The
lack of orthogonality is compensated by coding and ARQ techniques applied in data
transmission. The sequence period lasts for about 23 hours. Thus, 32 consecutive hops
span about 64 MHz of spectrum and all hop frequencies occur with equal probability
[16]. By selection of a different station identity and clock phase the station is able to
instantaneously switch to another piconet.
Table 16.6 The values of RF radio parameters applied in Bluetooth [18]
Parameter
Modulation
Peak data rate
RF bandwidth
RF carriers
Carrier spacing
Transmit power
Value
GFSK (h = 0.3)
1 Mbit/s
220 kHz (-3 dB), 1 MHz (-20dB)
79/23
1 MHz
< 20 dBm
The packets placed in subsequent time slots are sent using Gaussian-shaped FSK
modulation with the modulation index h = 2A/T = 0.3. The basic transmission
parameters are listed in Table 16.6. The packets have a fixed format. Each packet
consists of 72-bit access code, 54-bit packet header and a payload. The payload can
have 0 to 2745-bits. The packet format and the header fields are shown in Figure 16.20.
72 bits
54 bits
Access I Packet
code 
header
0 - 2745 bits
Payload
54 bits
FEC 1/3-rate coding
4 bits
Type
1 bit
SEQN
Figure 16.20 Bluetooth packet format and the header fields

382
WIRELESS LOCAL AREA NETWORKS
The access code is unique for the FH channel (and the piconet). The stations listen
to the access code of the received packet and check if the packet has been sent by a
station belonging to the same piconet. If not, the rest of it is ignored. The access code
is also used for synchronization and offset compensation.
A header is a packet field which follows the access code. It contains the MAC address
of the slave which transmits the packet to the master or to whom the master sends a
packet, the packet type code, the flow control bit, the ARQ and packet sequence bits and
header error check (HEC) bits. The packet header is protected using the 1/3 repetition
code.5 The last field of the packet is usually a payload; however, there are packet types
which do not contain the payload field. Typically packets do not exceed one time slot
(625 /zs); however, in some types of links multi-slot packets are used. They occupy three
or five slots. A multi-slot packet starting at the kth time slot and lasting for n = 3 or
5 slots is transmitted on a single hop frequency fk, but the next packet is transmitted
using the hop frequency fk+n-i resulting from the regular hop pattern.
One of the basic requirements for Bluetooth was to enable voice and data transmis-
sion. This determines the types of the links defined in the Bluetooth specification. They
are:
• Synchronous Connection-Oriented (SCO) links supporting symmetrical, point-to-
point, circuit-switched connections usually used for voice transmission. They are
realized by reserving two consecutive slots at fixed slot intervals for forward and
reverse transmission.
• Asynchronous Connectionless (ACL) links used for bursty data transmission and
supporting packet-switched symmetrical and asymmetrical connections.
Depending on the type of the link, the applied coding rate, the payload length and
the symmetry/asymmetry of a connection, several types of packets are defined. They
are summarized in Table 16.7 for ACL links and in Table 16.8 for SCO links.
Table 16.7 Parameters of ACL packets [17]
Type
DM1
DH1
DM3
DH3
DM5
DH5
AUX1
Payload
header
[bytes]
1
1
2
2
2
2
1
User
payload
[bytes]
0- 17
0- 27
0- 121
0- 183
0- 224
0- 339
0- 29
FEC
2/3
No
2/3
no
2/3
no
no
CRC
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
Symmetric
Max. rate
[kbit/s]
108.8
172.8
258.1
390.4
286.7
433.9
185.6
Asymmetric max. rate
[kbit/s]
Forward
108.8
172.8
387.2
585.6
477.8
723.2
185.6
Reverse
108.8
172.8
54.4
86.4
36.3
57.6
185.6
5The code word of the 1/3-rate repetition code consists of a sequence of triplicated bits.

BLUETOOTH
383
Table 16.8 Packet parameters in SCO connections [17]
Type
HV1
HV2
HV3
DV
Payload
header
[bytes]
na
na
na
1 D
User
payload
[bytes]
10
20
30
10+(0 - 9) D
FEC
1/3
2/3
no
2/3 D
CRC
no
no
no
yes D
Symmetric
max. rate
[kbit/s]
64.0
64.0
64.0
64.0 +57.6 D
Note: items followed by the letter D relate to data fields only
Let us note that the data rate of up to 723.2 kbit/s can be achieved in asymmetric
links in which 5 consecutive slots are used to transmit long packets. In SCO links the
basic data stream has the rate of 64 kbit/s and is mostly devoted to voice transmission.
Bluetooth specifies two types of voice representation: a regular 64-kbit/s nonlinear
PCM and a continuous variable slope delta (CVSD) modulation (see Chapter 1).
The applied coding rates are equal to 1/3 or 2/3. The 1/3 code is a repetition code
already mentioned in the description of a packet header. The 2/3 code is a shortened
Hamming code and is used both in SCO and ACL packets.
In ACL links the fast ARQ technique is applied. The station which transmits a
packet is notified of the packet reception in the slot directly following the slot in which
a packet in the opposite direction has been sent. The ARQN bit of the header carries
an ACK or NAK message which is the response to the packet transmitted in the last
slot.
A Bluetooth station remains in one of four modes. It can be in a connection mode,
idle mode, park mode and sniff mode. In the connection mode transmission proceeds.
In the idle mode the station wakes up for about 10 ms in a period of time ranging from
1.28 to 3.84 s and searches for its access code, which means a paging signal. If a piconet
has been established, the slave station can switch into park mode in which it scans the
piconet FH channel with a lower duty cycle than in the idle mode. In the sniff mode
the station scans the channel even more infrequently. Except in the connection mode,
in other modes a station saves power by being active only for a short fraction of time.
This is particularly important for battery-operated devices.
Another important procedure in the Bluetooth system is establishing a connection.
Let us assume that a station remains in an idle mode. It has to check if another station
wishes to communicate with it. Therefore, it periodically wakes up and searches the
channel for its access code. The searching relies on correlation of the received data with
the station access code and lasts for about 10 ms. During the wake-up phase the station
"visits" one of 32 hop frequencies which are repeated periodically. The 32-hop sequence
is unique for each station. Let us consider the station which wishes to page a particular
station remaining in an idle mode. The paging station must know the identity of the
station it wishes to connect. Knowing the identity, it calculates the access code which
is practically used as a paging message. The wake-up hopping sequence is also derived

384 
WIRELESS LOCAL AREA NETWORKS
from the station identity. In consequence, the paging station transmits the access code.
It is transmitted repeatedly on different wake-up hop frequencies. Let us note that
during 10 ms in which the paged station wakes up and scans the FH channel the paging
station visits 16 different hop frequencies6 out of 32 used by the paged and paging
station. The paging station cyclically sends the access code of the paged station during
the sleep time of the station because it does not know the moments of its waking up.
If there is no response from the paged station, the second half of 32 hop frequencies is
cyclically visited and the paged station finally detects its access code. The maximum
access delay is a doubled sleep time. If the paging station receives an answer from the
paged station in the form of the access code, it sends the so-called HFS packet. It
contains a real-time clock and identity information necessary to synchronize the hop
sequences of both stations. This way a piconet is established, in which the paging
station is a master and the paged station is a slave.
To establish a connection with a given station, its identity has to be known. If the
identity is not known, the station which wishes to set a connection can broadcast an
inquiry message asking all the stations in its range to send their addresses and clock
information. The stations which received and decoded the inquiry message send their
FHS packet, carrying their identity and clock information. In order to avoid collisions,
a pseudorandom backoff mechanism is used in the FHS packet transmission.
Transmision in the Bluetooth system is protected against eavesdropping and unautho-
rized use. During the connection set-up, the authentication process of the participating
stations is performed. The station initiating this process sends a 48-bit address to the
recipient, which returns a 128-bit block. On the basis of this block, a 128-bit secret
link key and the 48-bit address of the recipient the signed response (SRES) is generated
in both stations. The signed response is transmitted by the initiating station to the
recipient where it is compared with the SRES calculated locally. If both strings are
identical, the authentication is successful.
The payload bits are additionally encrypted by being modulo-2 added to the data
stream generated by the linear feedback shift register (LFSR), which is initialized in
each time slot. More advanced security algorithms are applied at higher levels of trans-
mission, which are beyond the Bluetooth system.
* * *
As we have mentioned, many important communication and electronic companies be-
long to the Bluetooth consortium. They pursue a smart policy of popularizing the
Bluetooth standard. Since Bluetooth is a good solution to wireless connectivity of dif-
ferent devices in home and office environment, it may be expected to become more and
more popular.
6During 10 ms 16 slots lasting for 625 f*s occur.

REFERENCES 
385
REFERENCES
1. J. H. Schiller, Mobile Communications, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 2000
2. B. Bing, High-Speed Wireless ATM and LANs, Artech House, Boston, 2000
3. J. Geier, Wireless LANs, Macmillan Technical Publishing, 1999
4. B. H. Walke, Mobile Radio Networks: Networking and Protocols, Wiley & Sons,
Ltd., Chichester, 1999
5. ETSI EN 300 652 V.I.2.1, Broadband Radio Access Networks (BRAN); High Perfor-
mance Radio Local Area Network (HIPERLAN) Type 1; Functional Specification,
1998
6. ETSI TR 101 683 V.I. 1.1, Broadband Radio Access Networks (BRAN); HIPERLAN
Type 2; System Overview, 2000
7. ETSI TS 101 475 V.I. 1.1, Broadband Radio Access Networks (BRAN); HIPERLAN
Type 2; Physical (PHY) Layer, 2000
8. ETSI TR 101 177 V.I.1.1, Broadband Radio Access Networks (BRAN); Require-
ments and Architectures for Broadband Fixed Radio Access Networks (HIPER-
ACCESS), 1998
9. ISO 8802, Information Processing Systems - Local Area Networks - Part 2: Logical
Link Control. International Standard, 1990
10. IEEE 802.11, Information Technology - Telecommunications and Information Ex-
change Between Systems - Local and Metropolitan Area Networks - Specific Re-
quirements, Part II: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical
Layer (PHY) Specifications, November 1997
11. B. P. Crow, I. Widjaja, J. G. Kim, P. T. Sakai, "IEEE 802.11 Wireless Local Area
Networks", IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 35, No. 9, September 1997, pp.
116-126
12. R. T. Valadas, A. M. de Oliveira Duarte, A. C. Moreira, C. T. Lomba, "The Infrared
Physical Layer of the IEEE 802.11 Standard for Wireless Local Area Networks",
IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 36, No. 12, December 1998, pp. 107–112
13. R. van Nee, G. Awater, M. Morikura, H. Takanashi, M. Webster, K. Halford, "New
High-Rate Wireless LAN Standards", IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 37,
No. 12, December 1999, pp. 82–88
14. M. J. E. Golay, "Complementary Series", IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, April 1961,
pp. 82-87
15. R. van Nee, R. Prasad, OFDM for Wireless Multimedia Communications, Artech
House, London, 2000

386 
WIRELESS LOCAL AREA NETWORKS
16. J. C. Haartsen, "The Bluetooth Radio System", IEEE Personal Communications,
February 2000, pp. 28–36
17. Specification of the Bluetooth System, Specification Volume 1, Bluetooth V.1.0 B,
December 1999
18. J. Haartsen, "BLUETOOTH - The Universal Radio Interface for ad hoc Wireless
Connectivity", Ericsson Review, No. 3, 1998, pp. 110–117

17
Third generation mobile
communication systems
17.1 
INTRODUCTION
In the previous chapters we presented examples of existing mobile communication sys-
tems. Among the second generation systems there are several cellular systems which
have attracted millions of subscribers, such as GSM, IS-95, IS-136 and PDC (the last
two only mentioned in this book), wireless telephony like DECT, PACS and PHS, data
transmission systems like GPRS and EDGE or personal satellite communication sys-
tems (e.g. Iridium, Globalstar). A large variety of systems differing in applications
requires different equipment. It is also worth noting that the existing systems operate
in selected environments only. Thus, it would be desirable to create a universal system
which could operate anywhere, anytime using a unified equipment.
The research on third generation systems was initiated long before the potential of the
GSM and other second generation systems was exhausted.The aim was to create a global
standard which would enable global roaming. The International Telecommunications
Union (ITU) began to work on the third generation mobile communication system
by defining the basic requirements. The system was initialy called Future Public Land
Mobile Telecommunication System (FPLMTS) and now is know as International Mobile
Telecommunications (IMT-2000). The basic requirements are as follows:
• Throughput rates up to
— 2 Mbit/s indoors and for pedestrians
- 384 kbit/s for terminals moving at no more than 120 km/h in urban areas
— 144 kbit/s in rural areas and for fast moving vehicles
• Support of global mobility
387

388 
THIRD GENERATION MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
• Independence of the IMT-2000 services from the applied radio interface technol-
ogy. This allows use of different air interfaces. On the other hand, multimode
terminals must be used.
• Seamless switching between fixed and wireless telecommunication services
• Support of circuit- and packet-switched services
• Support of multimedia and real-time services
• Implementation of the Virtual Home Environment (VHE). The user interface
features typical for his/her home environment remain the same during roaming
in different networks
The implementation of a system which would fulfill the above requirements was left
to the following regional bodies:
• ETSI (European Telecommunications Standard Institute), which since 1995 has
worked on proposals for UMTS (Universal Mobile Telecommunication System)
WCDMA (Wideband CDMA) radio access,
• the T1P1 committee in the USA which has coordinated research on the evolution
of the second generation systems used in the USA (IS-95, IS-136 and GSM 1900)
which resulted in the proposal of a multicarrier CDMA based on IS-95,
• ARIB (Association for Radio Industries and Businesses) in Japan, which pro-
posed an air interface very similar to the UMTS interface,
• TTA (Telecommunications Technology Association) in South Korea which pro-
posed to use CDMA in the air interface proposal, too.
In 1998 the 3GPP (3rd Generation Partnership Project) group was established in
order to define a common wideband CDMA standard. As a result the UMTS was
defined. However, an alternative standard called cdma2000 was also promoted by those
partners who wished to extend the IS-95 system. This way the 3GPP2 (3rd Generation
Partnership Project 2) was also established. In fact, three different IMT-2000 standards
were agreed upon:
• UTRA (UMTS Terrestrial Radio Access) - wideband CDMA transmission with
FDD and TDD modes and 5 MHz carrier spacing
• MC CDMA (Multicarrier CDMA)
• UWC136 (Universal Wireless Communications) - the standard based on the con-
vergence of IS-136 and GSM EDGE. The UWC136 will be a natural extension of
TDMA systems.
Figure 17.1 presents the evolution from the second generation systems to the third
generation systems.

INTRODUCTION 
389
IMT-2000 capabilities
7-28,8 kbit/s 
50-144kbit/s 
384 kbit/s-2Mb/s
IS136/CDPD 
• • - > • 
IS136+/
> 
EDGE/
** 
UWC136
uc^en
GSM
pnr/ 
-> 
WCDMA
PacketmSePDC 
£ 
(FDD, TDD)
cdmaOne 
^ 
cdma2000 
^ cdma2000 3x
IS95A/B 
1x 
multicarrier
1999/2000 
2001/2002
Figure 17.1 Evolution of the second generation systems resulting in the third generation systems
So far we have discussed the evolution of radio access standards. As we know, radio
access is only a part of a whole communication system. Another part is the core
network, which connects different elements of the radio access system with the fixed
part of the system and with other networks such as PSTN, ISDN, the Internet and
PDSN. The evolution has taken place in this respect, too. It has been decided that
the UMTS and EDGE systems (evolving from GSM) will initially work with the GSM
core network. On the other hand, the cdma2000 and EDGE (evolving from IS136)
will initially work with the IS-41 core network. Both core networks will be equipped
with interworking functions to enable roaming and other services. In a longer time
perspective, all IMT-2000 networks will cooperate with the IP core network similar to
the present core network of the GPRS system.
The implementation of third generation systems depenfd on the spectrum allocation
made by the administrative bodies. Figure 17.2 presents spectrum allocation agreed
upon during the World Radiocommunications Conference WRC-2000. Let us note that
the spectrum for IMT-2000 has been allocated in almost all countries except the USA,
where the third generation system will be allocated a new spectrum in the future, or
the existing PCS system spectrum will change its application.
In the following we will briefly describe the most important third generation systems:
UMTS and cdma2000. Currently, whole books are devoted exclusively to UMTS or
cdma2000, so the reader searching for details is asked to study [1], [2] [3] and [4].

390 
THIRD GENERATION MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
1850
1900
1950
ITU
WRC
-2000
1710 -1885 MHz
(WRC-2000)
2000
MSS
2050
1885MHz
Europe 
GSM 1800 DECT
1880MHz 
'
1900MHz
1875MHz
China GSM 1800
1885MHz
UMTS
IMT 2000
2025MHz
• ir»r> 
III
UMTS (FDD UL)
1920MHz 
1980MHz 
2010MHz
IMT 2000 
MSS
1980MHz
Japan
Korea
(w/o PHS)
1918MHz
PHS 
IMT 2000
1895MHz
PCS
MSS
North
America
A D B EF C
Uplink
1850
1900
A 0 B EF C
Downlink
1950
MSS
2000
2050
2100
2150
2200
IMT 2000 
•** 250°-2690
I Ml ^UUU 
MHz(WRC-2000)
IMT 2000 MSS
IMT 2000 MSS
2165MHz
Reserved
MSS
2100
2150
2200
Figure 17.2 Spectrum allocation for IMT-2000 in different parts of the world agreed upon during
WRC-2000 (MSS - mobile satellite systems)
17.2 
THE CONCEPT OF UMTS
The basic purpose of introducing the UMTS is to support integrated digital wireless
communications at the data rates up to 2 Mbit/s in the 2 GHz band. Table 17.1 presents
the bands allocated to the UMTS.
Table 17.1 UMTS spectrum allocation
Frequency [MHz]
1900–1920
1920–1980
1980–2010
2010–2025
2110–2170
2170–2200
Bandwidth [MHz]
20
60
30
15
60
30
Destination
UMTS (terrestrial), TDD
UMTS (terrestrial) FDD, UL
UMTS (satellite) FDD, UL
UMTS (terrestrial) TDD
UMTS (terrestrial) FDD, DL
UMTS (satellite) FDD, DL
The UMTS requirements are similar to those stated for IMT-2000. They are:
• Operation in various types of environment. The terrestrial part of the
UMTS will operate in several environments, from rural to indoor environment.
There will be three basic types of cells fitted to these environments: picocells.

UMTS RADIO ACCESS NETWORK ARCHITECTURE 
391
microcells and macrocells with appropriate physical layers of the UMTS. The
satellite segment of the UMTS will constitute a supplement of the land mobile
system and will work in the areas of very low traffic density or under-developed
infrastructure.
• The choice of duplex transmission. The bandwidth allocated by WRC'92
consists of two paired bands and two unpaired bands. This implies the necessity
to apply frequency division duplex transmission in the paired bands and time
division duplex transmission in the unpaired bands (see Tab. 17.1).
• A wide service offer. The UMTS should support a large selection of services,
from voice transmission to fast data transmission. The traffic can be asymmet-
ric. The system should be flexible enough to allow for the introduction of new
services in the future. For this purpose the radio access system should support
unidirectional links based on a few basic bearer services.
• Cooperation with fixed networks. The UMTS will be integrated with wireline
wideband networks such as B-ISDN. Intelligent Networks (IN) technology will be
applied.
Following the above requirements a list of services has been proposed and their quality
has been defined. Table 17.2 (based on [5] with modifications) shows the UMTS service
proposals. The UMTS offers voice, data and videotelephony transmission. Besides
that, it can be treated as a wireless extension of integrated services digital networks.
Therefore, the system supports basic ISDN access at the rate of 144 kbit/s (two B
channels plus a D channel). Data transmission at the rate of 2 Mbit/s, possible in a
limited range, allows transmission of compressed video.
Similar to the second generation systems, the UMTS will ensure a high level of
security of transmitted data. It is important not only for the privacy of individual
telephone calls, but also for support of tele-banking and e-commerce.
The UMTS applies a high quality Adaptive Multi-Rate (AMR) speech coding based
on ACELP coding with discontinuous transmission and comfort noise insertion. It works
at 8 different bit rates: 4.75, 5.15, 5.90, 6.70, 7.40, 7.95, 10.20 and 12.20 kbit/s. Three
of them are compatible with speech coders applied in the existing second generation
systems: 6.70 kbit/s - PDC EFR, 7.40 kbit/s - IS-641 (US TDMA/IS-136) and 12.20
kbit/s GSM EFR. The data rate of the AMR coder depends on the network load, the
service level specified by the network operator and the current SNR value.
17.3 
UMTS RADIO ACCESS NETWORK ARCHITECTURE
As we have already mentioned, the UMTS takes advantage of the existing GSM and
GPRS networks, which serve as a core network in the UMTS infrastructure. Figure
17.3 presents the UMTS radio access network architecture.
There are three main elements of this architecture:
• User Equipment (UE), which consists of

392
THIRD GENERATION MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Table 17.2 Examples of services in UMTS
Type of service
Speech transmission
Voiceband data
Hi-Fi sound
Videotelephony
Short messages/paging
E-mail
Facsimile (G4)
Broadcast or multicast transmission
Web browsing
Digital data without specified limitations
Access to data bases
Teleshopping
Electronic newspaper
Remote control
Navigation and location
Teleworking
Data rate
[kbit/s]
4.75–12.2
2.4–64
940
64-144
1.2-9.6
0–384
64
1.2-9.6
16–64 (UL)
96–384 (DL)
64-1920
2.4-768
2.4-768
2.4-2000
1.2-9.6
64
32–64
Error rate
10-4
10-6
10-5
10-7
10-6
10-6
10-6
10-6
10-6
10-6
10-6
10-6
10-7
10-6
10-6
10-6
10-6
Allowable delay
[ms]
40
200
200
40–90
100
many minutes
100
100
seconds
100
200
90
200
100
100
90
Uu
User Equipment (UE)
UMTS Terrestrial Radio Access
Network (UTRAN)
Core Network (CN)
Circuit Switched
Networks
PSTN,
PLMN, ISDN,
etc.
Packet Switched
Networks
e.g. Internet
External Networks
Figure 17.3 UMTS radio access network
Mobile Equipment (ME), which is a radio terminal connecting a UMTS sub-
scriber through the radio interface Uu with the fixed part of the UMTS
system
UMTS Subscriber Identity Module (USIM), which is a smart card similar to
the SIM card used in the GSM system. The card contains the subscriber
identity, authentication algorithms, authentication and encryption keys etc.

UMTS RADIO ACCESS NETWORK ARCHITECTURE 
393
• UMTS Terrestrial Radio Access Network (UTRAN), which is a system of base
stations and their controllers. It consists of two kinds of elements:
— base stations called Nodes B (in accordance with the 3GPP), which per-
form physical layer processing such as channel coding, data interleaving, rate
matching, modulation, etc. Briefly, a base station converts the data between
the Uu radio interface and the lub interface connecting a Node B with the
Radio Network Controller.
- Radio Network Controllers (RNCs), which control Nodes B connected to
them and manage radio resources assigned to them. In this sense the RNC
performs the data link layer processing and participates in the handover
procedures. The RNC is considered a service acccess point of UTRAN for
the core network. It is connected to a single MSC/VLR to route circuit-
switched traffic and to a single SGSN to route packet-switched traffic.
• Core Network (CN) is shared with GSM and GPRS. It therefore contains typical
elements both for circuit-switched and packet-switched systems, i.e.:
— Home Location Register (HLR) performing functions similar to those in the
GSM and GPRS systems,
— Mobile Switching Center/Visitor Location Register (MSC/VLR) handling
the circuit-switched traffic,
— Gateway MSC (GMSC) connecting the UMTS with external Circuit-Switched
(CS) networks,
— Serving GPRS Support Node (SGSN) similar to that in GPRS and serving
the packet-switched traffic,
- Gateway GPRS Support Node (GGSN) connecting the UMTS with external
Packet Switched (PS) networks.
Let us turn our attention to the interfaces shown in Figure 17.3. Most of the interfaces
have been defined with such accuracy that elements of the UMTS can be produced by
different manufacturers. Thus, the system can be attractive to many manufacturers
and can gain more popularity. Below we list the UMTS interfaces and present their
basic functions. They are as follows:
• Cu Interface connects the hardware part of the UMTS terminal with the USIM
smart card. It conforms to a standard format of smart cards.
• Uu Interface is the radio interface between UMTS terminals and the base stations
(Nodes B). It is precisely defined to allow for functioning of terminals of different
brands. The novel contribution of the UMTS is this definition of the Uu interface.
• lub Interface defines communication between base stations and an appropriate
RNC.
• lur Interface is the interface between different RNCs. Let us note that there is no
equivalent of lur interface in GSM; however, in the UMTS the lur is necessary

394
THIRD GENERATION MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
to perform a soft handover with the participation of two base stations which are
controlled by two different RNCs. This interface is also used if a connection from
a base station is routed from the so-called Drift RNC to the Serving RNC, which
finally, through the lu interface, directs it to the core network.
• lu Interface connects the UTRAN with the core network and is functionally sim-
ilar to the A interface in GSM and the Gb interface in GPRS.
In the literature and the descriptions of UMTS standards one can find detailed con-
siderations on different aspects of protocol layering. The interested reader is directed
for example to [1]. Here we will only quote the general protocol model for UTRAN
interfaces, which is directly related to above considerations on the UMTS radio access
network and defined interfaces. This protocol model is shown in Figure 17.4.
Radio
Network
Layer
Transport
Network
Layer
Control Plane
Application
Protocol
A
Transport Network
User Plane
Transport Network
Control Plane
User Plane
Data
Stream(s)
A
Transport Network
User Plane
¥
Signaling
Bearer(s)
f
ALCAP(s)
f
Signaling
Bearer(s)
f
Physical Layer
. 
. . T ._.
Data
Bearer(s)
*
Figure 17.4 General protocol model for UTRAN interfaces
The protocol model consists of horizontal layers and vertical planes. Two main
horizontal layers have been introduced:
• Transport Network Layer, in which data from the User Plane and Control Plane
are mapped onto dedicated and shared Transport Channels. Transport channels,
in turn are mapped onto Physical Channels
• Radio Network Layer, which is concerned with UTRAN-related issues, e.g. access
to UTRAN via the lu interface.
The following vertical planes have been defined across the Radio Network Layer and
the Transport Network Layer:
• Control Plane used for UMTS control signaling, consisting of an Application Pro-
tocol specific for the appropriate interface and a Signaling Bearer used for the
Application Protocol messages,

UMTS AIR INTERFACE 
395
• User Plane, in which all user data such as encoded voice or packet data are
transported. Within the user plane there are Data Streams and Data Bearers
associated with them. Data streams are characterized by one or more frame
protocols.
Within the Transport Network Layer the following vertical planes are defined:
• Transport Network Control Plane used for all control signaling within the Trans-
port Layer. It consists of
- Access Link Control Application Part (ALCAP) responsible for configura-
tion of transport channels with respect to the given requirements and for
combining the user and control data into dedicated and common channels,
and
— Signaling Bearers needed to perform the ALCAP.
• Transport Network User Plane which contain Signaling Bearers for the Applica-
tion Protocol and data bearers in the User Plane.
17.4 
UMTS AIR INTERFACE
The UMTS Terrestrial Radio Access (UTRA) interface was defined by the 3rd Gen-
eration Partnership Project (3GPP). It is often called WCDMA (Wideband CDMA]
interface. WCDMA has two modes of operation differing in the kind of duplex trans-
mission. As we have already mentioned, in the paired bands the UMTS operates in
the FDD mode, whereas in the unpaired bands, the standard is the TDD mode. Both
modes differ in their potential applications and details of their air interfaces. Table 17.3
presents the basic features these two modes.
Before we consider the WCDMA air interface, let us clarify its layered structure.
Figure 17.5 presents the meaningful components of the air interface protocol architec-
ture.
All the protocols can be placed in one of the three lowest OSI layers: the physical
(PHY) layer, the Data Link Control (DLC) layer and the network layer.
The physical layer offers information transfer services in the form of transport chan-
nels. In the physical layer all the signal processing functions, channel coding, inter-
leaving, modulation, spreading, synchronization, etc. are performed. One of them is
mapping of transport channels onto physical channels.
The Data Link Control layer is divided into the following sublayers:
• Medium Access Control (MAC) sublayer
• Radio Link Control (RLC) sublayer
• Packet Data Convergence Protocol (PDPC) sublayer
• Broadcast/Multicast Control (BMC) sublayer.

396 
THIRD GENERATION MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Table 17.3 Basic parameters of WCDMA interfaces
Multiple access method
Duplex method
Channel bandwidth
Chip rate
Frame length
Time slot structure
Multirate method
Spreading (DL)
Spreading (UL)
Spreading factor
Channel coding
Interleaving
Modulation
Pulse shaping
Detection
Burst types
Dedicated channel
power control
Intra-frequency handover
Inter-frequency handover
Channel allocation
Intra-cell interference
cancellation
UTRA FDD
CDMA
FDD
UTRA TDD
TDMA/CDMA
TDD
5 MHz
3.84 Mchip/s
10 ms
15 slots/frame
Multicode, multislot and OVSFa
Multicode and OVSFa
OVSF sequences for channel sep., truncated Gold seq. (218-1)
for cell and user sep.
OVSF sequences, truncated Gold seq. (225) for user separation
4-512
1-16
Conventional coding (R=l/2, 1/3, K=9), turbo
coding (8-state PCCC, R=l/3), service specific coding
Inter- frame interleaving (10, 20, 40 and 80 ms)
QPSK
Square-root raised cosine with roll-off factor = 0.22
Coherent, based on pilot symbols
Not applicable
Fast closed loop (rate - 1500 Hz)
Soft handover
Coherent, based on midamble
Traffic, random access and
synchronization bursts
UL: open loop (100 or 200 HZ)
DL: closed loop (< 800 Hz)
Hard handover
Hard handover
No DCA6 required
Joint detection possible
Slow and fast DCA6 possible
Advanced receivers at
base stations possible
0 OVSF - Orthogonal Variable Spreading Factor - a type of spreading code used in UTRA, see the
air interface description below.
6 DCA - Dynamic Channel Allocation
The MAC sublayer performs data transfer services on logical channels, which are
defined with respect to the type of information which is transferred on them.
The RLC sublayer performs ARQ algorithms, is responsible for segmentation and
assembly of user data, controls the appropriate sequence of data blocks and ensures
avoiding block duplication.
The PDPC sublayer provides transmission and reception of network Protocol Data
Units (PDUs) in acknowledged or unacknowledged and transparent RLC modes. In
turn, the BMC sublayer performs broadcast and multicast transmission service in trans-
parent or unacknowledged mode.

UMTS AIR INTERFACE 
397
sc 
_
8 
S;
Radio Resource
Control
Signaling Radio Bearers
User Plane Radio'Bearers
Network
,PDCP
PDCP
RLC Sublayer
RLC 
RLC 
RLC 
RLC 
RLC 
RLC 
RLC 
RLC
MAC Sublayer
Physical Layer
Logical
Channels
Transport
Channels
Figure 17.5 Air interface protocol architecture (after [6])
DLC
PHY
Finally, the lowest sublayer of the Network Layer shown in Figure 17.5 is the Radio
Resource Control (RRC) sublayer. The RRC sublayer fulfills the following functions
[7]: broadcasting of system information, radio resource handling, control of requested
quality of service, measurement reporting and control.
Summarizing, to ensure that the higher sublayers perform particular functions, the
MAC sublayer offers logical channels to those sublayers. In order to realize the MAC
functions, transport channels remain at the disposal of the MAC sublayer. They are
finally mapped onto physical channels in the physical layer.
Now let us consider all three types of channels. Let us start with logical channels.
They are divided into two classes:
• Control Channels (CCH) used for the information transfer performed in the con-
trol plane
• Traffic Channels (TCH) used to carry information in the user plane.
The following types of logical control channels exist:
• Broadcast Control Channel (BCCH) used in the downlink to broadcast system
control information,
• Paging Control Channel (PCCH) applied in the downlink to page the mobile
station or wake it up if it is in the sleeping mode

398 
THIRD GENERATION MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
• Common Control Channel (CCCH) applied in the downlink and uplink to transfer
control information
• Dedicated Control Channel (DCCH) used in point-to-point transmission to trans-
fer dedicated control information between the network and a mobile station during
establishment of the RRC connection.
The logical traffic channels are divided into the following types:
• Dedicated Traffic Channel (DTCH) used in point-to-point transmission between a
mobile station and the network to transfer user information; it can be established
in the downlink and uplink,
• Common Traffic 
Channel (CTCH) applied in point-to-multipoint transmission,
carrying information for a group of mobile stations.
The logical channels realized on the level of the RLC sublayer are mapped by the
MAC sublayer onto the transport channels. Among transport channels there is a single
Dedicated Channel (DCH) and six common channels.
The DCH is a point-to-point bidirectional channel carying both user data and higher
level control data. It can be transmitted to the whole cell or a part of it if a beam-
forming antenna is used. It can rapidly change its parameters (data rate, power level,
etc.).
The common transport channels carry control data and small amounts of user data
without establishing a dedicated connection with the user. There are the following
common transport channels:
• Broadcast Channel (BCH), which sends system- and cell-specific information at
a low data rate to reach all mobile stations in a cell; it carries part of the logical
BCCH channel,
• Forward Access Channel (FACH), which operates in the downlink, sending control
information containing another part of the BCCH channel and realizing the packet
data link; there can be more than one FACH in a cell, of which at least one is
transmitted at a low data rate and at high power,
• Paging Channel (PCH), which is a point-to-multipoint channel used to page a
mobile station,
• Downlink Shared Channel (DSCH), which is an optional transport channel shared
by several mobile stations; it provides dedicated user data and is associated with
the Dedicated Channel (DCH),
• Random Access Channel (RACH), which is an uplink low rate channel. It has to
be received by a base station when transmitted from any place in a cell and is
used by a mobile station to set a connection or to send a small amount of data to
the network,

UMTS AIR INTERFACE 
399
• Common Packet Channel (CPCH), which is an optional uplink transport channel
operating according to the contention principle and used for transmission of bursty
data.
Each type of transport channel is associated with a Transport Format (TF) set.
The TF determines possible mapping, encoding and interleaving of a given type of
transport channel. The MAC layer procedure selects an appropriate transport format
for a given transport frame. The features of the applied transport format are contained
in a block called Transport Format Indicator (TFI), which usually accompanies the
tranport blocks and indicates how the transport channel is realized.
After channel coding and interleaving, several transport channels can be multiplexed.
This way the received data stream is assigned to the physical data channel. Accordingly,
the multiplexed transport format indicators form a Transport Combination Format Indi-
cator (TFCI) which is transmitted on a physical control channel. Figure 17.6 illustrates
this process.
Transport Channel 1 
Transport Channel 2
Transport Block
t 
Transport Block 
* 
Transport Block
TFI 
Transport Block 
TFI 
Transport Block
: 
Higher Layers
^ T 
j 
T 
Physical Layer
TFCI 
Coding and Multiplexing
T 
t
Physical Control 
Physical Data
Channel 
Channel
Figure 17.6 Example of mapping of the transport channels onto physical channels
Because transport channels can consist of a different number of transport blocks,
the TFCI also informs which transport channel is active in a given frame. At the
receiver, after decoding the TFCI, the data received in the physical data channel can
be demultiplexed and decoded and the transport blocks of the appropriate transport
channels can be extracted.
17.4.1 
UTRA FDD mode
In the physical layer of the UMTS time is divided into 10-ms frames. The frames, in
turn, are divided into 15 slots 666.67 /xs long. In case of applying the FDD mode, this

400 
THIRD GENERATION MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
time division is not a result of using a multiple access method, because a CDMA scheme
is applied; however, the slots are time units in which the transmission of the appropriate
channel blocks takes place. Knowing that the basic chip rate is 3.84 Mchip/s, we find
that each time slot lasts for 2560 chips.
In the UMTS FDD mode a physical channel is determined by the carrier frequency,
the applied spreading sequence and the applied signal component (in the uplink, in-
phase and quadrature components can carry different physical channels).
In the physical layer, two types of dedicated physical channels have been defined for
uplink and downlink. They are:
• Dedicated Physical Control Channel (DPCCH)
• Dedicated Physical Data Channel (DPDCH).
10ms frame
•« 
»
StotO 
I 
Slotl 
Stoti 
Slot 14
DPDCH 
Data
DPCCH 
Pilot 
TFCI 
FBI 
TPC
•« 
—- 
- 
- 
-- - -
0.666 ms = 2560 chips
Figure 17.7 Uplink Dedicated Physical Channel structure
One dedicated physical control channel and up to six dedicated data channels are
assigned to each connection. In the uplink the binary stream of the DPDCH is fed to
the in-phase input of the transmitter, whereas the binary stream of DPCCH is fed to the
quadrature input of the transmitter. If the number of data channels (DPDCH) is higher
than one, then the odd-numbered channels are summed, weighted and transmitted using
the in-phase component, whereas the even-numbered channels are summed, weighted
and transmitted together with the control channel (DPCCH), using the quadrature
component.
The DPDCH transmits user data and the DPCCH sends a pilot signal needed in the
base station receiver for channel estimation, the TFCI block indicating the DPDCH for-
mat, the Feedback Information (FBI) for downlink transmit diversity and the Transmit
Power Control (TPC) block for implementation of fast power control in the downlink
(see Figure 17.7). Both data streams are spread using two different mutually orthogo-
nal channelization codes. Thanks to them 4 to 256-ary spectrum spreading is achieved,
depending on the information sequence data rate. The Spreading Factor SF = 256/2^",
k = 0,1,... ,6, so the number of bits transmitted in one of fifteen slots of the 10-ms
frame is 10 x 2fc. Because the data rates in both physical channels can be different,
the mean power of the in-phase and quadrature inputs can be different, too. and the

UMTS AIR INTERFACE 
401
applied spreading matches the current data rate in the data channel, resulting in the
desired bandwidth. The variability of the spreading factor is obtained thanks to the
application of the Orthogonal Variable Spreading Factor (OVSF) codes [8].
SF=2 
SF=4 
SF=8
c4,1=(1, 1,1,1) 
C8,1
c2,2=(1,-1)
Figure 17.8 OVSF code tree
The OVSF codes are defined by a tree shown in Figure 17.8. Considering any node
of the tree, we see that new code words are created by appending the preceding code
word with itself (in the upper branch originating from the node) or with its negation
(in the lower branch growing from this node). Mutual orthogonality of different code
words is achieved by their appropriate selection from the code tree. A code word ci is
orthogonal to a code word Cj , if and only if the code word Cj is not associated with the
branch leading from the branch associated with the code Ci to the root of the tree or is
not located in the subtree below the code word Ci . For example, if bits of a particular
data stream are spread using the code word c8,5 = (1,— 1,1,— 1,1,— 1,1,— 1) with the
spreading factor SF = 8, then for another data stream requiring the spreading factor
SF = 4 all the code words ck,i except c4,3 can be applied.
The resulting pair of data streams spread by the OVSF code words can be interpreted
as a complex signal with the real part being the in-phase component and the imaginary
part being the quadrature component of the data signal. This complex signal undergoes
a complex scrambling1 operation. The scrambling sequence consists of two components
interpreted as the real and imaginary parts of the complex scrambling signal. Let us
note that the scrambling operation does not increase the bandwidth, i.e. the chip rate
at the output of the scrambler is the same as at its input. The aim of scrambling is
to differentiate cells. The reason for selection of a complex scrambling sequence is the
possible unequal power of the in-phase and quadrature components carrying DPDCH
and DPCCH or their sums, respectively. By applying a complex scrambling sequence
the mean powers of both components become equal. Two types of complex scrambling
1A popular method of scrambling performed in the transmitter is modulo-2 summing of a binary
information sequence with a given pseudorandom sequence. The pseudorandom sequence is selected
to ensure good statistical properties of the transmitted sequence. Repeating the same operation in the
receiver allows recovery of the original binary information sequence. In our case the modulo-2 addition
is replaced by multiplication of scrambled signals by a scrambling bipolar signal.

402 
THIRD GENERATION MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
sequences are standardized. The short sequence is 256-bit long. It is repeated at
the frequency of 15000 Hz. Such sequence is applied when joint detection receivers (see
Chapter 10) are used in the base stations. The long sequence is a pair of Gold sequences
of the period 225 — 1 truncated to a 10-ms interval and applied when a regular RAKE
receiver is used in the base station [7].
Channelization 
Complex
OVSF code 
scrambling 
COS(2fct)
sequence
DPDCH CD Re lm X Re 
Re 
X
X 
+
Im 
Im 
X 
p(t) 
X
Cc
Channelization 
sin(2fct)
OVSF code 
SWK^V*
Figure 17.9 Generation of DPDCH and DPCCH signal in the uplink
The complex in-phase and quadrature pulse stream resulting from the complex scram-
bling operation is shaped by the filters with square-root raised cosine characteristics
(roll-off factor a = 0.22) and placed in the destination band by a pair of orthogonal
modulators (see Figure 17.9).
Frame - 10 ms
Slot 
0 
Slot 
1 
Slot 
1 
Slot 14
TFCI 
Data 
TPC 
Data 
Pilot
DPCCH 
DPDCH 
DPCCH 
DPDCH 
DPCCH
0.666 ms
Figure 17.10 Frame structure in the downlink transmission of dedicated channels
The organization of the downlink transmission of dedicated channels is different from
that applied in the uplink. The dedicated data and control channels are appropriately
multiplexed, as shown in Figure 17.10. Next, they are serially demultiplexed into two
parallel data streams which are the bases of the in-phase and quadrature components
of the transmitted signal. The binary signals in each branch are spread using the same
OVSF code word in both branches. The channelization code words used in the cell
sector are selected from the same OVSF code tree. The spread signals in the in-phase
and quadrature branch are treated as the real and imaginary parts of the complex
signal, so such a signal is scrambled using a complex pseudorandom sequence which is
10 ms long. The complex pseudorandom sequence is created using two appropriately

UMTS AIR INTERFACE 
403
shifted truncated Gold sequences generated by the LFSRs of length 18. A mobile station
that wishes to be synchronized with the base station has to find synchronism with this
scrambling sequence; therefore, the number of different scrambling sequences is limited
to 512. The sequences are divided into 16 groups with 32 sequences in each group. The
scrambling sequences are assigned to a cell in the cell planning process. Figure 17.11
presents the process of generation of a WCDMA signal carrying dedicated channels in
the downlink.
p(t)
Rg 
Re
^
Cchannelization :
Im 
Im
Re 
Im
scrambling
Figure 17.11 Generation of WCDMA signal in the downlink
Let us note that the downlink slot also transmits the pilot signal. The pilot signal
ensures the coherent detection in a mobile station and makes it possible to use adaptive
antennas in the downlink [7].
Besides dedicated channels, the following physical channels are also applied in the
downlink:
• Common Pilot Channel (CPICH)
• Synchronization Channel (SCH)
• Primary and Secondary Common Control Physical Channels (P-CCPCH and S-
CCPCH)
• Acquisition Indication Channel (AICH)
• Paging Indicator Channel (PICH).
In turn, in the uplink the Physical Random Access Channel (PRACH) and the Phys-
ical Common Packet Channel (PCPCH) are used. Let us briefly consider the above
listed channels.
The Common Pilot Channel (CPICH) is transmitted by a base station in each cell to
make the channel estimation possible. Therefore, the CPICH carries an unmodulated
signal which is spread at the spreading factor equal to 256 and is scrambled with the
cell-specific scrambling code. It has to be detected in the whole cell. Besides channel
estimation, the CPICH channel is used in measurements in handover and cell selection
operations.

404 
THIRD GENERATION MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
The Synchronization Channel (SCH) is used in the cell search procedure performed
by a mobile station. The SCH consists of two subchannels: the primary and secondary
synchronization channel. The primary SCH uses a 256-chip long spreading sequence
which is the same in all cells. The secondary SCH carries a sequence of fifteen 256-
chip sequences (one sequence in each slot of a frame) which allows for frame and slot
synchronization and determination of the group of scrambling codes used in the cell.
Both synchronization channels are transmitted in parallel (using different sequences)
within the first 256 bits of each slot. The remaining 2304 bits of each slot are occupied
by the Primary Common Control Physical Channel (P-CCPCH).
The P-CCPCH carries the transport Broadcast Channel (BCH). It is transmitted
continuously and has to be received by all mobile stations located in any place of the
cell. Therefore, the spreading factor of the P-CCPCH channel is equal to 256 and the
channel is transmitted with high power. A permanently allocated channelization code
is also used. In order to ensure required transmission quality, the rate-1/2 convolutional
code with interleaving over two frames (20 ms) is applied.
The Secondary Common Control Physical Channel (S-CCPCH) is used to transmit
the following transport channels: Forward Access Channel (FACH) and Paging Channel
(PCH). At least one S-CCPCH exists in a cell. If there is one S-CCPCH, it contains
both transport channels. If there are more than one, both transport channels can use
diferent physical channels. The spreading factor used in the S-CCPCH is fixed and
determined by the maximum data rate applied. Again, the rate-1/2 convolutional code
is applied in S-CCPCH. In the case of using FACH for data transmission, the rate-1/3
convolutional coding or turbo coding can be applied as well.
The Physical Random Access Channel (PRACH) and the Acquisition Indication
Channel (AICH) are associated with each other, therefore we will describe them jointly.
The PRACH channel is used by a mobile station to access the network (by carrying
the transport RACH channel). The random access is based on the slotted ALOHA
principle. Two consecutive 10-ms frames are divided into 15 random access slots each
5120 chips long. First, the mobile station acquires timing and frame synchronization in
the cell. Then, the mobile station detects the BCH channel in order to determine the
random access slots available in a given cell, the scrambling codes and the signatures
which can be used in the random access procedure. The mobile station also measures
the received power and on the basis of this measurement it sets the power of the RACH
preamble sent in the selected random access slot. The preamble is 4096 chip long
and contains 256 repetitions of the selected signature. The mobile station periodically
transmits the preamble in the available random access slots with gradually increased
power till it detects the AICH preamble. When the AICH preamble is finally decoded,
the 10 ms or 20 ms RACH message is transmitted.
A similar procedure is applied in data transmission using the Physical Common
Packet Channel (PCPCH). The transport Common Packet Channel (CPCH) is real-
ized using this physical channel. Again, a mobile station periodically sends 4096-chip
preambles with gradually increasing power till it receives and detects the AICH pream-
ble. Then it sends a CPCH CD (collision detection) preamble and after receiving the
echo from the base station in the form of the CD Indication Channel (CDICH) it starts
to transmit its packet. The message part lasts for N x 10 ms. although it is restricted

UMTS AIR INTERFACE 
405
to a negotiated maximum length. Figure 17.12 presents the process of sending a packet
using the PCPCH channel.
DL
UL
P1
AICH 
CDICH
1
DPCCH
Power control, pilot
and CPCH commands
Power
Control
Preamble
Figure 17.12 CPCH access procedure
One of the important procedures in the UTRA WCDMA is the cell search. After
power on a mobile station has to find the closest base station. In the UMTS the base
stations operate asynchronously and use different scrambling codes selected from the
set of 512 sequences of 10 ms duration. In order to simplify and accelerate the cell
search, the procedure is performed in the following steps:
• The mobile station searches for the primary synchronization channel (SCH) which
is sent in the form of a 256-chip sequence common for all cells. This way the
starting points of the slots are found. The search is performed using the filter
matched to a known sequence. The mobile station receives the primary SCH
signals from a few surrounding cells and selects the highest local maximum of the
output signal of the matched filter, which corresponds to the closest (strongest)
base station.
• For the detected starting points of the slots the mobile station attempts to acquire
frame synchronization and tries to find a code group used in the secondary SCH.
The synchronization is performed by the correlation of the received signal (the
start of the correlation has been found in the previous step) with 64 possible sec-
ondary synchronization code words applied in the secondary SCH. All 15 possible
slots have to be checked in order to find the slot No. 0, i.e. to find frame synchro-
nization. The secondary synchronization code word determines a particular code
group to which the scrambling code in a given cell is assigned.
• The scrambling code applied in the cell is found in the third step. For this purpose
the mobile station correlates the received signal with all possible scrambling signals
belonging to the given code group. After identification of the scrambling sequence,
the mobile station is able to read the primary common control channel which holds
system parameters sent on the broadcast channel (BCH).
Once a mobile station has been registered in the network it is allocated a paging
group. The mobile station periodically reads the Paging Indicator Channel (PICH),

406 
THIRD GENERATION MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
looking for its paging indicator stating that in the secondary common control physical
channel a paging message for the mobile station belonging to a given paging group
is contained. If the mobile station has detected a paging indicator of its own paging
group, it reads the PCH frame contained in the S-CCPCH in order to check if there is
a paging message for it. The PICH channel uses a fixed data rate with the spreading
factor SF = 256. Out of 300 bits transmitted within a 10-ms frame, 288 bits are used
for paging indicators. There may be 18, 36, 72 or 144 different paging indicators, which
are transmitted as the sequences of ones (if paging is indicated) or zeros.
As we know, power control has a crucial impact on the overall CDMA system capacity.
In WCDMA FDD the open and closed loop power control is applied. The open loop
power control is used in the RACH and CPCH transmission, as was described above.
The accuracy of such an open control loop is not very high, mostly due to internal
inaccuracies of a mobile station and due to measuring the signal arriving at the mobile
station in a different band than the band of the signal whose level is controlled.
The closed loop power control is performed in each slot, so it is done 15000 times per
second. As we remember, in the uplink dedicated physical control channel (DPCCH)
block the transmit power control (TPC) field is placed in each slot, which indicates
the change of power level by 1 dB or its multiple. In the case of soft handover, when
the mobile station is assigned to two neighboring base stations, both of them send
commands to the mobile station concerning the power control. In the mobile station
the commands are appropriately weighted to work out a final decision on the power
control.
The next procedure necessary for proper functioning of a cellular system is handover.
In WCDMA there are several types handover:
• soft, softer and hard handover
• interfrequency handover
• handover between FDD and TDD modes
• handover between WCDMA and GSM.
In typical situations soft handover is performed, because cells usually operate on
the same carrier frequency. A mobile station measures the power level of the common
pilot channel (CPICH) and relative timing between cells. The mobile station entering
the handover state receives the signal from all base stations participating in the con-
nection. This is possible due to the application of the RAKE receiver whose "fingers"
are synchronized with the scrambling and spreading sequences used in the current cell
and the cell which will probably overtake the connection. The mobile station signals
are received in the base stations participating in the handover procedure and are ap-
propriately combined to perform macrodiversity. During the connection, the mobile
station searches for a new base station from the list read from the BCH channel using a
cell-search algorithm. Considering a new base station as a handover candidate implies
sending by the mobile station a request to this base station to adjust the timing offset
of the dedicated physical data and physical control channels (DPDCH and DPCCH)
with respect to its primary common control physical channel (CCPCH). This way the

UMTS AIR INTERFACE 
407
frame timing differences between signals sent by different base stations and received at
the mobile station can be minimized and the mobile station can receive the signal from
the new base station as well.
Besides a soft handover, in WCDMA the so-called softer handover also occurs. In
this state a mobile station is connected to two neighboring cell sectors served by the
same base station, so the signals received in both sectors are already combined within
the same the base station.
The main reason for interfrequency handover is the movement of a mobile station
from one cell to another if both belong to different layers of the hierarchical cell struc-
ture e.g. pico-, micro- or a macrocell. A certain problem encountered in this case is
performing appropriate measurements on other carrier frequencies than the one which
is currently in use. There are two possible solutions to this problem. If a mobile sta-
tion is able to apply space diversity, it uses a dual receiver. Then one receiver gets the
signal from the current channel, whereas the second one is able to measure a signal on
a new carrier frequency. To compensate the lost gain which in the normal case would
be achieved due to the diversity reception, the signal sent on the current channel has
to be additionally amplified by the base station. This is possible thanks to the closed
loop power control.
The second solution of the measurement problem at the interfrequency handover is
the application of the compressed mode, which is useful if a mobile station does not use
a dual receiver. With a certain periodicity, the base station which normally sends its
frames in 10-ms intervals transmits the frame contents in a shorter interval, i.e. in 5 ms,
leaving the rest of the frame time for measurements performed by the mobile station
at different frequencies. The shortening of the transmission time is performed by the
application of code puncturing and changing the FEC rate. The signal power must be
increased to compensate the loss of power following the application of the former two
means. Figure 17.13 shows the principle of the compressed mode.
Power
Time
Time for measurement
on different frequencies
Figure 17.13 Principle of the compressed mode
Handover between FDD and TDD modes is possible if a mobile station can operate
in a dual mode. A mobile station measures the power level of TDD cells, using the
common control physical channels generated twice within a 10-ms frame of the TDD
base stations. A similar situation occurs if a mobile station is able to operate in GSM -
UTRA modes. This case is called inter-system handover. In the measurement periods

408 
THIRD GENERATION MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
a mobile station attempts to find a GSM frequency correction channel followed by the
synchronization channel.
17.4.2 
UTRA TDD mode
Let us consider the UTRA TDD mode. Its main parameters are presented in Table 17.3.
Let us note that a lot of them are common for both FDD and TDD modes, which leads
to strong similarities of both transmission types and simplification of mobile stations.
As we remember, a part of the spectrum allocated to the UMTS is unpaired. In this part
of the spectrum the FDD operation is excluded, so the TDD mode has been applied.
Thanks to the time division duplex, time can be asymmetrically divided between two
transmission directions. This division can be dynamically adjusted to the current kind
of traffic. Multirate transmission can be easily implemented. Channel reciprocity is
also an interesting feature of TDD transmission. Due to the fact that the same channel
spectrum is used in both transmission directions, the measurements performed in one
direction can be utilized in the opposite one, unless the channel is a fast time varying
one.
Figure 17.14 presents the frame in the UTRA TDD mode. It lasts for 10 ms and is
divided, as in the FDD mode, into 15 time slots. The physical channel is determined
by the carrier frequency, the time slot within a frame and the applied spreading code.
Several data rates can be achieved through allocation of an appropriate number of
physical channels to the connection. This rule is also shown in Figure 17.14.
Frequency
Time
B
Figure 17.14 Example of the resource allocation for connections with different rates: A - a single
channel (1 time slot +1 spreading code word), B — a connection using 3 time slots and 2 spreading
code words, C - a connection applying 3 time slots and a single spreading code word.

UMTS AIR INTERFACE 
409
The spreading codes used in the same slot are mutually orthogonal. They are se-
lected from the OVSF code family. Particular channels are mutually synchronized. The
frame consisting of 15 time slots is divided into two transmission directions. Several
arrangements are possible [14]. The slot allocation can be symmetric with multiple
switching between uplink and downlink within a frame. It can be asymmetric with
multiple switching, or symmetric/asymmetric with a single switching within a frame.
The main point is that at least one slot has to be allocated for uplink and at least one
slot has to be allocated in the downlink in a 15-slot frame.
A 
A
Higher layers
Dedicated channel 
Common channels
(DCH)
CD
c JS 
*
Common 
control channels 
Shared channels 
Random access
•g 
(CCCH) 
channel (RACH)
Q.
in
| 
t 
* 
t 
*
Broadcast 
Forward 
Paging 
UL shared channel
channel 
access 
channel 
(USCH)
(BCH) 
channel 
(PCH) 
DL shared channel
(FACH) 
(DSCH)
* 
T T i 
t 
V
~m —
.§ "j| 
Dedicated 
Common control 
Physical USCH 
Page 
Physical random 
Synchronization
physical 
channel 
physical channel 
Physical DSCH 
indicator 
access channel 
channel
(DPCH) 
(CCPCH) 
channel 
(PRACH) 
(SCH)
(PICH)
Traffic burst I 
Random access 
Synchronization
Traffic burst II 
burst 
burst
Figure 17.15 Mapping of the TDD transport channels onto physical channels
Transport and physical channels used in the UTRA TDD mode are similar to those
applied in the FDD mode. The mapping of the transport channels onto physical chan-
nels is presented in Figure 17.15.
The length of each time slot is equivalent to 2560 chips. Transmission of physical
channels is performed in the form of bursts. There are basically three types of bursts
differing in the internal structure and the guard time length. Each burst contains two
data fields, a midamble, and is ended with a guard period. Traffic bursts can also
contain the Transport Format Combination Indicator (TFCI) and the Transmission
Power Control (TPC) bit placed on both sides of the midamble. The transmission of
TFCI and TPC is negotiated at the call set-up. The TPC field of a particular user
is transmitted only once per frame. Figure 17.16 shows the structures of traffic and
random access bursts.
Traffic burst type I is used in the uplink. Because of the application of a long
midamble. up to 16 channel impulse responses can be estimated. The traffic burst type

410 
THIRD GENERATION MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Traffic burst type I
Data symbols 
Midamble 
Data symbols
976 chips 
512 chips 
976 chips
Traffic burst type II
Data symbols 
Midamble 
Data symbols
1104 chips 
256 chips 
1104 chips 
96 chips
PRACH burst
Data symbols 
Midamble 
Data symbols
976 chips 
512 chips 
880 chips 
192 chips
1 time slot = 2560 chips
Figure 17.16 Traffic and random access bursts in TDD mode
II is basically used in the downlink and can be also used in the uplink if less than four
users are allocated to the same time slot. The midambles used in the same cell are the
cyclic shifted versions of the same basic code sequence. Different cells apply different
basic code sequences.
Transmitted data is spread in the data symbol fields. Spreading is a two-step process
performed by a channelization code and a complex scrambling code, in the same way as
in the UTRA FDD mode. Dedicated physical channels use a spreading factor SF = 16
in the downlink. As we have mentioned, more than one physical channel using a different
channelization code can be assigned to a high rate data link. In case of a single code
used in a downlink physical channel, the spreading factor can be equal to 1. In the
uplink, dedicated physical channels apply a spreading factor of the value between 1 and
16. Maximum two physical channels can be used by a mobile station per slot to increase
the data rate. Simple calculations for the burst type II indicate that transmission with
SF = 16 using a single code and a single time slot results in the 13.8 kbit/s raw data
rate. On the other end, the application of 16 codes and 13 time slots gives the data
rate equal to 2.87 Mbit/s. The same result would be achieved if instead of 16 codes
with SF = 16, one code with SF = 1 were applied.
As in the FDD mode, in UTRA TDD the Primary and Secondary Common Control
Physical Channels (P-CCPCH and S-CCPCH) are used. The P-CCPCH carries the
BCH transport channel. For that purpose bursts type I with fixed spreading with
SF = 16 are applied. The Paging (PCH) and Fast Access Channel (FACH) are carried
by the S-CCPCH. Both types of bursts can be applied; however, the spreading factor
remains fixed and is equal to 16.
The position of the P-CCPCH within a frame, i.e. the time slot number and the
used spreading code, is written in the message carried by the Synchronization Channel

UMTS AIR INTERFACE 
411
(SCH). A synchronization burst is shown in Figure 17.17. One or two synchronization
bursts can be placed in a frame. In the first case the synchronization burst is emitted
in the same slot of a frame as the P-CCPCH. Every time slot can be selected for this
purpose. If two synchronization bursts are applied, then the Synchronization Channel
(SCH) is allocated in the kth (k = 0,1,... ,6) and (k + 8)th slots of the frame, whereas
the P-CCPCH is located in the kth time slot. Figure 17.17 illustrates the second case
when k = 0. The SCH consists of a primary sequence and three secondary sequences,
each of them 256-chip long. The sequences start at a specified time offset which is se-
lected from 32 possible values. This prevents the capturing effect which would otherwise
occur due to the mutual synchronization of base stations.
1 frame = 10 ms
TS 0 TS 1 TS 2 TS 3 TS 4 TS 5 TS 6 TS 7 TS 8 TS 9 TS10 TS11 TS12|TS.13TS-14
P-CCPCH
c0
s 
c0
s
2560 
chips 
2560 chips
Figure 17.17 Position of the SCH in the TDD frame for k = 0 and two SCH bursts in the frame
A mobile station sends a request for access to the channel using the Physical Random
Access Channel (PRACH). The request is realized by sending a random access burst,
shown in Figure 17.16. Let us note that a longer guard time is applied in the burst. It
allows operation at the time propagation differences resulting from the distance differ-
ences of the order of 7.5 km. Let us also note that a regular guard time applied in traffic
bursts is equivalent to the duration of 96 chips which implies differences in propagation
time equal to 25 us. This in turn allows design of cells of the radius of 3.75 km, without
applying the timing advance procedure.
A mobile station is paged by the message transmitted on the secondary CCPCH;
however, first the Page Indicator Channel (PICH) has to be used, which is realized by
replacing the S-CCPCH and carrying page indicators for appropriate groups of mobile
stations. Generally, the paging mechanism is similar to that described for UTRA FDD
and will not be described here.
Physical Uplink and Downlink Shared Channels (PUSCH and PDSCH) are used for
setting and transmitting user-specific parameters such as power control, timing advance
or directive antenna settings.
Due to the nature of the TDD mode, hard handover is applied. The network supplies
a mobile station with a list of neighboring base stations whose strength should be
measured. The mobile station performs the measurements in idle time slots. Similar

412 
THIRD GENERATION MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
handover types as in UTRA FDD occur in UTRA TDD. They are: TDD—TDD, TDD—
FDD, WCDMA-TDD—GSM handovers.
In the design phase of the UMTS TDD system, several kinds of interference have to
be taken into account. Detailed interference analysis [1] allows us to draw the following
conclusions:
• TDD base stations managed by a single operator have to preserve frame synchro-
nization; the frame synchronization between base stations managed by different
operators is also desired.
• Allocation of asymmetric uplink and downlink traffic in the cell is not fully free,
strong interference can potentially arise between transmission directions.
• Dynamic channel allocation (DCA) is a powerful tool used to avoid interference in
the TDD band. Another possibility is the use of inter-frequency and inter-system
handover.
• Special attention has to be paid to mutual influence of FDD and TDD systems,
in particular those operating in lower TDD band and FDD uplink band.
Interference among users implies application of advanced receiver structures both in
base and mobile stations. In base stations joint detection receivers (see Chapter 10) can
be applied. It is a feasible solution due to the fact that the number of simultaneous users
in a time slot is relatively low, so the computational complexity of such receivers is still
acceptable, in particular when suboptimal solutions are used. In mobile stations, it is
possible to apply single user detectors which combine adaptive intersymbol interference
equalization with cancellation of multiple access interference (MAI).
TDMA transmission applied in the UTRA TDD mode has serious consequences for
the cell coverage, since discontinuous transmission causes power reduction. Generally,
in order to provide the same coverage area as in the FDD mode, more TDD base
stations are needed. Therefore, the UMTS in the TDD mode can be applied as a
system complementary to the FDD, especially for data transmission and asymmetrical
links.
17.5 CDMA2000
As we have already mentioned, the 3rd Generation Partnership Project 2 (3GGP2) de-
veloped the air interface called cdma2000 which has evolved from the second generation
CDMA IS-95 air interface popular in America and South Korea.
Cdma2000 is one of the most important proposals for an IMT-2000 air interface.
The first phase of cdma2000 called cdma2000 1x is an extension of the existing IS-95B
standard. It allows doubling of the system capacity and increased data rates up to

CDMA2000 
413
614 kbit/s. The second phase called cdma2000 1xEV (Evolution) is a further enhance-
ment of cdma2000 1x. It includes High Data Rate (HDR) technology providing data
rates up to 2.4 Mbit/s. Initially, a dedicated carrier is devoted to high-speed packet
data, whereas one or more additional carriers are used to realize voice connections.
In later development of the 1xEV, packet data and voice transmission will be com-
bined in the same carrier; however, packet services on a separate carrier can be possible
[17]. Finally, in the third phase of cdma2000 development, called cdma2000 3x, three
independent non-ovelapping CDMA channels are used, retaining backward compatibil-
ity with cdma2000 1x and IS-95B. Tripling the bandwidth and giving some additional
freedom results in service enhancement and data rates up to 2 Mbit/s. Figure 17.18
shows the spectrum arrangement for cdma2000 1x and 3x. The cdma2000 is designed
to operate in the following environments [4]:
• outdoor rnegacells (cell radius >35 km),
• outdoor macrocells (cell radius 1 - 35 km),
• indoor/outdoor microcells (cell radius < 1 km),
• indoor/outdoor picocells (cell radius <50 m),
• wireless local loops.
IS-95/cdma2000 1 x 
cdma2000 3x
Downlink
1.25 MHz 
3 x 1.25 MHz
f
Uplink
1.25 MHz 
3.75 MHz
Figure 17.18 Spectrum arrangements for cdma2000 1x and 3x in downlink and uplink
Specific solutions for 3G systems in the USA partially result from the fact that no
additional spectrum has been allocated to these type of systems. The PCS band (see
Figure 17.2) currently partially used by cdmaOne (IS-95 based systems) and 1S-136,
has to be gradually reused by new 3G systems. Therefore backward compatibility is a
highly desired feature of the 3G systems.
Let us concentrate on the basic features of cdma2000. Table 17.4, based on [3],
presents the basic parameters of this system.
In cdma2000, as in IS-95, the downlink and uplink channels are called forward and
reverse channels, respectively. Figure 17.19 presents the list of dedicated and common
physical channels used in cdma2000.

414 
THIRD GENERATION MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Table 17.4 Basic parameters of cdma2000[3]
Channel bandwidth
DL RF channel structure
UL RF channel structure
Chip rate
Frame length
Timing
Channel coding
Modulation
Detection
Spreading factors
Spreading in downlink
Spreading in uplink
Multirate
Handover
Power control
cdma2000 1x
1.25 MHz
Direct Spread (DS)
Direct Spread (DS)
1.2288 Mchip/s (DL)
1.2288 Mchip/s (UL)
cdma2000 3x
3x1.25 MHz
Multicarrier, DS on each carrier
Direct Spread (DS)
1.2288 Mchip/s per carrier (DL)
3.6864 Mchip/s (UL)
20 ms / 5 ms option for signaling bursts
Synchronous, derived from GPS
Convolutional, turbo or no coding
QPSK
UL: Coherent, pilot sequence multiplexed with power control bits
DL: Coherent, common continuous pilot channel and auxiliary pilot
4 – 256
Variable length orthogonal Walsh sequences (channelization)
m-sequence of length 2 (the phase shift determines the cell)
Variable length orthogonal Walsh sequences (channelization)
m-sequence of length 2 -1 (the phase shift determines the user)
Variable spreading and multicode
Soft handover, interfrequency handover
Open loop and fast closed loop (800 Hz)
As we see in Figure 17.19, the list of physical channels is very long. The functioning
of many channels is very similar to the functioning of the physical channels in the
previously described IS-95 system; therefore, we will consider them very briefly. Let us
start with the forward link (equivalent to downlink in the UMTS).
The Forward Pilot Channel (F-PICH) is used by a mobile station to estimate the
channel impulse response necessary in RAKE reception. It is also needed in cell ac-
quisition and handover. It consists of a sequence of logical zeros, spread by the Walsh
function No. 0. The actual pilot sequence is received due to the complex scrambling
code determining the cell (see Table 17.4 and Chapter 11). The forward pilot signal is
common for all mobiles in the cell, so the overhead due to it is not very significant.
The Forward Sync Channel (F-SYNC) is used by mobile stations to acquire system
synchronization. There are two possible types of a synchronization channel [4]: the
shared F-SYNC functioning in the IS-95B and cdma2000, which operates in the same
area and wideband F-SYNC using the entire channel bandwidth and which can be
applied in overlay (IS-95B and cdma2000) and non-overlay systems.
The Forward Paging Channel (F-PCH) is used to page mobile stations located in a
cell and to send them several control messages to them, such as channel assignment,
acknowledgments, etc. There may be more than one paging channel in a cell. The
applied data rate is 9.6 or 4.8 kbit/s. The data is first convolutionally encoded (R = 1/2.
k = 9), then repetition (if the input data rate is 4.8 kbit/s) and block interlaving are
applied. The received signal is modulo-2 summed with the decimated long code which is
characteristic for the paging channel. Finally, the signal is spread using an appropriate

F/R-DPHDH
Forward/Reverse Dedicated
Physical Channel
CDMA2000 
415
F-DAPICH 
R-PICH
Forward Dedicated 
Reverse Pilot
Auxiliary Pilot 
Channel
Channel
F/R-FCH
Forward/Reverse
Fundamental
Channel
F/R-DCCH
Forward/Reverse
Dedicated Control
Channel
F/R-SCH
Forward/Reverse
Supplemental
Channel
F/R-SCH1
Forward/Reverse
Supplemental
Channel 1
Common Physical
Channels
F-PICH
Forward Pilot
Channel
F-CAPICH
Forward Common
Auxiliary Pilot
Channel
F-CCH
Forward Common
Channel
R-CCH
Reverse Common
Channel
F-CCCH 
F-SYNC 
R-ACH 
R-CCCH
Forward Common Forward Sync Reverse Access Reverse Common
Control Channel 
Channel 
Channel 
Control Channel
F-QPCH 
F-PCH 
F-BCCH
Forward Quick 
Forward Paging Forward Broadcast
Paging Channel 
Channel 
Control Channel
Figure 17.19 Physical channels used in cdma2000
Walsh function and is further processed by the output section. Shared and wideband
paging channels are possible, similar to the sync channel.
The Forward Common Control Channel (F-CCCH) is used to carry MAC and net-
work layer messages to mobile stations.
The Forward Common Auxiliary Pilot Channel (F-CAPICH) is applied to generate
spot beams, using adaptive antennas. The F-CAPICH is used by mobile stations located
in the generated spot beam. Similarly, the optional Forward Dedicated Auxiliary Pilot
Channel is applied to target a particular mobile station.
The Forward Broadcast Common Channel (F-BCCH) is a type of paging channel
which transmits overhead messages and SMS broadcast messages, so the paging channel
does not have to transmit them. The number of the Walsh function used by the F-
BCCH channel is transmitted on the sync channel.

416 
THIRD GENERATION MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
The Forward Quick Paging Channel (F-QPCH) is used to page mobile stations op-
erating in the slotted mode.
The Forward Fundamental Channel (F-FCH) is used to carry the downlink traffic.
The 20 ms frame and the variable data rates are chosen from the data rate sets known
from IS-95B: RS1 (1.5, 2.7, 4.8 and 9.6 kbit/s) and RS2 (1.8, 3.6, 7.2 and 14.4 kbit/s)
(see Chapter 11). The existence of many configurations of coding, repetition and block
interleaving results in a great number of available data rates (see [4] or cdma2000
standards [18]-[21] for details). All configurations yield the same number of 384 bits in
a 20 ms frame, which is equivalent to 19.2 kbit/s for the RS1 rate set or 768 bits in a
20 ms frame equivalent to 38.4 kbit/s for RS2 rate set.
The Forward Supplemental Channel (F-SCH) is used to carry user information jointly
with the fundamental channel at higher rates than can be achieved using the fundamen-
tal channel only. Convolutional coding is applied for lower data rates, whereas turbo
coding is applied for higher data rates. More than one F-SCH can be allocated to the
link at the same time. Several supplemental channels can have different requirements
on error rates depending on applications. A wide range of data rates can be achieved,
starting from 9.6 kbit/s and ending with 921.6 kbit/s for the RS2 data set applied in
the multicarrier cdma2000 configuration. Is is worth noting that such data rates are
practically achieved using multicode and multicarrier channel assignment. In transmis-
sion on supplemental channels the channelization Walsh functions can have different
length (different spreading factor) depending on the input data rate. They are selected
in such way that the bandwidth remains constant after spreading.
The Forward Dedicated Control Channel (F-DCCH) transmits point-to-point control
data at the data rate of 9.6 kbit/s.
As an example let us consider the block chain for data transmitted on the forward
supplemental channel with the input data selected from the data rate set RS2 [4] when
N = 3 carriers as in cdma2000 3x are used (Figure 17.20).
The data block to be transmitted in a 20 ms frame is first appended with 16 CRC bits,
then the encoder tail and reserve bits are added. Next the data block is convolutionally
encoded by the code of the constraint length k = 9 and the coding rate R = 1/4. The
resulting data are block interleaved and modulo-2 summed with the decimated output of
the long code generator with the mask characteristic for the nth user. The data stream
is demultiplexed into three branches generating CDMA signals on three carriers (f1, f2,
and f3). The binary streams are mapped into the in-phase and quadrature components
and changed from the binary into bipolar form. Subsequently, both components are
spread using the Walsh functions operating as the channelization codes and scrambled
by the 215-long PN complex sequence. The phase of this sequence determines the cell.
The in-phase and quadrature outputs of the scrambling process are spectrally shaped
by the baseband filters and modulated using the appropriate carrier frequency. Let us
note that besides the signals shown in Figure 17.20 other channels such as pilot, paging,
fundamental channel, etc. are also transmitted.
Let us turn our attention to the uplink transmission. We will shortly describe the op-
eration of most of the reverse physical channels shown in Figure 17.19. Reverse physical
channels can be divided into dedicated channels which are a means of communication

CDMA2000
417
Input
RS2
13.2 kbit/s
27.6 kbit/s
56.4 kbit/s
114.0 kbit/s
229.2 kbit/s
459.6 kbit/s
920.4 kbit/s
Add
16-bit
CRC
Encoder tail &
reserved bits
k=9
=9 
R=1/4
Conv. encoder
14.4 kbit/s
28.8 kbit/s
57.6 kbit/s
115.2 kbit/s
230.4 kbit/s
460.8 kbit/s
921.6 kbit/s (R=1/2)
Block
interleaver
1152 bits
2304 bits
4608 bits
9216 bits
18432 bits
36964 bits
36864 bits
per 20 ms frame
Long PN code
mask of the nth
user
Decimator
MUXand
IQ mapping
binary-to-
bipolar
mapping
MUXand
IQ mapping
binary-to-
bipolar
mapping
MUX and
IQ mapping
binary-to-
bipolar
mapping
Power control
bits (16 bits/20 ms)
P(t)
Walsh No.n1
Re
Im
Walsh No.n2
Walsh No.n3
Re
Im 
Im
Re 
lm
COS(2 f1t)
P(t)
Pit)
P(t)
A
cos(2f3t)
sin(2f3t)
p(t)
Carrier 1
Carrier 2
Carrier 3
Figure 17.20 Transmission of data at the RS2 rates on the forward supplemental channel with
multicarrier CDMA (cdma2000 3x)
between a particular mobile station and the base station, and common channels which
are used to send information from multiple mobiles stations to the base station.
The Reverse Access Channel (R-ACH) is a multiple channel used by mobile stations
to obtain access to the system resources. The slotted ALOHA principle is used in the
R-ACH transmission. Let us note that due to the CDMA multiple access, more users

418 
THIRD GENERATION MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
can simultaneously attempt to get the access to the medium. More than one R-ACH
channel can be used on one carrier frequency. The channels are then differentiated by
the applied PN codes.
The Reverse Common Control Channel (R-CCCH) is applied to transmit MAC and
network layer messages from a mobile station to the base station. The R-CCCH offers
extended capabilities as compared with the R-ACH, which enable faster access in packet
data transmission.
The Reverse Pilot Channel (R-PICH) consists of the pilot sequence originating from
setting a fixed value at the channel input, multiplexed with the power control bits which
are used in the closed loop power control. The R-PICH is applied in the base station
for initial acquisition, time tracking, channel estimation and sequence synchronization
used by the RAKE receiver and power control measurements [4].
The Reverse Dedicated Control Channel (R-DCCH) is associated with individual
transmission from a mobile station to the base station.
The Reverse Fundamental Channel (R-FCH) is used to transmit user data. The data
rates applied in R-FCH depend on the rate sets. They are equal to 1.5, 2.7, 4.8 and 9.6
kbit/s for RS3 and RS5 rate sets and are equal to 1.8, 3.6, 7.2 and 14.4 kbit/s for the
rate sets denoted as RS4 and RS6.
The Reverse Supplemental Channel (R-SCH) is an additional channel to cany user
data. It can be applied in two modes. In the first one the data rate does not exceed 14.4
kbit/s and the base station has to detect the real data rate without explicit information
sent from the mobile station. In the second mode, higher data rates are possible but
the data rate is known in advance.
The configuration of the fundamental, supplemental, pilot and dedicated channels
differs from an analogous configuration in the downlink. The properly encoded and
interleaved data streams sent on the fundamental, dedicated control and supplemental
channels are assigned to the in-phase or quadrature components after application of
the Walsh channelization codes. They are subsequently scrambled by the PN com-
plex sequence modified by the user-specific long code. Finally, after pulse shaping, the
in-phase and quadrature components are placed in the destination band by a pair of
orthogonal modulators. Let us stress that the spreading performed by the channeliza-
tion functions depends on the input data rates and the Walsh functions of different
lengths can be used. This is a major difference between cdma2000 and IS-95B. Figure
17.21 presents the channel assignment to appropriate signal components, applied in the
uplink (reverse) direction.
Several typical procedures, which have been previously described for UMTS, have to
be performed in cdma2000 as well. The most important are: power control, handover,
cell search and random access procedures.
Open loop and closed loop power control are applied in cdma2000. Typically, the
level of transmitted signal is set on the basis of the measured level of the received signal.
In cdma2000, as well as in the UMTS, the FDD mode is applied, so the accuracy of
the open loop is limited. In the cdma2000 closed loop power control, the commands
dealing with the power level modifications are transmitted in both directions 800 times
per second. As a result, medium and fast fading can be compensated.

CDMA2000 
419
R-SCH 2 
GS2
R-PICH Walsh S2
+ 
p(t)
R-DCCH
Re 
Re 
cos(2fct)
Walsh C +
R-FCH 
lm 
Im 
sin(2fct) 
A
GF 
Re
A 
Walsh F 
+ 
P(t)
R-SCH1 Gs1
Walsh (+1,-1)
Walsh 
S1 
Decimator
by 2
PN1 
PNQ
A 
A
1-Chip
delay
Mask for 
Long 
PN 
A
Mask 
for 
code
the user n
generator
Figure 17.21 Assignment of pilot, dedicated control, fundamental and supplemental channels in
the reverse link of cdma2000 (Walsh i denotes the Walsh channelizing function specific for the
given type of channel)
The cell search procedure is performed similar to IS-95, because all the cells use the
same complex PN sequence; however, in each cell the PN sequence is applied with a
cell-specific phase shift. A mobile station searches for the pilot channel transmitting
this PN sequence with appropriate phase shift selected from a finite number of shifts.
Cdma2000 applies the soft handover procedure. 
Intersystem handover between
cdma2000 and IS-95 is also supported. The fundamental and supplemental channels are
treated differently in the handover procedure. Generally, the number of base stations
transmitting the supplemental channel to a mobile station in the handover phase is a
subset of the base stations transmitting the fundamental channel [3]. The soft han-
dover procedure tends to use as small a number of base stations as possible to minimize
interference and maximize the system capacity.
In this section we presented a general overview of the physical layer of the cdma2000.
The reader interested in the details of the cdma2000 operation is asked to study
cdma2000 specifications [18]–[21].

420 
THIRD GENERATION MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
17.6 
APPENDIX - THE SOFTWARE RADIO CONCEPT
17.6.1 Introduction
As we noticed studying the previous chapters, the physical layers of the second and
third generation systems have not been unified. Several incompatible air interfaces are
applied. To obtain global roaming, a mobile station should be able to function with
all types of air interfaces. This can be achieved by application of multimode terminals
with duplicated or triplicated RF and DSP blocks. Another solution is the application
of Software Radio.
In the concept of the Software Radio [22], [23], [24], transmitters and receivers of
the base stations and mobile stations, implemented in a specialized hardware according
to a particular standard, are replaced by a universal system. In this system the RF
part is drawn to the minimum and the remaining parts consist of wideband A/D and
D/A converters and a DSP processor which realizes the transmit/receive functions in
software. The advantage of such a solution is not only the possibility to realize several
standards of the air interface but also its universality which enables use of the applied
system in the longer term and allows for gradual modifications reflecting the evolution
of the standards. A short time from the start of the design to the development of a new
product is another advantage. It allows for a faster response to the market needs.
The concept of transmit/receive blocks realized in software can be extended to the
concept of Mobile Software Telecommunications [25]. The authors of this concept ex-
pect that many different standards will coexist and none of them will be able to realize
all multimedia services. It is assumed that terminals will be intelligent, i.e. they will be
software reconfigurable and will be able to communicate with different networks. Ter-
minals will be reconfigurable according to different standards using a certain minimal
software. It is expected that new JAVA-like programming languages will be developed
which will allow for definition of new standards and services. Such a programming lan-
guage will constitute a platform for realization of a communication session by defining
the features of a physical connection and realized services. Therefore, at the connection
set-up, its details will be defined such as: the speech encoder/decoder, applied modu-
lation, data encryption, the features of realized services, associated protocols and the
bandwidth requirements. Because most of the elements necessary to realize the com-
munication session will be implemented in software, only a small part of the physical
link realized in hardware needs to be standardized.
17.6.2 
Minimum radio standard
In order to realize a communication session it is necessary to define a minimum radio
interface which will be used to establish a basic connection and to set the remaining
elements of the realized session and services. This interface has to enable network access
and mobility management associated with the location of mobile terminals and their
paging. In association with these tasks the Network Access and Connectivity Channel
(NACCH) is defined. Figure 17.22 shows a possible placement of the NACCH modem
in the mobile terminal architecture [25].

APPENDIX - THE SOFTWARE RADIO CONCEPT 
421
Antenna
Configuration
Application
interface
Modem
Figure 17.22 The concept of NACCH modem in the architecture of mobile terminal using Soft-
ware Radio technology
Besides the mobility management, the NACCH modem should perform authentica-
tion and user registration together with establishing the traffic channels and demanded
services. In order to do this, the NACCH modem should set the Software Radio mo-
dem configuration and program the traffic channels and services. Let us note that the
terminal modem consists of two main parts - the NACCH modem and Software Radio
(SR) modem. In the idle mode, only the NACCH modem is active. The above concept
implies sending software subroutines necessary to program the SR modem by the air
interface.
Several technical problems would arise in the implementation of this approach [28] .
Transmission of the software subroutines by air must be practically error-free, otherwise
the SR terminal will not be able to operate reliably. It cannot last too long, otherwise
users will be disappointed. Therefore, transmission of the software subroutines by air
requires an advance reliable procedure in which the software integrity is checked. On
the other hand, this approach is more flexible than the second one - loading the SR
software from a smart card.
Using a smart card storing the software enables reliable and fast programming of the
SR modem; however, part of the flexibility is lost. This approach requires a whole net-
work of distribution points in which new smart cards can be purchased. The intelligent
card technology has to be further developed to enable a huge amount of SR software to
be stored.
Another problem associated with the SR technology is the form of the software stored
in network data bases or in the memory of a smart card. In order to enable competition
among terminal vendors, the software cannot be hardware-dependent. It should be
run on several DSP platforms. Therefore, it should have the form of a higher-level
language instructions which would be compiled in the SR terminal. In consequence, an
SR terminal should contain a compiler which would translate the higher-level language
instruction sequence into a hardware-dependent program.
17.6.3 
Basic elements of Software Radio architecture
Let us consider the basic scheme of a receiver applied in a mobile communication system
(see Figure 17.23) [23].

The signal received in the antenna is filtered in a bandpass (BPF) filter, which
extracts the band of a whole system. Subsequently, the signal is amplified in a low
noise amplifier (LNA) and demodulated to the intermediate frequency band, using
a programmable frequency synthesizer, a mixer and a bandpass filter. The number of
intermediate steps is greater than one. After amplification in the automatic gain control
(AGC) circuit, the signal is demodulated and shifted to the baseband, where the in-
phase and quadrature components are derived. Both component signals are sampled
and converted to the digital form. Subsequent processing is typically performed using
an ASIC2 DSP block or a DSP processor.
Antenna
BPF LNA 
BPF AGC 
BPF
X 
X
A 
A
Synthesizer 
Generator
A/D 
Output
Dem 
DSP
IF
Amplifier
Figure 17.23 Architecture of a typical receiver of a mobile communication system
As we see, the receiver consists of many elements of which a large part is implemented
in the analog form. Such a receiver is not a universal solution and is usually fitted to
a single air interface. Instead, we can consider the scheme of an idealized receiver in
which most of the functions are realized in software. Such a scheme is shown in Figure
17.24.
Antenna
BPF LNA
Output
A/D 
DSP
Figure 17.24 Scheme of the idealized software receiver
The analog-to-digital conversion is made in the radio frequency range and the remain-
ing part of the receiver is implemented by a DSP block. This scheme is fully universal
and well fitted to the Software Radio concept, although at the current state of the
D/A technology it is not realizable at the required D/A conversion accuracy. However,
it is possible to implement a digital programmable receiver with hardware support of
2 ASIC - Application Specific Integrated Circuit

APPENDIX - THE SOFTWARE RADIO CONCEPT 
423
down-conversion. The Programmable Down-Converter (PDC) realizes down-conversion
from the intermediate frequency to the baseband and performs additional filtration in
the baseband. Figure 17.25 presents the scheme of the receiver with the PDC. We
expect that fast progress in VLSI and A/D and D/A technologies will soon enable the
realization of the SR terminal.
BPF AGC
Output
X 
A/D 
PDC 
DSP
Generator
Figure 17.25 The scheme of a digital programmable receiver with the Programmable Down-
Converter (PDC)
17.6.4 
Software Radio in the realization of base stations
The application of the idea of the Software Radio in base stations is different from that in
mobile stations [23]. The main task of a SR-implemented base station is the integration
of the transmit/receive blocks operating on a single carrier in a unified, multifrequency
transceiver for a whole base station. The main difficulty in the realization of such
a transceiver is ensuring a sufficient A/D accuracy (14-bit conversion at the 50 MHz
sampling frequency in case of the GSM system). Another challenge is the design of
a highly linear high power amplifier (HPA) whose bandwidth covers a whole system
band. In [26] the estimation of the required computational complexity of a GSM base
station has been reported. It is expected that soon it will be possible to implement a
GSM base station on a fast workstation or a server.
Software Radio is currently intensively researched by large scientific teams in Europe
and the USA. The reader interested in this subject is advised to study the recently
published books [29] and [30] and numerous papers published in proceedings of mobile
communications conferences.
REFERENCES
1. H. Holma, A. Toskala (eds), WCDMA for UMTS: Radio Access for Third Genera-
tion Mobile Communications, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Chichester, 2000
2. J. P. Castro, The UMTS Network and Radio Access Technology: Air 
Interface
Techniques for Future Mobile Systems, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Chichester, 2001

424 
THIRD GENERATION MOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
3. T. Ojanpera, R. Prasad (eds), WCDMA: Towards IP Mobility and Mobile Internet,
Artech House, Boston, 2001
4. V. K. Garg, IS-95 and cdma2000. Cellular/PCS Systems Implementation, Prentice-
Hall, Upper Saddle River, N.J., 2000
5. J. Rapeli, "UMTS: Targets, System Concept and Standardization in a Global
Framework", IEEE Personal Communications, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 1995. pp.
20–28
6. ETSI TS 125.301, Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS); Radio
Interface Protocol Architecture, (3G TS 25.301) V.3.4.0, March 2000
7. E. Dahlman, P. Beming, J. Knutsson, F. Ovesjo, M. Persson, Ch. Roobol, "WCDMA
- The Radio Interface for Future Mobile Multimedia Communications", IEEE
Trans. Vehicular Technology, Vol. 47, No. 4, November 1998, pp. 1105–1117
8. F. Adachi, M. Sawahashi, K. Okawa, "Tree-structured Generation of Orthogonal
Spreading Codes with Different Lengths for Forward Link DS-CDMA Mobile". Elec-
tronic Letters, Vol. 33, No. 1, 1997, pp. 27-28
9. ETSI TS 125.211, Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS); Physi-
cal Channels and Mapping of Transport Channels onto Physical Channels (FDD),
V.3.2.0, March 2000
10. ETSI TS 125.212, Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS); Multi-
plexing and Channel Coding (FDD), V.3.2.0, March 2000
11. ETSI TS 125.213, Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS); Spread-
ing and Modulation (FDD), V. 3.2.0, March 2000
12. ETSI TS 125.214, Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS); Physical
Layer Procedures (FDD), V. 3.2.0, March 2000
13. ETSI TS 125.221, Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS); Physi-
cal Channels and Mapping of Transport Channels onto Physical Channels (TDD).
V.3.2.0, March 2000
14. ETSI TS 125.222, Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS); Multi-
plexing and Channel Coding (TDD), V.3.2.0, March 2000
15. ETSI TS 125.223, Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS); Spread-
ing and Modulation (TDD), V. 3.2.0, March 2000
16. ETSI TS 125.224, Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS); Physical
Layer Procedures (TDD), V. 3.2.0, March 2000
17. Qualcomm CDMA Technologies, The CDMA Difference,
http://www.cdmatech.com/difference/faq/cdma^OOO.html
18. 3GPP2 IS-2000.2, Physical Layer Standard for cdma2000 Spread Spectrum Systems

APPENDIX - THE SOFTWARE RADIO CONCEPT 
425
19. 3GPP2 IS-2000.3, Medium Access Control (MAC) Standard for cdma2000 Spread
Spectrum Systems
20. 3GPP2 IS-2000.4, Signaling Layer 2 Standard for cdma2000 Spread Spectrum Sys-
tems
21. 3GPP2 IS-2000.5, Upper Layer (Layer 3) Signaling Standard for cdma2000 Spread
Spectrum Systems.
22. Software Radios, Special Issue of IEEE Communications Magazine, May 1995
23. Software Radio Workshop, European Commission DG XIII-B, Brussels, May 29,
1997
24. Software Radio and Baseband Technology, Session 1 and 2, Proc. of ACTS Mobile
Summit, October 7-10, 1997, Aalborg, Denmark
25. G. Fettweis, Ph. Charas, R. Steele, "Mobile Software Telecommunications", Proc.
of European Personal Mobile Communications Conference, Bonn, 1997, pp. 321-325
26. Th. Turletti D. Tennenhouse, "Estimating the Computational Requirements of a
Software GSM Base Station", Proc. of IEEE International Conference on Commu-
nications, 1997, pp. 169-175
27. W. H. Tuttlebee, "Software Radio Technology: A European Perspective", IEEE
Communications Magazine, February 1999, pp. 118-123
28. E. Buraccini, "SORT & SWRADIO Concept", Proc. of ACTS Fourth Mobile Com-
munications Summit, 1999, pp. 587-593
29. J. Mitola III, Software Radio Architecture: Object-Oriented Approaches to Wireless
Systems Engineering, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 2000
30. E. Del Re (ed.), Software Radio. Technologies and Services, Springer-Verlag, London,
2001

This page intentionally left blank

18
Application of smart
antennas in cellular
telephony
18.1 INTRODUCTION
Growing demand for cellular telephony services and wireless access to telecommuni-
cation networks results in a continuous need to increase the capacity of the existing
systems. As we remember, the capacity of a cellular system, measured as the traffic
density per area unit, depends on many factors. These factors are: the assigned band-
width, the width of a channel required for a single carrier, the applied multiple access
method, the kind of applied modulation, methods of reception and processing of the
signal carrying information, the tolerable value of the signal-to-co-channel interference
ratio, and the type of base station antennas, in particular the number of antenna sectors.
It seems that the technique of smart antennas is one of the most important factors
which will allow a substantial increase in system capacity. Smart antennas consist of an
array of antenna elements and digital signal processing hardware and software which
perform beamforming and estimation of direction of arrival (DoA) [9]. Smart antennas
can be applied both in the existing and in future systems. This technique has found
application in the first generation analog systems such as NMT [1] and in the second
generation GSM and DCS 1800 systems [2], [3] and the American TDMA IS-54 [4], [5].
The smart antenna technique finds application in the 3G UMTS system as well [6].
In this chapter we will present basic rules of operation of smart antennas and we will
show their influence on the factors which have a crucial meaning for the system capacity.
The topic of smart antennas is very wide. The motivated reader can find an interesting
lecture on smart antennas and beamforming in the book [7] and an introductory chapter
on adaptive antennas in the handbook [8].
427

428 
APPLICATION OF SMART ANTENNAS IN CELLULAR TELEPHONY
18.2 
BASIC PRINCIPLES OF SMART ANTENNA SYSTEMS
In a typical cellular system the communication between the base station and mobile
stations located in a cell is performed using the omnidirectional or sector antenna.
Typical sector antennas emit and receive the signals within the angle of 180, 120 or
60 degrees. Most of the energy emitted by the base station antenna is lost because at
a given moment the mobile stations are located in specified places only. If the signal
intended for a given mobile station was sent only in the direction of that station and the
angle of emission was updated following the movement of the mobile station, a lot of
energy would be saved. The energy savings can be expressed as a higher signal-to-noise
ratio observed during transmission between the base station and the mobile station
or as an increased range of the base station. The strong antenna directivity limits
the multipath effect, too, because the most delayed paths, arising from the reflections
from the obstructions located at large angles with respect to the desired direction, are
avoided.
Antenna 1
•*-X>LPF-#-A/D-»
Antenna 2 
----------
•*• X » LPF ** A/D
•»-X»LPF-»A/D--»
ISLV •<
W1.n
>A/D *•
...•
Direction of arrival 
^
and beamforming control
Figure 18.1 General scheme of the receiving part of the antenna array with the control system

BASIC PRINCIPLES OF SMART ANTENNA SYSTEMS 
429
Strongly directional antenna beam can be synthesized by the antenna array system
shown in Figure 18.1. In this system the antenna array consisting of M linearly spaced
antenna elements and a real time digital signal processing (DSP) controller are applied.
The DSP controller shapes the space characteristics of the antenna array and at the
same time it forms the shape and direction of the antenna beam. Other than uniformly
spaced linear arrays are also applied.
In the receiving part of the system shown in Figure 18.1, the signals acquired by each
antenna element are demodulated and their in-phase and quadrature components are
extracted. As we know, the in-phase and quadrature components can be interpreted
as the real part and imaginary part of the complex signal xi,n, (i = 1, . . . , M), respec-
tively. The signals xi,n are weighted by the weighting factors wi,n ((.)* denotes complex
conjugate) and combined, giving the output signal yn. The index n denotes subsequent
time instants. Through appropriate selection of the coefficient set wi,n (i = 1, . . . , M)
we are able to shape the space characteristics of the antenna array so as to maximize
the power received from the desired mobile station or to minimize the influence of the
interfering mobile stations.
* 
Antenna 1
Q
d
"«**
I 
Antenna 2
(M-2)d
Antenna M
Figure 18.2 Signals reaching the antenna elements
Considering the reception of the signals generated by a sufficiently remote mobile
station, we can assume that the waves carrying the desired signal reach M antenna
elements along parallel paths (see Figure 18.2). If the antennas are located along a
line (usually spaced by a half of the wavelength A), we can notice that the difference in
length between the reference path and the ith path is d(i — 1) sin0, (i = 1, . . . , M). In
consequence, for the wavelength A the difference in the path length is equivalent to the

430 
APPLICATION OF SMART ANTENNAS IN CELLULAR TELEPHONY
phase difference which is
V, = Mizi>sin(, 
(18.1)
>A
Let us consider the case when the weight coefficients wi,n equalize the phase shifts be-
tween the signals received by antenna elements but do not change the signal amplitudes.
The noise generated in the receivers connected to the particular antenna elements can
be considered as mutually uncorrelated. Thus, the noise power on the combiner output
increases M times. The desired signal received at each antenna element is phase-shifted
due to the weight coefficients, and the components from each branch are positively
combined. As a result, the signal amplitude increases M times so the power of the
desired signal increases M2 times. Therefore, the signal-to-noise ratio at the output of
the signal combiner is M times higher than at the output of a single antenna receiver.
In the decibel scale the obtained gain is
G = 10 log M [dB] 
(18.2)
The application of M = 8 antenna elements theoretically results in the SNR gain of
about 9 dB. In practice the gain is smaller, because the weight coefficients Wi,n are used
not only to correct the phase differences but also to lower the level of the sidelobes of
the antenna array characteristics. This is done through the adjustment of the weights'
magnitudes.
Consider another, a bit idealized, example showing the meaning of the antenna array
[9]. The level of the received signal in function of the distance r from the base station
can be estimated using the Hata propagation model [10] (compare Section 3.5.3). For
typical GSM propagation conditions (carrier frequency range, the height of the base
station and mobile station antennas) the Hata formula evolves to the form
L(r) = 100.1 + 33.3 log r [dB] 
(18.3)
where L(r) is the signal attenuation expressed in dB and r is the distance from the base
station, measured in km. If for a single antenna the highest permissible attenuation
level is achieved at the distance r1 from the base station, then after application of the
antenna array the same attenuation is achieved at the distance r2, where
L(r2) = L(r1) + G 
(18.4)
From (18.4) we conclude that G = 33.3 log ^, which results in the increase of the cell
radius in the following proportion
p = T* = 
10G/33.3 
= 
M0.3 
(18.5)
n
If we assume for simplicity that the base stations are distributed uniformly in the
considered area S, then thanks to increasing the cell radius from r1 (the area of a single
cell is S1) to r2 (the cell area is now S2) the number of necessary base stations decreases
according to the reduction factor g given by the formula
* 
if 
* 
M-™ 
(18.6)

BASIC PRINCIPLES OF SMART ANTENNA SYSTEMS 
431
Figures 18.3 and 18.4 [9] illustrate formulas (18.5) and (18.6) drawn as a function of the
number M of antenna elements. Space diversity with the maximum ratio combining or
the selection combining using two antennas is very often applied in base stations. If we
compare the gain obtained thanks to the antenna array with that obtained in the space
diversity reception, the difference is obviously smaller than that shown in Figures 18.3
and 18.4.
Range extension factor r2/r1
2.5 
;
1.5
1
0.5
0
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16
Number of antenna elements M
Figure 18.3 Range increase factor as a function of number of the antenna array elements M
Number of base stations reduction factor g
m
0.6
0.5
•
0.4
0.3 
•
0.2 
* 
• 
.
0.1
0 
- 
--• - 
-- 
-
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16
Number of antenna elements M
Figure 18.4 Reduction factor of the number of base stations as a function of the number of the
matrix elements M
A substantial computational complexity of the receiver applying the antenna array
results from the calculation of branch signal weights in real time. In the simple case a
certain number of coefficient sets are calculated in advance and stored. Subsequently,
the desired characteristic of the antenna array is synthesized by selection of the appro-
priate set of weights. This way we achieve the antenna array with a switched lobe. The
task gets more complicated if the antenna array determines the Direction of Arrival

432 
APPLICATION OF SMART ANTENNAS IN CELLULAR TELEPHONY
(DoA) of the user signal and has to track the change of the mobile station location.
Such an antenna array is called a dynamically phased array [20]. Finally, if besides
the tracking of the desired mobile station, the DoAs of interfering sources are to be
determined, too, the antenna array attempts to maximize the signal-to-interference ra-
tio by directing the main lobe to the desired station and placing the nulls of the array
characteristics in the direction of the interferers. That kind of antenna array is called
an adaptive array.
Let us analyze the antenna array consisting of M isotropic antenna elements linearly
and uniformly distributed. Let L be the number of mutually uncorrelated mobile sta-
tions, treated as point signal sources and located sufficiently far away from the base
station. We will treat the first antenna element as the reference. For the jth signal
source the signal received at the reference element is
mj(t) exp 
[j2Trf0t] 
(18.7)
The delay of the arrival of the jth signal at the kth antenna element is given by the
expression
(18.8)
so the signal received from the jth source at the kth receiver is
0(t 
– 
Tk(^j))] 
(18.9)
In consequence, the signals from all the sources seen at the kth receiver are described
by the formula
L-1
**(*) = mj(t) 
exp[j2Tvf0(t – Tk(0j))} 
(18.10)
j=o
so after weighting the signals from all receivers and combining them we receive the
output signal in the form
M
y(t) = 5>2,Ba*(t) 
(18.11)
fc=i
or in the vector form
y(t) = w?x(«) 
(18.12)
where (.)H denotes transposition of the complex conjugated vector.
As we have already mentioned, several methods of the weights calculation are pos-
sible. In the most conventional one, in which the weights compensate the phase shifts
only, their values are
wk,n = — exp 
[–j27r/0Tk(0k)] 
(18.13)

BASIC PRINCIPLES OF SMART ANTENNA SYSTEMS 
433
where the index K denotes the desired signal. In a more advanced method, the weights
are selected to locate the zeros of the antenna array characteristics in these directions
from which the undesired signals arrive. In order to consider this case, let us introduce
the so-called steering vector aj. It is given by the formula
'27r/0ri(^-)),... ,exp (j27rf0TM(Oj))}T 
(18.14)
and it is determined by the phase shifts caused in the antenna elements by the jth
signal. Let O0 be the angle of arrival of the desired signal, whereas 01 , . . . , OL are the
angles of arrival of interfering signals. The vector of weights which sets the zeros in
the characteristics in the directions indicated by the angles Q1 , . . . , BL and exposes the
desired signal arriving at the angle $0 is determined from the following set of equations
w?% - 1 
(18.15)
The same set of equations can be written in more elegant matrix form as
w^A = eT 
(18.16)
where A is the matrix with its columns being the steering vectors
A=[a 0,a 1,... ,aL_1] 
(18.17)
and e = [1, 0, . . . , 0]T. Multiplying (18.16) on the right-hand side by AH , we receive
1 
(18.18)
As we see from (18.18), the calculation of weights requires the exact knowledge of the
angles #1, . . . , #L for all interfering sources. Besides that, (18.18) does not take into
account the noise. Instead, we can formulate the optimization problem for the weights
in the following form
min P(w) = min E [|y(t)|2] = min wH E [xxH] w = min wHRxw 
(18.19)
w 
w
L
J
w
L
J
u
>
with the constraint w^ao = 1. -P(w) is the mean power at the output of the combiner,
E[.] denotes expectation and Rx = E[xxH] is the input signal correlation matrix.
Formula (18.19) indicates that we minimize the mean power of the noise and interfering
signals at the constant power of the desired signal. The solution of this optimization
problem with the above constraint results in the following formula for the optimum
weights
Calculating (18.20) requires the knowledge of the correlation matrix of the signals re-
ceived at each antenna output.

434 
APPLICATION OF SMART ANTENNAS IN CELLULAR TELEPHONY
A much easier method from the implementation point of view consists in finding the
weights iteratively, minimizing the mean square error. This time the pattern signal dn
is required and the minimized function is determined by the expression
EMSE = E [|en|
2] = E [|dn – w*xn|2] =
= E [|dn|2] + wHRxw – 2wHp 
(18.21)
where p = E [d* xn] is the cross-correlation vector of the pattern signal and the vector
of antenna elements' signals. The minimum of (18.21) equal to
-, , 
T>—1-» 
/1O OO\
WMSE
 = *»-x P 
(18.22)
can be found iteratively using the well-known least mean squares (LMS) algorithm
wn+1 = wn + ae*xn, where en = dn – w"xn 
(18.23)
The vector of weights wn+1 at the moment n+1 is received from the weights vector wn
at the nth moment by adding the updating terms depending on the current error en, the
signals xn at the output of each antenna branch and a small constant a which is called
the step size of the algorithm. The value of a has a crucial influence on the convergence
of the algorithm (18.23) and the final value of the mean square error. Figure 18.5
presents the characteristics of the 8-element antenna array with the weights which were
received using (18.23) after 10000 iterations. Three interfering signals arrived at the
angles equal to -45°, 20°, 60°. It was assumed that the angle of arrival of the desired
signal was 0° and the SNR was equal to 10 dB.
Amplitude [dB]
5
o
-5
-10
-15
-20
-25
-30
-35
-40
-100
90,
1.029
0.8571
06857.
0.5143
03429
0.1714-
330
50 
100
DOA [degrees]
a)
b)
Figure 18.5 Two forms of characteristics of the 8-element antenna array achieved using the LMS
algorithm (18.23)
So far we have been interested in the antenna array working in the receiver and we
considered the weights adjustment performed for the uplink. The situation is more

BASIC PRINCIPLES OF SMART ANTENNA SYSTEMS 
435
complicated in the downlink where the antenna array is applied in the transmitter.
The base station has to form a beam in the direction of the desired mobile station
to extract its signal from among the interfering signals. If the time division duplex
transmission on the same carrier is used in communication between the mobile station
and the base station, then, assuming that the channel varies slowly with respect to the
frame length, the same weights can be used in the downlink as those calculated for
the uplink. Here the channel reciprocity rule is applicable. However, if the frequency
division duplex method is applied, transmission in the uplink and in the downlink takes
place on different carriers. In this case the channel reciprocity rule is not applicable.
Fortunately, the assumption of directional reciprocity is fully justified. It means that
the antenna array in the transmitter should form a beam in the downlink in the same
direction from which the signal has arrived in the uplink [20]. Thus, the estimation of
Direction of Arrival (DoA) is necessary to estimate the angular directions of the mobile
stations in the cell. This estimation is also useful in the handover procedure and in the
determination of the concentration of mobile stations.
The DoA algorithms could be the topic of a separate chapter. The motivated reader
is advised to study the tutorial paper [21]. Here we will present the most important
methods without going into much detail.
The simplest method relies on the computation of the received signal spectrum as
a function of the angle of arrival 0. Subsequently, the local maxima of the estimated
spectrum are determined. Their arguments indicate the angular directions of the signal
sources. Knowing that the received power P in the function of the vector of weights w
can be estimated using the formula
1 
N 
I 
N
*x*xf w = wHRxw 
(18.24)
and setting the vector of weights w(#) = a(0)/M, we get the formula for the power-
received from direction 0 as
where a(0) =
c
The drawback of this method is its low resolution because the resulting power is not
only contributed by the main lobe steered by the weights but also from the side lobes
of the antenna array characteristics.
Several other methods of finding the DoA have been investigated. Among them the
most important are MUSIC [22] and ESPRIT [23].
In its basic version, the MUSIC algorithm estimates in the first step the correlation
matrix Rx of the received signals from M antenna elements. If L different signal sources
are expected, then in the next step M — L smallest eigenvalues of Rx are found. Next,
the M by M — L matrix U of the eigenvectors associated with the above eigenvalues is
formed. Finally, the maxima of the following spectrum
(18.26)

436 
APPLICATION OF SMART ANTENNAS IN CELLULAR TELEPHONY
are searched for. They indicate the DoA of all signal sources.
Description of the ESPRIT algorithm requires longer derivation and it will not be
presented here. Both algorithms attracted a lot of interest and many improvements
have been proposed for them.
18.3 
PHASES OF SMART ANTENNA DEPLOYMENT
Introduction of the smart antenna technique can be performed in three phases [9].
In Phase 1 smart antennas are applied in the uplink only. Thanks to them the
range of a base station increases. This is equivalent to a possible decrease in the
power emitted by a mobile station. This last possibility is particularly advantageous
due to health reasons. The other advantage, which we have already considered, is a
possibility of deploying fewer base stations in a given area. This feature is particularly
attractive for DCS 1800, PCS 1900 and other similar systems which have smaller cells
than standard cellular telephony, and allows reduction in the cost of deployment and
system exploitation in the areas with low traffic density.
In Phase 2 smart antennas are applied in the base station in both up- and downlink.
The basic aim of this development phase is to reduce the interference through beam-
forming, sending the signal only in the direction of the mobile station and tracking
its location. Such technique is often called Space Filtering for Interference Reduction
(SFIR). It allows reduction in the power emitted by the base station. Thanks to the
reduction of the co-channel interference, the cell cluster size can be decreased. This in
turn has an impact on the system capacity through increasing the frequency reuse fac-
tor. Figure 18.6 presents graphically the operation of the cellular system with adaptive
antennas.
Figure 18.6 Operation of the cellular system using adaptive antennas for tracking locations of
mobile stations

INFLUENCE OF THE SMART ANTENNA TECHNOLOGY ON THE CELLULAR SYSTEM CAPACITY 
437
Finally, in Phase 3 the known techniques of multiaccess such as FDMA, TDMA
and CDMA are supplemented with Space Division Multiple Access (SDMA). Thanks to
beamforming, the tracking of a mobile station and the co-channel interference reduction,
more than one mobile station can use the same channel in a cell if the mobile stations
are appropriately angularly distributed. This results in a substantial increase in the
system capacity and flexibility.
18.4 
INFLUENCE OF THE SMART ANTENNA TECHNOLOGY ON THE
CELLULAR SYSTEM CAPACITY
One of the main reasons for the interest in the smart antenna technology in mobile
systems is the expected system capacity increase measured as the traffic served per unit
area. Another, more precise measure of the gain achieved thanks to this technique is
the spectral efficiency ns characterizing the traffic per unit area per Hz. This parameter
is given by the formula
V* = 
[Erl/m2/Hz] 
(18.27)
where Nc is the number of channels in a cell, Gc is the offered traffic load in a cell. S
is the cell area and Wsys is the bandwidth used by the cellular system.
The values of the expected gains achieved thanks to the application of the smart
antenna arrays depend on the ways of their operation and on the assumptions made
in the system analysis. Due to the complex nature of the phenomena and the interde-
pendence of many parameters, elaborate simulation models are usually built to estimate
the gain achieved by the application of antenna arrays at some simplifying assumptions.
These assumptions refer to the locations of mobile stations in a cell, the way the mobile
stations move and the influence of the mobile stations and base stations from other
cells.
In the previous paragraph we described three phases in the introduction of smart
antenna technology in cellular systems. The gain estimations shown below are associ-
ated with the second and the third phase. In [13] the increase in the spectral efficiency
of a system with SFIR in comparison to a conventional system has been estimated to
be equal to \/M. For the system using SDMA the gain has been found to be VKM,
where K is not greater than 3 for M = 8 antenna elements. [14] reports the simulation
results in which handover was taken into account. It was assumed that the signal-to-co-
channel interference ratio decreases below the threshold level of 9 + 6 = 15 dB for GSM.
The value of 9 dB results from the GSM standard defining the signal-to-co-channel
interference ratio necessary for reliable system operation. The additional 6 dB margin
is results from the shadowing effect. Realistic antenna radiation patterns have been
assumed. The detailed results have been summarized in Table 18.1, quoted according
to [14]. The propagation model was assumed in which the received power decreases
with the fourth power of the distance from the base station. Let us note the size of
the cell cluster was equal to N = 3 or N = 1, which indicates potential use of the
whole set of carrier frequencies in each cell. Let us compare these numbers with typical

438 
APPLICATION OF SMART ANTENNAS IN CELLULAR TELEPHONY
values of N = 4 at the application of 120°—sector antennas in GSM or with N — 7
or N — 12 in the analog systems. When the SDMA technique is applied, the spectral
efficiency increases considerably. Some losses are observed if the power control in the
mobile stations is not perfect; however, they are not very meaningful.
Table 18.1 Increase of spectral efficiency n8 due to the application of intelligent antenna tech-
nique as compared with the systems using omnidirectional or sector antennas, N — the size of the
cell cluster
Sector antennas
SFIR
SFIR
SDMA
SDMA
N = 3
N = 1
N = 3
N = 1
System with
omnidirectional antenna
2.3
2.3
7
4.8
9.8
System with
sector antennas
1
1
3
2.8
5.4
The price which has to be paid for the capacity increase is not only growing complex-
ity of the antenna system and the RF part of the transmitter but also the introduction
of a complex digital signal processing block which controls the radiation patterns of the
antenna array. Due to the number of M received signals, the front-end blocks of the re-
ceiver are also getting much more complicated, particularly if the maximum likelihood
detection is performed in each branch [15]. Channel allocation rules in the systems
using SDMA principle become more complicated too, because the allocation algorithm
has additionally to take into account the angular distance between the mobile stations
[16]. The frequency of intra-cell handovers increases, too.
Generally, the SDMA technique can be treated as a substantial enrichment of the
existing multiple access methods such as FDMA, TDM A and CDMA. This has been
confirmed by field measurements reported in the literature [17], [18] and [19].
REFERENCES
1. H. Andersson, M. Landing, A. Rydberg, T. Oberg, "An Adaptive Antenna for
the NMT 900 Mobile Telephony System", Proc. of IEEE Vehicular Technology
Conference, 1994
2. U. Forssen, J. Karlsson, B. Johannisson, M. Almgren, F. Lotse, F. Kronestedt,
"Adaptive Antenna Arrays for GSM900/DCS1800", Proc. of IEEE Vehicular Tech-
nology Conference, 1994
3. M. Tangemann, U. Bigalk, C. Hoeck, M. Hother, "Sensivity Enhancements of GSM/
DCS1800 with Smart Antennas", Proc. of the Second European Personal Mobile
Communications Conference, 1997

REFERENCES 
439
4. J. Winters, "Signal Acquisition and Tracking with Adaptive Arrays in the Digital
Mobile Radio System IS-54 with Flat Fading", IEEE Trans. on Vehicular Technol-
ogy, Vol. 42, No. 4, 1993
5. K. J. Molnar, G. E. Bottomley, "D-AMPS Performance in PCS Bands with Array
Processing", Proc. of IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, 1996
6. G. Tsoulos, M. Beach, S. C. Swales, "Adaptive Antennas for Third Generation
DS-CDMA Cellular Systems", Proc. of IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference,
1995
7. J. Litva, T. K.-Y. Lo, Digital Beamforming in Wireless Communications, Artech
House, Boston, 1996
8. S. R. Saunders, Antennas and Propagation for Wireless Communication Systems,
J. Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Chichester, 1999
9. M. Tangemann, "Smart Antenna Technology for GSM/DCS1800", Proc. of the
Second Workshop on Personal Wireless Communications (PWC), Frankfurt, Dec.
10-11, 1996
10. M. Hata, "Empirical Formula for Propagation Loss in Land Mobile Radio Services",
IEEE Trans. on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 29, August 1980
11. H. Krim, M. Viberg, "Two Decades of Array Signal Processing Research", IEEE
Signal Processing Magazine, July 1996
12. M. Haardt, J. A. Nossek, "Unitary ESPRIT: How to Obtain Increased Estima-
tion Accuracy with a Reduced Computational Burden", IEEE Trans. on Signal
Processing, Vol. 43, May 1995
13. M. Tangemann, C. Hoek, R. Rheinschmitt, "Introducing Adaptive Array Antenna
Concepts in Mobile Communications Systems", Proc. of RACE Mobile Telecom-
munications Workshop, Amsterdam, May 17-19, 1994, Vol. 2
14. J. Fuhl, A. Kuchar, E. Bonek, "Capacity Increase in Cellular PCS by Smart An-
tennas", Proc. of IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, 1997
15. G. E. Bottomley, K. Jamal, "Adaptive Arrays and MLSE Equalization", Proc. of
IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, 1995
16. N. Gerlich, M. Tangemann, "Towards a Channel Allocation Scheme for SDMA-
based Mobile Communication Systems", ITG Fachbericht No. 135, Mobile Kom-
munikation, 26-28 Sept. 1995, Neu-Ulrn, Germany
17. P. Mogensen, K. Pedersen, P. Leth-Espensen, B. Fleury, F. Frederiksen, K. Olesen,
S. Larsen, "Preliminary Measurement Results from an Adaptive Antenna Array
Testbed for GSM/UMTS", Proc. of IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, 1997
18. S. Anderson, U. Forssen, J. Karlsson, "Ericsson/Mannesmann GSM field-trials with
adaptive antennas", Proc. of IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, 1997

440 
APPLICATION OF SMART ANTENNAS IN CELLULAR TELEPHONY
19. P. Chevalier, F. Pipon, J.-J. Monot, C. Demeure, "Smart Antennas for the GSM
System: Experimental Results for a Mobile Reception", Proc. of IEEE Vehicular
Technology Conference, 1997
20. P. H. Lehne, M. Pettersen, "An Overview of Smart Antenna Technology for Mobile
Communication Systems", IEEE Communication Surveys and Tutorials,
http://www.comsoc.org/publications/surveys/, Vol. 2, No. 4, Fourth Quarter 1999
21. L. C. Godara, "Application of Antenna Arrays to Mobile Communications, Part II:
Beam-Forming and Direction-of-Arrival Considerations", Proceedings of IEEE, Vol.
85, No. 8, August 1997, pp. 1195-1247
22. R. O. Schmidt, "Multiple Emitter Location and Signal Parameter Estimation",
IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagat., Vol. AP-34, 1986, pp. 276–280
23. R. Roy, T. Kailath, "ESPRIT - Estimation of Signal Parameters via Rotational
Invariance Technique", IEEE Trans. Acoust., Speech, Signal Processing, vol ASSP-
37, 1989, pp. 984–995

A interface (GSM), 178
Abis interface (GSM), 178
ACELP (Algebraic Code Excited Linear
Prediction), 276
ACK (Acknowledge), 24
Adaptive Delta Modulation, 9
Adaptive Differential Pulse Code Modulation
(ADPCM), 7
AGCH (Access Granted Channel), 181
Air Loop, 329
ALCATEL 9800, 326
algorithm
Fano, 29
Viterbi, 28
ALOHA protocol
pure, 59
slotted, 59
AMPS channels, 168
AMPS (Advanced Mobile Phone System), 157,
168
analog-to-digital (AD) converter, 2
antenna, 4
directivity, 81
gain, 81
isotropic, 80
ARQ, 24
go-back-N, 25
idle, 25
selective repeat, 25
asymptotic coding gain, 18
AUC (Authentication Center), 177
Automatic Positioning Reporting (APR), 335
B
Base station (BS), 159
Base Station System (ERMES), 123
BCCH (Broadcast Control Channel), 181
bent-pipe principle, 344
bits
Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC), 23
bit stuffing, 66
blank-and-burst signaling, 170
Bluetooth, 379
establishing a connection, 383
piconet, 380
requirements, 379
scatternet, 380
security means, 384
station modes, 383
transmission method, 380
types of links, 382
broadcast carrier (GSM), 180
BS (Base Station), 177
BSC (Base Station Controller), 177
BSIC (Base Station Identity Code), 188
BSS (Base Station System), 177
BTS (Base Transceiver Station), 177
441
Index

442 
INDEX
CAI (Common Air Interface), 306
call processing (AMPS), 173
CCCH (Common Control Channel), 181
CDMA
receiver, 256
transmitter, 256
cdmaOne, 271
cdma2000, 388, 412
basic features, 413
cell search procedure, 419
forward link channels, 414
HDR, 413
physical channels, 413
power control, 418
reverse link channels, 416
soft handover, 419
spectrum arrangement, 413
IxEV, 413
Ix, 412
3x, 413
cell, 133
sectorization, 147
splitting, 148
cell cluster, 136
cellular system, 135
cellular telephony, 74
central limit theorem, 91
CGI (Cell Global Identity), 189
channel
access (NMT), 161
binary symmetric memoryless, 14
combined paging and traffic (NMT), 161
data (NMT), 161
feedback, 24
Forward Control (FCC), 169
Forward Voice (FVC), 168
main, 24
paging (NMT), 159
Reverse Control (RCC), 169
Reverse Voice (RVC), 168
traffic (NMT), 160
channel assignment
borrowing with ordering strategy, 153
dynamic, 153
fixed, 152
flexible, 153
flexible predictive, 154
flexible with scheduling, 154
hybrid, 153
simple borrowing strategy, 152
channel capacity, 49
channel decoder, 3–4
channel encoder, 3
channel equipment, 167
code
inner, 32
outer, 32
codebook, 12
Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA), 3, 51,
57
code excited linear prediction, 12
codes
BCH, 21–22, 171, 311
binary, 18
block, 18
channelization, 400
channelizing, 274
complementary, 368
convolutional, 18, 26
cyclic, 20
error correction, 18
error detection, 18
Fire, 206
Manchester, 170
maximum length, 252
nonbinary, 18
nonsystematic, 19
Orthogonal Variable Spreading Factor (OVSF),
401
polynomial, 19
Rate Compatible Punctured Convolutional
(RCPC), 28
recursive systematic, 33
Reed-Muller, 300
Reed-Solomon, 22
systematic, 19
code word, 16
coding
concatenated, 32
error detection, 14
forward error correction (FEC), 14
turbo-coding, 33
coding gain, 17
combining
equal gain, 111
maximum ratio, 111
comfort noise, 206
component
in-phase, 35
quadrature, 35
constellation points, 36
Continuous Variable Slope Delta Modulation
(CVSD), 9
cordless telephony, 305
co-channel interference, 134
co-channel interference reduction factor, 138
CSMA (Carrier Sense Multiple Access), 59
nonpersistent, 60
p-persistent, 60
1-persistent, 59
CSMA/CD (Carrier Sense Multiple Access with
Collision Detection), 358
CSPDN (Circuit-Switched Public Data
Network), 220

INDEX 
443
CTS (Clear to Send), 358
CT2 (Cordless Telephony-2), 306
frame structure, 73, 307
signaling, 308
cyclic prefix, 47
D
DAMA (Demand Assigned Multiple Access), 327
DAMPS (Digital AMPS), 169
data compression, 3
DCCH (Dedicated Control Channel), 181
DCS 1800 (Digital Cellular System), 200
decoder
maximum likelihood, 16
decoding
algebraic, 29
hard decision, 16
soft decision, 16
DECT (Digital Enhanced Cordless
Telecommunications), 73, 305, 309
applications, 309
architecture, 309
beacon signal, 313
DECT Fixed System (DFS), 309
DECT/GSM interworking, 314
Dynamic Channel Allocation (DCA), 313
Fixed Part (FP), 309
handover, 313
handset, 314
Interworking Unit (IWU), 309
MAC layer, 313
modulation, 312
multislot assignment, 314
packets, 311
physical layer, 310
Portable Part (PP), 309
time slots, 311
deinterleavirig, 30
delay system, 144
Delta Modulation, 8
detector, 4
Differential Pulse Code Modulation (DPCM), 6
Direction of Arrival (DoA), 432
directivity gain, 81
dispatch systems, 289
distance
Euclidean, 17
Hamming, 16
distribution
log-normal, 96
diversity, 110
explicit, 110
frequency, 111
implicit, 110
path, 112, 258
polarization, 112
preselection, 318
receiver, 110
selection, 318
space, 110
switched transmitter, 319
time, 111
transmitter, 110, 112
Doppler
effect, 89
frequency, 89, 91
power density spectrum, 92
duo-simplex mode, 289
Dynamic Channel Allocation (DCA), 313
E
ECSD (Enhanced Circuit-Switched Data), 243
EDACS (Enhanced Digital Communication
System), 292
EGPRS (Enhanced GPRS), 243
EIR (Equipment Identification Register), 177
EIRP (Effective Isotropic Radiated Power), 81
elevation angle, 337
Enhanced Data Rate for Global Evolution
(EDGE), 243
Incremental Redundancy (IR) ARQ, 246
link quality control, 245
physical layer, 244
equalizer, 48
Erlang B formula, 145
ERMES (European Messaging System), 122
ERP (Effective Radiated Power), 81
European Space Agency (ESA), 335
EutelTracs, 335
EVRC (Enhanced Variable Rate Codec), 276
EY-NPMA (Elimination Yield Non Pre-Emptive
Multiple Access), 362
FACCH (Fast Associated Control Channel), 181
fading
fast, 87
flat, 108
selective, 108
slow, 87
FCCH (Frequency Correction Channel), 181
field
extension, 21
finite, 21
Galois, 21
filter
anti-aliasing, 5
duplex, 167
Long-Term Prediction (LTP), 12, 209
matched, 256
Short-Term Prediction (STP), 12, 208
Whitened Matched Filter (WMF), 265
FLEX protocol, 128

444
INDEX
FM modulation index, 36
FN (Frame Number), 183
FPLMTS (Future Public Land Mobile
Telecommunication System), 387
Frame Check Sequence (FEC), 227
Fraunhofer distance, 84
free-space path loss, 82
frequency deviation, 36
frequency discriminator, 43
Frequency Division Duplex (FDD), 58
Frequency Division Multiple Access (FDMA), 3,
55
frequency hopping, 53, 178
frequency reuse factor, 250
G
General Packet Radio Service (GPRS), 234
architecture, 235
coding schemes, 238
GPRS Attach procedure, 240
GPRS Support Node (GSN), 235
logical channels, 237
multiframe structure, 238
multislot operation, 236
physical layer, 236
protocol stack, 241
services, 241
transmission management, 240
Tunneling Protocol (GTP), 236
generator, 21
generator polynomial, 20
GMSC (Gateway Mobile Switching Center), 177
Gold sequence, 254
GPRS Support Node (GSN), 235
Gateway (GGSN), 236
Serving (SGSN), 235
GPS (Global Positioning System), 128
Grade of Service (GOS), 144
granulation noise, 8
GSM (Global System for Mobile
Communications)
architecture, 176
authentication algorithm, 197
A3 algorithm, 198
A5 algorithm, 199
A8 algorithm, 199
bearer services, 221
burst, 183
access, 184
dummy, 185
frequency correction, 183
normal, 183
synchronization, 183
call set-up procedure, 187
channel coding for data transmission, 225
channel coding, 204
encryption algorithm, 198
frame, 182
handover, 194
intra-BSC, 195
intra-cell, 195
intra-MSC, 195
inter-MSC, 195
hyperframe, 182
Interworking Function (IWF), 220
logical channel, 180
mobile station, 203
multiframe, 182, 185
Phase 1, 199
Phase 2, 199
Phase 2+, 199
physical channel, 179
Radio Link Protocol (RLP), 226
rate adaptation, 222
registration in the network, 187
roaming, 193
Short Message Service (SMS), 221, 228
frame structures, 230
Short Message Entity (SME), 229
SMS Service Center (SC), 229
SMS-GMSC, 230
SMS-IWMSC, 230
Subscriber Identity Module, 197
superframe, 182
teleservices, 221
Terminal Adaptation Function (TAF), 220
time hierarchy, 182
timing advance (TA), 191
Unrestricted Digital Information (UDI), 221
VAD (Voice Activity Detection), 206
H
half-wave dipol, 81
handover, 134, 164, 173, 194
hard, 250
mobile assisted, 135
soft, 267
hand-off, 134
High-Speed Circuit-Switched Data Service
(HSCSD), 232
architecture, 232
non-transparent bearer service, 234
transparent bearer service, 234
HIPERLAN/1, 359
burst format, 363
Channel Access Control (CAC) sublayer, 362
communication model, 359
EY-NPMA, 362
MAC sublayer, 361
packet format, 363
physical layer, 363
HIPERLAN/2, 375
assigned spectrum, 376
Data Link Control (DLC) layer, 378

INDEX 
445
MAC layer, 378
modes of operation, 375
OFDM packets, 377
Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing
(OFDM), 376
physical layer, 376
HLR (Home Location Register), 177
IEEE 802.11
architecture, 364
Basic Service Set (BSS), 364
Complementary Code Keying (CCK), 367
contention-free mode, 373
contention mode, 372
Distribution System (DS), 365
DS-SS physical layer, 366
FH-SS physical layer, 368
infrared (IR) physical layer, 369
MAC frame structure, 371
MAC sublayer, 370
PLCP packet, 367
reference model, 365
illumination efficiency factor, 83
IMSI (International Mobile Subscriber Identity),
190
IMT-2000 (International Mobile
Telecommunications), 387
basic requirements, 387
spectrum allocation, 389
Incremental Redundancy ARQ (IR ARQ), 246
Industrial Scientific Medical (ISM) band, 364
INMARSAT (International Maritime
Telecommunication Satellite
Organization), 334
A, 335
B, 335
C, 335
M, 335
Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN), 67
interference
co-channel, 134
interchannel, 94, 150
interleaver
block, 30
convolutional, 30
interleaving, 15, 30
International Standardization Organization
(ISO), 61
intersymbol interference, 44, 108
irreducible polynomial, 21
ISDN (Integrated Services Digital Network), 220
ISM (Industrial Scientific Medical) band, 77
IS-95, 271
access channel, 281–282
application in WLL, 328
connection set-up, 284
forward link, 272
Interworking Function (IWF), 284
IS-95B enhancements, 284
long code, 274
pilot channel, 277
power control subchannel, 275
power control, 283
rate sets (RS), 274
registration to the network, 282
reverse (uplink) transmission, 281
short code, 274
synchronization channel, 277
traffic channel, 278
fundamental code channel, 279
suplemental code channel, 279
transmission parameters, 272
Jakes formula, 92
joint CDMA detection, 261
joint CDMA detector
decorrelating detector, 263
interference cancellation detector, 264
Minimum Mean Square Error (MMSE)
detector, 264
Zero-Forcing (ZF) detector, 263
K
Kasami sequence, 254
LAC (Location Area Code), 193
LAI (Location Area Identity), 189
lattice filter, 11
Lee W.C.Y., 96
Linear Feedback Shift Register (LFSR), 251
Linear Predictive Coding (LPC), 10
Location Area, 181
location update, 165
loss system, 144
M
MACA (Multiple Access with Collision
Avoidance), 358
Maximum likelihood reception, 217
Mobile Station (MS), 159
modulation, 35
Binary Phase Shift Keying (BPSK), 39
Frequency Shift Keying (FSK), 36
GMSK (Gaussian Minimum Shift Keying), 38,
214
index, 36
Minimum Phase Shift Keying (MSK), 37
multicarrier, 44

446 
INDEX
OQPSK (Offset Quaternary Phase Shift
Keying), 40, 281
Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing
(OFDM), 45
period, 36
7T/4-DQPSK, 41
Pulse Position Modulation (PPM), 369
Quadrature Amplitude Modulation (QAM), 39
Quadrature Phase Shift Keying (QPSK), 39
8-PSK, 244
modulator, 3
MPT 1327, 289
ACTIONET, 291
control message, 290
random access, 289
signalling, 289
MS (Mobile Station), 177
MSC (Mobile Switching Center), 176
m-sequence, 251
MSRN (Mobile Subscriber Roaming Number),
192
MTX (Mobile Telephone Exchange), 159
Gateway, 162
Home, 162
Visited, 162
multicoupler, 167
multiple access, 3
MUSIC algorithm, 435
N
NAK (Not-Acknowledged), 24
narrowband AMPS, 169
near-far effect, 150, 161, 266
networks
channel switching, 64
packet switching, 64
NMC (Network Management Center), 178
NMT (Nordic Mobile Telephone), 157-158
noise
impulse, 94
nonlinearity, 94
notch frequency, 108
O
OMC (Operation and Maintenance Center), 123,
178
OmniTracs, 335
Open System Interconnection (OSI) reference
model, 61
orbit
GEO (Geostationary Earth Orbit), 337
ICO (Intermediate Circular Orbit), 337
LEO (Low Earth Orbit), 336
MEO (Medium Earth Orbit), 337
OSI layer
application, 63
Data Link Control (DLC), 62
network, 62
physical, 61
presentation, 63
session, 63
transport, 62
OVSF codes, 401
PACH (Paging Channel), 181
Packet Handler (PH), 228
PACS (Personal Access Communications
System), 305, 316
architecture, 316
diversity, 318
frequency planning, 319
logical channels, 317
mobility management, 319
radio access, 319
radio transmission, 317
versions, 316
PAD (Packet Assembler/Disassembler), 222, 228
pager, 72, 117
paging networks, 118
paging standard
APOC (Advanced Paging Operators Code),
119
ERMES (European Radio Messaging System),
119, 122
FLEX, 120, 128
MBS (Mobile Search), 119
POCSAG (Post Office Code Standardisation
Advisory Group), 119–120
ReFLEX, 128
paging systems, 72, 117
PAMR (Public Access Mobile Radio), 289
parity
bits, 19
equations, 19
PCN (Personal Communication Network), 200
PCS (Personal Communication System), 271
PDP (Packet Data Protocol), 236
personal satellite communications, 335
personal satellite systems
GLOBALSTAR, 342
CDMA transmission, 344
connection set-up, 345
network, 345
orbits, 343
satellites, 342
speech coding, 345
Iridium, 339
concept, 339
intersatellite links, 340
multiple access method, 341
satellites, 339
services, 341

INDEX
447
New ICO, 347
architecture, 347
ICONET, 347
space segment, 347
services, 338
Skybridge, 350
architecture, 351
capacity, 351
satellites, 350
terminals, 351
system description, 339
PHS (Personal Handyphone System), 305, 319
burst structure, 321
frequency ranges, 320
logical channels, 321
transmission mode, 320
PIN (Personal Identification Number), 197
7T/4-DQPSK, 300
PMP systems, 326
POCSAG protocol, 120
Point-to-Multipoint (PMP) technique, 326
power control, 266, 283, 406
power delay profile, 93
power efficiency, 81
predictor, 6
primitive element, 21
PRM (Private Mobile Radio), 287
probability of blocking, 144
propagation
free-space, 80
loss, 95
multipath, 83, 94
two-path, 85
propagation model
COST 231-Hata, 103
COST 231-Walfish-Ikegami, 103
Hata, 100
Lee, 96
linear attenuation, 106
multi-wall, 106
Okumura, 98
one-slope, 106
protocol
Link Access Protocol on the D Channel
(LAP-D), 67
Link Access Protocol - Balanced (LAP-B), 65
X.25, 64
PSDN (Public Switched Data Network), 177
PSPDN (Packet-Switched Public Data Network),
220
PSTN (Public Switched Telephone Network), 220
pulse
frequency, 36
phase, 37
Pulse Code Modulation, 5
puncturing, 28
puncturing table, 28
Q
QCELP (Qualcomm Code Excited Linear
Prediction), 276
quantization, 2
quantizer
nonuniform, 5
R
RACH (Random Access Channel), 181
radiation density, 80
Radio Link Protocol (RLP), 222, 224, 226
asynchronous balanced mode, 227
asynchronous disconnected mode, 227
RAKE receiver, 258
random access, 59
ray tracing method, 136
receiver
coherent, 41
joint CDMA detector, 261
non-coherent, 41
RAKE, 51, 258
reflection coefficients, 11
ReFLEX protocol, 128
RF amplifier, 4
RF block, 3
RFN (Reduced Frame Number), 183
roaming, 128, 165, 193
RPE (Regular Pulse Excitation), 209
RPE-LTP (Regular Pulse Excitation Long Term
Prediction), 204
decoder, 210
encoder, 208
RTS (Request to Send), 358
SACCH (Slow Associated Control Channel), 181
satellite mobile communication systems, 76
scatter function, 92
SCH (Synchronization Channel), 181
SDCCH (Stand-Alone Dedicated Control
Channel), 181
sectorization, 141
sequential data detection, 214
service area, 159
shadowing, 96
Short Message Service (SMS), 228
SID (System Identification Number), 169
Signalling System No. 7, 67
SIM (Subscriber Identity Module), 197
slop overloading, 8
slot, 56
smart antennas, 427
adaptive array, 432
basic principles, 428

448 
INDEX
dynamically phased array, 432
ESPRIT algorithm, 435
general scheme, 429
influence on system capacity, 437
MUSIC algorithm, 435
phases of deployment, 436
Space Division Multiple Access (SDMA), 437
Space Filtering for Interference Reduction
(SFIR), 436
steering vector, 433
Software Radio, 420
architecture, 422
in base stations, 423
minimum radio standard, 420
source, 2
source encoder, 2
Space Division Multiple Access (SDMA), 57, 437
speech coder, 4
speech coding
Enhanced Full Rate (EFR), 208
Full Rate (FR), 208
Half Rate (HR), 208
speech decoder, 4
speech encoder
analysis-by-synthesis, 11
CELP (Code Excited Linear Prediction), 212
half rate, 210
LPC, 10
Spreading Factor (SF), 400
spreading sequence, 250
Gold, 254
Kasami, 254
mask of LFSR, 253
m-sequence, 251
Walsh, 255
spread spectrum system
Direct Sequence (DS), 50, 272
Frequency Hopping (FH), 53
Time Hopping (TH), 54
steering vector, 433
stored-and-forward, 229
synchronization
carrier, 41
timing, 41
syndrom polynomial, 22
T
TACS (Total Access Communication System),
157
TCH (Traffic Channel), 181
Teledesic, 349
ATM transmission, 350
multiple access method, 349
network, 350
space segment, 349
Telepoint, 73, 306
TETRA (Terrestrial Trunked Radio), 293
architecture, 295
bursts, 304
channel coding, 300
control channels, 302
frequency ranges, 297
modes of operation, 298
modulation, 300
physical channels, 298
physical layer, 296
services, 294
traffic channels, 302
Time Division Duplex (TDD), 58
Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA), 3, 55
TMSI (Temporary Mobile Identification
Number), 177
traffic area, 159
traffic intensity, 144
transmission
circuit-switched, 221
non-transparent, 222
packet-switched, 221
point-to-multipoint, 221
point-to-point, 221
transparent, 221
transmission channel, 88
transmitter combiner (NMT), 167
trellis diagram, 27
trunking, 144, 287
trunking systems, 73, 287
U
Um interface (GSM), 178
UMTS (Universal Mobile Telecommnications
System)
air interface, 395
cell search procedure, 405
compressed mode, 407
concept, 390
core network (CN), 393
Cu interface, 393
downlink frame structure, 402
handover, 406
interfrequency, 407
intersystem, 407
softer, 407
soft, 406
lub interface, 393
lur interface, 393
lu interface, 394
logical channels, 397
Mobile Equipment (ME), 392
network access procedure, 404
Node B, 393
physical channels, 397, 400, 403
physical layer, 395
power control, 406
protocol model for UTRAN interfaces, 394

INDEX 
449
radio access network (UTRAN) architecture,
391
Radio Network Controller (RNC), 393
requirements, 390
services, 391
Subscriber Identity Module (USIM), 392
transport channels, 397-398
User Equipment (UE), 391
UTRA FDD mode, 399
UTRA TDD mode, 408
dynamic channel allocation, 412
frame, 408
interference analysis, 412
physical channels, 409–410
random access bursts, 409
traffic bursts, 409
transport channels, 409
Uu interface, 393
WCDMA, 395
air interface protocol, 395
basic parameters, 395
UPT (Universal Personal Telecommunications),
333
UTC (Universal Time Coordinated), 125
UTRA (UMTS Terrestrial Radio Access), 388
UWC136 (Universal Wireless Communications),
388
V
vector quantization, 10, 12
vector sum excited linear prediction (VSELP), 13
Virtual Home Environment (VHE), 388
Viterbi algorithm, 28, 216
Viterbi sequence estimator, 214
VLR (Visitor's Location Register), 176
W
Walsh sequence, 255, 274
WCDMA (Wideband CDMA), 395
Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN)—355
Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN)
Access Point (AP), 356
Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN)
ad hoc network, 357
hidden station, 358
infrastructure base network, 356
Wireless Local Loop (WLL), 325
Wireless Local Loop (WLL) technologies
CDMA technology, 329
cellular technology, 328
DECT technology, 330
DECT Access Node (DAN), 331
Fixed Access Unit (FAU), 331
Radio Network Controller (RNC), 331
Wireless Repeater Station (WRS), 330,
IS-95 technology, 328
PMP systems, 326
WSSUS (Wide-Sense Stationary with
Uncorrelated Scattering) channel, 91
3GPP2 (3rd Generation Partnership Project 2),
388
3GPP (3rd Generation Partnership Project), 388

