
 MODERN HOMELESSNESS 

 Animal Rights, Clifford J. Sherry 
 Autism Spectrum Disorders, Raphael Bernier 
and Jennifer Gerdts 
 Climate Change, David L. Downie, Kate Brash, 
and Catherine Vaughan 
 DNA Technology, David E. Newton 
 Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue 
 Education in Crisis, Judith A. Gouwens 
 Environmental Justice, David E. Newton 
 Gay and Lesbian Rights, David E. Newton 
 Genocide, Howard Ball 
 Global Organized Crime, Mitchel P. Roth 
 Global Refugee Crisis, Mark Gibney 
 Identity Theft, Sandra K. Hoffman and Tracy G. McGinley 
 Lobbying in America, Ronald J. Hrebenar and Bryson B. Morgan 
 Modern Piracy, David F. Marley 
 Modern Sports Ethics, Angela Lumpkin 
 Obesity, Judith Stern and Alexandra Kazaks 
 Same-Sex Marriage, David E. Newton 
 Sentencing, Dean John Champion 
 Sexual Crime, Caryn E. Neumann 
 Sexual Health, David E. Newton 
 Substance Abuse, David E. Newton 
 U.S. Border Security, Judith A. Warner 
 U.S. Space Policy, Peter L. Hays, PhD 
 U.S. Trade Issues, Alfred E. Eckes Jr. 
 Women in Combat, Rosemarie Skaine 
 For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit  
www.abc-clio.com. 
 Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s 
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES 
Series 

 Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital 
issues in today’s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution, 
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and 
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly 
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting 
point for research by high school and college students, scholars, 
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople, 
activists, and others. 
 Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an 
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical 
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other 
primary-source material, a directory of organizations and 
agencies, annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, 
and an index. 
 Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will 
find the information they need to have a better understanding 
of the social, political, environmental, and economic issues 
facing the world today. 

This page intentionally left blank 

 MODERN 
HOMELESSNESS 
 A Reference Handbook 
 Mary Ellen Hombs 
 Foreword by Philip F. Mangano 
 CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES 

 Copyright 2011 by ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior 
permission in writing from the publisher. 
 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Hombs, Mary Ellen.
 Modern homelessness: a reference handbook / Mary Ellen Hombs ; 
foreword by Philip F. Mangano.
  p. cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-1-59884-536-5 (alk. paper) — ISBN 978-1-59884-537-2 
(ebook)
1. Homelessness. 2. Homelessness — Government 
policy. 3. Homelessness — Prevention. I. Title. 
 HV4493.H63 2011
 362.5 — dc22   2011008474
 
ISBN: 978-1-59884-536-5 
 EISBN: 978-1-59884-537-2 
 
15 14 13 12 11 1 2 3 4 5 
 This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook. 
 Visit www.abc-clio.com for details. 
 
ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911 
 Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911 
 
This book is printed on acid-free paper 
 
 Manufactured in the United States of America 

vii
 Contents 
 Foreword  by Philip F. Mangano , xiii
 1 
Background and History , 1
 Introduction , 1
 What Changed in the United States? , 2
 Developing Policy and Investment with Data , 4
 Partnership, Investment, and Innovation , 9
 New Federal Funding Approaches , 13
 Identifying and Adopting Innovation , 14
 Unprecedented Reductions in Homelessness , 16
 Research and Resources for Homeless Populations , 17
 Background to the Early Response to Homelessness , 23
 Recent Issues in Federal Programs , 26
 International Developments , 32
 Other European Action , 32
 Australia’s National Plan , 33
 Canada’s National Partnering Strategy , 34
References, 35
 2 
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions , 41
 Introduction , 41
 Defining and Measuring Homelessness: A New Debate , 42
 Increasing Resources, Prioritizing Populations , 44
 What about Poverty? , 49
 How Many People Are Homeless? , 51
 Ten-Year Plans: Rhetoric, Restrictions, or Results? , 53
 Where Are the Resources to Prevent and End 
Homelessness? , 60
 Federal Spending on Homelessness , 60
 Mainstream Resources , 60

viii Contents
 What about Prevention? , 64
 Discharge into Homelessness from Other Systems , 65
 Homelessness and Legal Issues , 67
 Civil Rights , 67
 Siting Homeless Housing and the “Not in My Backyard” 
Problem , 71
References, 73
 3 
Worldwide Perspective , 79
 Introduction , 79
 Homelessness in the United Kingdom , 80
 England’s Strategy on Street Homelessness , 80
 Other U.K. Strategies on Homelessness , 92
 Homelessness in Europe , 94
 The Role of Social Exclusion , 94
 Other European Strategies , 98
 Ireland , 98
 Denmark’s Goal of Ending Homelessness , 101
 Planning in Other Scandinavian Countries , 102
 Canada’s National and Local Strategies , 103
 The Business Model and Canadian 10-Year Plans , 104
 Australia , 106
 International Human Rights Treaties , 107
References, 108
 4 
Chronology , 113
 5 
Biographical Sketches , 141
 Angela Alioto , 141
 Murray Barr , 142
 Ellen Bassuk, MD , 143
 Ellen Baxter , 144
 Martha M. Burt, PhD , 144
 Louise Casey , 145
 Henry Cisneros , 146
 Jim Collins , 147
 Dennis P. Culhane, PhD , 147
 Andrew M. Cuomo , 148
 Deborah De Santis , 149
 Manual Diaz , 149
 Maria Foscarinis , 150
 Mayor Paul Fraim , 151

Contents ix
 Shirley Franklin , 151
 Malcolm Gladwell , 152
 Rosanne Haggerty , 153
 Robert M. Hayes , 154
 Robert Hess , 155
 John W. Hickenlooper , 156
 William Hobson , 156
 Kim Hopper, PhD , 157
 Jack Kemp , 157
 Philip F. Mangano , 158
 Mel Martinez , 160
 George T. McDonald , 161
 Representative Stewart B. McKinney , 161
 Gavin Newsom , 162
 James O’Connell, MD , 163
 M. Dene Oliver , 164
 Barton “Bart” R. Peterson , 164
 Michael S. Rawlings , 165
 Priscilla Ridgway, PhD , 165
 Debra J. Rog, PhD , 166
 Nan Roman , 167
 Sister Mary Scullion , 167
 Marybeth Shinn, PhD , 168
 Horace Sibley , 169
 Mitch Snyder , 169
 Sam J. Tsemberis, PhD , 170
 Representative Bruce Vento , 171
 6 
Data and Documents , 173
 Introduction , 173
 Collecting Data on Homelessness Nationally , 173
 Recent Issues in Federal, State, and Local Government 
Programs , 181
 Passage and Implementation of the Federal 
HEARTH Act , 181
 Lessons Learned from the National Partnership , 192
 Homelessness in Europe , 207
 Homelessness in England , 208
 European Homeless Initiatives , 209
 Canada’s National Partnership , 209
 Australian Government Initiatives , 209
References, 210

x Contents
 7 
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies , 213
 Introduction , 213
 U.S. Government Agencies , 214
 Federal Agencies , 214
 State, Provincial, and Local 10-Year Plans , 217
 States , 218
 Cities and Counties , 219
 Canada , 220
 Innovators , 220
 Common Ground , 220
 Corporation for Supportive Housing , 221
 The Doe Fund , 221
 Family Promise , 221
 Family and Senior Homeless Initiative of Denver , 222
 Pathways to Housing , 222
 Project Homeless Connect , 222
 National Organizations , 223
 American Bar Association (ABA) , 223
 American Round Table to Abolish 
Homelessness (ART) , 223
 Bazelon Center for Mental Health Law , 223
 Catholic Charities USA , 224
 Center on Budget and Policy Priorities (CBPP) , 224
 Child Welfare League of America (CWLA) , 224
 Children’s Defense Fund (CDF) , 224
 Funders Together to End Homelessness , 225
 Housing Assistance Council (HAC) , 225
 International Downtown Association (IDA) , 225
 National Alliance to End Homelessness (NAEH) , 225
 National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) , 226
 National Association for the Education of Homeless 
Children and Youth (NAEHCY) , 226
 National Association of Counties (NACo) , 226
 National Center on Housing and 
Child Welfare (NCHCW) , 226
 National Center on Family Homelessness , 226
 National Coalition for the Homeless (NCH) , 227
 National Coalition for Homeless Veterans (NCHV) , 227
 National Council of State Housing Agencies , 227
 National Governors Association (NGA) , 227
 National Health Care for the 
Homeless Council (NHCHC) , 228

Contents xi
 National Law Center on Homelessness & Poverty 
(NLCHP) , 228
 National League of Cities (NLC) , 228
 National Low Income Housing Coalition (NLIHC) , 228
 National Network for Youth (NN4Y) , 229
 National Policy and Advocacy Coalition 
on Homelessness (NPACH) , 229
 National Student Campaign against Hunger & 
Homelessness , 229
 United States Conference of Mayors (USCM) , 229
 State and Local Homeless Organizations , 230
 International Organizations , 230
 Comité Européen de Coordination de l’Habitat Social 
(CECODHAS) European Liaison Committee for Social 
Housing , 230
 European Anti-Poverty Network , 230
 European Federation of National Organizations 
Working with the Homeless (Fédération Européenne 
d’Associations Nationales Travaillant Avec Les Sans-
Abri) (FEANTSA) , 231
 Habitact , 231
 International Network of Street Newspapers , 231
 Sisters of Mercy , 232
 United Nations Centre for 
Human Settlements (UNCHS) , 232
 England , 232
 Department of Communities and Local Government , 232
 Shelter , 232
 Canada , 233
 Human Resources and Skills Development Canada 
(HRSDC) , 233
 Federation of Canadian Municipalities (FCM) , 233
 Australia , 233
 Department of Families Housing, Community Services, 
and Indigenous Affairs , 233
 Homelessness Australia , 234
 8 
Resources , 235
 Introduction , 235
 General References , 236
 Homelessness Policy and Research , 248

xii Contents
 Journals , 248
 Special Journal Issues , 251
 Nonprint Resources , 252
 DVDs , 252
 Databases , 254
 Census Data , 254
 Housing Cost and Income Data , 255
 Litigation , 255
 Poverty Data , 255
 Web Sites , 255
 Policy and Research , 255
 Media , 256
 Federal Government Web Resources , 257
Key State Government Sites, 266 
Key Local Goverment Sites, 267 
Nongovernmental Organizations, 267
 International Resources , 269
 Glossary , 271
 Index , 277
 About the Author , 289

xiii
 Foreword 
 A 
decade into the 21st century, homelessness is yielding to so-
lutions. Even as the United States and countries around the 
world struggle with the effects of an ongoing economic down-
turn, governments at every level across the Atlantic and Pacific 
Oceans have acted in unprecedented ways in unprecedented part-
nerships with unprecedented results to prevent and end home-
lessness. 
 Having served as the point person of the federal effort on 
homelessness from 2002 to 2009 under President Bush and in the 
first 100 days of the Obama administration, I saw firsthand that 
we made progress in increasing resources and decreasing num-
bers. During those years we more than doubled federal invest-
ment and reduced street and long-term homelessness. In the years 
2005–2009 the number of homeless living on our streets and lan-
guishing in our shelters dropped by 36 percent. That outcome was 
the first sustained decrease in street and shelter homelessness in 
our nation’s history documented by data and research. 
 During those years we left behind much that had not worked, 
moving beyond compassion fatigue and frustration and policy dé-
tente. Belatedly we learned that if good intentions, well-meaning 
programs, and humanitarian gestures could end homelessness, it 
would have been history decades ago. They don’t, and it isn’t. 
 We shaped a new approach to homelessness based on what 
works: a strategy that emphasized local political and civic lead-
ership, business principles and practices, and field-tested and 
evidence-based innovative initiatives in engagement, housing, 
employment, and services. 
 The new approach resulted in more than 1,000 mayors and 
county officials partnering in 10-year plans to prevent and end 
street and chronic homelessness. That worked. All across the 

xiv Foreword
country, cities and counties began to report reductions on the 
streets and in shelters. Those reports continue. From 2005 to 2009, 
the decrease in street and chronic homelessness was documented 
by data and research in communities across the nation. The aver-
age 9 percent annual decrease signaled that we are on track to 
accomplish the 10-year goal. 
 The long-term street homelessness of the most disabled indi-
viduals continues to yield to innovative solutions fashioned in the 
United States and now adopted internationally. 
 What elements of that strategy and success should be sus-
tained? What changes were made to secure the unprecedented 
reductions? What can we learn from the innovations and new re-
sults? 
 First, on this issue of homelessness, partnership trumps parti-
sanship. On this issue there is no D or R. We are simply Americans 
partnered to end the disgrace. There can be no partisan divide 
that undermines our most vulnerable neighbors. The Bush and 
Obama administrations and the Congress all ensured increased 
resources for the past nine consecutive years. 
 Second, local planning fueled by the political will of jurisdic-
tional CEOs —mayors and county officials—can create and sustain 
policy and resources that reduce homelessness. Local leadership 
informed by national innovation—our practice was always the 
rapid dissemination of innovation—offers the ingredients of solu-
tions. Local plans, led by elected officials convening all of the stake-
holders, created reductions. 
 Third, the new political will is inspired and fueled by cost 
studies that reveal the economics of homelessness and the expense 
of ad hoc, uncoordinated responses. Street homeless people are 
expensive to the public purse. The cost of doing nothing for them 
is very expensive—in hospitals, emergency rooms, acute mental 
health and addiction programs, police lockups, courtrooms, and 
jail cells. 
 More than 65 cost studies across the nation revealed that this 
random ricocheting costs between $35,000 and $150,000 per per-
son, per year in expensive health and law-enforcement systems 
and simply maintains people in their homelessness. But the cost 
of the supported housing intervention for these vulnerable indi-
viduals ranges from $13,000 to $25,000 a year and literally ends 
their homelessness. You don’t need to be a hedge fund manager to 
know which is the better investment. 

Foreword xv
 Fourth, as a result of these cost studies, we recognize that the 
stakeholders of homelessness are a much more expansive group 
than once thought. Not only are they well-intentioned homeless 
providers and faith communities on the front lines, but the issue 
also impacts hospital administrators, businesses, police, judges, 
jailers, chambers of commerce, pedestrians, and librarians. Self-
interest as a motivator for cost efficiency and results makes 
sense—common sense and dollars and sense—for many of these 
stakeholders. 
 Our mission is clear and unambiguous. Our intent is to move 
beyond managing the crisis to ending the disgrace. We know we 
have more work to do. Our research and data-driven strategies, 
when applied to families and youth, will lead us to the field-tested 
and evidence-based innovations that will reduce those popula-
tions of homeless people as well. 
 The new business mindset requires us to prioritize consumer 
preferences, develop relevant metrics, and invest only in quantifi-
able results. Our new focus moves us away from process, inputs, 
and funding to performance, outcomes, and investments. 
 The good news is that we can speak of investment in innova-
tive ideas that end the long misery of our homeless neighbors—
ideas that are proven in the field and in the research. Initiatives 
focused on housing, engagement, and employment—Pathways to 
Housing, Assertive Community Treatment Teams, Street to Home, 
Ready, Willing & Able, and Project Homeless Connect. These in-
novations engage our homeless neighbors wherever they are, 
house them, and support them with services and employment. 
 Of these innovations, Housing First is the most significant. 
After all, the central antidote to homelessness is a place to live. 
Consumers know that. Now it’s our turn to connect our execution 
to their aspirations. In doing so, we change the equation of home-
lessness and create a trajectory toward safety, recovery, and up-
ward mobility. 
 Through our focus on solutions, results, and sustained political 
will we achieve a public policy trifecta: good for homeless people; 
good for the community; good for the taxpayer. 
 In this comprehensive volume, the remarkable story of a 
public policy mindset change is chronicled. Political leaders, re-
searchers, and innovators are named and their impact analyzed. 
The results of their leadership are made available to the reader, 
and their investment in innovation challenges the policy maker. 

xvi Foreword
 More importantly the achievements and strategies detailed 
here offer, for our era, a template of strategic response for other 
social wrongs. For those societal ills that seem intractable, here is 
a roadmap to abolition. 
 Philip F. Mangano 
 President and CEO of the American Round 
Table to Abolish Homelessness 
 
 

1
 1 
 Background and History 
 Introduction 
 F
undamental change occurred on the issue of homelessness 
over the past decade in the United States and other countries 
with comparable socioeconomic conditions. Both the problem 
of homelessness and other issues (such as the worldwide eco-
nomic crisis) became more widely understood through research 
and data. New strategies and solutions emerged and yielded in-
ternational dialogue about preventing and ending homelessness. 
In the last decade, the problem of modern homelessness seemed to 
be growing and irreversible—“intractable” was a common charac-
terization. The last decade, however, brought key developments in 
research, policy, housing strategies, and service delivery that were 
shown through data to decrease homelessness. Active partner-
ships among governments of the United States, Canada, England, 
and Australia moved the issue and its remedy in a new direction. 
 This chapter provides a brief history of the contemporary 
issue of homelessness as well as insight into changes at work in re-
search and policy during the last decade. Homelessness itself has 
not been new for over 25 years. In the 1980s, the problem was per-
ceived at epidemic proportions, and frontline local crisis response 
became visible in soup kitchens and shelters nationwide. Many of 
those local programs endure today. 
 As the numbers of those experiencing homelessness con-
tinued to increase, service providers and public officials alike 
recognized that the problem was often complex. That perceived 
complexity also made solutions difficult for elected leaders to craft 
and made meal programs and shelters the most visible response in 

2 Background and History
communities. For different profiles of people experiencing home-
lessness, achieving stability touches on many issues of poverty 
such as public assistance, wage levels, addiction, mental illness, 
education, and housing costs. The commonality in all homeless-
ness is a lack of housing. 
 The unique safety net and welfare-state programs of national 
governments once seemed to define what government response 
was possible, making international comparisons of policy initia-
tives and budget investments speculative at best. But larger global 
economic issues are not confined by national borders, as evidenced 
most recently in the worldwide downturn. Peers in policy mak-
ing from several national governments came to see that they had 
much to convey about strategies and investments targeting home-
lessness. Insight could be mined in peer-to-peer settings for the 
larger lessons that were changing the historic response in nations 
toward one of targeted investment and an expectation of reducing 
and ending homelessness. 
 In addition to economic crisis, natural disaster, in the form of 
hurricanes Katrina and Rita in the United States in 2004, provided 
valuable lessons on new ways to organize community response for 
those in need. The ongoing wars in Iraq and Afghanistan made ad-
dressing homelessness for service members a key priority. 
 A significant portion of the story told here starts with the ini-
tiatives of the federal government in the United States. The events 
of the last decade provide a basis for this approach. It is not the case 
that the response to homelessness begins and ends with national 
government anywhere. But the degree of change in the United 
States during this period was driven by concrete goals, strong lead-
ership from the public and private sectors, new investment, and 
consistent effort to disseminate new ideas to the field and identify 
those innovations that were being developed locally. Not since the 
first legislative response in Congress in 1987 has the federal govern-
ment made such a major contribution to change on the issue. 
 What Changed in the United States? 
 The unprecedented change that occurred in the United States on 
the issue of homelessness—which itself resulted in never-before-
seen reductions first announced in 2007—resulted from several 
crucial shifts in strategy, investment, and results, which will be 
highlighted throughout this book. The dramatic changes in policy 

What Changed in the United States? 3
and investment strategies of the last decade can be analyzed for 
the factors that proved to be most effective in changing the nature 
of the national and local dialogue, response, and results. 
 In 2002, the new Bush administration established through lan-
guage in the annual federal budget a goal to end chronic homeless-
ness within a decade (OMB, 2002). For those who asked, “Why 
chronic homelessness?” the federal goal drew on new research 
data that showed this most long-term homeless adult population 
as finite (estimated at 150,000), expensive, and with deep levels of 
disability (Kuhn and Culhane, 1998). Critics challenged the notion 
of such a targeted goal coming at the expense of others in need, 
including homeless families (NPACH, 2005). Debate over the defi-
nition of the chronic population and its targeting was unabated 
and eventually was reflected in legislative changes to the homeless 
programs in 2009 (HEARTH, 2009). 
 While the federal government in 2002 had 15 years of history 
in administering homeless programs, the new federal goal was 
surprising in its details. First, federal homeless appropriations had 
steadily increased over those 15 years, yet there was little expecta-
tion that the existing investment would end homelessness in the 
nation. There was likely less expectation by policy advocates and 
service providers that a new Republican administration would 
set such a target or follow through to demonstrate its consistent 
support for meeting the goal. The federal budget increased invest-
ment in homelessness initiatives every year from 2001 on, yielding 
unprecedented resources for the new strategies it was identifying 
and supporting (USICH, 2008c). 
 At almost the same time as the administration’s new policy 
announcement, several more resources had become available to 
support strategies to accomplish the federal goal. The federal In-
teragency Council on Homelessness, composed of 20 federal agen-
cies, was created by federal legislation in 1987 but was dormant 
and unfunded in the several years prior to the Bush administra-
tion (1994–2000) (USICH, 2010  b). The council was revitalized in 
2002 with U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development 
secretary Mel Martinez serving as chair. The agency was put under 
the strong leadership of Philip Mangano, an entrepreneurial advo-
cate on the issue for more than two decades. Mangano identified 
several emerging elements for a federal strategy and partnership 
for the newly independent agency. One was the new data that of-
fered quantifiable insight into the needs of homeless adults who 
were the most disabled and long-term homeless on the streets and 

4 Background and History
in shelters, the “chronically homeless.” Another was the commit-
ment and political will of state and local jurisdictional officials. 
 The new federal goal and its strategies drew directly on the 
lessons of the Rough Sleepers Initiative in England. In 1999, Brit-
ish prime minister Tony Blair issued a new plan for addressing 
the needs of the country’s “rough sleepers,” or people living out-
side. The government’s initial report recommended setting up the 
Rough Sleepers Unit, with the target of reducing rough sleeping in 
England to as near to zero as possible, and by at least two-thirds, 
by 2002. 
 Coming in from the Cold: The Government’s Strategy on Rough 
Sleeping  in 1999 noted that “a steady population of long-term rough 
sleepers who have not been helped effectively by previous initia-
tives” needed to be the focus of new “braver” approaches and that 
“some services have in practice sustained people in a street life-
style, rather than helping them off the streets.” The report concluded: 
“The balance in the system must be tipped towards the most vulner-
able rather than making the streets a fast track for the most able.” 
Blair further noted: “Government will provide the tools, and the 
funding. But we know that this approach will only succeed as part 
of a genuine partnership—between central and local government, 
the voluntary sector, statutory bodies, businesses, community 
groups and rough sleepers themselves” (ODPM, 1999). 
 The government policy peers of the Rough Sleepers Initiative 
were a resource to the new direction of U.S. policy makers focused 
on chronic homelessness, giving rise to what became a new and 
regular series of exchanges between counterparts that expanded 
to include Canadian and Australian initiatives. 
 Developing Policy and Investment with Data 
 The new federal policy target was based on research data that 
clearly identified the chronic population and some of its dynam-
ics and informed strategy. Data had been a missing ingredient to 
the development of policy and investment on homelessness, but 
the Bush administration’s management agenda required all in-
vestments to be data driven, performance based, results oriented, 
and consumer focused. 
 One key problem in crafting responses to homelessness had 
historically been the lack of data about who is homeless and why 
and what is needed to end their homelessness. Prior to the last de-

What Changed in the United States? 5
cade, very little data was available to guide public investment or 
policy in the United States. Anecdotes and information on inputs 
(meals served, beds filled) characterized the issue of homelessness. 
This was both a practical problem and a cultural one for social ser-
vices programs, which were more focused on assisting individual 
and families than on collecting or analyzing data. There was no 
expectation that homelessness was being prevented or ended for 
those in contact with such programs. Thus, ending homelessness 
as an expected outcome of resources being invested was not a part 
of the dialogue on the issue. 
 An important new development during the last decade in the 
United States was the shift of public policy development and bud-
get investment on homelessness to data-driven initiatives and an 
increased expectation of measurable results. While national data 
collection efforts in the federal homeless programs were directed 
by the U.S. Congress, new academic research also emerged to re-
shape public and policy debate. The new developments included 
data on specific populations (such as veterans, youth, and the 
long-term or chronically homeless), on the quantifiable outcomes 
of new strategies, and on the costs and results of new approaches. 
 Research on Chronic Homelessness 
 Research, especially cost and cost-benefit research about the un-
derlying cost of the status quo response to homelessness—for pub-
lic systems such as police, fire, EMTs, hospital emergency rooms, 
libraries, and more—emerged as a new component of policy. Cost 
data demonstrated that communities of all sizes that faced the 
challenge of homelessness—whether visibly on downtown streets, 
in encampments along rivers or in parks, in winter shelters, or in 
other settings—could quantify their problem, its costs to public 
systems and taxpayers, and more effective solutions. 
 Until the late 1990s in the United States, public policy for 
homeless adults (not families) was largely based on stereotypes 
of visibly homeless individuals on the streets as unreachable, iso-
lated, and untreatable. These individuals, viewed as the majority of 
homeless adults, were often seen as a nuisance, asking for change 
on the streets or publicly suffering the effects of alcohol, drugs, 
and/or mental illness. Volunteers and outreach workers brought 
blankets, coffee, soup, and more, with little expectation that more 
could be done for individuals who had often been on the same 

6 Background and History
streets for years. Their situation was viewed as frustrating and not 
changeable. If they used shelter or mission programs periodically 
to escape the weather or access food, clothing, and showers, they 
were likely expected to participate in treatment or other programs. 
Their continued homelessness, albeit accompanied by disability, 
was a choice in the eyes of many. 
 The research of Dr. Dennis Culhane of the University of Penn-
sylvania was key to changing how shelter use and individual need 
was understood. Dr. Culhane looked at shelter beds as a system of 
resources through which people with distinct needs came and went, 
with bed turnover as a crucial and measurable component, much 
as hospital beds would be analyzed (Kuhn and Culhane, 1998). 
This view of emergency shelter as a resource that could be tailored 
to specific profiles of greater or lesser need changed the view of the 
adult population from one that was static and homogenous to a dy-
namic one with distinct subpopulations. The data changed the idea 
of what factors were important in policy and investment. 
 Dr. Culhane’s data revealed that the single adult homeless 
population is made up of three distinct groups or clusters. The larg-
est group (80 percent) is transitional in nature, staying only a brief 
time in shelter and never returning. These individuals are helped 
by access to permanent housing and income through jobs. A second 
group (10 percent) stays in shelter and then returns, often using 
other public systems between episodes. They experience medical, 
mental health, and substance abuse problems and chronic unem-
ployment, using costly services in hospitals, jails, and detoxifica-
tion programs (Kuhn and Culhane, 1998). 
 The third group, highly visible and inaccurately perceived 
as the largest group of homeless adults, in fact turned out to be 
a small percentage of the population—the chronically home-
less (10 percent) (Kuhn and Culhane, 1998). Their stays in shelter 
(and on the street) are long and virtually unbroken, their levels of 
disability from mental illness and substance abuse are deeper, and 
their almost permanent residence in emergency programs absorbs 
50 percent of available homeless resources. The nearly constant 
presence of this third group in homelessness was the basis of the 
expectation that they were the largest number of homeless adults 
with the least connection to services and the least potential to end 
their homelessness. Both of these assumptions were soundly chal-
lenged and disproven by the results of policy and investment 
changes that followed Dr. Culhane’s research. Subsequent research 
by Culhane that focused only on costs for chronically homeless in-

What Changed in the United States? 7
dividuals in psychiatric care, addiction treatment, and incarceration 
(but not in law enforcement, courts, EMS, and general health care) 
demonstrated that 20 percent of those with the highest service costs 
represented 60 percent of total annual costs (Poulin et al., 2010). 
 While consuming most of the homeless resources, this small 
group—on the streets and in shelters—was offered little to end 
their homelessness; they were seen as the manifestation of the in-
tractability of the problem. There was no perceived “win” in direct-
ing public policy or investment to these visible individuals. Yet, 
during the last decade, new strategies for this population emerged 
and were proven to end homelessness. Rather than a sequence of 
programs, ready access to cost-effective housing solutions worked. 
Against most expectations, the long-term, disabled homeless adult 
population showed a high rate of success in supported housing 
programs that combine appropriate services with housing sub-
sidies. 
 Collecting Data Nationally 
 The U.S. Congress understood the need for more data on home-
lessness, both to understand the problem and to examine the in-
crementally increasing investment of federal budget resources in 
homeless programs. During the last decade, the U.S. Congress 
was newly interested in what data revealed about homelessness. 
In 1998, Congress through the annual budget process directed the 
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)—
the federal agency where the key McKinney-Vento homeless pro-
grams have historically been administered—to develop a standard 
process for collecting data about people experiencing homeless-
ness across the nation. 
 Specifically, Congress indicated that HUD should collect an 
unduplicated count of people who were homeless; characteristics 
(such as age, race, sex, disability status, health status, and income); 
types of services that homeless clients received; and client out-
comes (such as length of stay in transitional programs, success in 
acquiring permanent housing, and employment status). Congress 
concluded that this information would allow HUD to better assess 
the quality of programs supported with federal funds. 
 In 2001, HUD began to implement what is called the Home-
less Management Information System (HMIS). HMIS established 
standard pieces of information or data definitions to be col-
lected from people seeking shelter or services, created a means to 

8 Background and History
aggregate this information within communities, and provided the 
opportunity to social services agencies to coordinate their work 
with individuals by using electronic data. Communities must un-
dertake a biennial one-night count of streets, shelters, and other 
sites during a late-January time frame. 
 Congress directed that data be reported from HUD annually. 
In 2007, HUD released the first analysis of data from a sample of 
communities participating in HMIS in a report called the  Annual 
Homeless Assessment Report (AHAR). An overview of key data from 
the 2009 AHAR is included in chapter 6, and a summary is pro-
vided here (HUD, 2010c). 
 Data from the 2009 report reflect 334 communities as they 
are grouped geographically to apply for federal homeless funds. 
Together they represent 2,988 counties and 1,056 cities reporting 
data. The 2009 report includes 2007 and 2008 data, allowing for 
comparison as well as information from personal interviews in 
9 cities. 
 According to the report, on the night of the January count 
across the nation, there were an estimated 643,067 people expe-
riencing homelessness (including both sheltered and unsheltered 
people). More than 60 percent were in shelter or transitional pro-
grams, and 37 percent were living on the streets (HUD, 2010c). 
 Individuals accounted for 63 percent of the population, and 
37 percent were in a family. Just 21 percent of family members 
were without shelter, compared to almost half of all homeless in-
dividuals. The estimate of people experiencing chronic homeless-
ness was 110,917, demonstrating over a 10 percent decrease from 
the 2008 count of 124,135 chronically homeless people and a total 
36 percent drop in chronic homelessness since 2005. All of the 2009 
decrease was among unsheltered chronically homeless people 
(HUD, 2010c). 
 The data that make up the AHAR are limited by the time lag 
of local communities reporting their annual data centrally for ag-
gregation. In 2009, HUD announced that it would begin another 
data initiative, called the “Homelessness Pulse Project,” to collect 
quarterly data on sheltered families and individuals that were 
more timely from nine localities. According to HUD’s announce-
ment, the agency’s goal is “to help gauge whether rising unem-
ployment, increased foreclosures, and a struggling economy are 
leading to marked increases in homelessness in these nine com-
munities. The up-to-date information enhances HUD’s ability to 
respond to the economic crisis and inform public policy. . . . Its 

What Changed in the United States? 9
contents should be taken as suggestive—not definitive—of how 
homelessness may be changing during these uncertain economic 
times” (HUD, 2010a). 
 Partnership, Investment, and Innovation 
 Jurisdictional Partnership with State and Local Government  
 Many of the new solutions that emerged during the decade were 
the result of the leadership of government at every level—na-
tional, state and provincial, and local—and locally tested innova-
tions whose results were documented through data. Engagement 
of other levels of government was a centerpiece of the federal strat-
egy in the United States. 
 The decade brought increased focus on strategic planning 
using business principles, inclusive community partnerships that 
established the participation and leadership of business and civic 
figures alongside front-line social services providers, and a new 
expectation of results in reducing and ending homelessness. This 
major shift in partnership and strategy was characterized by Philip 
Mangano, the leading policy maker at the federal level in his role 
as the appointed executive director of the federal U.S. Interagency 
Council on Homelessness from 2002 to 2009, as “changing the na-
tional mindset from  managing  homelessness to  ending homeless-
ness” (Mangano, 2002). 
 The council had an existing legislative mandate to encourage 
the development of state interagency councils on homelessness 
that mirrored the federal council in its membership and mission 
of coordination and partnership. Such state councils assemble a 
broad partnership of state agencies, legislative representatives, 
business and civic leaders, and social service providers and ad-
vocates to focus on the unique role of states, state resources, and 
federal resources provided directly to states. 
 Every state governor was contacted by the federal council to 
take this step or revitalize an existing state-level entity in order to 
provide state partnership with federal and local government. State 
after state convened new councils, created state plans, and engaged 
local government to coordinate investment and solutions. 
 Additionally, a concept paper on local planning had been 
outlined in 2000 by the National Alliance to End Homelessness 
(NAEH). The alliance had developed a conceptual approach to 
four ideas: planning for outcomes, closing the “front door” of home-
lessness by increasing accountability in mainstream programs, 

10 Background and History
opening the “back door” out of homelessness by increasing hous-
ing opportunity, and building infrastructure in housing, services, 
and income supports (NAEH, 2000). 
 With a set of sophisticated and proven strategies and a con-
tinuing commitment to jurisdictional leaders to deliver evidence 
of “what works,” the Interagency Council adopted 10-year plans 
as a key tool for new business-oriented planning and strategy. 
Plans were developed with the consistent guidance and support of 
the council based on jurisdictional leadership, business principles, 
and inclusive partnership. From a handful of early plans in 2002, 
over 350 plans involving partnerships of over 1,000 elected mayors 
and county officials had been recorded by 2009 (USICH, 2009d). 
 Ten-year plans became the primary tool to enlist elected ju-
risdictional officials at the state, county, and city level to become 
partners in ending homelessness, a role that would expand part-
nership, provide accountable leadership, and draw other sectors 
to the new dialogue. Local jurisdictional leaders who committed 
to create and implement business-oriented plans frequently ap-
pointed a “community champion,” a local business, civic, or po-
litical leader who could give a higher profile to the plan and help 
attract the resources needed for implementation. Champions were 
another planning innovation that emerged. 
 When Council Director Mangano first presented the U.S. Con-
ference of Mayors with the challenge to develop plans in 100 cities 
in January 2003, the mayors demonstrated their support by pass-
ing a unanimous resolution. When Director Mangano reported 
back to the mayors the next year, over 115 mayors had committed 
to plans. From New York, Chicago, Miami, and Denver to Atlanta, 
San Francisco, St. Louis, and Washington, D.C., to Norfolk, Vir-
ginia, Springfield, Massachusetts, Chattanooga, Tennessee, and 
Asheville, North Carolina, mayors moved forward with 10-year 
plans. Also in 2003, both the National League of Cities and the Na-
tional Association of Counties passed resolutions endorsing the 
goal of ending chronic homelessness and 10-year plans. The may-
ors’ resolution is included in chapter 6. 
 In a 2007 homelessness summit of mayors and county officials 
convened in Denver, local jurisdictional officials signed a state-
ment of commitment that demonstrated the evolution of key prin-
ciples and innovations through planning and partnership titled 
“America’s Road Home.” The new statement was signed by more 
than 300 city and county officials by 2009 (USICH, 2009a). 

What Changed in the United States? 11
 The council also developed toolkits and other resources to 
support officials in moving forward. The key components of the 
10-year plan strategy were laid out: committing the jurisdiction to 
developing a plan; identifying stakeholders; convening a working 
group; gathering research and data on homelessness; defining the 
community’s homeless problem; developing strategies to address 
these problems; soliciting stakeholder feedback and finalizing a 
strategic plan; creating an action plan to implement strategies; an-
nouncing and publicizing the strategy; and implementing the plan 
(USICH, 2009e). 
 Emerging strategies in implementation included regular pub-
lic “report cards” on progress and subsequent “recalibration” of 
plans to incorporate new ideas and innovations. 
 The Economic Argument to End Homelessness 
 Business thinker and writer Malcolm Gladwell also influenced 
change on homelessness. Gladwell’s popular book  The Tipping 
Point  demonstrated the value of investing modest new resources in 
the most visible expression of a social problem. “Concentrate, don’t 
dissipate” was the lesson for investing against the goal. This argu-
ment took on the prevailing expectation that every resource should 
be expended equally over all need. It countered with an expecta-
tion that concentration would show results, which would then at-
tract more resources (Gladwell, 2002). 
 Gladwell contributed another vital resource to the national 
effort with a February 2006 essay in the  New Yorker magazine titled 
“Million-Dollar Murray: Why Problems like Homelessness May Be 
Easier to Solve than to Manage.” The cost of what was seen as “man-
aging” homelessness through an individual’s frequent use of public 
services (including hospitalization, incarceration, detox treatments, 
and ambulance rides) was demonstrated for a Reno man, Murray 
Barr, whose street homelessness cost an estimated $1 million in 
public resources (Gladwell, 2006). 
 The magazine article caught and kept the attention of policy 
makers, media, and local partners, who embarked on their own cost 
studies to provide the economic argument for ending the expensive 
chronic homelessness of their neighbors. No city could afford the 
costs being revealed. Soon, local planning efforts were seen as in-
complete without a cost analysis of heavy users of public services. 
Those very vulnerable individuals who lived on the streets and 
sidewalks turned out to be very expensive to emergency medical 

12 Background and History
services, ambulances, EMTs, primary health care, behavioral health 
care, psychiatric treatment, detox facilities, and the justice system, 
police, law enforcement, corrections, and the courts. 
 Local Cost-Analysis Studies 
 The cost-benefit research many local officials conducted on home-
lessness with the Interagency Council’s encouragement became 
the convincing economic argument in 10-year plans. While data 
published in the early 1990s had demonstrated that hospitalization 
costs were higher for individuals who were homeless, with their 
homelessness accounting for the increased expense, data also in-
dicated that their hospitalizations for substance abuse and mental 
illness were far higher than for other patients (Salit et al., 1998). 
 Other data that gave direction to research and practice had 
emerged from the Boston Health Care for the Homeless Program. 
Some 119 chronically homeless individuals were tracked through 
data that showed that they had 18,000 emergency room visits in 
five years, each estimated at a cost of $1,000 per visit (O’Connell 
et al., 2005). 
 In the early 1990s Dr. James O’Connell of the Boston Health 
Care for the Homeless Program had examined the street deaths of 
13 individuals in downtown Boston in six months. He identified 
factors ranging from the day and week of death to key individual 
characteristics. He found that those who died were chronically 
homeless, lived on the streets and avoided shelters, and were very 
vulnerable to injury, trauma, and hypothermia. They showed a 
high utilization of emergency services and detox. Importantly they 
each had multiple major medical issues, including mental illness, 
alcohol abuse, dual diagnosis, and several major medical illnesses, 
constituting so-called trimorbidity (O’Connell et al., 2005). 
 Dr. O’Connell applied this profile of risk to identify those 
most in danger of death on the streets. His research is now at the 
core of the “Vulnerability Index,” a tool to register those in critical 
need of intervention and housing placement now in use in numer-
ous cities globally. 
 More than 65 cost studies emerged around the country, from 
jurisdictions large and small. Three of the most often cited are sum-
marized here. In San Diego, California, the University of Califor-
nia at San Diego followed 15 chronically homeless street people for 
18 months, tracking their use of behavioral health acute systems, 
mental health and substance abuse services, law-enforcement in-

What Changed in the United States? 13
terventions on the streets, and temporary periods of incarceration. 
Their total cost was $3 million, or $200,000 per person. 
 In Seattle/King County, a $4 million savings to public sys-
tems through the 1811 Eastlake Housing First initiative was doc-
umented. The project, for 75 chronic inebriates, was reported in 
the  Journal of the American Medical Association  in 2009. “Providing 
housing and support services for homeless alcoholics costs taxpay-
ers less than leaving them on the street, where taxpayer money 
goes towards police and emergency health care. Stable housing 
also results in reduced drinking among homeless alcoholics.” The 
reduced costs included 41 percent in Medicaid costs, 19 percent 
in EMS paramedic interventions, and 42 percent fewer jail days 
(Larimer et al., 2009). 
 In Denver, a Housing First study examined emergency room, 
inpatient medical, psychiatric, outpatient medical, detox services, 
incarceration, and shelter costs and utilization for two years pre- 
and post housing placement for a group of chronically homeless 
individuals with an average of eight years of homelessness per 
person. Over 80 percent housing retention was reported at six 
months, with a 73 percent reduction in emergency costs, or nearly 
$600,000, in the two years post placement compared to two years 
while homeless. There was a 66 percent decrease in inpatient costs, 
40 percent fewer inpatient visits, and 82 percent fewer detox visits 
(Perlman and Parvensky, 2006). 
 The Denver results in 2008 led to an announcement by Mayor 
John Hickenlooper that the city would reinvest $20 million in 
savings in public systems to create 200 new units of housing for 
persons who are chronically homeless. This reinvestment strategy 
was the first of its kind in the nation (USICH, 2008a). 
 New Federal Funding Approaches 
 With new data, new budget resources, and new partners focused 
on chronic homelessness, the federal government in early 2003 
undertook an unprecedented joint-funding initiative on home-
lessness involving the U.S Interagency Council on Homeless-
ness and the Departments of Housing and Urban Development, 
Health and Human Services, and Veterans Affairs. Practitioners in 
the field had long sought federal funding opportunities that com-
bined the resources of multiple agencies in the same time frame so 
that they could compete for dollars that would blend effectively 

14 Background and History
and holistically for local needs. More than 100 applications were 
filed for what would be 11 local awards (HUD, 2003). 
 The joint-funding announcement, published in the  Federal Reg-
ister  on January 27, 2003, and which eventually awarded $55 mil-
lion, summarized the research basis for the focused initiative and 
concluded: “Research indicates that these individuals consume 
more than half of all homeless services. As such, there are signifi-
cantly fewer resources available for 90 percent of the homeless—
including families—who, with a little assistance, could often exit 
homelessness relatively quickly. By addressing the housing and 
service needs of persons who are chronically homeless, we will 
have more resources available to meet the needs of other homeless 
people. When persons who are chronically homeless have access 
to basic assistance like housing and treatment, they have fewer 
problems and are less likely to need expensive emergency inter-
ventions. The research makes it clear that one of our best hopes for 
ending homelessness of every sort depends on addressing chronic 
homelessness. We are setting policy and taking action based on 
that research.” 
 The goals of the new initiative were to increase the effective-
ness of integrated systems of care for persons experiencing chronic 
homelessness by providing comprehensive services and treatment 
and linking them to housing; create additional permanent housing 
for persons experiencing chronic homelessness; increase the use 
of mainstream resources (e.g., Medicaid, Temporary Assistance for 
Needy Families, Food Stamps, Substance Abuse Prevention and 
Treatment Block Grants, Mental Health Block Grants, Social Ser-
vices Block Grants, State Children’s Health Insurance Program) 
that pay for services and treatment; replicate service, treatment, 
and housing models that have proven to be effective based on 
sound evidence; and support the development of infrastructures 
that sustain the housing, services, treatments, and interorganiza-
tional partnerships beyond the federal initiative. 
 HUD subsequently awarded 12 demonstration grants total-
ing $10 million to sites focusing on chronic street alcoholics. The 
second initiative was designed to identify unique needs and suc-
cessful housing strategies for the over 500 individuals in the “serial 
inebriate” population (HUD, 2005). 
 Identifying and Adopting Innovation 
 Other new and innovative approaches were tested during the 
decade, displacing established thinking and practice to achieve 

What Changed in the United States? 15
new results. Whether in housing, employment, engagement of the 
most difficult to reach on the streets, or accessing benefits, inno-
vations surfaced and were propelled back to the local level to be 
adopted by more communities through organized efforts to infuse 
new ideas into the field. The federal Interagency Council took as 
its goal the identification and “rapid dissemination” of emerging 
innovations that were being tested locally and evaluated through 
data, promoting “the art of legitimate larceny” among communi-
ties that tailored and adopted what was working elsewhere (Man-
gano, 2005). 
 One new approach was Housing First, a housing strategy that 
has now been recognized as an evidence-based practice with a 
more than 85 percent success rate. Seeing that “business as usual” 
was not working for the homeless individuals he was supporting 
through street outreach and other services, Dr. Sam Tsemberis in 
New York City listened harder to what they told him they wanted. 
It was not a sequence of programs that required them to main-
tain sobriety or treatment and succeed at each step until they were 
judged ready for housing. Instead, his clients wanted housing and 
choice about the services they used. In other words, their expressed 
desire was for housing “first.” 
 Just as many found the Bush administration commitment on 
homelessness counterintuitive to expectations of a Republican 
president, the trajectory of Housing First seemed unlikely. As char-
acterized by Dr. Tsemberis, “Fifteen years ago, who would have 
imagined that the most humane and effective solution for ending 
homelessness would come directly from the people who were liv-
ing on the streets—people who were, by all accounts, helpless, dis-
oriented, and vulnerable?” What would happen if you offered the 
person who slept on the sidewalk the key to an apartment? How 
could someone who might have spent years on the streets, who 
might be mentally ill or addicted, who had not lived independently, 
sustain housing? Thousands of vulnerable individuals—formerly 
living at great risk on the streets and costing communities dispro-
portionate expense in resources—now show the stabilizing effect 
of housing itself and how the model succeeds in cities around the 
globe that have adopted it as a central strategy (Pathways to Hous-
ing, 2007). 
 Another innovation was Project Homeless Connect, which 
gained global traction after being developed in San Francisco, 
adopted in more than 250 U.S. cities, and then migrating to Can-
ada and Australia. Again, business as usual was challenged by 
this innovative “one-day, one-stop” model in delivering easy and 

16 Background and History
expedited access to services, benefits, and “quality of life” re-
sources, such as haircuts and clean clothes. Connect drew on the 
need to make access easy and choice available for people living on 
the streets who were often distrustful of their prior experiences in 
seeking services (PHC, n.d.). 
 Connect took lessons from the one-stop centers that were 
spontaneously organized in many welcoming communities after 
hurricanes Katrina and Rita and from veterans’ “Stand Down” 
events, which were typically outdoor, multi-day encampments. 
Those displaced by natural disaster had not been stigmatized by 
their status or need. Communities welcomed families and individ-
uals with expedited and simplified resources ranging from identi-
fication to health care to clothing, setting up one-stops in armories 
and convention centers. The same consumer-focused approach 
was modeled by Connect with events in nonhomeless locations 
such as civic centers, hotels, and sports arenas. Connect events 
were convened for families and youth to specialize resources for 
these populations. 
 All of these factors worked together to change the way all 
sectors—government, business, faith communities, social services 
agencies, law enforcement, health care, and more—were thinking 
about homelessness and responding to it. After 20 years of crisis 
response and increased federal funding but no decline in numbers 
or development of strategies that could be applied broadly, the last 
decade was a time of unprecedented change. 
 Unprecedented Reductions in Homelessness 
 The changed approach delivered unprecedented news in Novem-
ber 2007 when, for the first time in the history of contemporary 
homelessness in the United States, the federal government released 
national data that had been reported by over 3,900 local communi-
ties showing a “nearly 12 percent decrease in the number of chroni-
cally homeless persons living on the nation’s streets. HUD’s analysis 
found that more than 20,000 persons moved from the streets into 
transitional and permanent supportive housing between 2005 and 
2006.” According to HUD data, the 175,914 individuals reported 
in 2005 decreased to 155,623 in 2006. (HUD, 2007) A November 7, 
2007, statement released by the White House on the announcement 
noted that the new results demonstrated that “targeted, focused re-
sources can achieve measurable results” (White House, 2007). 

What Changed in the United States? 17
 When a 36 percent reduction in chronic homelessness for the 
years 2005 to 2009 was announced in 2010, it underscored the ef-
fectiveness of the new strategies underway and highlighted the 
needed progress to meet the 10-year goal. As noted in a national edi-
torial, “The Bush administration focused mainly on the chronically 
homeless, whose numbers have dropped 30 percent since 2006. An 
Obama plan wisely builds on that foundation to help more of the 
homeless, such as families and veterans” (“Obama,” 2010). 
 Research and Resources for Homeless Populations 
 The  2009 Annual Homeless Assessment Report from HUD to Congress 
noted several key facts about the data from local communities that 
had been aggregated nationally in the annual report. According to 
the 2009 report, almost 1.56 million people used either emergency 
shelter or a transitional program during the year (October 1, 2008, 
through September 30, 2009). Two-thirds of those reported were in-
dividuals, and one-third were members of families (HUD, 2010c). 
 While adult males make up just over 40 percent of the general 
population, they represent 63.7 percent of the homeless adults. The 
profile for a shelter user is an adult male, a member of a minor-
ity group, middle-aged, and unaccompanied. Slightly over two-
thirds have a disability. The number of sheltered homeless families 
increased for the second year, and, similarly to 2008, the number 
of sheltered homeless individuals decreased. Most families have a 
female head of household under age 31. Sixty percent of those in 
families are children, and more than 50 percent of the children are 
under age six. 
 Homeless Families 
 With new research emerging on chronic homelessness, there was 
a parallel federal strategy building to develop a research base to 
address family homelessness and other issues. The U.S. Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services (HHS) convened a national 
research conference and commissioned papers to look at many 
homeless populations and strategies. Dr. Debra Rog, a leading re-
searcher on homeless families, reviewed what was known from 
prior family research. She found that most homeless families are 
headed by a single woman in her late twenties with an average of 
two children, one or both under six years of age. Those at most risk 
of homelessness are also from ethnic minority groups. Families are 

18 Background and History
very poor and lack assets in education and employment. Families 
demonstrated a high level of housing instability, living “doubled 
up” with others and moving frequently. Dr. Rog found that part-
ner violence and childhood abuse were strongly present in these 
families. Mothers exhibited poorer health than housed mothers 
and comparable levels of mental health problems but self-reported 
higher levels of substance abuse (Rog and Bruckner, 2007). 
 Dr. Rog also found that, while homelessness had an impact 
on children’s health and well-being, including on education, there 
was little research on long-term effects and evidence that impact 
declined over time, with exposure to violence being a more sig-
nificant factor that homelessness. 
 Dr. Rog pointed to the role of housing affordability—variable 
across markets—and the lack of research data on common models 
in use for families. No studies had compared transitional programs 
(the longer-stay model emphasized in federal homeless spending), 
permanent supported housing, or permanent housing for home-
less families or identified the right mix of housing and services 
that was cost effective and stabilizing. The idea of rapid rehousing 
strategies for families was not yet visible. 
 A subsequent 2007 research study by Dr. Dennis Culhane 
sought to apply the same “cluster” analysis he used on single 
adults to the family population. Analyzing data from several juris-
dictions, Dr. Culhane found that the majority of families fell into 
the temporary stay category. “In terms of the relative use of shelter 
system resources, the groups again exhibit fairly comparable re-
sults across sites. In all four jurisdictions, approximately half of the 
total bed days are used by the roughly one-fifth of family house-
holds in the long-stay category” (Culhane et al., 2007). 
 The lack of a research basis for new initiatives for families 
demonstrated the need for additional strategies and research. The 
federal Interagency Council in 2008 published the results of a fed-
eral survey of programs that could serve homeless families with 
children, an inventory of 73 programs in 11 federal agencies. Just 
as the federal investment in chronic homelessness had yielded in-
sights into “what works” to house and stabilize individuals, HUD 
sought to learn more about family rapid rehousing strategies. In 
2009, it awarded over $23 million to support and evaluate 23 pilot 
projects across the country (USICH, 2009c). Subsequent new re-
sources under the Recovery Act (ARRA) yielded a new $1.2 billion 
for the Homelessness Prevention and Rapid Re-Housing Program 
(HPRP) (USICH, 2009b). 

What Changed in the United States? 19
 HUD undertook a study of transitional programs to address 
the gap in knowledge identified by Dr. Rog and determine if length 
of stay was a factor in program benefits. In 2010, HUD released 
findings from a five-city study that showed that “while transitional 
housing programs produced increasingly positive outcomes for 
families with longer stays, HUD found the number of barriers fac-
ing families did not impact outcomes. Given the significant costs 
associated with service-intensive transitional housing programs, 
HUD’s report brings into question whether this housing model is 
the most appropriate intervention for those families who do not 
have significant barriers to housing” (HUD, 2010b). 
 Veterans 
 In November 2009, the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) 
announced a five-year plan to end homelessness among veterans. 
When the federal Interagency Council released its new strategy 
in mid-2010, the VA noted that homelessness among veterans had 
been reduced from 195,000 to 107,000 over six years (VA, 2010b). 
AHAR data estimated veterans to represent about 13 percent of 
persons in shelter (HUD, 2010c). AHAR also reported that veterans 
are slightly more likely to be represented in the sheltered homeless 
population than the general population but are a much smaller 
share of the adult poverty population (5.1 percent) than the home-
less population, in part because the adult poverty population in-
cludes fewer adult men who are the most likely to be veterans. 
The estimated number of homeless veterans will be a focus as the 
number of veterans returning from Iraq and Afghanistan increases 
during the next few years (HUD, 2009). 
 Women veterans now number approximately 1.8 million, ac-
cording to the VA. This number has steadily increased, up from 
1.2 million in 1990. Representing 6 percent of veterans in 2000 
data, women are estimated at 8 percent of all veterans in 2010. At 
median age 47, they are also younger than the average male vet-
eran at 61 years of age (VA, 2010a). 
 The VA plan includes preventive measures such as discharge 
planning for incarcerated veterans, supportive services for low-
income veterans and their families, and a national referral center 
to link veterans to local service providers. The plan calls for ex-
panded efforts for education, jobs, health care, and housing. VA 
partners with more than 600 community organizations to provide 
transitional housing to 20,000 veterans. It also works with 240 pub-
lic housing authorities to provide subsidized permanent housing 

20 Background and History
to homeless veterans and their families under a partnership with 
the Department of Housing and Urban Development. The VA/
HUD partnership will provide permanent housing to more than 
20,000 veterans and their families. 
 Young Adults 
 Homeless young adults reflect several specific background issues, 
though there is little data to determine how much overlap exists. 
Young people—and there is no commonly agreed on age range—
may have aged out of foster care at age 18 or left the child welfare 
system even earlier, be runaways or throwaways from family dif-
ficulties or sexual, physical, or other abuse or neglect, or have left 
the juvenile justice system. 
 The federal Runaway and Homeless Youth Act, the key fed-
eral legislation for the population, created programs that are oper-
ated by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). 
The legislation defines the population as “individuals under age 18 
who are unable to live in a safe environment with a relative and 
lack safe alternative living arrangements, as well as individuals 
aged 18 to 21 without shelter” (HHS/HCF, 2001). 
 The Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention 
(OJJDP) of the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) distinguishes 
runaways and throwaways by looking at young people who left 
home without permission and stayed away for specified periods of 
time, young people who left at the direction of an adult without 
adequate alternatives, and young people prevented from returning 
by an adult. 
 Numbers have been difficult to establish, and little is known 
about costs of youth homelessness. Causes are several from the 
description above, but there has more recently been attention fo-
cused on the needs of this population. The 2010 federal homeless 
strategy,  Opening Doors,  which set a goal to prevent and end youth 
homelessness in five years, called for targeted outreach and im-
proved access to health care, housing, and supports to “Advance 
Health and Housing Stability for Youth Aging Out of Systems such 
as Foster Care and Juvenile Justice” (USICH, 2010  a). 
 A short list of federal resources for the young adult popula-
tion would include the Chafee Foster Care Independence Act; the 
Runaway and Homeless Youth Act (HHS); other federal programs, 
such as the Workforce Investment Act (WIA), Temporary Assis-
tance for Needy Families (TANF), and Medicaid, which provide 

What Changed in the United States? 21
states flexibility to use various funding streams to help youth tran-
sition out of foster care; the Department of Labor’s Re-integration 
of Ex-Offenders program (REXO) for youth and juvenile justice 
cases; DOL’s YouthBuild program; and the DOL Job Corps/Foster 
care recruiting initiative. 
 Homeless Children 
 The homeless young adult population is not the same population 
as that of homeless children, who generally are defined as being 
part of a family household that has become homeless or is at risk of 
homelessness. This group, including those who are living doubled 
up, has long had protections under the federal education laws. 
 Data on the number of children are reported to the U.S. De-
partment of Education under the McKinney-Vento Act education 
provisions. The National Center for Homeless Education reported 
in 2010 on data from the 2008–2009 federal data collection of state 
reports that require that all children have access to a free, appropri-
ate education, including children who are homeless (NCHE, 2010). 
 Homeless children and youth are considered enrolled if they 
are attending classes and participating fully in school activities. 
In the school year 2008–2009, local education agencies (who are 
required to have a designated liaison for homeless children) re-
ported a total of over 956,000 homeless students. Some 66 percent 
of those reported, or more than 600,000 children, were reported liv-
ing doubled up. This figure represents an increase over 2006–2007 
figures of 420,995 (NCHE, 2010). 
 The report suggests that the increase may be due to one or 
more factors, including improved data collection, the nation’s eco-
nomic downturn, and displacement of students by disasters such 
as hurricanes Katrina and Rita. 
 Domestic Violence and Homelessness 
 Domestic and family violence contribute to homelessness, but the 
safety and confidentiality concerns for victims and their families 
means that programs and services operate in an arena that is fre-
quently set apart from other homeless resources. Domestic violence 
programs include shelters, rape crisis centers, battered women’s 
shelters, transitional housing programs, and other resources for 
victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or 
stalking. The separateness of this network also generally means 
that locations of services and shelters are kept confidential. While 

22 Background and History
victims of domestic violence using homeless programs were re-
ported in the 2008 Annual Homeless Assessment Report (AHAR) 
as representing almost 13 percent of those in shelter, domestic vio-
lence providers do not enter their client information in the HMIS 
system. This prohibition was established by the Violence against 
Women and Department of Justice Reauthorization Act of 2005 
(HUD, 2010c). 
 Rural Homelessness 
 Little data has been available to focus on the needs of rural areas. 
A 1996 U.S. Department of Agriculture report,  Focusing on the 
Needs of the Rural Homeless,  was used by the federal Interagency 
Council to convene a panel of experts to identify gaps in the report 
and emerging needs. The USDA reported key findings from rural 
homelessness conferences conducted by USDA’s Office of Rural 
Economic and Community Development (RCED): the invisibility 
of rural homelessness including lack of shelters; isolation from ser-
vices due to distance and lack of transportation options; the need 
for increased networking and training opportunities for commu-
nity providers to learn more effective service methods; the need 
for more flexibility in federal program requirements; recognition 
that housing quality in rural areas is as much a problem as hous-
ing affordability; and support for reinforcing existing network of 
community agencies and faith-based organizations that tradition-
ally help people in their community in lieu of creating separate 
systems of care for homeless people. Participants also noted the 
role of technology in bridging rural geography. 
 New 2009 legislation for the federal homeless programs 
added a new rural homelessness funding category for the Rural 
Housing Stability Assistance Program at HUD, designed for re-
housing or improving the housing situations of individuals and 
families who are homeless or in the worst housing situations; sta-
bilizing the housing of individuals and families who are in im-
minent danger of losing housing; and improving the ability of the 
lowest-income residents of the community to afford stable housing 
(HEARTH, 2009). 
 A 2010 federal report called for by the HEARTH Act found 
that both targeted and nontargeted federal programs can meet the 
needs of people who are homeless in rural areas. However, GAO 
identified that federal agencies do not have important data on rural 
resources awarded in these programs, which would make compari-
sons with other areas more possible. In its focus on areas in six states 

What Changed in the United States? 23
(Arizona, Kentucky, Maine, Minnesota, New Mexico, and Texas), 
GAO found similar barriers to those identified in 1996: large areas 
with low population density, lack of transportation, shortages of 
housing, and gaps in collaboration (GAO, 2010). 
 Background to the Early Response to Homelessness 
 Beginning in the early 1980s, the problem of homelessness in the 
United States received increasing attention across the country. 
In 1980, then congressman Ron Dellums, the chair of the House 
Committee on the District of Columbia and subsequently mayor 
of Oakland, California, convened the committee for the first con-
temporary congressional hearing to focus on homelessness, with 
specific attention to the District of Columbia (House District Com-
mittee, 1980). 
 As the problem of homelessness grew through the 1980s, the 
sheer visibility of contemporary homelessness was perhaps its most 
identifiable attribute. Whether it was the sight of a person begging 
on the corner, a family living in a car, or the countless homeless 
people in the streets and subways of big cities, striking images of 
this utmost poverty were inescapable for most Americans. Little 
was known about homelessness outside cities, in suburbs or even 
rural areas. Over time, communities of all sizes discovered within 
their own borders a version of a problem many Americans previ-
ously associated only with the Depression years or with certain 
stereotypes of hobos and tramps of another era. 
 Ultimately replacing the heavy media coverage of the mid-
1980s were the more intermittent and less sympathetic stories of 
the “truth” about homelessness, including the reported incidence 
of alcohol and drug use and mental illness among adults, espe-
cially those living on the streets. Gone—except for the traditional 
Thanksgiving and Christmas press coverage—were the stories 
asserting that “homeless people are just like the rest of us except 
they’ve had a few bad breaks.” 
 Throughout this period, a pair of policy and budget debates 
continued. Are there homeless and very poor people who are 
simply victims of bad luck and deserve help and support? Are 
there people whose own personal behavior—whether alcohol or 
drug related, whether laziness or lack of thrift—could be recti-
fied by their own efforts and contribute to their more stable, more 
“normal” future? In other words, as the dilemma was more usu-
ally phrased, aren’t some of the poor deserving of help and some 

24 Background and History
not? Second and more simply stated was the question, what are 
the dimensions of the homelessness problem? 
 During the same period, more communities passed new laws 
or undertook punitive enforcement campaigns of existing laws to 
regulate the behavior of homeless people in public spaces. Laws 
prohibited acts such as sleeping, camping, storing belongings, or 
distributing food. There were also documented acts of violence 
against people on the streets. These actions also brought new and 
increased press coverage, though seldom of a sympathetic nature 
when it came to panhandling or public inebriates. 
 The nation faced a significant challenge: not only did people 
continue to be pushed to the streets and shelters, but for some of 
them, escape from homelessness seemed nearly impossible, the 
problem intractable. Nonprofit social services agencies and the 
faith community provided emergency response. Few states or cit-
ies invested or directed policy aimed at solutions. 
 Early Advocacy and Federal Response in the United States  
 The federal government had tried to respond to homelessness be-
ginning in the late 1980s. Federal policy and funding for homeless-
ness in the United States was driven largely by the 1987 passage 
of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (P.L. 100-77), 
subsequently renamed the McKinney-Vento Act to recognize two 
key U.S. House of Representatives leaders who oversaw its pas-
sage and implementation. Originally the McKinney-Vento Act was 
introduced in January 1987 as the Urgent Relief for the Homeless 
Act and was passed quickly by the U.S. Congress to show concern 
about the growing problem of homelessness. The act was passed 
by overwhelming bipartisan majorities in both houses and signed 
by President Ronald Reagan on July 22, 1987 (Pear, 1987). 
 Twenty Years of Federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Programs 
 McKinney-Vento, which originally included 20 programs in 7 fed-
eral agencies (U.S. departments of Education, Health and Human 
Services, Housing and Urban Development, Labor, and Veterans 
Affairs, General Services Administration, and Federal Emergency 
Management Agency) and created the new entity of the Inter-
agency Council on the Homeless, was a major component of the 
federal response to homelessness as the problem grew in the 1980s 
(GAO, 1992). 

What Changed in the United States? 25
 The McKinney-Vento programs and other federal initiatives 
on homelessness reflected the multiple elements of the emergency 
response to homelessness as well as the variety of populations 
(families, youth, veterans, people with disabilities) and systems of 
care and treatment (drug treatment, mental health, primary health 
care, education) and resources (rental subsidies) that interacted 
with the lives of homeless individuals and families. Funds were 
designated primarily for emergency food and shelter programs, 
transitional programs, supportive services, and some permanent 
housing. Funds were distributed by formula to all eligible entities 
or by competitive grants. 
 The first targeted federal funding response to homelessness 
had been the creation in 1983 of the Emergency Food and Shelter 
Program (EFSP), a component of the Federal Emergency Manage-
ment Agency (FEMA), now part of the U.S. Department of Home-
land Security. EFSP remains in operation today. Originally $50 
million was appropriated to assist hungry and homeless people 
with food and shelter through formula awards to local boards at 
the community level. Since its creation, the program has disbursed 
over $3.4 billion to over 12,000 local providers in more than 2,500 
counties and cities. Local boards include the same organizational 
representatives as well as a homeless or formerly homeless person 
(EFSP, 2010). 
 By the early 1990s, when the McKinney-Vento programs un-
derwent major reauthorization (a legislative term for revising and 
updating existing programs), key constituencies concerned with 
homelessness attached some importance to revising the federal 
programs on which most communities rely. There was an emerg-
ing understanding of the problem, the availability of new data, 
and the opportunity to concentrate resources locally. Housing, and 
especially permanent supported housing for persons with disabili-
ties, had emerged as a new solution to homelessness. 
 The federal government continued to try to break through 
the growing problem, both through policy and personal commit-
ment. News coverage actually began to increase in the early 1990s, 
due to several factors. Shortly after U.S. secretary of Housing and 
Urban Development Henry Cisneros declared homelessness to 
be his agency’s top priority in 1993, a homeless woman died at a 
bus stop outside the federal agency. Her death was highly publi-
cized and analyzed as a symbol of a larger social problem (Cis-
neros, 1993). Just a few months later came the release of a federal 

26 Background and History
strategy on homelessness, prepared as a result of President Clin-
ton’s 1993 executive order. While federal funds for these pro-
grams grew incrementally, there were no breakthroughs on the 
issue (HUD, 1994). 
 Some key references from prior to the last decade are included 
in background sections of chapter 8. 
 Recent Issues in Federal Programs 
 Passage and Implementation of the HEARTH Act 
 Reauthorization of the HUD McKinney-Vento programs and fun-
damental change to their structure and approach occurred with 
passage of the Homeless Emergency Assistance and Rapid Tran-
sition to Housing (HEARTH) Act of 2009. With both House and 
Senate leadership, new legislation passed in early 2009. The legis-
lation was incorporated in the Helping Families Save Their Homes 
Act, signed into law by President Barack Obama on May 20, 2009 
(HEARTH, 2009). 
 Reauthorization had been an ongoing process for the HUD 
programs, as multiple versions of the legislation were brought close 
to passage over several years, reflecting a common understanding 
that emerging new themes and strategies should be incorporated in 
the federal programs. 
 The HEARTH legislation was also the vehicle for more contro-
versial issues, including the expansion of the definition of home-
lessness used by HUD. The expansion to include people defined as 
homeless by other federal programs and those living doubled up 
with friends and families had been controversial among advocates 
and policy makers. 
 The impact of the expansion, even for steadily increasing re-
sources, could not be estimated with credible data. One national 
advocacy organization looked at U.S. Census data in 2007 and 
published its analysis, which estimated, “Approximately 744,313 
people on a given night currently meet the HUD definition of 
homeless. Expanding the definition by including the 3.8 million 
people who are doubled up for economic reasons would increase 
the size of the homeless population by a factor of five. The current 
funding for homeless assistance grants funds only enough shelter 
for 56 percent of those who are currently defined as homeless. The 
amount that would have to be appropriated so that the amount of 
funding per homeless or doubled up person matched the actual 
amount of funding per homeless person in 2005 is $7.725 billion 

What Changed in the United States? 27
instead of the $1.241 billion that was actually available” (NAEH, 
2008). More detail on the definitions is provided in chapter 6. 
 As passed and signed by the president, the purposes of the 
HEARTH Act are to consolidate the existing McKinney-Vento 
homeless assistance programs, which had grown in 2009 to rep-
resent 6,445 individual renewal awards to existing local projects 
and more than 450 local, regional, or statewide groups preparing 
applications (HUD, 2009  ). The new law codified this continuum 
of care process in use since the 1990s as the local provider process 
for developing projects and preparing funding applications and to 
establish a goal that families who become homeless return to per-
manent housing within 30 days. Performance and outcomes will 
be emphasized in funding applications, including reducing the 
lengths of homeless episodes, reducing the number of people who 
become homeless, and reducing the number of those who return 
to homelessness. Rapid rehousing strategies are emphasized, as is 
prevention and continuing results in ending chronic homelessness 
(HEARTH, 2009). 
 Legal Issues 
 Language sought by national organizations and accompanying 
the HEARTH Act requires the U.S. Interagency Council on Home-
lessness to devise constructive alternatives to criminalization 
measures that can be used by cities around the country to “de-
velop constructive alternatives to criminalizing homelessness and 
eliminate laws and policies that prohibit sleeping, feeding, sitting, 
resting, or lying in public spaces when there are no suitable alter-
natives, result in the destruction of a homeless person’s property 
without due process, or are selectively enforced against homeless 
persons” (HEARTH, 2009). 
 Punitive measures, such as laws against sleeping, camping, 
food distribution, storing belongings, and more, had never proven 
successful in reducing the street presence of individuals. Given the 
limited power of federal agencies to change local law, the inclusive 
partnerships of stakeholders to homelessness convened for 10-year 
plans had been seen by both the federal and local jurisdictional 
partners as an affirmative strategy focused on outcomes. A defense 
of civil rights for people on the streets assumes their continuing 
presence there, while results-oriented planning was focused on 
ending their homelessness. In fact, many Housing First initiatives 
focused on the availability of an actual door key in reaching out to 
those experiencing chronic homelessness, saying: here is the key 

28 Background and History
to your new apartment, if you want to come—as many did. There 
was no denying, however, that physical danger was also present 
as long as people lived outdoors. Attacks were reported in cities 
of all sizes. 
 Legal advocates for people who are homeless and living out-
side emphasized protection of the rights of individuals but seldom 
gave concrete support to the work of 10-year plans or measures that 
placed people in housing. According to the American Bar Associa-
tion Commission on Homelessness & Poverty, many shared the 
view that it was an individual’s choice to stay out. Ensuring protec-
tions of person and property was vital where so-called banishment 
practices were instituted by officials, and addressing homelessness 
without addressing poverty was futile. There was little affirmation 
of the interests or insights of the business or law-enforcement part-
ners key to many plans (ABA, 2010). More details on legal issues 
and civil rights initiatives are provided in chapter 2. 
 The Role of Mainstream Resources 
 The use of federal mainstream resources to prevent and end home-
lessness and stabilize those who have moved out of homelessness 
has remained a concern. A 1999 government report observed that 
“homeless people can be served by two types of federal programs: 
(1) those targeted to the homeless population, such as the pro-
grams authorized under the McKinney Act, and (2) those designed 
to assist all eligible low income people. As we reported in 1999, 
50 key federal programs administered by eight federal agencies 
provided services to homeless people. Of these 50 programs, 16 
were specifically targeted to homeless people and 34 were main-
stream programs designed for low-income people in general. In 
fiscal year 1997, the federal government obligated about $1.2 bil-
lion for targeted programs and about $215 billion for mainstream 
programs. The deeper resources of mainstream programs needed 
to be tapped for homeless people” (GAO, 1999). 
 However, the variety of ways in which mainstream resources 
reach the local level makes a single set of solutions difficult. Some 
federal programs are largely administered by the federal agencies, 
such as Supplemental Security Income (SSI). Others, including 
the Food Stamp Program (now renamed SNAP), are administered 
by the states. Another group of resources flows to states as block 
grants for substance abuse prevention and treatment with choice 
available to states in using funds. Still other resources, for health 

What Changed in the United States? 29
care and job training, are awarded competitively to nonprofit 
providers. 
 The GAO noted that homelessness itself—a situation of “tran-
sience, instability, and a lack of basic resources”—makes it difficult 
for people to apply, assemble records, travel to government offices, 
keep appointments, and more. These barriers are greater when 
programs do not involve providers or outreach workers with ex-
perience and expertise in homelessness. Mainstream programs 
themselves are variable in structure, with differing eligibility and 
application requirements, making it difficult to know everything 
that is available or simpler ways of applying for more than one 
resource (GAO, 1999). 
 A subsequent 2000 GAO report on barriers to using main-
stream resources noted the increases in McKinney Act funding: 
“Even with this expansion, however, experts generally agree 
that the McKinney Act programs, by themselves, cannot ade-
quately meet the needs of homeless people and that mainstream 
programs must be made more accessible to this population” 
(GAO, 2000). 
 From 2001 to 2005, the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, in partnership with the Interagency Council, HUD, VA, 
the Department of Labor (DOL), and others, convened state teams 
for a policy academy process focused on access to mainstream 
resources for both the chronic and family populations. States as-
sembled teams to work with expert faculty who assisted state and 
local policy makers to develop an action plan intended to improve 
access to mainstream health, human services, education, and em-
ployment and training programs that are coordinated with hous-
ing and other existing community programs (HHS/HRSA, 2007). 
 Key to the process was to create and reinforce relationships 
among the governor’s office, state legislators, key program admin-
istrators, and stakeholders from the public, private, and nonprofit 
sectors. Every state developed an action plan, and many used the 
process as the launching point for renewed state interagency coun-
cil initiatives and encouragement of 10-year plans. 
 Increasing Access to Income 
 Both the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL) and the Social Secu-
rity Administration (SSA) offered new resources to secure income 
for people experiencing chronic homelessness. With the success 
of the federal chronic homelessness initiative, DOL awarded five 
grants to combine employment resources with housing and other 

30 Background and History
services for people who are chronically homeless (DOL, 2003). 
SSA in 2004 awarded multiyear grants to more than 40 sites to 
increase access to benefits and ensure that applications are com-
pleted faster and with higher success rates, thus allowing per-
sons experiencing chronic homelessness to leave the streets, have 
a source of income, obtain health care coverage, and obtain em-
ployment. The SSA awards, titled Homeless Outreach Projects 
and Evaluation (HOPE), combined with a joint initiative of the 
U.S. departments of Health and Human Services and Housing 
and Urban Development to offer training in SOAR (SSI/SSDI 
Outreach, Access, and Recovery), a best practice in preparing ap-
plications. Many enrolled in the HOPE program went on to hous-
ing, and the SOAR initiative has assisted both individuals and 
health care providers (SSA, 2004 ). 
 The New Federal Strategy 
 The HEARTH Act directed the federal Interagency Council on 
Homelessness to develop a strategy on homelessness and update it 
annually. The strategy, called Opening Doors, was released in mid-
2010 and recognized progress in reducing homelessness: “Over 
the last decade, significant progress has been made in reducing 
homelessness among specific communities and populations. Com-
munities across the United States—whether it is rural Mankato, 
Minnesota, to an urban center such as San Francisco—have orga-
nized partnerships between local and state agencies with the pri-
vate and nonprofit sectors to implement plans to prevent, reduce, 
and end homelessness. By developing the strategy of combining 
housing and supportive services—delivering permanent sup-
ported housing via a targeted pipeline of resources, these communi-
ties, in partnership with the Federal Government, have ‘moved the 
needle’ on chronic homelessness, reducing the number of chroni-
cally ill, long-term homeless by nearly one-third in the last five 
years” (USICH, 2010 a). 
 The federal strategy focuses on four goals, to (1) finish the job 
of ending chronic homelessness in 5 years; (2) prevent and end 
homelessness among veterans in 5 years; (3) prevent and end 
homelessness for families, youth, and children in 10 years; and (4) 
set a path to ending all types of homelessness. 
 The Impact of the Economic Crisis 
 In February 2009, Congress passed the American Recovery and 
Reinvestment Act of 2009. Legislation to provide stimulus for the 

What Changed in the United States? 31
national economy, the new appropriation included $787 billion 
to create jobs and add to the safety net, including for people ex-
periencing homelessness. The stimulus package included several 
provisions that were beneficial for preventing and ending home-
lessness (USICH, 2009b). 
 A total of $1.5 billion was to be distributed to state and local 
government through the federal McKinney-Vento Emergency 
Shelter Grants (ESG) formula as the new Homelessness Prevention 
and Rapid Rehousing Program (HPRP) for short-term rental as-
sistance, housing relocation, and stabilization services for people 
who may become homeless. (USICH, 2009b) 
 Some $70 million was allocated to states to distribute to local 
school districts to meet the increased needs of children who are 
homeless as defined by the McKinney-Vento Education for Home-
less Youth and Children Program, by ensuring that they are able to 
enroll in and attend school. 
 An additional $100 million was distributed through the Fed-
eral Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) emergency food 
and shelter program for rent, mortgage, and/or utility payments, 
meals or groceries, and shelter or hotel costs. 
 A second round of the Neighborhood Stabilization Program 
consisting of $2 billion was provided to assist states, local govern-
ments, and nonprofit organizations purchase and rehabilitate fore-
closed, vacant properties to create more affordable housing and 
reduce neighborhood blight. The first round had required that 25 
percent of all housing serve people at lower income levels, and the 
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development urged com-
munities to consider rental housing for people with special needs 
as a way to fulfill this obligation. A third round of funds was re-
leased in 2010 (Senate Banking Committee, 2010). 
 There was $500 million included for the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture’s (USDA) Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for 
Women, Children, and Infants (WIC) and $19.9 billion for USDA’s 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), formerly 
Food Stamps, to increase benefit levels by 13.6 percent. 
 An additional $50 million was included for the U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice’s Violence Against Women Prevention and Pros-
ecution Programs for victims of domestic violence, dating violence, 
sexual assault, and stalking for services, short-term housing assis-
tance, and transitional programs. 
 Other measures included an increase in unemployment ben-
efits and a continuation of the extended unemployment benefits 

32 Background and History
program (which provides up to 33 weeks of extended benefits); the 
creation of a Temporary Assistance For Needy Families (TANF) 
Contingency Fund through FY 2010 to provide states with relief; 
one-time payments of $250 to Social Security beneficiaries, SSI re-
cipients, and veterans receiving VA disability compensation and 
pension benefits; and a temporary increase in the Earned Income 
Tax Credit (EITC) for working families with three or more children. 
 International Developments 
 The Rough Sleepers Unit (RSU) was set up by the Blair govern-
ment in Britain in 1999 with the aim of reducing the number of 
people sleeping rough in England by two-thirds by April 2002. The 
RSU achieved its target by November 2001. Success in the Rough 
Sleepers Initiative generated broader support to address family 
homelessness. There were also new insights into other street ac-
tivities in target areas, such as begging, drinking, and drug use, as 
well as the development of “street families” who could be identi-
fied for special strategies of engagement. Both chapter 3, which 
focuses on issues outside the United States, and chapter 6, which 
includes data and documents on modern homelessness, discuss 
the Blair initiative in more depth. 
 Other European Action 
 The emphasis of initiatives on homelessness in Europe has gener-
ally been from a perspective of “social inclusion” in society, includ-
ing through employment and fundamental human rights, such as 
those recognized by the United Nations. In 1998, the European 
Federation of National Organisations Working with the Homeless 
(FEANTSA), a nongovernmental organization, published “Europe 
against exclusion: HOUSING FOR ALL,” which it called “a set 
of practical policy proposals to promote social inclusion and en-
sure access to decent housing for all citizens and residents of 
the European Union.” The report was published with the support 
of the European Commission, with contributions from represen-
tatives of FEANTSA member organizations, correspondents of 
the European Observatory on Homelessness, and selected expert 
(FEANTSA, 1998 ). 
 Since that time, and with the support of international peer-to-
peer dialogue among national government representatives, Euro-

International Developments 33
pean nations have begun to develop specifics goals and strategies 
targeted to homeless populations. FEANTSA reported in 2010 
that Denmark, Finland, France, Ireland, the Netherlands, Sweden, 
Scotland, Wales, Hungary, and Norway had national homeless-
ness strategies (FEANTSA, 2010). These approaches are covered 
in chapter 3. 
 FEANTSA launched a 2010 campaign to end homelessness 
in the context of the European Union during the European Year 
on Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion. A key tool to accom-
pany the effort was FEANTSA’s  Ending Homelessness: A Handbook 
for Policy Makers,  explaining the importance of the entity to their 
efforts: “The EU is an important arena in which crossnational ex-
change on homelessness strategies can take place, good practice 
can be shared, and progress can be monitored. The EU can act as 
an important source of political momentum to end homelessness. 
Ending homelessness is now firmly established on the EU agenda 
as a political priority.” The EU’s 2010 joint report called on member 
states to develop integrated policies to tackle homelessness, and in 
2008, the European Parliament adopted a written declaration on 
ending street homelessness (FEANTSA, 2010). More about these 
measures is covered in chapter 3. 
 FEANTSA noted that the strategies sought by the EU were 
to be guided by specific housing-oriented goals and targets based 
on data, with attention to all policy areas that were relevant. 
FEANTSA proposed that EU support for member nations should 
focus on increasing the evidence base available through research 
and dialogue. 
 Australia’s National Plan 
 In May 2008, the government of Australian prime minister Kevin 
Rudd, which had been a partner to prior international dialogue, is-
sued a “green paper” for discussion, noting in his public remarks: 
“As a nation we have failed to address these issues. Our response 
to homelessness is not nationally coordinated or strategically fo-
cused. While there are excellent programs, many lack sufficient 
scale or coordination to adequately address the multiple causes 
and effects of homelessness. The cost of homelessness to individu-
als and their families is large. The cost to society of our failure to 
reduce homelessness is even greater. While tackling homelessness 
involves additional investment, not tackling homelessness will 
only cost more.” The green paper was designed to invite response 

34 Background and History
for the development of the subsequent white paper issued in 2008 
(Commonwealth of Australia, 2008a, 2008b). The prime minister 
appointed a council on homelessness made up of 10 members with 
a broad range of expertise in the issue of homelessness. 
 The resulting white paper,  The Road Home: A National Approach 
to Reducing Homelessness,  identified three strategies for action: 
“ turning off the tap: preventing homelessness, wherever possible, 
through early intervention and prevention services; improving 
and expanding services: improving service quality and building 
better connections between services so clients who are vulnerable 
to homelessness achieve sustainable housing and improved eco-
nomic and social participation; and breaking the cycle: ensuring 
that people who become homeless move quickly through the crisis 
system to stable housing with the support they need so that home-
lessness does not recur” (Commonwealth of Australia, 2008a). 
 Canada’s National Partnering Strategy 
 Canada, also a national partner to international dialogue, launched 
a national homelessness initiative in 1999 and continued it until 
2006, when it announced the new Homelessness Partnering Strat-
egy (HPS), which provided $269.6 million over two years to help 
prevent and reduce homelessness. This strategy put in place stra-
tegic partnerships and structures including long-term housing and 
stable supports to help homeless persons move toward autonomy 
and self-sufficiency. In January 2009, the national government an-
nounced that it was extending funding two years, from April 2009 
to March 2011, and would maintain annual funding for federal 
housing and homelessness programs until March 31, 2014, as part 
of its five-year commitment. Funding housing and homelessness 
programs for a five-year period will provide an opportunity to con-
sider improvements to address housing and homelessness chal-
lenges and to ensure that programs continue to effectively respond 
to the needs of Canadians (HRSDC, 2009 ). 
 The Homeless Partnering initiative seeks to prevent and re-
duce homelessness through investments in transitional programs 
and supported housing through a Housing First approach; sup-
port to community-based efforts to prevent and reduce homeless-
ness; partnerships between the federal government, provinces, and 
territories; and collaboration with other federal departments and 
agencies. The funding elements of the strategy are designated com-
munities, outreach communities of smaller cities, rural or outlying 

References 35
areas, aboriginal communities, federal interagency pilot projects, 
knowledge development funding for communities, not-for-profit 
organizations, researchers, and scholars; an information manage-
ment system, and a surplus federal property initiative for munici-
pal, provincial, or territorial governments and community-based 
organizations. 
 More details and documents on international strategies are 
covered in chapter 3. 
 References 
 ABA (American Bar Association) Commission on Homelessness & 
Poverty.  No Such Place As “Away”: Why Banishment Is a Wrong Turn on the 
Path to Better and Safer Cities. Washington, D.C.: ABA, 2010. 
 Cisneros, Henry G. “The lonely death on my doorstep; Yetta Adams’ 
story and the new war on homelessness.”  Washington Post , December 5, 
1993. 
 Committee on the District of Columbia, U.S. House of Representatives 
(House District Committee), Oversight Hearings. “Problems in Urban 
Centers, Washington, D.C., and the Federal Government Role.” Serial 
No. 996-17 (September 30, 1980). 
 Commonwealth of Australia.  The Road Home: A National Approach to 
Reducing Homelessness  (white paper). Canberra, Australia, 2008a. 
 Commonwealth of Australia.  Which Way Home? A New Approach to 
Homelessness  (green paper). Canberra, Australia, 2008b. 
 Culhane, Dennis P., Stephen Metraux, Jung Min Park, Maryanne 
Schretzman, and Jesse Valente. “Testing a Typology of Family 
Homelessness Based on Patterns of Public Shelter Utilization in Four 
U.S. Jurisdictions: Implications for Policy and Program Planning.” 
 Housing Policy Debate, Volume 18, Issue 1 (May 2007). 
 DOL (U.S. Department of Labor). Ending Chronic Homelessness 
through Employment and Housing Projects, 2003. Available at http://
www.dol.gov/odep/programs/homeless.htm. 
 EFSP (Emergency Food and Shelter Program). Alexandria, VA: United 
Way of America, 2010. Available at http://www.efsp.unitedway.org/. 
 FEANTSA (European Federation of National Organisations Working 
with the Homeless). Available at http://www.feantsa.org. 
 GAO (Government Accountability Office).  Homelessness: McKinney 
Act Programs and Funding through Fiscal Year 1991. Washington, D.C., 
December 1992. 

36 Background and History
 GAO (Government Accountability Office).  Homelessness: Coordination 
and Evaluation of Programs Are Essential. Washington, D.C., 1999. 
 GAO (Government Accountability Office).  Homelessness: Barriers to 
Using Mainstream Programs. Washington, D.C., 2000. 
 GAO (Government Accountability Office).  Rural Homelessness: Better 
Collaboration by HHS and HUD Could Improve Delivery of Services in Rural 
Areas. Washington, D.C., July 2010. 
 Gladwell, Malcolm.  The Tipping Point: How Little Things Can Make a Big 
Difference. Boston: Back Bay Books, 2002. 
 Gladwell, Malcolm. “Million-Dollar Murray: Why Problems like 
Homelessness May Be Easier to Solve than to Manage.”  New Yorker, 
February 13, 2006. 
 HEARTH (Homeless Emergency Assistance and Rapid Transition to 
Housing Act), Helping Families Save Their Homes Act, Division B of 
Public Law 111-22 § 1001, et seq., 123 Stat. 1632, 111th Congress (2009). 
 HHS/ACF (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
Administration for Children and Families). Runaway and Homeless 
Youth Basic Center Program, 2001. Available at http://www.acf.hhs.
gov/programs/fbci/progs/fbci_rhyouth.html. 
 HHS/HRSA (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health 
Resources and Services Administration). Homeless Policy Academies: 
Improving Access to Mainstream Resources for People Experiencing 
Homelessness, 2007. Available at http://www.hrsa.gov/homeless/. 
 HRSDC (Human Resources and Skills Development Canada).  The 
Homelessness Partnering Strategy, 2009. Available at http://www.hrsdc.
gc.ca/eng/homelessness/index.shtml. 
 HUD (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development).  Priority 
Home! The Federal Plan to Break the Cycle of Homelessness. Washington, 
D.C.: HUD, 1994. 
 HUD (U.S. Departments of Housing and Urban Development), 
Health and Human Services, and Veterans Affairs. Notice of Funding 
Availability (NOFA) for the Collaborative Initiative to Help End Chronic 
Homelessness. Federal Register, Volume 68, Number 17 (January 27, 
2003). 
 HUD (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development). Housing 
for People Who Are Homeless and Addicted to Alcohol. Federal 
Register, Volume 70, Number 5 (March 21, 2005). 
 HUD (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development). “HUD 
Reports Drop in Number of Chronically Homeless Persons Living on 

References 37
Nation’s Streets: Decrease Largely Attributed to Increase in Supportive 
Housing” (press statement). Washington, D.C.: HUD, November 7, 2007. 
 HUD (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development). “Obama 
Administration Awards Nearly $1.4 Billion in Homeless Grants” (press 
statement). Washington, D.C.: HUD, December 23, 2009. Available 
at http://portal.hud.gov/portal/page/portal/HUD/press/press_
releases_media_advisories. 
 HUD (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development).  The 
Homelessness Pulse Report: Fifth Quarterly Report. Washington, D.C.: 
HUD, 2010a. 
 HUD (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development).  Life 
after Transitional Housing for Homeless Families. Washington, D.C.: HUD, 
2010b. 
 HUD (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development).  The 2009 
Annual Homelessness Assessment Report to Congress (AHAR). Washington, 
D.C.: HUD, 2010c. 
 Kuhn, Randall, and Dennis P. Culhane. “Applying Cluster Analysis 
to Test a Typology of Homelessness by Pattern of Shelter Utilization: 
Results from the Analysis of Administrative Data.”  American Journal of 
Community Psychology, Volume 26, Issue 2 (April 1998). 
 Larimer, Mary E., Daniel K. Malone, Michelle D. Garner, David C. 
Atkins, Bonnie Burlingham, Heather S. Lonczak, Kenneth Tanzer, 
Joshua Ginzler, Seema L. Clifasefi, William G. Hobson, and G. Alan 
Marlatt. “Health Care and Public Service Use and Costs Before and 
After Provision of Housing for Chronically Homeless Persons With 
Severe Alcohol Problems.”  Journal of the American Medical Association 
(JAMA), Volume 301, Issue 13 (April 1, 2009). 
 Mangano, Philip F. Remarks at Ohio Dominican University Life of the 
Mind Series, Columbus, Ohio, October 3, 2002. 
 Mangano, Philip F. Remarks to the Hartford, CT, Ten-Year Plan to End 
Chronic Homelessness Event, January 31, 2005. 
 NAEH (National Alliance to End Homelessness). A Plan: Not a 
Dream—How to End Homelessness in Ten Years. Washington, D.C.: 
NAEH, 2000. 
 NAEH (National Alliance to End Homelessness).  Data Snapshot: Doubled 
Up in the United States. Washington, D.C.: NAEH, March 2008. 
 NCHE (National Center for Homeless Education). Education for 
Homeless Children and Youth Program: Data Collection Summary 2010. 
Greensboro, NC: NCHE, 2010. 

38 Background and History
 NPACH (National Policy and Advocacy Council on Homelessness). 
NPACH Perspective: HUD NOFA Further Restricts Communities and 
Excludes Populations. Washington, D.C.: NPACH, 2005. 
 “Obama Builds on Bush Success to Help the Homeless.”  Christian 
Science Monitor, June 22, 2010. 
 O’Connell, James J., Shawn Mattison, Christine M. Judge, H. Josiyn 
Strupp Allen, and Howard K. Koh. “A Public Health Approach to 
Reducing Morbidity and Mortality Among Homeless People in Boston.” 
 Journal of Public Health Management Practice,  Volume 11, Issue 4   (2005). 
 ODPM (Office of the Deputy Prime Minister), Government of the 
United Kingdom, Rough Sleepers Unit (RSU).  Coming in from the Cold: 
The Government’s Strategy on Rough Sleeping. London, Crown copyright 
1999. Available at http://www.communities.gov.uk/archived/
publications/housing/cominginfromcold. 
 OMB (White House Office of Management and Budget).  The Budget 
for Fiscal Year 2003. Washington, D.C.: OMB, 2002. Available at http://
www.gpoaccess.gov/usbudget/fy03/browse.html. 
 Pathways to Housing.  Annual Report 2007. New York City: Pathways to 
Housing, 2007. Available at http://www.pathwaystohousing.org/files/
AnnualReport_2007.pdf. 
 Pear, Robert. “President Signs $1 Million Bill to Aid Homeless.”  New 
York Times, July 24, 1987. 
 Perlman, Jennifer, and John Parvensky.  Denver Housing First Collaborative 
Cost Benefit Analysis and Program Outcomes Report. Denver: Colorado 
Coalition for the Homeless, 2006. 
 PHC (Project Homeless Connect). Available at http://www.
projecthomelessconnect.com/. 
 Poulin, Stephen R., Marcella Maguire, Stephen Metraux, and Dennis 
P. Culhane. “Service Use and Costs for Persons Experiencing Chronic 
Homelessness in Philadelphia: A Population-Based Study.”  Psychiatric 
Services, Volume 61, Number 11 (November 2010). 
 Rog, Debra J., and John C. Bruckner. “Homeless Families and 
Children. National Symposium on Homelessness Research,” in  Toward 
Understanding Homelessness: The 2007 National Symposium on Homelessness 
Research . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Departments of Health and Human 
Services and Housing and Urban Development, September 2007. 
Available at http://www.hhs.gov/homeless/research/index.html. 
 Salit, Sharon A., Evelyn M. Kuhn, Arthur J. Hartz, Jade M. Vu, 
and Andrew L. Mosso. “Hospitalization Costs Associated with 
Homelessness in New York City.”  New England Journal of Medicine, 
Volume 338, Issue 24 (1998). 

References 39
 Senate Banking Committee.  Brief Summary of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street 
Reform and Consumer Protection Act (2010). Available at http://banking.
senate.gov/. 
 SSA (Social Security Administration). Social Security Administration 
(SSA) Service to the Homeless. Washington, D.C.: Social Security 
Administration, 2004. http://www.ssa.gov/homelessness. 
 USICH (U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness). “In the Cities: 
Denver City Council Approves Reinvestment Strategy to Use Cost 
Savings for New Housing Investment to End Chronic Homelessness.” 
Washington, D.C.: USICH, 2008a. 
 USICH (U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness).  Inventory of Federal 
Programs That May Assist Homeless Families with Children. Washington, 
D.C.: USICH, 2008b. Available at http://www.usich.gov/library/
publications/FamilyInventory_Mar2008.pdf. 
 USICH (U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness). “President’s 
FY 2009 Budget Proposes a Record Level of More Than $5 Billion in 
Resources Targeted to the Lives of Homeless People; Eighth Consecutive 
Year of Record Resources to End Homelessness; Administration 
Proposes Key Expansions to Intervention and Prevention Resources 
for Veterans, Housing, Health Care, Treatment, and Employment.” 
Washington, D.C.: USICH, 2008c. 
 USICH (U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness).  America’s Road 
Home Statement of Principles and Actions. Washington, D.C.: USICH, 
2009a. Available at http://www.ich.gov/newsletter/Interactive_
Statement_Action_Only.pdf. 
 USICH (U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness). “In Washington: 
$787 Billion American Recovery and Reinvestment Act Becomes Law 
with New Resources to Prevent and End Homelessness as President 
Obama Calls for Converting Crisis to Opportunity.” Washington, D.C.: 
USICH, 2009b. 
 USICH (U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness). “Obama 
Administration Announces Record $1.6 Billion In Investments to 
Prevent and End Homelessness, Including 23 New Sites For Rapid 
Rehousing for Families.” Washington, D.C.: USICH, 2009c. 
 USICH (U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness).  City and County 
10-Year Plan Update, 2009. Washington, D.C.: USICH, 2009d.
 USICH (U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness). “The 1-Year 
Planning Process to End Chronic Homelessness in Your Community: 
A Step-by-Step Guide.” Washington, D.C.: USICH, 2009e. Available at 
http://www.usich.gov/slocal/plans/toolkit.pdf. 

40 Background and History
USICH (U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness).  Opening Doors: 
Federal Strategic Plan to Prevent and End Homelessness. Washington, D.C.: 
USICH, 2010a. 
 USICH (U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness).  United States 
Interagency Council on Homelessness Historical Overview. Washington, 
D.C.: USICH, 2010b. Available at http://www.usich.gov/PDF/USICH_
History.pdf. 
 VA (U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs) (2010a).  October 2010 Women 
Veterans Fact Sheet. Available at http://www1.va.gov/WOMENVET/
Women_Vet_Pop_FS_10_10.pdf. 
 VA (U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs) (2010b). Remarks by Secretary 
Eric K. Shinseki to the National Coalition for Homeless Veterans, 
Washington, D.C., June 21, 2010. Available at http://www1.va.gov/
opa/speeches/2010/10_0621.asp. 
 White House. Statement by the White House press secretary, November 7, 
2007. 
 

41
 2 
 Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions 
 Introduction 
 O
ver the more than 25 years that modern homelessness has 
been visible in the United States, a few key issues have con-
sistently been debated in the national dialogue. First among 
these questions has been the origin of homelessness as a problem. 
Whenever modern homelessness increases, comparisons to the 
years of the Great Depression surface rapidly. But this is the 
21st century. Is homelessness different? 
 This chapter highlights key issues and debates that emerged 
in the last decade, when there was more change in research, policy, 
investment, and results than at any time since the passage of the 
1987 federal legislation of the McKinney Act. Changes included 
the unprecedented level of engagement of federal, state, and local 
government officials in an issue that aligned their political will 
with the historic work of community and faith-based organiza-
tions and private charity responding to local homelessness. The 
content of this chapter represents the range of issues that mark the 
national debate, touching on enumeration, measures of poverty, 
modern “messaging” about homelessness that emerged with new 
electronic tools, and more. The issues presented here also unfold 
a story about how the seemingly intractable problem of homeless-
ness yielded to new ideas and new outcomes. 

42 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 Defining and Measuring 
Homelessness: A New Debate 
 Are people who are homeless really just like you and me, given a 
few bad breaks in our personal and economic life? Are you and I 
really just one paycheck away from homelessness? Or are home-
less people individuals and families who made unwise personal 
choices, used drugs or alcohol, didn’t finish school, learn a trade, 
or hold a job, had children too young and without adequate in-
come to support them, spent instead of saving? Are they veterans 
who honorably served their country or families and individuals 
whose disabilities make them vulnerable to instability? 
 Or are homeless people victims of the global economy in 
good times and bad—priced out when the economy is robust and 
off the bottom rung of the economic ladder when bad times hit? Is 
homelessness more indicative of poverty and the distribution of 
wealth combined with a frayed safety net? Does it reflect bad pub-
lic policy choices that leave people at risk? Is it some combination 
of bad personal and public policy choices? How do the answers 
affect our ideas about possible remedies? 
 Another key question is how to identify who is homeless. 
Clearly, the choice of definition has significant influence when 
estimating the size of the problem of homelessness. A family or 
individual may face the circumstances described above, lose their 
housing, and seek shelter. Having to use a public or community-
based shelter or motel may reflect the fact that a person has no 
social or family network to fall back on in bad times. Or it may 
reflect shame about the situation or show a desire not to burden 
available friends or family who may also face difficulties. Or it 
may mean that the resources of those friends and families—a 
couch, a spare bed, a makeshift accommodation to keep children 
from going to a shelter—have been expended. When a mother 
and her children are sharing the extra bed at a relative’s apart-
ment, is that homelessness? 
 The stigma of homelessness is real, whether for children in 
the classroom or adults estranged from family or friends through 
addiction or mental illness, unemployment, or simply years on the 
streets. The “person-centered” language favored in some public 
policy discussions (a “person experiencing homelessness” rather 
than a “homeless person,” denoting that homelessness is a cir-
cumstance, not a characteristic) is intended to reduce the stigma. 

Defining and Measuring Homelessness 43
 The prevailing federal definition of homelessness as used in 
the U.S Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) 
McKinney-Vento homeless programs for over 20 years—and by 
numerous other federal agencies whose programs were estab-
lished by the same legislation—was in place before more recent 
debate on expanding the definition. Identifying more people as 
“homeless” because of “doubled up” and other circumstances 
was seen by advocates as a reality check for the problem of home-
lessness writ large, an effort to steer policy away from a history 
where targeted goals and definitions reflected the reality of scarce 
public resources and federal executive branch policy making. 
It was also argued that causing populations to compete for re-
sources was “unethical and ineffective” and that the expansion 
would recognize all populations and provide local flexibility 
(NAEHCY, 2006). 
 National advocacy proponents of the expansion included the 
American Friends Service Committee, Catholic Charities USA, 
Child Welfare League of America, Family Promise, National As-
sociation for the Education of Homeless Children and Youth, Na-
tional Center on Family Homelessness, National Coalition Against 
Domestic Violence, National Coalition for Homeless Veterans, 
National Coalition for the Homeless, National Health Care for the 
Homeless Council, National Law Center on Homelessness & Pov-
erty, National Low Income Housing Coalition, National Network 
for Youth, National Network to End Domestic Violence, National 
Policy and Advocacy Council on Homelessness (NPACH), and 
Volunteers of America. 
 The HUD programs prior to the passage of the 2009 HEARTH 
Act reflected a more than 20-year history of definition, targeting, 
and practices that were focused on those individuals perceived as 
most vulnerable and unsheltered by virtue of living on the streets 
with mental illness, physical disability, and other issues. Long be-
fore the focus on the “chronic” homeless person was supported 
by data and research—and criticized by advocates for “patholo-
gizing” people—earlier federal McKinney-Vento efforts in sev-
eral federal agencies (Safe Havens, Shelter Plus Care housing, the 
PATH mental health outreach program, ACCESS, and more) were 
intended to focus on those with disabilities and street histories 
and bring them inside to use the ever-increasing resources of fed-
erally funded programs (NCH, 2002). Those who fit the profile 
were shown by the data, then and now, to be single, unaccompa-
nied adults who were most likely male. 

44 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 Note that the focus on resources is in the context of federal 
McKinney-Vento resources. As of 2000, few cities or states were 
expending their own resources on homelessness, though some 
did and invested heavily. Some of this spending was driven by 
legal requirements for shelter. But for many communities, the fed-
eral formula and competitive resources, growing each year, were 
the only available dollars besides local philanthropic and chari-
table funds. These latter resources are not tracked in an aggregate 
fashion, whereas the federal investment can be traced across time 
and through project-specific data. 
 The more recent debate between government policy makers 
forwarding the goal of ending chronic homelessness and national 
organizations representing providers and advocates has focused 
on the policy target of chronic homelessness (versus other popu-
lations). Some commentators question whether any resources 
should be expended for the chronic population. Cost data showed 
the public savings from the Housing First innovation and the im-
proved health outcomes and decreased drinking in Seattle’s 1811 
Eastlake initiative, for example. One media commentator ques-
tioned spending anything at all, calling the Seattle housing site 
“bunks for drunks,” adding, “It’s a living monument to failed so-
cial policy” (Kowal, 2006). 
 Increasing Resources, Prioritizing Populations 
 As federal homeless resources grew, advocates critical of the ori-
entation toward single adults with disabilities noted the tilt of the 
HUD McKinney-Vento housing programs toward that population, 
including a disproportionate number of veterans. Single-room oc-
cupancy units, Shelter Plus Care housing for people with disabili-
ties, and permanent supportive housing all reflected the realities 
of a specific population. With a shortage of mainstream housing 
resources such as housing rental vouchers for low-income fami-
lies and a shortage of public housing units—both of which would 
provide more housing answers for homeless families—the federal 
approach and federal homeless funds were seen as falling short 
for families. 
 Was vulnerability the right criteria to use to focus resources? 
Could degrees of vulnerability be compared? Conclusive cost 
arguments did not begin to surface until after 2002. Are single 
adults with disabilities on the streets really more vulnerable than 
homeless children and youth? If public resources will always be 

Defining and Measuring Homelessness 45
limited and policy choices required, is there a way to measure 
benefit when not everyone is served? Are homeless children and 
youth reflective of poor families in general, or do they face special 
risk that should shift the focus of investment? 
 Children and youth—arguably facing instability and the 
stress and health risk of living in shelter or unfit housing—do not 
generally demonstrate the level of “vulnerability” that gave rise 
to the identification of age, race, gender, and trimorbid medical 
conditions identified by Dr. James O’Connell of Boston Health 
Care for the Homeless in chapter 1 and reflecting the greatest 
documented risk of death for the street population. It is this data-
driven profile that is behind the names read annually at memorial 
services for those who have died while homeless, a national day 
of remembrance organized by advocacy groups. 
 If federal resources increased, what should be the strategy to 
expend them? Should the additional funds be targeted and their 
effectiveness evaluated for new lessons for specific populations? 
This was the approach of the HUD-VASH supportive housing 
voucher program of the 1990s and the federal chronic homeless-
ness and serial inebriate housing initiatives of the last decade. 
With the goal of ending chronic homelessness set in federal policy, 
resources were targeted with an expectation of results against the 
larger goal. The strategies of 10-year plans invoked the economic 
insights of both  Tipping Point  writer Malcolm Gladwell (“concen-
trate, don’t dissipate”) and business thinker and author of  Good 
to Great  Jim Collins (“results are infectious”), whose findings 
about what allows good companies to become great companies 
informed homeless plan strategies. See the biographies of these 
thinkers in chapter 5 for further details. 
 Should the increased resources be solely subject to local deci-
sion making about priorities or based on larger goals established 
by the federal funders? This is a basic question, and there are an-
swers from each perspective. There are also associated questions 
regarding the federal role. What is the federal role and responsi-
bility on the issue of homelessness? Policy maker? Investor? Even 
national advocates do not agree. More response was sought from 
the federal government, and certainly in the last decade federal 
policy and initiatives were made visible to local communities in 
an unprecedented way. 
 Recent federal research has demonstrated the costs of first-
time homelessness. While the data was not intended to be of na-
tional scope, the findings published in 2010 lend themselves to 

46 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
further examination about the variety of responses to homeless-
ness. According to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban 
Development (HUD): 
 For individuals, overnight emergency shelter has the 
• 
lowest cost per day (and provides the fewest services 
and often limited hours). 
 For individuals, transitional programs prove more 
• 
expensive than permanent supported housing, since 
services for transitional programs were usually 
offered directly by the homeless system rather than by 
mainstream service providers. 
 For families, emergency shelters are usually equally 
• 
or more expensive than transitional programs and 
permanent supported housing, because families are 
often given private rooms or apartments. Emergency 
shelters for families are also likely to operate 24 hours, 
provide supportive services, and have fewer units, 
yielding higher fixed costs. 
 HUD found that the average costs for individuals ($1,634 to 
$2,308) are much lower than those for families ($3,184 to $20,031) 
(HUD, 2010a). 
 HUD summarized the research, saying: “In brief, we con-
clude that communities should explore strategies to (1) prevent 
homelessness for the majority of families facing first-time home-
lessness, (2) avoid extensive use of high-cost homeless programs 
for individuals or families who primarily need permanent hous-
ing without supports or those whose service needs can be met by 
mainstream systems, (3) alter the way their homeless assistance 
systems respond to households that are unable to remain stably 
housed and face repeated instances of homelessness, (4) work 
with mainstream systems to design appropriate discharge plan-
ning strategies and ways to identify clients at-risk of homeless-
ness so their homelessness can be prevented.” 
 Federal resources are used to develop data, set policy, and 
measure results. Not all critics see these as appropriate roles. In 
addressing the development of the federal strategy in 2010, a na-
tional health policy organization stated: “The federal government 
has a major role to play in addressing the economic and social fac-
tors that generate homelessness. The strategy of the previous ad-

Defining and Measuring Homelessness 47
ministration to devolve political responsibility for homelessness to 
the ‘community’ level while withdrawing critical federal resources 
did create new initiatives at state and local levels, but it failed to 
end homelessness” (NHCHC, 2010). Another organization that 
characterizes itself as “watchdog and frequent critic” of the Inter-
agency Council revealed new skepticism in a 2010 on-line post: “A 
plan is not a home—we continue to be skeptical that our govern-
ment can plan its way to ending homelessness” (NPACH, 2010). 
 A national homeless education organization urged in its rec-
ommendations on homeless families with children that the fed-
eral strategy be a proxy for antipoverty efforts “tied closely to, 
and implemented in conjunction with, a broader plan to address 
poverty in the United States. Homelessness represents a failure of 
multiple federal polices: housing, incomes, health care, education, 
and child welfare. Yet much of the federal response to homeless-
ness over the past decade has been characterized by a separation 
of homelessness from the larger issues of poverty that underlie 
it. The most proactive continuum of care is powerless to affect 
national macro-economic issues, such as the unemployment and 
foreclosure crises that are driving families from their homes; the 
most progressive state housing trust fund cannot make up for the 
lack of federal investment in affordable housing. The FSP must be 
driven by reforms to, and expansion of, federal mainstream anti-
poverty programs; it must be grounded in the understanding that 
targeted homeless assistance programs cannot, by themselves, 
prevent or end homelessness” (NAEHCY, 2010 ). 
 HUD McKinney-Vento dollars are unique in their segrega-
tion from other HUD housing and community development re-
sources and other federal homeless resources, which are generally 
forwarded to state and local government, often by formula and 
not by annual competition. State and local officials prepare five-
year plans and annual updates on their use of these larger HUD 
dollars. Only the homeless dollars can effectively bypass this pro-
cess by the setting of priorities in a process that can be driven by 
social services providers and can be shaped by pressure to renew 
funding rather than decrease or shift resources in favor of emerg-
ing models or engage the larger government plan. 
 Should the relative size of a population be considered in set-
ting resource priorities? After all, the population with long stays 
and disabilities was targeted for its finite number—estimated at 
150,000 and deemed to be an achievable goal. Within a few years 
of planning and investment, results were reported. Should a goal 

48 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
have been chosen that was harder to achieve because it required 
larger resources or would show slower progress? As shown by 
some of the effective innovations such as Housing First, not all 
the successful answers for the chronic population were known at 
the start of the commitment, and some seemed unlikely at first 
glance. Cities were actively encouraged to visit one another to see 
innovations in action, to have their skepticism about the viability 
of solutions confront the results. 
 The existing targeted federal measures might, in fact, end the 
homelessness of some, though ending homelessness as a larger 
goal was not yet on the public policy table for discussion. Targeted 
measures to engage and move individuals were indeed life-
saving work for many. The definition first provided in the 
McKinney-Vento Act, increasingly under attack as narrow and ex-
clusionary in the 1990s and until the passage of the HEARTH 
Act to expand it, applied to what data consistently showed were 
three-quarters of the homeless population: single adults, primar-
ily men. Data showed concretely that single adults, not families 
with children, were the majority of the homeless population, de-
spite what advocates argued in seeking a HUD definition more 
“aligned” with other federal agencies. Critics have argued that 
families, children, and youth were disproportionately excluded 
by the HUD definition (NPACH, 2007). 
 Additionally, labeling individuals and families as “hard to 
serve,” “service resistant,” “not housing ready,” “noncompliant,” 
and “barred” individuals not permitted in programs inevitably 
leads to discussion about the practices of some social service agen-
cies in “creaming” their clients to choose those with the likely best 
outcomes. 
 In the face of the debate over expansion of the definition, the 
Interagency Council convened federal agencies in 2005 to inven-
tory the federal definitions. The federal inventory revealed that 20 
programs across eight federal agencies used a common definition, 
with just three having an expanded version that linked primarily 
women and children to health care, education, and domestic vio-
lence services. Council director Mangano argued that further ex-
pansion would be costly in budget terms, though others asserted 
that it would provide local flexibility to meet locally identified 
needs and that “real world” prioritization was needed. Mangano 
noted that key partners such as mayors understood that resources 
are often limited and require tough choices to prioritize assistance 
to help the neediest individuals. “Many would argue that persons 

Defining and Measuring Homelessness 49
who are literally homeless in the streets or in emergency shelters 
should take precedence over individuals or families that are shar-
ing the housing of others, albeit in an unstable environment, they 
are nevertheless sheltered,” said Mangano (USICH, 2006a). 
 Establishing a position on the definition question—who is 
homeless and why—can lead directly to other questions. If home-
lessness could happen to anyone under the right circumstances, 
we don’t need to label or judge whether an individual or family 
“deserves” not to be homeless. We may not even debate whether 
they deserve a specific level of resources in a world of scare re-
sources. But if homelessness happens because of bad public pol-
icy and unfair economics, why are local communities expected to 
pick up the pieces of inadequate and often restrictive government 
and charitable resources and try to make them work for clients 
whose personal situations are not likely to change without deeper 
intervention? Why address homelessness as distinct issue, rather 
than trying to alleviate the larger problem of poverty? 
 What about Poverty? 
 Before examining the issue of numbers, a short look at some pov-
erty issues can help identify why some advocate for rehousing 
strategies for people experiencing homelessness, to shift the set-
ting of their needs to the stability of housing and not take an “ei-
ther/or” stance on lifting people out of poverty as a predicate for 
ending their homelessness. Some communities have gone as far 
as to continue to count as homeless those placed in housing, on 
the grounds that they remain at risk of homelessness because of 
their poverty. 
 In early 2010, the U.S. Census Bureau issued a statement on 
work it would begin on a new supplemental measure of poverty. 
The Supplemental Poverty Measure will be released in late 2011 
when the official income and poverty measures for 2010 are re-
leased by the Census Bureau (U.S. Census Bureau, 2010). The sup-
plemental measure will look beyond the cash income elements of 
the existing poverty measure and consider other items that affect 
family assets, such as tax payments and expenses for work. The 
new measure will not be used to establish eligibility for federal 
programs but will offer insight into economic trends. 
 Several poverty measures and standards have existed at 
the federal level. Chief among them have been the annual U.S. 

50 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) figures on 
what it takes to support a household. HHS releases a new set 
of income standards each year, and the figures for different size 
households determine eligibility for many assistance programs. 
The standards set by the poverty line also determine the federal 
government’s official estimates of how many people are living in 
poverty (HHS, 2010a). 
 The 2010 HHS poverty guidelines are as follows: one-person 
household—$10,830; two-person—$14,570; three-person—$18,310; 
four-person—$22,050; five-person—$25,790; six-person—$29,530; 
seven-person—$33,270; and eight-person—$37,010. 
 One national organization focused on federal and state bud-
get issues for poor and working families found that some key in-
dicators pointed to increased poverty in the nation. The Center on 
Budget and Policy Priorities (CBPP) reported that there was a sig-
nificant increase in the number of uninsured people in the nation 
and that an increase in poverty with a drop in median income in 
2008 showed the worst data since 1997. CBPP reported that “the 
percentage of Americans living in poverty rose from 12.5 percent 
in 2007 to 13.2 percent in 2008, the highest rate since 1997.” Fur-
ther, the data indicated that poor families were pushed further 
into poverty—as judged by being below half the poverty line—at 
the highest rate in 14 years. One in five children were reported 
below the poverty line, a level not seen in over a decade (Sherman 
et al., 2009). 
 Area Median Income (AMI) is the measure used by HUD to 
determine if individuals and families meet the income guidelines 
for housing that receives federal assistance. HUD uses data from 
three years of the American Community Survey, part of the cen-
sus. “Low-income” is defined as 80 percent of AMI, “very low” as 
50 percent, and “extremely low income” as 30 percent or below. 
By definition, 50 percent of residents earn less than the median or 
mid-point figure, and 50 percent earn more. AMI differs across 
geography. Here is just one set of examples of how AMI varies 
in different regions of the United States: San Francisco—$75,219; 
Chicago—$60,433; Dallas—$55,263; Boston—$68,488; and Miami—
$40,260 (HUD, 2010d). 
 While people who are literally homeless are not included in 
the computations, most would fall into the extremely low income 
category. HUD’s annual worst case housing needs data demon-
strates the use of this data to show the housing shortage or surplus 
for each AMI category. The most recent data found that worst case 

Defining and Measuring Homelessness 51
needs are concentrated among extremely low income households. 
Households where an adult with disabilities is present have the 
highest risk of such housing needs (HUD, 2010d). 
 The mismatch of need and housing is significant for ex-
tremely low income people, according to HUD: “In 2007, of the 
5.91 million households with worst case needs, a majority (4.33 
million) fell into the extremely low income group, and a smaller 
but substantial portion (1.58 million) were in the 30 to 50 percent 
of area median income group.” 
 When the key factors of affordability, availability (a lower-rent 
unit not being occupied by a higher-income renter), and physi-
cal adequacy are looked at together, the outcome for extremely 
low income renters is grave: “There are only 76.2 affordable units 
for every 100 extremely low income households. The ratio of 
available units is about three-fifths as great, at 44.2 units per 100 
households. If physically adequate units are required, only 37.4 
are available per 100 extremely low-income households.” 
 What about wages and housing costs? A national housing 
advocacy organization annually publishes data on the “housing 
wage,” a computation for every locality of how much an earner 
would need to afford HUD fair market rent levels at no more than 
30 percent of income. This figure is then compared to the wage 
and income levels for every state and local jurisdiction. Data from 
HUD, the U.S. Census Bureau, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the 
Department of Labor, and the Social Security Administration are 
used (NLIHC, 2010b). 
 Even factoring in the increase in the minimum wage in 2009, 
a two-bedroom unit at an average national fair market rent would 
require $18.44 an hour, or $38,360 annually. The data showed that 
there was no locality in the United States where a full-time job 
would provide this income for a renter (NLIHC, 2010b). 
 How Many People Are Homeless? 
 Substantial problems of methodology exist in trying to count 
homeless people, not the least of which is that many homeless 
people work very hard to obscure their homelessness by loca-
tion, dress, appearance, and daily schedule. They try to make 
their homelessness “invisible” to those who might not otherwise 
recognize it. Others achieve invisibility by sleeping in abandoned 
buildings, in parked cars, or in a tent in the woods. As revealed 

52 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
by the definitional problem, instability for many others is hidden 
by precarious housing arrangements with friends or families, 
circumstances that can be ended in a moment. As previously 
pointed out, others make do in structures not intended as living 
quarters, including in rural areas. 
 Congress directed that new data be collected locally and re-
ported nationally to inform understanding of the problem and to 
examine the incrementally increasing investment of federal bud-
get resources in the McKinney-Vento programs. Both data col-
lected through the Homeless Management Information System 
(HMIS) and annual Point-In-Time (PIT) counts conducted in most 
communities during the last week of January contributed to new 
insights on sheltered and unsheltered people, use of programs, 
and homeless in urban and suburban/rural areas. 
 In the years before standardized data collection, regular 
counts, and improved methodologies, homelessness was rou-
tinely reported to be increasing, and year after year yielded the 
information that “families are the fastest-growing segment of the 
population.” There was no critique of methodology to arrive at 
these often-anecdotal conclusions reflecting shelter use but not 
necessarily homelessness. There was no questioning of head-
lines announcing record increases. When decreases began to be re-
ported in 2007, the path to those results was deemed to be flawed 
by advocates and the results achieved through the exclusionary 
strategies of the focus on chronicity. A fair question seemed to be, 
if homeless numbers decrease, won’t existing and future funds be 
negatively affected for community providers? 
 At the same time, the nation’s mayors, many of them com-
mitted to 10-year plans, began to move their largely anecdotal 
annual survey of hunger and homelessness in more than 25 of 
the nation’s cities to a basis in data. With the availability of 
HMIS data, the Annual Homeless Assessment Report (AHAR), and 
other resources, the report that had relied on a question and an-
swer survey since the early 1990s was able to provide more than 
anecdotes in 2009 and an affirmation of policy direction. In 2009, 
the mayors reported in the  Hunger and Homelessness Survey that 
“most of the cities that experienced drops in individual home-
lessness attributed the decline to a policy strategy, promoted by 
federal, state, and local government, of finding permanent hous-
ing for chronically homeless disabled adults. Nearly all of the 
cities on the task force have 10-year plans to end homelessness” 
(USCM, 2009). 

Defining and Measuring Homelessness 53
 The mayors reported that “despite the recession, 16 cities, 
64 percent of respondents, reported a leveling or decrease in the 
number of homeless  individuals  over the past year. This is an in-
dication of the success of policies aimed at ending chronic home-
lessness among single adults with disabilities. Nineteen cities, 
76 percent of respondents, reported an increase in  family  home-
lessness. Cities attributed the increase in family homelessness to 
the recession and a lack of affordable housing.” 
 The U.S. Census has made several efforts to count people who 
are homeless, dating back to “Transient Night” in 1970, followed 
by “M Night” in 1980 (rescue missions, all-night movie theatres), 
and “S Night” (street and shelter) in 1990. Methods continued to 
change, as the federal agency and local partners examined results 
and understood homelessness better. In 2000, service-based enu-
meration was tried. Service-based enumerations were again used 
in 2010 for emergency shelters, soup kitchens and mobile food 
vans, and targeted outdoor locations (NAEH, 2010). 
 Ten-Year Plans: Rhetoric, Restrictions, or Results? 
 What can’t be measured can’t be managed, goes the axiom. Setting 
targets and using quantifiable data to measure progress against 
benchmarks seemed like a foreign notion when first introduced 
into the issue of homelessness, where saving a life or serving a 
meal was the focus. But elected officials prefer solvable problems, 
and the business-oriented 10-year plans encouraged by the fed-
eral Interagency Council on Homelessness brought tools for ad-
dressing a problem in large and small communities nationwide. 
Just as no community had a monopoly on the problem due to 
size or geography, all had market share in developing innovations 
and achieving measurable results. And the opportunity was pre-
sented to reorient long-standing and institutionalized responses 
to homelessness. 
 Researcher Dr. Dennis Culhane of the University of Pennsyl-
vania, whose work on profiling homelessness among adults led to 
the identification of the chronic population through data, had ex-
tended his approach to examine family homelessness. In a policy 
brief focused on alternatives, Dr. Culhane argued that “services 
for the homeless have focused on assisting households only when 
they are literally homeless, and then in a manner that dupli-
cates and often supplants the services of more mainstream social 

54 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
welfare systems like corrections, substance abuse treatment, in-
come maintenance, housing assistance, mental health, and child 
welfare services” (Culhane and Metraux, 2008). 
 What has resulted from homeless programs trying to coordi-
nate is “a parallel social welfare system, with an array of health, 
mental health, employment, legal, dental, homemaking, childcare, 
and other services, for a select population eligible only by virtue 
of their temporary housing status, and typically only at the time of 
their residence in a facility for the homeless.” The result, Culhane re-
ports, is that the mainstream systems sending people into home-
lessness are able to bypass any oversight of the housing status of 
their clients, reducing accountability and leaving the “front door” 
into homelessness open. 
 The existing homeless network cannot reduce homelessness 
because it has made itself central to an increasing number of peo-
ple who lack alternatives and remain for longer and longer periods 
of time. Culhane argues for a reconceived “housing emergency” 
context to examine resources and responses. 
 Some national organizations criticized the encouragement of 
plans that accompanied the Bush administration’s commitment 
to end chronic homelessness in 10 years. Tools and supports did 
focus on the chronically homeless population where the goal had 
been set, but many communities for political and practical pur-
poses chose to use their plans to address all forms of homeless-
ness. Many were able to identify innovations and results for other 
populations, including families. What were also needed were ef-
fective strategies to access other investment resources, especially 
from mainstream programs. 
 Critics asserted that funding direction adopted by HUD—the 
federal agency where the McKinney-Vento homeless programs 
were administered and that was charged to implement the goal 
along with other federal partners—caused some shifts at the local 
level, though hard data on this are not available (NPACH, n.d.). 
Chief among the targets of criticism was the implementation of 
a congressionally directed 30 percent set-aside of funds for 
housing and eventually a funding application scoring target to 
prioritize housing for people who are chronically homeless. Some 
argued that the need for homeless funds was to replace other fun-
damental cuts in federal resources, so compelling specific types 
of applications forced communities to overlook their own priori-
ties and follow HUD’s direction. Still, a national survey in 2010 of 

Defining and Measuring Homelessness 55
supportive housing providers published a recommendation that 
urged policy makers to “make supportive housing a more promi-
nent part of the implementation of Ten Year Plans to End Home-
lessness” (CSH, 2010). 
 According to one organization critical of federal direction, 
“Communities are being forced to overlook the results of their 
own needs assessments in order to meet federal mandates to 
serve ‘chronically homeless’ people. As a result, federal funding 
is not addressing the service gaps determined by communities.   In 
distributing homeless assistance grants, HUD asks communities 
to rank local needs and prioritize the gaps in the resources avail-
able to meet those needs” (NPACH, n.d. ). 
 Another national organization focused on economic issues 
for low-income Americans commended the establishment of 
the policy target on chronic homelessness in an analysis of what 
works in poverty reduction. Noting that “a target transforms the 
debate,” the Center on Law and Social Policy observed that the 
identification of solutions plays a key role in reaching a target, 
which itself must be trackable and transparent. Political will—
more in evidence than ever before on the issue of homelessness 
and at every level of government and with the private sector—is 
required to move the target to results. The results can leverage 
additional benefits, as more than one mayor used the lessons 
learned from 10-year planning to tackle other difficult local issues 
(Levin-Epstein and Lyons, 2009). 
 Even before the unprecedented decreases in numbers of peo-
ple who are homelessness were reported, the new federal direction 
was receiving media attention. When, in July 2008, the Bush ad-
ministration announced that between 2005 and 2007 chronic home-
lessness declined almost 30 percent—from about 176,000 down to 
124,000—press attention grew. Further, homelessness overall de-
clined in this period prior to the economic downturn, from over 
750,000 on a single night to just more than 665,000. From  American 
Prospect  headlining “A Major Bush Success” to the  National Review 
announcing “Good News on Homelessness,” media outlets with 
little prior interest in the issue recognized the result. 
 The somewhat predictable story lines about homelessness of 
the past were now infused with bylines from business and eco-
nomic reporters and from those who were at far ends of the politi-
cal spectrum from one another. A sample of excerpts and quotes 
from the launch of the federal initiative follows. 

56 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 An Accelerating National Movement Reduces 
Numbers of Chronically Homeless 
 Ten-year plans encouraged by the council [are] a burst 
of effort [that] has buoyed a field long accustomed to 
futility and part of an accelerating national movement 
that has reduced the numbers of the chronically homeless. 
 —New York Times , June 2006 
 Metrics of Business Is the Language of Hope: 
Targeting the Toughest Customers of All 
 Here’s how hard-headed business practices can help 
the world’s wealthiest nation deal with the hard-core 
homeless . . . 
 The market research is done the usual way: asking 
what they want. The typical response is emphatic. . . . 
What they want is a room of their own. 
 As with any business plan, a lot has to go right. But 
while applying the metrics of business to homelessness 
may sound icily clinical, ultimately this is the language 
of hope. 
 —Fortune  magazine, 2006 
 Democrats Say Administration Plan Offers Solutions  
 A number of big-city Democratic mayors who have often 
been harshly critical of Bush’s domestic policies [say the 
new approach] offers practical solutions to a problem 
that has vexed them for decades. 
 —Bloomberg.com, June 15, 2006 
 Million-Dollar Murray: Why Problems like Homelessness 
May Be Easier to Solve than to Manage 
 By Malcolm Gladwell 
 Enormous sums of money are already being spent 
on the chronically homeless, and . . . the kind of money it 

Defining and Measuring Homelessness 57
would take to solve the problem could well be less than 
the kind of money it took to ignore it. 
 So far, the Council has convinced more than two 
hundred cities to radically reevaluate their policy for 
dealing with the homeless. 
 —New Yorker, February 13, 2006 
 Solving the Toughest, Most Visible, and 
Costly Part of the Problem 
 The mission is to cajole Governors, Mayors and County 
Executives into not just embracing but owning the elu-
sive goal of ending chronic homelessness. 
 What matters more than rhetoric and the planning 
is the new thinking behind it all: focusing on the tough-
est and most visible part of the problem—the hard-core 
street homeless, who cost taxpayers dearly in hospital 
and prison stays. 
 Abolitionist Apostle: On a mission to end chronic 
homelessness.  Christopher Swope, November 2006
 —Governing 
 Something That Works 
 One factor now motivating local officials is a realization 
of how much the homeless are costing them. . . . The im-
portant thing is that somebody has finally found some-
thing that works. 
 Give ’em Shelter: Good news for the homeless. 
 William Tucker, July 3, 2006 
 —Weekly Standard 
 Support also came from experts in the field. The Joint Center 
for Housing Studies at Harvard published a 2007 report on hous-
ing in the nation that included support from former U.S. Depart-
ment of Housing and Urban Development secretaries Jack Kemp 
and Henry Cisneros.  Our Communities, Our Homes: Pathways to 
Housing and Homeownership in America’s Cities and States stated: 
“Home defines who we are and prepared us for all we can be. 

58 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
Home should be a source of joy. But for too many people, poor 
living conditions or the loss of a home engender sorrow. . . . Home 
at the very least should be shelter from cold and protection from 
predation. But for the least among us, home is a heating grate or a 
tarp in the park. It should not be this way.” 
 The secretaries, along with former HUD assistant secretary 
Nick Retsinas of Harvard and former National Association of 
Home Builders CEO Kent Colton, introduce the new bipartisan 
report for state and local jurisdictional leaders on housing 
strategies and financing, including strategies for ending chronic 
homelessness (Cisneros et al., 2007). 
 The report noted that “local officials must lead efforts to 
end chronic homelessness in their communities using a research-
driven approach incorporating the ‘housing first’ model,” fur-
ther commenting that the targeting of the chronic population can 
“rally the troops around clear, achievable outcomes that can lead 
to system changes” and benefit all populations. 
 The Millennial Housing Commission, charged by Congress 
in 2000 to report on housing recommendations for the nation, in-
cluded homelessness in its 2002 report: “Homeless families and 
individuals generally fall into two categories: the transitionally 
homeless and the chronically homeless. Transitionally homeless 
households need adequate housing, first and foremost, while 
those who are chronically homeless confront health or substance 
abuse problems in addition to extreme poverty. With its capital 
subsidy for units targeted exclusively to extremely low-income 
households and its recommended improvements to public hous-
ing, vouchers, and the HOME and Low Income Housing Tax 
Credit programs, the Commission believes that the tools needed to 
end transitional homelessness will be available. For the chronically 
homeless, permanent supportive housing, which combines housing 
with intensive rehabilitative and other social services, is needed. 
The Commission recommends the elimination of chronic home-
lessness over a 10-year period by the creation of additional units of 
permanent supportive housing and the transfer of renewal fund-
ing for such units to HUD’s Housing Certificate Fund” (MHC, 2002): 
 Targeting resources toward permanent supportive hous-
ing for the “chronically homeless,” as currently pro-
posed, is unlikely to “free up” emergency resources for 
families or other populations .  The argument that target-
ing resources toward permanent supportive housing for 

Defining and Measuring Homelessness 59
the “chronically homeless” will “free up” emergency re-
sources for families and other populations assumes that 
there is a fixed, unchanging population of people who 
are “chronically homeless,” and that “freed up” shelter 
beds will go to serve other populations. Neither assump-
tion is true. 
 —National Policy and Advocacy Coalition 
on Homelessness (NPACH) Questions & 
Answers about the “Chronic 
Homelessness” Initiative 
 The National Coalition for the Homeless recognizes the 
obligation placed on units of government at all levels to 
collect and report data pertaining to homelessness, di-
rectly and by compelling or requesting organizations to 
participate in homeless data collection and reporting ef-
forts as a condition of receiving public funds. As the na-
tion’s strongest voice for the protection of the civil rights 
of people experiencing homelessness, the National Coali-
tion for the Homeless urges that this obligation not over-
take the fundamental right to privacy and confidentiality 
of the individuals from whom data is being collected. 
 —National Coalition for the Homeless Position 
Statement on Homeless Data Collection 
and Reporting 
 The reactivation of the council is a positive step, but its 
focus has been primarily on convincing states and cities 
to develop ten-year plans to end homelessness in their 
communities. How can cities and states end homeless-
ness—or even develop realistic plans to do so—when 
federal housing and other anti-poverty funds are being 
cut? How can the administration state a commitment 
to ending even the most limited kind of homelessness 
while at the same time pressing for these cuts? And how 
can we, as advocates, respond? 
 —National Law Center on Homelessness 
and Poverty, In Just Times
 June 2005 

60 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 Where Are the Resources to Prevent 
and End Homelessness? 
 Federal Spending on Homelessness 
 Federal spending for people who are homeless increased every 
year in the last decade, more than doubling to over $5 billion. 
This spending includes both targeted dollars in homeless-specific 
federal programs and the estimated spending for people who are 
homeless and using nontargeted federal programs. 
 By federal agency, these resources include HUD (McKinney-
Vento programs, HUD-VASH housing vouchers, Family Uni-
fication Program housing vouchers); HHS (Health Care for the 
Homeless, PATH Block Grant, SAMHSA Mental Health Programs 
of Regional and National Significance, Runaway and Homeless 
Youth Programs, Head Start); FEMA/DHS (Emergency Food and 
Shelter Program); VA (Health Care for Homeless Veterans, Domi-
ciliary Care, Compensated Work Therapy, Nontargeted Medical 
Care, Grant and Per Diem Program, Transitional Housing Loan 
Program); Education (Education for Homeless Children and 
Youth); DOL (Homeless Veterans Reintegration Projects); USDA 
(meal programs); and Social Security Administration (Homeless 
Outreach and Project Evaluation). The federal Interagency Coun-
cil on Homelessness is also included in this budget total. 
 Mainstream Resources 
 Little had been done to tap the deeper federal mainstream re-
sources available primarily to families and children to augment 
the much smaller pool of federal HUD homeless funds (HUD 
because other targeted funds existed in other federal agencies, 
whether distributed to states and providing the opportunity to 
work with policy makers on targeting and set-asides of funds or 
competitive funds not currently being sought by state, local, or 
nonprofit agencies). Instead, many communities had come to use 
HUD homeless dollars heavily for supportive services for home-
less programs, leaving HUD, the federal housing agency, the 
funder of everything from child care to drug treatment and men-
tal health services to veterans services. 
 In 1994, the Government Accountability Office (GAO), an 
independent, nonpartisan agency that works for Congress, pub-

Where Are the Resources to Prevent and End Homelessness? 61
lished a report on the impact of the McKinney programs that 
noted: “The experts generally agree that mainstream assistance 
programs for low-income people must also be expanded and 
made more accessible to the homeless to significantly improve the 
current situation” (GAO, 1994). 
 A subsequent 2002 GAO report noted that “the underlying 
structure and operations of federal mainstream programs are 
often not conducive to ensuring that the special needs of home-
less people are met. Federal programs do not always include ser-
vice providers with expertise and experience in addressing the 
needs of homeless people. These providers may not be organized 
or equipped to serve homeless people, may not be knowledgeable 
about their special needs, or may not have the sensitivity or expe-
rience to treat homeless clients with respect. For example, many 
providers delivering Medicaid services for states are not adept at 
dealing with homeless patients’ special needs and characteristics, 
such as their inability to store medicines or their lack of adequate 
shelter, nutrition, and hygiene” (GAO, 2002). 
 Observing that mainstream programs, themselves fragmented 
in a complex system, often lacked incentives to serve those with 
complex needs and experiencing transience, instability, and a lack 
of basic resources, GAO added, “Numerous studies have demon-
strated that the multiple and complex needs of homeless people—
which may include medical care, mental health care, substance 
abuse treatment, housing, income support, and employment 
services—should not be addressed in isolation but rather through 
programs that are integrated and coordinated” (GAO, 2002). Few 
initiatives to fill this gap had emerged, chief among them the “First 
Step” screening tool developed among federal agencies and the 
SSA SOAR initiative. But benefits screening and homeless-specific 
strategies for mainstream resources—including 10-year plans—to 
ensure that no resources that could assist an individual or family 
were left untouched were few and far between. 
 Mainstream resources are a wide-ranging category, and new 
opportunities have come into play with the economic downturn. 
The Recovery Act (ARRA) resources included many dollars that 
could assist various homeless populations in prevention, rehous-
ing, income support, health access, homeless education, and more. 
 Federal health care reform legislation in 2010 included Med-
icaid expansion to anyone under 133 percent of poverty in 2014. 
According to the National Health Care for the Homeless Council, 
this amounts to about $14,400 annual income for a single adult, the 

62 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
most likely profile of those uninsured. Community health centers, 
already dramatically expanded over the last decade, will expand 
capacity again. Health Care for the Homeless programs derive 
their budgets from the community health centers line item. Given 
2010 research published by the  American Journal of Public Health, 
showing that 73   percent of homeless clients surveyed reported 
that they had difficulty getting medical or surgical   care, prescrip-
tion medications, mental health care, eyeglasses, and dental care, 
such expansion is warranted (Bagget et al., 2010). 
 Legislation was moving in 2010 to provide more than one bil-
lion dollars for the National Housing Trust Fund, which would 
target 75 percent of its rental allocation to people below 30 percent 
of AMI (NLIHC, 2010 a). 
 In some places, state and local advocacy—based on data, out-
comes, and costs—had produced gains in targeting mainstream 
resources to people who are homelessness, including to provide 
the “support” in supported housing. The reliance on HUD dol-
lars for social services, including treatment and training instead 
of housing, simply represents a gap in state and local advocacy 
strategies to target the relatively deeper federal resources coming 
to state agencies and local communities. A simple example would be 
the state of Florida. According to HUD data, HUD’s competitive 
homeless awards for 2009 totaled over $73 million, while the fed-
eral formula award for the state for substance abuse and mental 
health programs as reported in HHS data was over $130 million, 
with another $47 million in discretionary or competitive awards. 
States have broad discretion in how they target and invest formula 
funds (HHS, 2010b). 
 Mainstream resources are a path forward for moving indi-
viduals away from risk in a broader group of poverty-oriented 
programs that do not require homelessness as an eligibility fac-
tor. Critics question whether creating homeless-specific systems 
to parallel mainstream systems is a good use of scarce resources, 
when an alternative is creation of access points and practices that 
can help bridge homeless clients to mainstream resources. 
 The partnership of state and local jurisdictional officials pro-
vides an additional venue for educating officials and building com-
mitments for these resources. In a provider-driven decision-making 
process, where maintaining funding may compete with adopting 
new ideas, there have been few incentives to change course. 
 Several examples of partnership and investment strategies 
by states are included in chapter 6. 

Where Are the Resources to Prevent and End Homelessness? 63
 Largely through business-minded leadership for 10-year 
plans, some cities and counties have created dedicated revenue 
streams for investing in their plans, following a best practice that 
the targeting of funds will help ensure the resource meets the deep-
est need and not be dissipated on higher income users. Issued by 
the Atlanta Development Authority in 2005, new local bonds cre-
ated the Homeless Opportunity Fund representing new revenue 
targeted to 10-year plan goals. Public sector partners executed a 
multipart resource realignment, including a local car rental tax, 
existing bonds, and tax increment funds, a creative approach to 
using bonding authority and revenues to produce new targeted 
resources. Funds have been invested in permanent supportive 
rental housing, assessment centers for women and children, and 
other plan goals. This initiative raised $22 million in public re-
sources in four years (USICH, 2008b). 
 A Homeless and Domestic Violence Tax has long been col-
lected on all food and beverage sales in Miami/Dade County 
state-licensed establishments that sell alcoholic beverages for con-
sumption on the premises, except for hotels and motels. Eighty-
five percent of the tax receipts go to the Miami-Dade County 
Homeless Trust, and 15 percent go to domestic violence centers. 
The initiative generated $11.9 million in 2007 for homeless pro-
grams (Miami-Dade , n.d.). 
 An increase in the real estate transaction recording fee in In-
dianapolis was approved by the city and county and increased 
the city’s housing trust fund for Indianapolis’ efforts to reduce 
homelessness and build more housing that is affordable for those 
in need. The fee was projected to generate $1 million annually tar-
geted to homeless and housing programs (USICH, 2008c). 
 Seattle supported a series of high-performing multiyear 
housing levies from local property taxes. The initiative includes 
new rental production, preservation, and emergency homeless-
ness prevention and stabilization assistance as eligible uses. The 
levy fund targets its largest component to capital funds for rental 
development. For 2010–2011 the levy projected $8.76 million in 
rental resources to extremely low income households and people 
who are homeless or disabled (City of Seattle, 2010 ). 
 Transportation revenues were identified as an available 
source of investment funds for Chicago’s 10-year-plan, including 
earmarking city parking meter revenues for homeless programs. 
The 2010–2011 initiative earmarked $1.4 million in city parking 
meter revenues for homeless programs (USICH, 2006b). 

64 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 What about Prevention? 
  One of the debates about homelessness concerns the issue of 
prevention. Surely it was cheaper and less harmful to individu-
als and families to intervene before people became homeless or 
separated to avoid homelessness. A 2010 HUD study examined 
9,000 individuals in six places in the nation and found that, while 
housing costs were usually higher than the fair market rent lev-
els that direct federal housing assistance, transitional programs 
or permanent supported housing for families costs either the 
same or less than shelter. Further, the majority of both individuals 
(50–65 percent) and families (58–72 percent) used a homeless pro-
gram only once in the 18 months covered by the data. Ten percent 
of the individuals were tallied as using over 80 percent of the costs 
accrued to homeless programs (HUD, 2010a). 
 Historically, if a family needed a back rent or utility payment, 
most communities received annual resources through the FEMA 
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Emergency Food and 
Shelter Program and the former Emergency Shelter Grant (ESG) 
program. These were the only prevention assistance under the 
HUD homeless programs until new recovery initiatives in 2009. 
ESG is used by a small number of localities under a 30 percent cap 
for prevention to provide short-term subsidies for rent and utility 
debt; security deposits or first month’s rent to permit individuals 
or families at risk of homelessness to obtain permanent housing; 
mediation programs for landlord-tenant disputes; and other simi-
lar uses. 
 Local prevention resources were always distributed quickly 
in communities, and little was known through data about out-
come indicators other than numbers served and average payments. 
There was no insight from investment or research into what was 
most effective, the profile most at risk, and the likelihood that—
absent the aid—the individual or family would have fallen into 
homelessness. 
 With the 2009 passage of the American Recovery and Rein-
vestment Act, the Homelessness Prevention and Rapid Rehous-
ing Program (HPRP) was created at HUD with $1.5 billion in 
resources to prevent and end homelessness through short-term 
rental subsidies. Communities reporting to HUD through HMIS 
will now have a vehicle to track a larger resource and examine its 
effectiveness. 

What about Prevention? 65
 Other resources have received increased attention for their ef-
fect in preventing and ending homelessness. HUD awards Family 
Unification Program rental assistance vouchers—2,500 rental as-
sistance vouchers to more than 40 public housing authorities in 
2010—to reunite more than 2,500 families where a lack of adequate 
housing is a primary cause of parents being separated or near sep-
aration from their children. About 20 percent of the rental vouch-
ers provide assistance for about 750 young adults (ages 18–22) 
who have “aged-out” of the foster care system (HUD , 2010b). 
 The recent expansion of these resources in the federal bud-
get reflects the data that show that keeping children in foster care 
is more expensive than housing costs. According to the National 
Center for Housing and Child Welfare (NCHCW), “On average, it 
costs more than $48,000 annually per family when children enter 
foster care. By contrast, housing and services to keep a family to-
gether costs approximately $15,000 annually. Supportive services 
for FUP families and youth are provided by agencies funded 
through the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. This 
$20 million investment in FUP vouchers will save more than 
$134 million in foster care costs” (NCHCW, 2010). 
 Discharge into Homelessness from Other Systems 
 Another form of prevention need identified during the 1990s as 
shelter numbers surged was the direct path between publicly 
funded care, treatment, custody (hospitals, addiction and men-
tal health treatment, jails and prisons, foster care, the military), 
and homelessness. While numbers were only being documented 
in a few places to show the impact of releases and discharges, the 
homeless shelter system was being used to rectify a lack of access 
and availability both for community-based residential placements 
and for treatment. People leaving from both long and short stays 
regularly appeared at shelters with a printed list of programs 
given to them upon exit. 
 Better discharge planning was needed to affect this situation 
at the local level, but there has rarely been effective advocacy to 
create change. HUD added coordination of discharge to its appli-
cation process in the 1990s, and discharge strategies and partner-
ships were a component of the federal policy academies for states. 
By convening state teams of interagency personnel, the goal was 
to create the kind of partnerships that could begin discharge plan-
ning with mainstream resources upon an individual’s entry into 

66 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
an institution or hospital. Federal efforts to highlight these re-
sources were intended to avoid formalizing homeless programs 
as a de facto discharge site that relieves public institutions and 
systems of planning responsibility for the stability of their clients 
and the justification of the investment already made. 
 One place where early work was done on discharge planning 
that gained national attention was in Massachusetts. Interagency 
Council director Philip Mangano, who spent more than 20 years 
working in Massachusetts advocacy for families and individuals, 
led the Massachusetts Housing and Shelter Alliance in its pre-
HMIS work to identify dynamics of adult shelter use in a state 
where more than $30 million was spent annually on shelter for 
individuals (NHCHC, 2002). 
 Moving the discharge issue in an overflowing emergency shel-
ter system from anecdote to data required “front door” data about 
where new shelter guests were coming from as well as research 
into state system data on discharges. The early data showed about 
1,000 entries annually from jails and prisons directly to shelter, 
and over 500 young adults with state system histories. Over 1,200 
people were coming from a detox program into a shelter without 
sobriety requirements. Up to 800 were coming from hospitaliza-
tion, with most coming from private hospitals. 
 With street death data from Dr. James O’Connell of the Boston 
Health Care for the Homeless program showing that more than 
one person who died in his study group had been discharged to 
the streets within a short time of death, and with over a quarter of 
aging-out foster care youth nationally experiencing homelessness 
after leaving the child welfare system, there was ample evidence 
to develop new approaches (NHCHC, 2002). 
 Federal resources that addressed diverse needs related to 
homelessness and its prevention were increasing during the last 
decade. Policy makers were quick to point out to local providers 
the need to identify and use these dollars for prevention. Among 
the new resources were the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services’ (HHS) Access to Recovery Substance Abuse Treatment 
Vouchers, which supported client choice in seeking treatment, the 
U.S. Department of Labor’s (DOL) Prisoner Reentry Initiative, na-
tional expansion of community health centers, which automati-
cally expanded the Health Care for the Homeless program, and 
Foster Care Independent Living Vouchers. 
 With the economic crisis and the return of veterans from Iraq 
and Afghanistan, this number may continue to increase. In order 

Homelessness and Legal Issues 67
to better serve this population, HUD plans to increase housing 
resources available to homeless veterans, to focus efforts to ensure 
that coordination between local VA Medical Centers and Contin-
uums of Care are strengthened, and to utilize Recovery Act re-
sources provided through the Homelessness Prevention and 
Rapid Re-Housing Program (HPRP) to assist veterans who are at 
risk of becoming homeless. 
 In 2009 HUD developed a new $10 million homelessness-pre-
vention initiative for veterans through a demonstration program 
in both rural and urban areas, at the direction of Congress. Fo-
cused primarily on veterans from Iraq and Afghanistan, including 
the National Guard and Reserve units, HUD, VA, and DOL will 
coordinate housing, services, and employment (HUD, 2010c). 
 Not all effective initiatives require new dollars; some can be 
forwarded through coordination. A no-cost initiative proposed by 
Interagency Council director Mangano and adopted by the U.S. 
Department of Labor (DOL) was a new relationship between state 
foster care systems and the DOL Job Corps program. Job Corps 
provides training and residential placement for young adults, of-
fering access to aging-out youth that addresses both the need for 
education and training and stable housing. DOL reported in 2008 
that over 11,000 aging out youth joined Job Corps from 2001 to 
2007 (USICH, 2008a). 
 Homelessness and Legal Issues 
 Civil Rights 
 Housing First models are deemed to be consumer responsive, 
providing the very housing that people living on the streets and 
in shelters ask for as a priority. For most, it ends their homeless-
ness when supported by the appropriate and consumer-driven 
choice of supportive services. If it is a goal to end homelessness, 
especially for those who have been homeless the longest, is it rea-
sonable to examine closely the investment made by national and 
local advocates in city after city to protect the civil rights of those 
living outdoors? 
 As noted in chapter 1, the HEARTH Act requires the federal 
Interagency Council on Homelessness to devise constructive al-
ternatives to criminalization measures that can be used by cit-
ies around the country. Punitive measures, such as laws against 

68 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
sleeping, camping, food distribution, storing belongings, and 
more, had never proven successful in reducing the street presence 
of individuals. National organizations regularly issued reports on 
the nation’s “meanest cities” for homeless people, including both 
punitive measures and attacks on people (NLCHP/NCH, 2009). 
 The inclusive partnerships of stakeholders to homelessness 
convened by results-oriented 10-year plans were seen by both 
the Interagency Council and local jurisdictional partners as affir-
mative means to steer away from a part of the issue focused on 
making homelessness less of an assault on those living outdoors, 
rather than support street homelessness. For local officials who 
could learn from other cities, 10-year plans presented an opportu-
nity to close encampments and similar settings through affirma-
tive strategies rather than punitive response. 
 There was no denying that physical danger was present, as 
attacks on those living outdoors were reported in cities of all sizes; 
homelessness means constant exposure to violence, leaving peo-
ple on the street vulnerable (Hombs, 1994). Legal advocates had 
given only passing response to the potential of 10-year plans for 
people who are homeless and living outside. Instead they empha-
size protection of the rights of individuals. Some oppose the use 
of “special courts” such as those targeting drug offenses, men-
tal health issues, and veterans, creating more consumer-oriented 
outcomes that may remove legal barriers to housing and employ-
ment. Such courts are often a feature of the Project Homeless 
Connect innovation, helping clear warrants and fines so that ID, 
housing, and jobs move closer. 
 Many shared the view that it was an individual’s choice to 
make to stay outside, that ensuring protections of person and 
property was vital where so-called “banishment” practices were 
instituted, and that addressing homelessness without addressing 
poverty was futile. There was little affirmation of the business or 
law enforcement partners key to many plans (ABA, 2010). 
 The American Bar Association Commission on Homelessness 
& Poverty (ABA) described the debate as: “Banishment stems 
from the faulty belief that if the experience of homelessness or ex-
treme poverty is made painful enough, then individuals targeted 
will (1) choose to stop being homeless and become self-sufficient; 
or (2) choose to relocate to an area that is less hostile to their peace 
and survival.” Other commentators went further, seeing puni-
tive efforts as simply extensions of the goals of downtown busi-
ness interests that wanted clean sidewalks. Banishment practices 

Homelessness and Legal Issues 69
themselves were deemed to increase costs to taxpayers. The ABA 
presented just two constructive alternatives in its report and did 
not include any affirmation of proven housing innovations that 
remove the need for people to remain on the streets. 
 Panhandling had long been an issue that was perceived as 
hand in hand with street homelessness but also as a quality of life 
issue for downtown residents and businesses. With 10-year plans 
came the opportunity to examine the data on panhandling more 
effectively and forward alternatives for residents and visitors. 
 The International Downtown Association (IDA), a partner to 
federal initiatives, conducted a 2000 study of successful downtown 
partnerships and reported several lessons summarized here. First, 
IDA noted that “homelessness, poverty and mental illness are of 
society, not outside it.” Indicating that there would be no quick or 
one-size-fits all answers, IDA emphasized that a partner “with an 
interest in the problem has a legitimate set of goals that need to be 
respected and reflected in the program response.” Stressing that 
the public sector must accept its role in creating “bipartisan and 
community wide” goals, IDA placed front and center the impor-
tance of “leadership, mutual respect, and the agreement to coop-
erate” (IDA, 2000). 
 Denver’s Road Home (DRH), the city’s 10-year plan, worked 
with the Denver Business Improvement District to survey pan-
handling and its results in one downtown area. Denver prioritized 
public education and community engagement as essential to the 
successful implementation of its plan. The results were startling: 
72 percent of Denver adults saw panhandling as a serious prob-
lem and a problem across the city; 42 percent of Denver adults 
had given money to panhandlers in the last year, and those who 
gave to panhandlers averaged $1.84 each time, $24.58 per year, 
which equated to a total of $4.5 million dollars per year. 
 A Denver Donation Meter Program initiated in 2007 provided 
an opportunity for individual citizens to participate directly and 
productively to provide housing, employment, behavioral health 
treatment, and other services to homeless and at risk individu-
als and families in the community. The Donation Meter Program, 
which grew to over 85 meters, was a response to citizen and busi-
ness concerns (DRH, 2010b). 
 Redecorated meters—painted red with 10-year plan decals—
were placed downtown where panhandling occurred as part of 
the Better Way to Give campaign. Passersby could put money in 
the meters and know that 100 percent would be directed by the 

70 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
United Way partner into local initiatives that provide meals, job 
training, substance abuse counseling, housing, and other pro-
grams. Local businesses could support the initiative by adopting 
the meters for $1,000 each per year. Denver, through the very “le-
gitimate larceny” being encouraged among cities, had adopted 
the meter idea to its own community, and others studied the Den-
ver example to tailor it to their own jurisdictions. Panhandling in 
Denver’s target area decreased more than 80 percent from 2006 
to 2009. 
 In Calgary, a 2003 survey found that over 29 percent of peo-
ple over 18 (approximately 200,000 people) had given money to 
people on the street in the prior year. Of that number, most gave 
between $1 and $3 twice per month. The survey concluded that 
there are approximately 60 panhandlers in the downtown core 
making approximately $50/day, or per year—approximately 
$1,000,000.00 in after-tax dollars (Cameron Strategy, 2003). 
 Panhandling is just one issue that is frequently entwined 
with other street activity where local enforcement efforts that 
also included street sweeps and destruction of personal property 
frequently resulted in community polarization and discussion of 
the civil rights of homeless people and their service providers. 
Some cities sought to regulate the distribution of food—so-called 
drive-by feeding—that occurs on sidewalks and in parks through 
the efforts of volunteers and is seen by some as providing re-
sources that keep people living outdoors (NLCHP, 2009). 
 As part of Denver’s 10-year plan, the city engaged feeding 
programs to offer indoor settings combined with service engage-
ment. “Come On In” was the new Denver partnership of Denver’s 
Human Services Department, other public entities, faith-based 
organizations, service providers, and neighborhood associations 
and targeted more than 20 public feeding programs in the city 
to create a match between resources—an indoor place to sit and 
eat, and restrooms—and access to other resources and services, 
such as health care and counseling. Feeding programs can pose 
a challenge for communities that also experience issues related to 
garbage, sanitation, and traffic (DRH, 2010a). 
 Violence toward homeless people was deemed to be on the 
rise. Legal advocates focused their efforts on securing the status of 
“hate crimes” for such attacks, which were then subject to greater 
penalties. 
 One national organization reported on several such measures. 
In 2010, Florida governor Charlie Crist signed a hate crimes bill 

Homelessness and Legal Issues 71
for his state, which has experienced a disproportionate number of 
reported attacks on homeless people. Maryland, the first state to 
have such a law, and Washington, D.C., have such protections. A 
2004 California law requires police training on hate crimes, espe-
cially for homeless persons with disabilities. Judges in Maine can 
incorporate a homeless crime victim’s circumstances in their sen-
tencing of offenders. Miami-Dade County and Los Angeles acted 
to increase school-based education on homelessness (NCH, 2010  ). 
 Siting Homeless Housing and the 
“Not in My Backyard” Problem 
 Opposition to the placement of housing for people who have ex-
perienced homelessness has raised issues usually associated with 
the “Not In My Backyard” or NIMBY response to choosing sites. 
Some communities have encountered this opposition as they have 
sought to implement 10-year plan housing goals. Even with re-
search from coast to coast showing that existing property values 
are not negatively affected by such housing and that, in fact, some 
practitioners restore vacant or deteriorated stock to being assets in 
a neighborhood, opposition remains. Addressing neighborhood 
concerns often means time and financial resources expended to 
address myths and misinformation about people with mental ill-
ness or addiction, as well as reentering prisoners and others. Com-
munities have even encountered opposition to housing homeless 
veterans. 
 In 2001, President George Bush signed an executive order 
creating the New Freedom Commission, which stated as its mis-
sion: “We envision a future when everyone with a mental illness 
will recover, a future when mental illnesses can be prevented or 
cured, a future when mental illnesses are detected early, and a 
future when everyone with a mental illness at any stage of life has 
access to effective treatment and supports—essentials for living, 
working, learning, and participating fully in the community.” The 
president’s order subsequently identified three barriers for people 
with mental illnesses that needed to be addressed: stigma, treat-
ment limitations and financial requirements, and a fragmented 
mental health service delivery system (President’s New Freedom 
Commission, 2003). 
 In its final report to the president, the commission noted the 
role of housing in achieving “a life in the community for every-
one.” According to the commission, 

72 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 The lack of decent, safe, affordable, and integrated hous-
ing is one of the most significant barriers to full partici-
pation in community life for people with serious mental 
illnesses. Today, millions of people with serious mental 
illnesses lack housing that meets their needs. 
 The shortage of affordable housing and accompany-
ing support services causes people with serious mental 
illnesses to cycle among jails, institutions, shelters, and 
the streets; to remain unnecessarily in institutions; or to 
live in seriously substandard housing. People with seri-
ous mental illnesses also represent a large percentage of 
those who are repeatedly homeless or who are homeless 
for long periods of time. 
 In fact, people with serious mental illnesses are over-
represented among the homeless, especially among the 
chronically homeless. (President’s New Freedom Com-
mission, 2003) 
 In 2008, the Furman Center for Real Estate and Urban Policy 
at New York University released a study that focused on the im-
pact of supportive housing among a range of factors that affect 
property values. The data included 7,500 units in 123 develop-
ments opened between 1985 and 2003. Units were either new con-
struction or major renovation projects (Furman Center, 2008). 
 The center’s report found that, in the five years following 
construction, property values increased more within two blocks 
of a supportive housing building than for properties not nearby. 
Neighborhood density was not a factor in the outcomes, and nei-
ther was building size. 
 The  New York Times,  editorializing on the data in  Good Neigh-
bors  on November 7, 2008, observed, “This strategy is taking root 
all over the country and proving beyond a doubt that people who 
were once homeless can be good neighbors and good citizens. . . . 
Politicians and business leaders across the country should pay at-
tention.” 
 Fair housing and antidiscrimination measures have been 
used in some instances to counter NIMBY campaigns. The Ameri-
cans with Disabilities Act (ADA; 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101-12213) pro-
hibits discrimination against people with disabilities, including in 
employment, provision of government services, and such public 
accommodations as hotels and restaurants. The federal Fair Hous-
ing Act prohibits discrimination against people with disabilities, 

References 73
minorities, and others in selling, renting, and building housing 
(HUD, 2009). 
 References 
 ABA (American Bar Association Commission on Homelessness & 
Poverty).  No Such Place As “Away”: Why Banishment Is a Wrong Turn on 
the Path to Better and Safer Cities.  Washington, D.C.: 2010. Available at 
http://new.abanet.org/homeless/PublicDocuments/ABA_CHP_%20
Banishment_White_Paper%20February%202010.pdf. 
 Bagget, Travis P., James J. O’Connell, Daniel E. Singer, and Nancy A. 
Rigotti. “The Unmet Health Care Needs of Homeless Adults: A National 
Study.”  American Journal of Public Health, Volume 100, Number 7 (July 
2010): 1326–1333. 
 Cameron Strategy, Inc., 2003. Calgary Downtown Association Issue 
Tracking—Panhandling: 2003 City Omnibus Survey. Calgary, 2003. 
 Cisneros, Henry, Jack Kemp, Kent Colton, and Nicolas Retsinas.  Our 
Communities, Our Homes: Pathways to Housing and Homeownership in 
America’s Cities and States. Cambridge, MA: Joint Center for Housing 
Studies, Harvard University, 2007. 
 City of Seattle , Office of Housing. Seattle Housing Levy, 2010. Available 
at http://www.seattle.gov/housing/levy/default.htm. 
 CSH (Corporation for Supportive Housing).  Forging Ahead: The 
State of the Supportive Housing Industry in 2010. New York: CSH, 
2010. Available at http://documents.csh.org/documents/pubs/
StateOfIndustryReport.pdf. 
 Culhane, Dennis P., and Stephen Metraux. “Rearranging the Deck 
Chairs or Reallocating the Lifeboats? Homelessness Assistance and Its 
Alternatives.”  Journal of the American Planning Association,  Volume 74, 
Issue 1 (2008): 111–121. 
 DRH (Denver’s Road Home).  Come On In: Public Feeding Campaign. 
Denver, CO: Mile High United Way, 2010a. Available at http://
participate.denversroadhome.org/get-involved/programs/come-on-
in-public-feeding-campaign/. 
 DRH (Denver’s Road Home).  Denver’s Ten-Year Plan to End Homeless 2010 
Annual Update: Year 5. Denver, CO: DRH, 2010b. Available at http://
denversroadhome.org/files/DRH_AnnualReport2011_vF_crops.pdf. 
 Furman Center for Real Estate and Urban Policy, New York University. 
 The Impact of Supportive Housing on Surrounding Neighborhoods: Evidence 
from New York City. New York: Furman Center, 2008. 

74 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 GAO (Government Accountability Office).  Homelessness: McKinney 
Act Programs Provide Assistance but Are Not Designed to Be the Solution. 
Washington, D.C.: Government Accountability Office, GAO/RCED-94-
37, May 1994. 
 GAO (Government Accountability Office).  Homelessness: Improving 
Program Coordination and Client Access to Programs: Statement of Stanley 
Czerwinski. Washington, D.C.: Government Accountability Office, GAO-
02-485T, March 6, 2002. 
 HHS (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services). HHS Poverty 
Guidelines for the Remainder of 2010 (August 2010). Washington, D.C.: 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2010a. Available at 
http://aspe.hhs.gov/poverty/. 
 HHS (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services). SAMHSA Grant 
Awards—State Summaries FY 2010/2011. Washington, D.C.: HHS, 
2010b. Available at http://www.samhsa.gov/Statesummaries/index.
aspx. 
 Hombs, Mary Ellen. “A Continuum of Violence: Rethinking Advocacy 
Priorities in Homelessness.”  Clearinghouse Review, Volume 28, Issue 407 
(1994–1995), Chicago, IL: Sargent Shriver National Center on Poverty Law. 
 HUD (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development).  Costs 
Associated with First-Time Homelessness for Families and Individuals. 
Washington, D.C.: HUD, 2010a. Available at http://www.huduser.org/
portal/publications/povsoc/cost_homelessness.html. 
 HUD (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development). “HUD 
Provides Rental Assistance Vouchers to Help More Than 2,500 
Families Stay Together” (press statement). Washington, D.C.: HUD, 
2010b. 
 HUD (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development). Notice of 
FY (FY) 2009 Implementation of the Veterans Homelessness Prevention 
Program. Federal Register, Volume 75, Number 143 (2010c). 
 HUD (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development).  Worst 
Case Housing Needs 2007: A Report to Congress. Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Department of Housing and Urban Development, 2010d. 
 HUD (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development).  Fair 
Housing—It’s Your Right.  Washington, D.C.: HUD, 2009. Available at: 
http://www.hud.gov/offices/fheo/FHLaws/yourrights.cfm 
 IDA (International Downtown Association).  Addressing Homelessness: 
Successful Downtown Partnerships—A Report of Strategies to Assist Homeless 
Persons with Serious Mental Illnesses.  Washington, D.C.: IDA, 2000. 
 Kowal, Jessica. “Homeless Alcoholics Receive a Permanent Place to 
Live, and Drink.”  New York Times, July 5, 2006. 

References 75
 Levin-Epstein, Jodie, and Webb Lyons. Target Practice: Lessons for 
Poverty Reduction. Washington, D.C.: Center on Law and Social Policy 
(CLASP), January 2009. Available at http://www.clasp.org/admin/
site/publications/files/0453.pdf. 
 MHC (Millennial Housing Commission).  Meeting Our Nation’s Housing 
Challenges: Report of the Bipartisan Millennial Housing Commission. 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 2002. 
 Miami-Dade  County, Florida. What You Pay: Tourist and Convention 
Development Tax -Homeless and Domestic Violence Tax on Sale of Food and 
Beverages.  (n.d.). Available at http://www.miamidade.gov/taxcollector/
tourist_pay.asp. 
 NAEH (National Alliance to End Homelessness). Fact Sheet: Questions 
and Answers on Homelessness Policy and Research — the Decennial 
Census and Homelessness. Washington, D.C.: NAEH, April 28, 2010. 
http://www.endhomelessness.org/content/article/detail/2971. 
 NAEHCY (National Association for the Education of Homeless 
Children and Youth). Comments of the National Association for the 
Education of Homeless Children and Youth submitted to the U.S. 
Interagency Council on Homelessness Federal Strategic Plan Families 
with Children Workgroup. Washington, DC: NAEHCY, 2010 Available 
at http://www.naehcy.org/ich.html. 
 NAEHCY (National Association for the Education of Homeless Children 
and Youth), National Health Care for the Homeless Council, National 
Policy and Advocacy Council on Homelessness, and Volunteers of 
America. Questions and Answers about Expanding HUD’s Definition 
of Homelessness. May 30, 2006. Available at http://www.npach.org/
deffaqFINAL.pdf. 
 NCH (National Coalition for the Homeless).  Poverty Versus Pathology: 
What’s “Chronic” about Homelessness. Washington, D.C.: NCH, February 
2002. Available at http://www.nationalhomeless.org/publications/
chronic/full.html. 
 NCH (National Coalition for the Homeless). Take Action to 
Support Hate Crimes Protections. (2010). Available at http://www.
nationalhomeless.org/hatecrimes/SenateHearingTakeAction.html. 
 NCH (National Coalition for the Homeless) and National Law Center 
on Homelessness & Poverty (NLCHP). A Place at the Table: Prohibitions 
on Sharing Food with People. Washington, D.C.: NCH/NLCHP, 2010. 
Available at http://www.nlchp.org/view_report.cfm?id=338. 
 NCHCW (National Center for Housing & Child Welfare). (2010). 
HUD’s Family Unification Program. Available at http://www.nchcw.
org/fup/. 

76 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 NHCHC (National Health Care for the Homeless Council).  Essential 
Tools for Discharge Planning. Nashville, TN: NHCHC, 2002. Available at 
http://www.nhchc.org/discharge.html. 
 NHCHC (National Health Care for the Homeless Council). Statement 
of Executive John N. Lozier, MSSW in Supplemental Document to the 
Federal Strategic Plan to Prevent and End Homelessness, June 2010, 
External Experts’ Briefs. Available at http://www.usich.gov/PDF/
OpeningDoors/ExpertsBriefs_All5Workgroups.pdf. 
 NLCHP (National Law Center on Homelessness & Poverty) and 
National Coalition for the Homeless (NCH).  Homes Not Handcuffs: 
The Criminalization of Homelessness in U.S. Cities.  Washington, D.C.: 
NLCHP/NCH, 2009. Available at http://nlchp.org/content/
pubs/2009HomesNotHandcuffs1.pdf. 
 NLIHC (National Low Income Housing Coalition). The New National 
Housing Trust Fund: Frequently Asked Questions. Washington, D.C.: 
NLICH, 2010a. Available at http://www.nlihc.org/doc/NHTF-FAQ.pdf. 
 NLIHC (National Low Income Housing Coalition).  Out of Reach 2010: 
Renters in the Great Recession, The Crisis Continues.  Washington, D.C.: 
National Low Income Housing Coalition, 2010b. Available at http://
www.nlihc.org/oor/oor2010/. 
 NPACH (National Policy and Advocacy Council on Homelessness).  Fact 
Check: Updating HUD’s Definition of Homelessness in the Reauthorization 
of the HUD McKinney-Vento Act Programs. Washington, D.C.: NPACH, 
November 16, 2007. Available at http://www.npach.org/HEARTH/. 
 NPACH (National Policy and Advocacy Council on Homelessness).  A 
Plan Is Still Not a Home. Washington, DC: NPACH, February 16, 2010. 
Available at http://npach.org/2010/02/a_plan_is_still_not_a_home_1.
html. 
NPACH (National Policy and Advocacy Council on Homelessness). 
Questions & Answers about the “Chronic Homelessness” Initiative. 
Washington, D.C.: NPACH, n.d. Available at http://www.npach.org/
chronicq.html.
 President’s New Freedom Commission on Mental Health.  Achieving 
the Promise: Transforming Mental Health Care in America. Washington, 
D.C.: President’s New Freedom Commission on Mental Health, 2003. 
Available at http://www.mentalhealthcommission.gov/reports/
reports.htm. 
 Sherman, Arloc, Robert Greenstein, Danilo Trisi, and Paul Van De 
Water. “Poverty Rose, Median Income Declined, and Job-Based Health 
Insurance Continued to Weaken in 2008—Recession Likely to Expand 
Ranks of Poor and Uninsured in 2009 and 2010.” Washington, D.C.: 
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities (CBPP), September 10, 2009. 

References 77
Available at http://www.cbpp.org/research/index.cfm?fa=viewAll&id=
36&type=&year=2009&numReturn=100. 
 U.S. Census Bureau. “Census Bureau to Develop Supplemental Poverty 
Measure.” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau press-release of 
March 2, 2010. Available at http://www.commerce.gov/news/press-
releases/2010/03/02/census-bureau-develop-supplemental-poverty-
measure. 
 USCM (U.S. Conference of Mayors). Hunger and Homelessness Survey: 
A Status Report on Hunger and Homelessness in America’s Cities—a 
27-City Survey. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Conference of Mayors, copyright 
December 2009. Available at http://www.usmayors.org/pressreleases/
uploads/USCMHungercompleteWEB2009.pdf. 
 USICH (U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness). “In Washington: 
Council Reviews Federal Agency Definitions of Homelessness.” 
Washington, D.C.: USICH, 2006a. Available at http://www.usich.
gov/e-newsletterarchive.html. 
 USICH (U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness). “Results in the 
Cities: Chicago’s Mayor Daley Reports 10-Year Plan Progress—5,775 
Assisted Through Homeless Prevention Program.” Washington, D.C.: 
USICH, 2006b. Available at http://www.usich.gov/e-newsletterarchive.
html. 
 USICH (U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness). “In Washington: 
U.S. Department of Labor Reports Results as 11,000 Youth Identified 
as Homeless, Runaway, and Aging Out Foster Care Youth Enroll in Job 
Corps.” Washington, D.C.: USICH, 2008a. Available at http://www.
usich.gov/e-newsletterarchive.html. 
 USICH (U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness). “Innovation 
Number 4: Atlanta’s Homeless Opportunity Bonds: New Resources 
Invested in 10 Year Plan Solutions.” Washington, D.C.: USICH, 2008b. 
Available at http://www.usich.gov/e-newsletterarchive.html. 
 USICH (U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness). “In the Cities: 
Indianapolis Takes New Steps to Analyze and Address Homelessness.” 
Washington, D.C.: USICH, 2008c. Available at http://www.usich.gov/
e-newsletterarchive.html. 

This page intentionally left blank 

79
 3 
 Worldwide Perspective 
 Introduction 
 F
undamental change in research and policy on homelessness 
occurred during the last decade in the United States and 
yielded new results in ending homelessness. Similar change 
emerged in countries across both the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. 
In the United Kingdom (which includes England, Northern Ire-
land, Scotland, and Wales), Canada, Australia, and the European 
Union countries, new national and state/provincial government 
initiatives, research, partnership, and investment have emerged. 
Important to these developments was the partnership between 
peers in these governments and U.S. counterparts. 
 As noted in chapter 1, the worldwide economic crisis of the 
last few years has provided new understanding of the global 
economy and its impact on financial, housing, and labor markets. 
At the same time, the problem of homelessness has become more 
widely understood through recent research and data. As new 
strategies and solutions have emerged and became international 
dialogues about preventing and ending homelessness, learning 
across borders and sectors has taken on fresh relevance. Active 
partnerships among governments of the United States, the United 
Kingdom, Canada, and Australia—first initiated by the federal 
U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness under the leadership 
of Philip Mangano—moved the issue and its remedy in a new di-
rection. 
 The Blair government initiative on rough sleeping in En-
gland offered valuable lessons and partnership for U.S. policy 
makers and researchers to examine new strategies and results 

80 Worldwide Perspective
and commit to new goals. Themes that emerged in both the 
United Kingdom and the United States, despite differences in 
government structure and social safety net programs, had much 
in common. These themes included development of new policy 
and strategies based on data and research, the development of 
10-year business plans through expansive partnership, the iden-
tification and dissemination of field-tested and evidence-based 
initiatives, accountability and measurement of outcomes (versus 
traditional reliance on numbers of beds and meals), and partner-
ship of government with other sectors. 
 The specifics of how these strategies were carried out in the 
field included use of cost analysis, new forms of consumer engage-
ment, multidisciplinary teams accountable for individuals deemed 
most vulnerable, Housing First and rapid rehousing strategies, 
employment initiatives, and prevention resources. 
 Earlier chapters looked in detail at the background of change 
in the United States as well as new directions in legislative and 
policy initiatives. This chapter focuses more closely on contempo-
rary strategies in selected other nations that have pursued similar 
new paths and faced similar challenges, despite significant differ-
ences in government structure, revenues, and policy. Included are 
highlights of key policies and documents from the United King-
dom, Canada, Australia, and the European Union. 
 Ten-year plans include key strategies that make them research 
and data driven, consumer focused, performance based, and re-
sults oriented. Plans reflect expansive and inclusive partnership, 
are driven by the political will of elected officials and shaped by 
business principles that integrate baseline data, set benchmarks 
for outcomes, utilize best practices, and identify budget implica-
tions. Plans emphasize consumer preferred solutions in housing, 
employment, and services, as well as field-tested strategies to in-
crease and expedite access to mainstream resources for income 
and social supports. 
 Homelessness in the United Kingdom 
 England’s Strategy on Street Homelessness 
 In 1999, British prime minister Tony Blair issued an ambitious new 
plan for addressing the needs of the country’s “rough sleepers,” 
who are people living on the streets in England. The Labor gov-

Homelessness in the United Kingdom 81
ernment had created a Social Exclusion Unit (SEU) in the top level 
of government to set priorities on important social issues. When 
rough sleeping became a priority focus, the Rough Sleepers Unit 
was established in the SEU, with leadership by Louise Casey. 
Casey was appointed by Blair and brought both experience in the 
field on the issue and a view that change was needed and pos-
sible. 
 After achieving its targets, the Rough Sleepers Unit became 
the Homelessness Directorate in 2002, and its work was subse-
quently headquartered in the government’s Department for 
Communities and Local Government (DCLG), moving from the 
Cabinet Office of the Deputy Prime Minister (ODPM). An inter-
ministerial work group in DCLG is discussed later. 
 The new government strategy focused on a goal of reduc-
ing rough sleeping by two-thirds within three years.  Coming in 
from the Cold: The Government’s Strategy on Rough Sleeping  reflected 
months of dialogue with individuals and nongovernmental or-
ganizations as well as with homeless individuals. New policies 
demonstrated the “joined-up” approach of partnership, which, as 
the plan promises, offers “a better deal for rough sleepers, and 
better value for the taxpayer.” 
 The Rough Sleepers Initiative achieved its targeted decrease 
in numbers by November 2001, reducing the rough sleepers’ 
census reflected in government data from 1,850 to 550. An intro-
duction and the key principles of this initiative are covered in 
chapter 6. 
 Following is a portion of Prime Minister Blair’s introductory 
statement to the government strategy document. Blair’s comments 
reflect the commitment to acknowledge the unacceptable situation 
of people sleeping outside and to move policy, investment, and 
practice in new directions. As was subsequently demonstrated 
in the United States in the commitment of the Bush administra-
tion to end chronic homelessness, the articulation of the goal by 
the government’s highest official conveys the significance of the 
commitment being made. The excerpt here is from  Coming in from 
the Cold: The Government’s Strategy on Rough Sleeping,  published in 
1999 (SEU, 1999). 
 On the eve of the 21st century, it is a scandal that there 
are still people sleeping rough on our streets. This is not 
a situation that we can continue to tolerate in a modern 
and civilised society. That is why, in a report last year by 

82 Worldwide Perspective
the Social Exclusion Unit, I set the tough but achievable 
target of reducing rough sleeping in England by at least 
two thirds by 2002 . . . 
 Many of the proposals set out in this strategy will 
build on and refine the valuable work that has been going 
on for many years. But some will require radical change. 
 The Rough Sleepers Unit has taken a long hard look 
at everything being done to help rough sleepers. It is clear 
that some things work, and others do not. 
 In the long term, we can only make a lasting differ-
ence on the streets by stopping people from arriving there 
in the first place. That is why prevention is a key part 
of this strategy, and why more will be done to address 
the reasons why particular groups such as careleavers, 
ex-servicemen and ex-offenders are disproportionately 
likely to end up on the streets. The strategy also sets out 
support for new temporary and permanent beds, bet-
ter help in finding jobs and a more focused approach to 
helping people off the streets. Above all, it focuses on 
how a real difference can be made to the lives of the most 
vulnerable. 
 Too many people are still coming onto the streets. 
And too many people who were sleeping rough five or 
ten years ago are still out there. That is why we need a 
new approach, with services to help people come in from 
the cold, and support to help them rebuild their lives. 
 Government will provide the tools, and the fund-
ing. But we know that this approach will only succeed 
as part of a genuine partnership—between central and 
local government, the voluntary sector, statutory bod-
ies, businesses, community groups and rough sleepers 
themselves. 
 I believe that this strategy sets out a way forward 
which can deliver our vision—a vision of a society where 
no one needs to sleep in doorways, and where rough 
sleeping has become a thing of the past. 
 Targeting the Population and Changing Policy 
 The new rough sleepers’ strategy identified the 30 largest known 
concentrations of rough sleepers in England, a key step since reli-
ance on data and local authority were cornerstones of the Blair 

Homelessness in the United Kingdom 83
initiative. According to government data, the largest numbers of 
rough sleepers were found in Westminster (the portion of Cen-
tral London where many government and historic sites are)—234; 
Camden—66; Oxford—52; Lambeth—46; Manchester—44; Bir-
mingham—43; Brighton and Hove—43; City of London—36. 
 Costs associated with homelessness were also a factor in the 
new approach, though not nearly as prominent in the dialogue as 
they became in the United States. In the U.S. context, cost analy-
sis became the chief tool for making the new economic argument 
that supplemented other existing motivations, such as moral and 
humanitarian reasons to address homelessness. The Social Exclu-
sion Unit had long collected data on the costs to society of social 
exclusion. Homelessness was viewed as the most extreme version 
of this exclusion, and while cost analysis began with the rough 
sleepers’ initiative, it continued with a broader look at family home-
lessness when progress on rough sleeping showed the way for 
new policy and investment initiatives on families. The Office for 
the Deputy Prime Minister sought cost studies related to family 
homelessness, including estimating the impact on families of time 
in shelter rather than simply focusing on costs to local commu-
nities. 
 The rough sleepers strategy summarized the government’s 
costs since 1990 in addressing rough sleeping at more than £250 
million. The strategy estimated that these resources had supported 
outreach and placement for approximately 1,300 hostel spaces and 
3,500 permanent housing placements. Yet an estimated 635 indi-
viduals remained on the streets of London alone as a fairly steady 
population for whom prior initiatives had not proven effective. 
 Calling for a “new, braver approach,” the 1999 strategy stated, 
“We need to do more. We need to change our approach. The balance 
in the system must be tipped towards the most vulnerable rather 
than making the streets a fast track for the most able.” Maintaining 
that earlier efforts had, in fact, supported individuals in their life 
on the street rather than addressing their homelessness or trying 
to prevent homelessness, the strategy sought to concentrate focus 
and resources, end fragmentation of effort, and move to a stron-
ger focus on the population at each step of day services, outreach, 
and permanent housing. 
 Clearly stating the point of view that “people should not in 
the 21st century have to sleep on the streets. . . . This strategy rec-
ognises the complexity of need that we must respond to, and aims 
to offer rough sleepers options which acknowledge their atypical 

84 Worldwide Perspective
and frequently chaotic lifestyles. Our long-term objective is to 
provide services which ensure that sleeping on the streets is never 
the preferred option.” 
 The strategy proposed a partnership that included the inter-
ests of rough sleepers, taxpayers, government, and public agencies, 
local government officials, voluntary organizations, businesses, 
and members of the public. 
 New Resources for a New Direction 
 New resources targeted to meet the specific needs of rough sleep-
ers were seen as key to achieving change. In addition, the new 
strategy called for a different and more focused type of street en-
gagement for this population in the form of contact and assess-
ment teams, recognizing that prior efforts had not achieved results 
for this group of individuals. Along with accountability for out-
comes, the new plan sought vigilance against measures that sup-
ported life on the street instead of offering alternatives that ended 
homelessness and created stability. The Blair strategy included the 
following key elements for implementation. 
 More beds would be available for rough sleepers in London, 
in the form of three tiers of resources: (1) hostels and shelters, 
which could serve as the initial point of entry and assessment; 
(2) specialized hostels and supportive services aimed at deeper 
levels of needs or complex sets of needs; and (3) permanent hous-
ing with necessary supports to sustain housing placement and 
stability. 
 Street engagement would be more targeted and dynamic as 
evidence of a rethinking of the role of continuing contact with peo-
ple who had experience years of outreach that provided blankets 
and hot food and beverages but did not seek to end their homeless-
ness or consider their preferences for services or housing. Along 
with rethinking the premise of engagement, the new plan sought 
clear responsibility and accountability for outcomes so that the 
emphasis was on ending homelessness, not supporting life on the 
streets. 
 Services on the street would be structured according to the 
presence of rough sleepers. The population generally was on the 
streets from late night to early morning. This would be the key 
period in which to offer services and to identify the most effective 
means of bringing people inside. 
 Individuals with mental health and drug and alcohol issues 
were deemed most in need. Services to bring people indoors would 
need to account for these often intertwined issues. In fact, the new 

Homelessness in the United Kingdom 85
plan stated clearly, “There should be no reason for someone who 
is severely mentally ill to be out on the streets.” Sixty new special-
ists would ensure support to rough sleepers as they moved off the 
streets and continued on a path to housing. At the start, Homeless 
Mentally Ill Initiative teams already in London were to be inte-
grated with contact and assessment efforts. 
 Data were developing in the United States at the same time 
to illustrate the vulnerability of those living on the street. Through 
the research of Dr. Dennis Culhane of the University of Pennsyl-
vania in 1998 and Dr. James O’Connell of Boston Health Care for 
the Homeless in 1999, the widespread nature of mental health and 
alcohol and drug issues in the street population as well as major 
medical conditions that resulted in extreme vulnerability and 
risk of death were illustrated. While it would later be a focus of 
U.S. advocates—when the federal goal to end chronic homeless-
ness was announced in 2002—to question research findings and 
whether the long-term population with disabilities was in fact at 
the most risk among people who were homeless, the Blair strategy 
similarly asserted the level of risk for those living on the streets. 
The recognition that some individuals need intervention, due to 
their circumstances or health issues, requires that there be appro-
priate emergency response resources for medical needs and men-
tal health issues. The new strategy recognized that current systems 
were not meeting these needs and that there was urgency in the 
situation. 
 Using Existing Resources in New Strategies 
 Disaster conditions, such as those that followed hurricanes Ka-
trina and Rita in the United States, can provide the circumstances 
to administer wholesale reorganization to service delivery. But 
there are seldom real opportunities to develop new policy and 
practice with a clean slate. Given history, resources, and chang-
ing policy directions, the configuration of existing services at the 
local level—which itself includes the application of local, state, 
and national government resources as well as philanthropic and 
faith community resources—must be taken as it has developed 
and exists and then retargeted or realigned. This usually means 
that there is inherent fragmentation and overlap as well as organi-
zational autonomy. Proposing changes generally means propos-
ing challenges to existing ways of doing business. 
 Dr. O’Connell’s Boston research on street deaths was expected 
to illustrate the anonymity and exclusion of the individuals who 

86 Worldwide Perspective
died, people seen as disconnected from available services and 
resources that could help. Instead, the research underscored the 
wide variety of systems and resources that touched those lives reg-
ularly, frequently, and over time. Rather than being anonymous, 
those homeless individuals were found to be well known to mul-
tiple public systems, including hospitals, ambulance and emer-
gency services personnel, and police as well as outreach workers. 
Multiple street outreach teams were at work on downtown streets, 
during different hours on different days, focusing on different 
populations (the young, the old, individuals with specific issues), 
offering different resources. Yet they were seldom in coordination 
or communication with one another to the benefit of the individu-
als who were homeless. Regular meetings of all outreach teams, 
along with police and emergency workers, became a new standard 
(O’Connell et al., 2005). 
 The Blair strategy tackled a similar set of issues, citing the 
need for focus and coordination and the recalibration of street re-
sources to establish a clear trajectory away from rough sleeping. 
The trajectory was expected to provide a consistent and ongoing 
base for supporting the individual rough sleeper who came inside, 
ensuring support in housing, to move practice beyond past failures 
of these resources to sustain individuals: “Experience shows that 
we have not in the past got this right.” The strategy also looked to 
end “street lifestyle” issues, noting that some individuals who had 
moved to housing continued to see the street as a daytime resource 
(SEU, 1999). 
 The path from the street was intended to be a reciprocal one. 
New incentives would be offered to meet individual needs and 
ensure a focus away from street life. The government asserted an 
additional point clearly: Rough sleepers were expected to take the 
opportunity being offered. “If their needs can be provided through 
one or other of the accommodation, treatment or support routes 
that we are funding, rough sleepers themselves have a responsi-
bility to come in. Once we are satisfied that realistic alternatives 
are readily available, we—and the public at large—are entitled to 
expect those working on the streets to seek to persuade people to 
take advantage of them” (SEU, 1999). 
 The Role of Engagement 
 Part of the change in the rough sleepers’ census was subsequently 
attributed to change in engagement strategies, similar to what 
would be seen in U.S. results. In June 2002,  Helping Rough Sleepers 

Homelessness in the United Kingdom 87
off the Streets  was published by the government to evaluate the 
work being done. The following section identifies some of the key 
changes, changes that would subsequently be seen in U.S. strat-
egy (SEU, 1999). 
 The role of effective engagement, as compared to the old style 
of outreach efforts that sustained life on the streets, was vital to 
achieving change. The “assertive and persistent” engagement ini-
tiatives that were a hallmark of change were understood by agency 
partners to be key. Among the factors contributing to greater suc-
cess was a dramatic shift in the time workers actually spent on the 
street, thus emphasizing where their key focus was. From less than 
a third of their time, work shifted to up to a 75 percent presence on 
the streets. This level of presence coincided with persistent daily 
contact with their target population. Gone were the approaches 
that allowed individuals on the streets to decline interventions. To 
the forefront came measures to move individuals first and then to 
conduct deeper assessment (SEU, 1999). 
 Ensuring Stability off the Streets 
 Work was seen as essential for the foundation of a life away from 
the streets, in part because it builds self-esteem. Developing skills 
and creating social networks separate from the streets was seen 
as key to supporting individuals in moving into the mainstream. 
U.S. initiatives, such as Housing First, initially did not take this ap-
proach with a population deemed to require many other supports. 
Mainstream employment, especially for persons with disabilities 
and including volunteerism for those with limited work oppor-
tunity, emerged as a fundamental strategy for people achieving 
stability in their housing. 
 The Blair strategy saw “daytime occupation” as important to 
resettlement in housing and also as a buffer against isolation in a 
new life. The workplace, whether focused on education, training, 
production, or volunteerism, develops strengths for life and work 
and offers a path into social relations outside work. For people who 
have lived lives oriented to the streets or in an isolation brought 
about by individual health, addiction, mental health, or family chal-
lenges, the need is real for a new social network as part of sustain-
ing and stabilizing the new trajectory. 
 Enhancing the Role of Prevention 
 Prevention was understood as the important task of ending 
rough sleeping by ensuring that individuals did not fall into the 

88 Worldwide Perspective
population through future systemic failures that could be cur-
tailed. Chief among the approaches to sustain reductions would 
be targeting vulnerable populations, especially those termed 
“care-leavers.” Two areas of effort would address prevention. 
First, government would put new measures in places, and sec-
ond, “practical projects” would be undertaken for the care-leaver 
population. 
 Stated  Rough Sleeping: The Government’s Strategy,  “For the long 
term, efforts must be targeted on those groups that we know are par-
ticularly vulnerable to homelessness and to rough sleeping: young 
people leaving care; people leaving prison; people who have expe-
rienced family breakdown; and people leaving the armed forces. 
There is a central role here for Government, both in what we can 
achieve directly, and what we can achieve through the work of oth-
ers, especially local authorities. This is a crucial challenge for us all. 
We must ensure that those who have been in our care as children, 
as prisoners or as servicemen, are properly equipped for and sup-
ported towards independent living. Rising to this challenge must 
be a major component not only of our work to tackle rough sleep-
ing, but also our efforts to deal with social exclusion more widely” 
(SEU, 1999). 
 New legislation was introduced in the form of the Govern-
ment’s Children (Leaving) Care Bill. Much like similar legislation 
targeted to foster care in the United States, the legislation sought to 
improve conditions for young people in care and for those “aging 
out,” including preventing the inappropriate discharge from care 
of 16- and 17-year-olds. Based on the Department of Health’s 1999 
paper  Me, Survive, Out There?, new funding was made available to 
local government to meet the needs of this population and ensure 
suitable housing. Local government authorities would commence 
supporting young adults as they made the transition from care 
to age 21, and to age 24 if the individual was receiving education 
and training (U.K. Department of Health, 1999). 
 As was true in U.S. research that demonstrated the role of so-
called childhood antecedents in adult homelessness, a 2001 survey 
of rough sleepers in  Leaving Care: A Time for Change; Government 
Response  found that about 25 percent were formerly in care, with 
the results primarily among rough sleeping adults who had been 
in care as children (SEU, 1999). 
 So-called care leaving packages (usually including support 
funds for the individual) available to those who had been in pub-
lic systems were to be reexamined in coordination with the Rough 
Sleepers Initiative to ensure use of best practices. 

Homelessness in the United Kingdom 89
 Prisoners reentering the community were another special 
population at risk of falling into rough sleeping. The Rough Sleep-
ers Unit was directed to study current practice with prison and 
probation authorities to identify what steps were in place to re-
duce risk of rough sleeping. Performance measures for “resettle-
ment” (generally called “reentry” in the United States) would be 
combined with a review of available benefits and resources. 
 A 2002 report commissioned by the government,  Blocking the 
Fast Track from Prison to Rough Sleeping,  used interviews with pro-
fessionals and former prisoners and found several key elements 
that closely parallel U.S. experiences. The findings demonstrated 
that stable housing, legal income and available and accessible 
benefits, and access to treatment were essential to successful reen-
try. The “reception and induction” process or intake did not pre-
pare prisoners for reentry. Discharge planning best practice for 
public systems was understood in the United States to start upon 
intake, not at the brink of discharge itself. The report found that 
few prisoners were properly supported in a process described as 
“haphazard” even where best practices were identifiable. Indi-
viduals who had been unstably housed upon entry were among 
the high numbers who were discharged without specific housing 
plans (ODPM, 2002). 
 The focus on prisoners has continued, as officials reported in 
October 2010 that one-third of London’s rough sleepers reported 
spending time in prison. The report by Housing Minister Grant 
Shapps and Prisons Minister Crispin Blunt noted that some indi-
viduals described committing crimes to be rehoused. Given that 
20 percent of ex-offenders have no housing upon release and that 
two-thirds of prisoners commit new crimes within two years, it is 
believed that stable housing could reduce this recidivism outcome 
by at least 20 percent. 
 Service members were also deemed at risk upon discharge. 
The U.K. Ministry of Defence, under its “policies for people” ini-
tiative, was already underway with efforts to reduce risk of home-
lessness. The Rough Sleepers Unit committed to work with the 
ministry to examine the role of community organizations who 
could assist rough sleepers who formerly served in the military to 
achieve successful reintegration. 
 Service members were prioritized by the Rough Sleepers Ini-
tiative at a time before the start of war in Iraq and Afghanistan. 
Yet, as has been true in the United States, the need for health and 
mental health services, employment, housing, and social services 
was identified in the resources compiled in a guide issued by the 

90 Worldwide Perspective
government, titled  Resources for Ex-Service Personnel in London. The 
guide was produced by the Rough Sleepers Unit with the Ex-
Service Action Group on Homelessness (ESAG). ESAG is a part-
nership of ex-service welfare organizations working to address 
homelessness among service members (RSU/ESAG, 2004). 
 Each of the three target populations for prevention resources—
young adults, ex-prisoners, and service members–has also emerged 
in U.S. policy on homelessness. Each is a population that needs 
to achieve successful transition from a form of institutional living 
into residential stability, income, and needed services. Individuals 
in these specific populations frequently express mistrust of efforts 
not rooted in their own experience and value guidance from oth-
ers who faced the same issues and succeeded, whether a military 
veteran, a successful young adult, or a former prisoner integrated 
in the community. 
 “Rough sleeping is at the sharp end of social exclusion,” 
stated  Coming in from the Cold: The Government’s Strategy on Rough 
Sleeping.  Acknowledging that the numbers of people affected by 
rough sleeping are small, just as they would be shown through 
research to be in the United States, the direction of policy and 
resources made clear that change would be the theme carrying 
efforts forward and that there was public support for this new di-
rection. 
 “This will not always be easy and will require courage. But, 
meeting our target is not just about numbers, it is about making a 
difference to people’s lives. The strategy outlines action that will 
help those currently out on the streets exposed to danger and ill-
health, and it puts in place measures to stop new groups becom-
ing tomorrow’s rough sleepers. We must work together so that 
we can be proud of living in a country that does not have rough 
sleepers on the streets at night” (SEU, 1999). 
 In the subsequent strategy for England that looks forward 
from the successful reduction in rough sleeping to bringing all 
rough sleeping to an end in England in 2010, policy makers issued 
what it called “good practice” notes. The government’s report 
identified three key areas for future strategy: prevention, diversion 
to shorten stays in rough sleeping, and ensuring stability once in-
dividuals were placed in housing, to prevent a return to the streets 
(SEU, 1999). 
 The good practice guide identified the chief elements of a 
new toolkit based on outcomes already highlighted. This ap-
proach included securing accommodations for eligible individu-

Homelessness in the United Kingdom 91
als, those “unintentionally” homeless, and those without priority 
needs. 
 The toolkit included a data strategy for developing informa-
tion about the rough sleepers population and a checklist for local 
authorities to review with their partners to create their commu-
nity strategy on rough sleeping. Among the checklist elements 
review elements were strategy and partnerships, resources for 
early intervention, prevention and emergency services, outreach, 
resources for moving from streets to stability, and specialized in-
terventions. A scorecard for assessing outreach performance and 
a “reconnections protocol” for those from outside the local area 
were also elements of the toolkit. 
 By examining the paths individuals followed into rough 
sleeping, policy makers hoped to identify way to prevent new in-
dividuals from falling into the population. The development of 
PrOMPT, the Prevention Opportunities Mapping and Planning 
Toolkit, was central to this goal. The counterpoint, MOPP: Move 
On Planning Protocol, focused on housing and service needs. 
 With the toolkit came the announcement of the identification 
of 15 “champions,” individuals who demonstrated best practices 
in prevention and intervention and the strategy at work in urban 
and rural areas of all sizes. Champions represented local housing 
government authorities, community organizations, and partner-
ships. 
 The success of the Rough Sleepers Initiative in reducing num-
bers led to the examination of policy and expansion of focus on 
family homelessness. Measurable outcomes in the rough sleeping 
strategy provided a record on which to forward new research and 
policy for families and youth. 
 In 2008, the Department of Communities and Local Govern-
ment issued a research report on other forms of homelessness. 
The goal of the report was to provide data on families and 16- and 
17-year-olds that could inform future policy. The government re-
port examined the characteristics and needs of the population, 
causes of homelessness, and the experience and impact of tempo-
rary shelter situations (DCLG , 2008). 
 Ongoing oversight of homelessness initiatives is the current 
responsibility of the Ministerial Working Group on Preventing 
and Tackling Homelessness. Members of the group, which meets 
quarterly, and their areas of focus include the following: Depart-
ment for Communities and Local Government (housing and 
homelessness) (chair); Ministry of Defence (welfare of veterans); 

92 Worldwide Perspective
Department for Business, Innovation and Skills (adult skills); De-
partment of Health (health and care services); Department for 
Work and Pensions (housing benefit); Ministry of Justice (criminal 
justice); Home Office (crime prevention); and Department for Ed-
ucation (children and youth services). Other current issues being 
addressed include the influx of migrants, including impoverished 
Eastern Europeans, who were estimated to make up more than 
half of London’s rough sleepers at the beginning of 2010. 
 Other U.K. Strategies on Homelessness 
 A 10-Year Plan for Wales 
 The Welsh Assembly Government in Wales published  10-Year 
Plan Homelessness Plan for Wales 2009–2019  in 2009. Calling home-
lessness “one of the most significant social problems” in Wales, 
the plan sought to reduce the “distress, deprivation and disadvan-
tage” associated with it. The plan, which its authors described as 
a “working document” that would be calibrated as it moved for-
ward, included a strategy to create more detailed action plans as 
part of its implementation, to ensure the “widespread acceptance, 
ownership and engagement in delivery” that would make the doc-
ument a plan for the entire country (Welsh Assembly Government 
Housing Directorate, 2009). 
 England and Wales share a definition of homelessness under 
the 1996 Housing Act, which finds a person to be homeless if they 
have no accommodation or they have accommodation but they 
cannot reasonably continue to occupy it. 
 Key elements of the plan include keeping the consumer as 
a central focus and developing “sustainable housing solutions 
for all.” To accomplish these goals, the plan included addressing 
rough sleeping, veterans’ needs, youth homelessness, criminal 
justice reentry, asylum seekers and refuges, rural homelessness, 
housing counseling, expansion of the private markets for rentals, 
new tenancies, employment, financial participation, foreclosure 
prevention, and health care. Each section of the plan expressed 
its specific vision and the goal to be achieved and sought to align 
homelessness goals with other national strategies targeting sys-
tems or populations. 
 The plan’s strategy for veterans noted several of the same 
issues identified in U.S. strategies: “The pathways into home-
lessness experienced by veterans are varied. The four identified 

Homelessness in the United Kingdom 93
groups are: those who carry vulnerabilities deriving from child-
hood or adolescence; those who encountered difficulties within 
the Armed Forces, such as the onset of alcohol or mental health 
problems; those who had a successful career in the Armed Forces, 
but found the return to civilian life very difficult; and the fourth 
group who had a good career in the Armed Forces but who then 
encountered unrelated problems later in life; this last group was 
the most widespread experience reported by one third of ex-
service personnel affected” (Welsh Assembly Government Hous-
ing Directorate, 2009). 
 Scotland’s Legislative Strategy 
 Since 1977, Scotland has passed several pieces of legislation to ad-
dress homelessness. The 2003 act passed by the Scottish Parlia-
ment (referred to as “Homelessness etc. [Scotland] Act 2003”)   set 
a 2012 goal to ensure “permanent accommodation” for all people 
who are unintentionally homelessness and no longer use “prior-
ity” need categories to provide access to housing. Some 60 percent 
of those reported homeless are single adults without children, of 
whom the largest number are in Glasgow. 
 Earlier 2001 legislation had required all local governments 
to assess homelessness and develop strategies to prevent and ad-
dress the problem. Local strategies were to be submitted to the 
Scottish ministers or cabinet secretaries. 
 A task force on homelessness had been established in 1999 by 
the Scottish executive. The Homeless Task Force (HTF) included 
more than 20 individuals, academics, members of the executive 
and others. This body was succeeded by the Homelessness Monitor-
ing Group (HMG). HMG includes the Scottish Council for Single 
Homeless (SCSH), Scottish Federation of Housing Associations 
(SFHA), Scottish Executive Development Department, Greater 
Glasgow Health Board, Convention of Scottish Local Authorities 
(CoSLA), Fife Council (CoSLA), and academics and voluntary sec-
tor representatives. 
 Prevention of homelessness was an important aspect of Scot-
land’s initiative: “The importance of preventing homelessness is 
paramount—both to avoid the harmful effects of homelessness 
for individuals and their families and to make most effective 
use of limited resources.” Clear data on prevention was needed, 
as has been shown repeatedly in the United States and else-
where. In 2006 the Department of Communities announced eight 

94 Worldwide Perspective
innovation awards to demonstration projects to test approaches 
for specific populations. Among the £230,000 in awards were ini-
tiatives for reentering prisoners, care-leaving youth, women, and 
vic-tims of domestic violence, and work to examine homeless-
ness “triggers” and create rent arrears initiatives (Scottish Gov-
ernment, 2005). 
 Homelessness in Europe 
 The Role of Social Exclusion 
 Time  magazine published “Down and Out in Europe,” an article 
surveying the growing problem of homelessness in Europe 
(Ghosh, 2003). The groundbreaking recognition provided by the 
article underscored the role of economics and regional differences, 
such as high unemployment in Eastern Europe. It also noted that 
Western European countries found their homeless populations 
profiling many issues that are commonly recognized in the United 
States: addiction, mental health issues, and trauma. 
 Historically, the emphasis of the European homelessness lit-
erature has been on emergency services for the range of people who 
are homeless and the provision of housing as the means to address 
the “social exclusion” seen as both cause and effect of homeless-
ness and poverty. Social exclusion can be seen in economic, social, 
cultural, and political arenas. But the causal link in explaining 
homeless solutions in the long term is on joblessness in the Euro-
pean literature. Relative to U.S. discussion and due to differences 
in social policy and programs, there has been less emphasis on the 
role of chronic disability (including physical disability, mental ill-
ness, and substance abuse) and continuity in public systems of care, 
treatment, and custody (including child welfare, hospitals, prisons, 
treatment facilities). 
 The EU strategy on social exclusion was launched in 2001 
and reviewed in 2006. The EU practice is that national reports are 
submitted every three years on such measures to identify the op-
portunities and focus for longer-term exchange on strategies and 
results. 
 In June 2010, the heads of all member-state governments in 
the EU, meeting as the European Council, adopted the new Eu-
rope 2020 strategy for the next decade, reported in  European Coun-

Homelessness in Europe 95
cil Conclusions, 17 June 2010.  The unprecedented poverty target 
of the commitment is “promoting social inclusion, in particular 
through the reduction of poverty, by aiming to lift at least 20 mil-
lion people out of the risk of poverty and exclusion.” People in 
poverty are defined as those who are at risk of poverty and exclu-
sion by three indicators (at risk of poverty; material deprivation; 
jobless household). Each EU country will set its target using its 
preferred indicator (European Council, 2010). 
 European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion 
 The year 2010 was designated as the European Year for Combat-
ing Poverty and Social Exclusion for the countries of the European 
Union (EU). Current member-states of the European Union are 
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, 
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, 
Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Po-
land, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, and 
the United Kingdom. 
 Homelessness was one of the key social exclusion issues for 
the EU initiative. The EU provides coordination, and EU member-
states have the responsibility for policy development. At the con-
clusion of the year, the Council of the European Union noted that 
“active inclusion” is key to poverty reduction, especially stressing 
the “three pillars” of income support, employment, and services 
(EU , 2010). 
 As previously noted, the European Parliament in 2008 ad-
opted a Written Declaration on Ending Street Homelessness by 
2015 with 438 signatures. The EU called for member-states to de-
velop integrated strategies to combat homelessness and called for 
a 2010 conference on policies to address homelessness, to bring 
together public sector officials, EU institutions, housing provid-
ers, and people who have experienced homelessness. 
 FEANTSA—the European Federation of National Organisa-
tions Working with the Homeless—launched a related campaign 
called Ending Homelessness. The FEANTSA campaign message 
was that homelessness is a problem to be solved the develop-
ment of “integrated strategies rather than by investing in reactive, 
short-term measures.” FEANTSA’s work as a nongovernmental 
organization is frequently cited in this chapter, given the role it 
fulfills in research, policy, and best practice networks in the EU 
(FEANTSA , 2010d). 

96 Worldwide Perspective
 In late 2010, five members of the European Parliament 
launched a resolution across party lines that called on the 
European Council to commit by the end of 2010 to ending street 
homelessness by 2015. Additionally, the resolution   calls on the 
European Commission to develop an ambitious EU homelessness 
strategy and to support Member States in developing effective 
national strategies following the guidelines of the Joint Report 
on Social Protection and Social Inclusion adopted in March 2010 
and as part of the EU 2020; calls on Eurostat to collect EU home-
lessness data; supports the following priorities for action: no one 
sleeping rough; no one living in emergency accommodation for 
longer than the period of an “emergency”; no one living in tran-
sitional accommodation longer than is required for a successful 
move-on; no one leaving an institution without housing options; 
no young people becoming homeless as a result of the transition 
to independent living; [and] instructs its   President to forward 
this declaration, together with the names of the signatories, to 
the Council, the Commission and the Parliaments of the Member 
States (Thomsen, 2010) .
 FEANTSA established the European Observatory on Home-
lessness to conduct research as a basis for policy across Europe. 
The European Observatory organizes an annual European Re-
search Conference and publishes a research journal. Recent confer-
ences have included U.S. government and academic participation. 
Conferences have addressed “Understanding Homelessness and 
Housing Exclusion in the New European Context” (2010); “Home-
lessness and Poverty”   (2009); “Good Governance: The Key to Ef-
fective Homelessness Policies”   (2008); “Rethinking Homelessness 
Policies” (2007); and “Intervention Strategies to Combat Home-
lessness and Social Exclusion” (2006) (FEANTSA, 2010c). 
 FEANTSA Report on Social Exclusion 
 In 1998, FEANTSA published  Europe against exclusion: HOUSING 
FOR ALL, which it called “a set of practical policy proposals to 
promote social inclusion and ensure access to decent housing for 
all citizens and residents of the European Union.” FEANTSA’s 
work is supported by the European Union. The report was pub-
lished with the support of the European Commission, with contri-
butions from representatives of FEANTSA member organizations, 
correspondents of the European Observatory on Homelessness, 
and selected experts. The contents of the report were unanimously 

Homelessness in Europe 97
endorsed by the administrative council of FEANTSA in Novem-
ber 1998. 
 Key elements of the FEANTSA report are summarized here. 
Stated FEANTSA: “To be ‘homeless’—that is, without access to 
adequate accommodation—is probably the most serious manifes-
tation of social exclusion. If you are homeless it is almost impos-
sible to realise your potential as an active member of society, such 
as by getting a job or by raising children. Therefore, ensuring an 
adequate provision of decent housing is one of the basic founda-
tions for building a society in which everyone can play an active 
part. In this sense, one can say that access to housing is the princi-
pal key to social inclusion.” 
 The key proposals of the FEANTSA report addressed access 
to housing in the EU, growing homelessness and housing barriers, 
demographic and socioeconomic changes in the region, trends in 
social welfare and housing programs, and the impact for vulner-
able populations (young people, people with mental health and/
or addiction issues, domestic violence cases). 
 The Importance of Data 
 The data issues related to enumerating the size of homeless popu-
lations in EU countries have certain similarities to issues identi-
fied in the United States earlier. For example, improving census 
results raises implications for methodology and infrastructure at 
the local and national level in each member-state of the EU as well 
as for policy direction and investment based on data. Common 
definitional terms are needed, including the use of a typology 
such as was developed in the United States through research data 
on adult homelessness. 
 FEANTSA launched a 2005 initiative to develop further in-
sights into definition and census issues and published “Typology 
of Homelessness and Housing Exclusion (ETHOS)” to address 
these challenges. The resulting report uses existing definitions in 
member-states and examines homelessness according to whether 
an individual is (1) roofless (without shelter); (2) houseless (with 
a temporary place to sleep); (3) insecurely housed due to an un-
stable tenancy, eviction, domestic violence; and (4) inadequately 
housed in caravans, in unfit housing, or in overcrowded condi-
tions. FEANTSA’s work in this area has tried to recognize some 
of the same issues raised in the United States, including the idea 
of episodes of homelessness over time, duration of episodes, 

98 Worldwide Perspective
and the prevalence of homelessness in a given period of time 
(FEANTSA , 2010a). 
 The EU adopted a regulation on census activities in 2008. 
Under this proviso, population and housing census counts must 
be undertaken in all EU member-states in 2011. Housing arrange-
ments are one of the core data factors in the census. 
 Habitact is a new peer-to-peer initiative for policy exchange 
regarding local homeless strategies and was launched with 
FEANTSA’s support. Habitact was a response to the need for 
best practice information and strategies from local authorities in 
Europe. A key feature of the EU’s social inclusion strategy is the 
so-called Open Method of Coordination (OMC), which seeks to 
support comparisons across national boundaries. 
 With similarities to the U.S. idea of seeing homelessness as a 
national problem with local solutions, Habitact was founded by 
cities to improve the exchange of ideas and results in initiatives 
to address homelessness. Habitact founding cities were Amster-
dam, the Netherlands; Athens, Greece; Dublin, Ireland; Esch-sur-
Alzette, Lithuania; Ghent, Belgium; Odense, Denmark; Madrid, 
Spain; and Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. 
 A first-year assessment found that Habitact was underway 
with a European research initiative on local welfare systems and 
homelessness, development of a electronic policy bank on home-
lessness policies at the local level, and receiving what it called 
“moral patronage” from the EU Committee on the Regions. Prior-
ity issues for the next year were identified as migrants, preven-
tion, and examination of Housing First strategies. 
 Other European Strategies 
 Following are excerpts and summaries of strategies from several 
other European countries. In addition to the highlights presented 
here for Ireland, Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden, there 
are planning processes in France, Netherlands, Poland, and Por-
tugal. 
 Ireland 
 Ireland’s Department of the Environment, Heritage & Local Gov-
ernment in 2008 published  The Way Home: A Strategy to Address 
Adult Homelessness in Ireland 2008–2013,  a five-year strategy on 

Other European Strategies 99
adult homelessness. Key strategic goals of the official initiative in-
cluded homelessness prevention, an end to rough sleeping, hous-
ing resources, effective services, and coordination of funding. The 
introductory statement to the strategy from John Gormley, Min-
ister for the Environment, Heritage and Local Government, and 
T. D. Michael Finneran, Minister for Housing, Urban Renewal and 
Developing Areas, addresses a new sense of direction in policy 
and a vision with key goals of ending long-term use of shelter and 
the need for rough sleeping and prevention of new rough sleep-
ing (Government of Ireland, 2008). 
 The government already had a financial foundation in com-
mitting to the new approach. Budgets and earlier planning docu-
ments since 2000 had provided resources for both temporary 
shelter and services and then for capital investment for facilities. 
The future challenge was to ensure that funds were well invested 
for the goals of the new strategy. 
 Homelessness prevention, for example, requires engaging 
a variety of systems and sectors that provide supports to those 
at risk, those experiencing homelessness, and those with special 
needs who may fall into homelessness without ongoing interven-
tions. Among these systems are health care, mental health, drug 
and alcohol treatment, public welfare, child and family supports, 
domestic violence, education, employment, and corrections and 
incarceration. 
 As the national strategy noted, the articulated goals point to 
decisions that may be needed regarding service delivery in any of 
the above-named systems. Reorganization, setting of standards, 
new collaboration, and data collection and analysis may all be 
examined in an effort to ensure that resources are used to meet 
policy goals. 
 The Dublin, Ireland, Strategy 
 Dublin’s strategy published in 2006 is an example of local plan-
ning in the context of an evolving national initiative.  A Key to the 
Door  was the Dublin Homeless Agency’s third action plan, follow-
ing  Shaping the Future  (2001–2003) and  Making it Home (2004–2006). 
The strategy clearly states that its overarching context is to view 
homelessness as solvable and preventable. 
 Homelessness in Dublin is defined by the Housing Act 1988 
as follows: 
 A person shall be regarded by a housing authority as 
being homeless for the purposes of this Act if— 

100 Worldwide Perspective
 ( a ) there is no accommodation available which, in 
the opinion of the authority, he, together with any other 
person who normally resides with him or who might 
reasonably be expected to reside with him, can reason-
ably occupy or remain in occupation of, or 
 ( b ) he is living in a hospital, county home, night 
shelter or other such institution, and is so living because 
he has no accommodation of the kind referred to in  para-
graph (a), and he is, in the opinion of the authority, un-
able to provide accommodation from his own resources. 
 The Dublin planning process included many stakeholders 
and strands, consisting of current and former consumers, a public 
process, and the consultation of an intergovernmental homeless-
ness team, local authorities in Dublin, the local authority strategic 
policy committees, the Dublin City Development Board, social 
exclusion officials for the national health service, mental health 
officials, local homeless forums established in Dublin under the 
national government strategy, the Homeless Network represent-
ing the voluntary sector, and the Irish Council of Social Housing 
(Homeless Agency, 2007). 
 The important action of consultation with consumers was 
conducted in a dozen sites, including the streets. Consumers 
were asked the reasons they became homeless, what might have 
prevented their homelessness, and their views on existing ser-
vices. 
 A Key to the Door  identified 10 action steps to achieve an 
overall vision. These steps included identifying those at risk of 
homelessness and appropriate multidisciplinary interventions; 
ensuring access to health care and other services for people who 
are homeless or at risk; forwarding a public education campaign; 
implementing new needs assessment and case management ap-
proaches for homeless services providers; expanding consumer 
participation; increasing housing opportunities and removing 
barriers in the market; evaluating housing models; and resources 
that might be used to incorporate best practice. 
 Performance indicators were identified for each area of the 
strategy. Among these indicators were the numbers of individuals 
experiencing homelessness and repeat episodes of homelessness; 
the number of individuals experiencing long-term homelessness; 
the number of individuals falling into homelessness from prison, 
hospitalization, or during asylum requests; the duration of home-

Other European Strategies 101
lessness; the number of rough sleepers; the number of rough sleep-
ers unable to access emergency shelter; the numbers of individuals 
at risk upon discharge from care or custody; the effectiveness of 
prevention strategies; the number of individuals barred from shel-
ter or services; local housing need; and the number of individuals 
placed in housing. 
 The Irish Penal Reform Trust, a nongovernmental organiza-
tion with a long history on prison and reentry issues, published 
a report in 2010 titled  It’s like Stepping on a Landmine . . .”: Reinte-
gration of Prisoners in Ireland.  As in other systems, reentry and the 
lack of discharge planning with housing solutions is a key prob-
lem in effective prevention of homelessness and successful re-
integration. 
 The report identified several issues that readily correlate with 
similar problems identified in the United States. Existing research 
was cited that indicated that a quarter of all prisoners had been 
homeless when incarcerated and over half has previously expe-
rienced homelessness. Lack of housing was the most frequently 
named concern of prisoners, and barriers to housing are substan-
tial for exiting prisoners with mental health, addiction, or dual-
diagnosis issues. One of the successful initiatives is a 13-week 
rent-payment program by the Irish Prison Service that ensures 
that housing is available to prevent homelessness in cases of short 
sentences. 
 In addition to the lack of clear statutory authority for release 
conditions and the lack of information for prisoners on resources 
is the structure of release in overcrowded systems. This situa-
tion can mean that prisoners are discharged with as little as a few 
hours’ notice or at night or on weekends. Very few resources are 
available under these conditions to ensure stable integration. 
 Denmark’s Goal of Ending Homelessness 
 Denmark’s government strategy for people who are homeless re-
lies on its larger approach for socially marginalized adults, which 
states that the government’s goal is that individuals will “emerge 
from the homeless situation and live worthwhile and stable lives 
in their own homes.” This strategy embraces consumer participa-
tion and choice, a housing focus for solutions, and a recognition 
that the voluntary and social service sectors need to change and 
that prevention of homelessness and recurring homelessness are 
critical efforts (Denmark Ministry, 2009). 

102 Worldwide Perspective
 Denmark’s Council for Socially Marginalised People was es-
tablished in 2002 and is responsible for the guarantee of treatment 
for those who use drugs and alcohol, specialized housing strate-
gies, employment opportunities, and necessary supports for vul-
nerable populations. 
 The national strategy on homelessness seeks to reduce and 
end homelessness by reducing rough sleeping, creating solutions 
for young people, shortening the length of homeless episodes, 
and addressing housing as part of discharge from prisons and in-
stitutions. 
 The government of Denmark released a plan to address home-
lessness in 2009,  The Government’s Homelessness Strategy—a Strategy 
to Reduce Homelessness in Denmark 2009–2012. Denmark defines 
homelessness as “persons who do not own or rent homes or rooms, 
but are obliged to avail of temporary accommodation, or live tem-
porarily, without a rental contract, with relatives, friends or ac-
quaintances. Homeless persons also include those who do not have 
a place to stay for the coming night.” 
 The eight Danish municipalities with the largest homeless 
populations were invited to cooperate in the implementation of 
the Homelessness Strategy. They were Albertslund, Esbjerg, Fred-
eriksberg, Høje Taastrup, Copenhagen, Odense, Randers, and 
Århus. Copenhagen was recorded as having the largest number 
of people sleeping on the street. 
 The key role in social, housing, and employment initiatives 
rests with local municipalities under government reform efforts 
of 2007. Thus, the Denmark strategy notes, “The councils of the 
participating municipalities are therefore the principal players in 
the application of funding under the Homelessness Strategy, and 
it is emphasised that the initiatives for the homeless must have a 
political base in the municipalities.” 
 The key strategies embraced by the plan to support housing 
initiatives included assertive community treatment (ACT) teams, 
critical time intervention (CTI), individual case management, and 
discharge planning. 
 Planning in Other Scandinavian Countries 
 The Scandinavian countries of Finland, Norway, and Sweden also 
have national strategies on homelessness that are aligned with 
responsibility for implementation and data. These strategies are 
briefly summarized here. 

Canada’s National and Local Strategies 103
 Finland’s 2008 commitment to reduce long-term homeless-
ness focused on 10 population centers, with a priority on Helsinki. 
In its  Finnish Government’s Programme to   Reduce Long-Term Home-
lessness 2008–2011, the government forwarded its goal to reduce 
long-term homelessness by half by 2011 and entirely by 2015. The 
national plan uses a Housing First approach, stating, “Solutions 
to social and health problems cannot be a condition for organising 
accommodation: on the contrary, accommodation is a requirement 
which also allows other problems of people who have been home-
less to be solved. Having somewhere to live makes it possible to 
strengthen life management skills and is conducive to purposeful 
activity.” 
 In 2010 Finland convened a national seminar on Housing 
First led by the Finnish housing minister in which Dr. Sam Tsem-
beris, the U.S. innovator of the model in Pathways to Housing in 
the United States, described the key elements for success and the 
evidence for the strategy. Dr. Tsemberis identified to participants 
that Canada, France, and Finland, as well as 10 cities in the EU, 
are studying the innovation. 
 Norway’s 2004 strategy was titled  The Pathway to a Permanent 
Home.  The key components of the strategy include reducing evic-
tions, improving prisoner reentry and other discharge planning, 
ensuring the quality of overnight shelter, and shortening stays in 
temporary shelter to three months’ duration (Government of Nor-
way, 2004). 
 Sweden’s  Homelessness, Multiple Faces, Multiple Responsibili-
ties—a Strategy to Combat Homelessness and Exclusion from the Housing 
Market, 2007–2009  guarantees shelter to all, commits to improved 
discharge planning, seeks to increase housing opportunity, and 
pledges to reduce evictions, including eliminating evictions where 
children are involved (Government of Sweden, 2007). 
 Canada’s National and Local Strategies 
 The Homelessness Partnering Strategy (HPS) is Canada’s na-
tional government model that looks to local communities to iden-
tify needs and develop solutions in which national resources are 
allocated. HPS invests in transitional programs and supportive 
housing, supports community efforts to prevent and end home-
lessness, and seeks partnerships and collaborations between lev-
els of government (HRSDC, 2010). 

104 Worldwide Perspective
 The Canadian government department Human Resources 
and Skills Development Canada (HRSDC), where the national 
homelessness initiative is based, employs a strategy of “desig-
nated” communities. “The Government of Canada identified ten 
most affected communities in 1999 and fifty-one additional com-
munities were selected in 2000 in consultation with provinces and 
territories. These designated communities are maintained under 
the Homelessness Partnering Strategy (HPS). Designated Com-
munities funding goes directly to community projects.” Commu-
nities that are selected must have plans for long-term solutions 
to prevent and end homelessness. HPS’s strategy includes pilot 
projects, development of an information system, and use of fed-
eral surplus property. 
 Designated communities include (by province) the following: 
(1) British Columbia/Yukon:   Kelowna, Kamloops, Nanaimo, Nel-
son, Prince George, Vancouver, Victoria, Whitehorse; (2) Alberta/
NWT/Nunavut:   Calgary, Edmonton, Grande Prairie, Iqaluit, 
Lethbridge, Medicine Hat, Red Deer, Wood Buffalo, Yellowknife; 
(3) Saskatchewan:   Prince Albert, Regina, Saskatoon; (4) Manitoba:  
 Brandon, Thompson, Winnipeg; (5) Ontario:   Barrie, Belleville, 
Brantford, Dufferin, Guelph, Halton, Hamilton, Kingston, Kitch-
ener, London, North Bay, Ottawa, Peel Region, Peterborough, 
Region of Durham, Sault Ste. Marie, St. Catharines-Niagara, Sud-
bury, Thunder Bay, Toronto, Windsor, York Region; (6) Quebec:  
 Drummondville, Gatineau, Montreal, Quebec City, Saguenay, 
Sherbrooke, Trois-Rivières; (7) New Brunswick:   Bathurst, Fred-
ericton, Moncton, Saint John; (8)   Prince Edward Island:   Char-
lottetown, Summerside; (9) Nova Scotia:   Halifax, Sydney (Cape 
Breton); and (10) Newfoundland and Labrador:  St. John’s. 
 “Outreach Communities” are smaller jurisdictions and rural 
communities. They are not required to have plans in place for HPS 
funding but must have a wide range of partners. 
 The Business Model and Canadian 10-Year Plans 
 In September 2010, the Canadian Chamber of Commerce sup-
ported a policy resolution at its annual conference, calling for a 
reallocation of federal funding to support a national plan to end 
homelessness. The chamber represents more than 300 local board 
of trade organizations and local chambers of commerce, which 
themselves represent more than an estimated 175,000 local busi-
nesses. The resolution was brought forward by the Burnaby Board 

Canada’s National and Local Strategies 105
of Trade, the Greater Victoria Chamber of Commerce, the Surrey 
Board of Trade, and the Metro Vancouver Homelessness Secre-
tariat (CCC, 2010). 
 Provincial and local government officials and business lead-
ers in Canada undertook partnerships with U.S. federal officials, 
researchers, and innovators during the 2002–2009 period to learn 
from their peers the new expectations, strategies, and solutions 
that were producing results. Many major Canadian cities adopted 
10-year plans, including Calgary, Vancouver, Toronto, Montreal, 
Ottawa, Edmonton, Victoria, and smaller communities such as 
Red Deer. 
 While the role of business in supporting 10-year plans in the 
United States drew some criticism that the interests of business 
were more specifically revenue oriented, the resolution passed 
by the chamber of commerce clearly stated, “Homelessness has a 
direct financial impact on businesses as it deters customers, dam-
ages employee recruitment and retention, harms tourism and 
discourages companies from setting up offices in areas with a vis-
ible homeless population.” The resolution called for a nationally 
benchmarked plan that would set “goals, objectives, metrics and 
outcomes” and called for the adoption of best practices, including 
Housing First. 
 The resolution estimated that “homelessness costs Cana-
dian taxpayers between $4.5 and $6 billion annually, inclusive of 
health care, criminal justice, social services and emergency shelter 
costs.” This figure was developed by Gordon Laird and published 
in 2007 as  SHELTER: Homelessness in a Growth Economy; Canada’s 
21st Century Paradox  for Calgary’s Sheldon Chumir Foundation 
for Ethics in Leadership. Laird also demonstrated that, from 1993 
to 2004, an estimated $49.5 billion in costs could be attributed to 
homelessness. 
 In 2005 Canada held a first-ever national conference, the Ca-
nadian Conference on Homelessness: Stories, Research, Solutions, 
at York University, Toronto. A key result of the conference was 
the development of the Homeless Hub, a web-based umbrella for 
research and other tools useful to policy makers, providers, re-
searchers, and other interested persons. The Homeless Hub was 
launched in 2007. 
 Finding Home  is an e-book on the Hub site. Chapters are 
accessible to a general readership and cover many aspects of 
homelessness. The e-book project is funded by the Social Sci-
ences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC) as 

106 Worldwide Perspective
a partnership with the national homelessness charity, Raising 
the Roof, and with the newly created SSHRC-funded Canadian 
Homelessness Research Network (Hulchanski et al., 2009). 
 Australia 
 In 2008, the new government of Australian prime minister Kevin 
Rudd launched a national government initiative to develop a new 
strategy on homelessness. Prime Minister Rudd became foreign 
minister in 2010 after a change in Labor Party leadership. 
 The Australian housing market has been documented as dra-
matically more expensive than that of the United States and has 
an absolute shortage of units. High-density development in exist-
ing population centers is official strategy. According to research 
published as the  Demographia International Housing Affordability 
Survey,  the median home price was more than six times the gross 
yearly income in 2009, compared to almost three times the income 
level in the United States. The same research identified 6 of the 
top 10 cities lacking affordability as being in Australia, compared 
to the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, and New Zea-
land. Lack of housing and affordability pose particular challenges 
to those starting out in the work world or starting families and to 
people facing special challenges in the market because of disabil-
ity and/or lack of income (Demographia, 2010). 
 Following are excerpts from the prime minister’s remarks at 
a national conference in Adelaide in May 2008, which convened 
on the release of the government’s green paper on homelessness. 
The green paper was part of a initial consultative process that 
yielded a white paper of the government’s plan later in 2008. Like 
the Blair government’s earlier initiative in the United Kingdom, 
Prime Minister Rudd invoked “mutual partnership and mutual 
responsibility” to support those who choose to move out of home-
lessness. 
 Calling the goal of addressing homelessness “a great new 
enterprise,” Rudd stressed that government would find new ap-
proaches for prevention and for breaking the cycle of homeless-
ness, looking outside government in its search for “what works,” 
identifying evidence-based practices to drive long-term solutions. 
 “As a Labor government we are committed to a principle of 
social solidarity that includes private philanthropy, community 
action, and public responsibility to protect the most vulnerable,” 

International Human Rights Treaties 107
stated the prime minister. “But let me also say this: we don’t have 
an old-fashioned approach.” The prime minister encouraged those 
who shared the ambitious goal to forward “undiluted, forceful, 
evidence based on the issues” to move solutions forward (Com-
monwealth of Australia, 2008). 
 Both the green paper and the resulting white paper are avail-
able on line at http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/sa/housing/progserv/
homelessness/whitepaper/Pages/default.aspx. 
 International Human Rights Treaties 
 International human rights treaties are a tool being used to seek 
recognition of housing rights for people experiencing homeless-
ness. Both European organizations and U.S. organizations focused 
on the law have employed various of these instruments. 
 Seven key international treaties address human rights: the 
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Ra-
cial Discrimination (ICERD) (1965); the International Covenant on 
Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) (1966); the International Cov-
enant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) (1966); 
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination 
against Women (CEDAW) (1979); the Convention against Torture 
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punish-
ment (CAT) (1984); the Convention on the Rights of the Child 
(CRC) (1989); and the International Convention on Protection of 
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families 
(ICMRW) (1990). 
 Each treaty is monitored by an expert committee examin-
ing implementation by the signers to the documents. Detailed 
information is available at http://www.unfpa.org/rights/instru 
ments.htm. 
 Universal Periodic Review (UPR) is a process undertaken by 
United Nations that occurs every four years. The United States 
took part in its first review in November 2010 in Geneva, Switzer-
land. The UN Human Rights Council examines how each coun-
try is meeting its obligations under the UN charter, the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), other human rights trea-
ties that have been ratified by that country, any relevant voluntary 
commitments by the government, and international law. 
 The UPR Working Group conducts the review. The work-
ing group is composed of 47 members of the UN Human Rights 

108 Worldwide Perspective
Council. The 2010 review was the first for the United States to 
address housing rights. 
 In a statement issued by the U.S. Department of Housing 
and Urban Development secretary on the review, the secretary 
noted the federal strategy recently released by the government 
and stated, “Under the Obama Administration, HUD is making a 
concerted effort to become fully engaged in the global discussion 
of creating socially and environmentally sustainable urban com-
munities, rooted in safe, decent, and affordable shelter.” 
 “In the context of our current economic challenges, the United 
States is aggressively working toward a more focused, balanced, 
and expansive role for housing and community development 
programs. The UN’s Universal Periodic Review process helps to 
inform and influence our nation’s effort to dramatically increase 
the amount of affordable housing, especially for those struggling 
to find a place to call home” (HUD, 2010). 
 References 
 CCC (Canadian Chamber of Commerce). Proposed Policy Resolutions—
The 81st Annual General Meeting of the Canadian Chamber of 
Commerce. Gatineau, QC: September 25–28, 2010. Available at http://
www.chamber.ca/images/uploads/Proposed_resolutions/2010/
Proposed%20English%202010.pdf. 
 Commonwealth of Australia. Remarks of Prime Minister Kevin Rudd 
at the 5th National Homelessness Conference, Adelaide, Australia, May 
2008. 
 Council of the European Union (EU). Council Declaration on The European 
Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion: Working together to 
fight poverty in 2010 and beyond. Brussels, Belgium, December 6, 2010. 
Available at http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/
docs/pressdata/en/lsa/118250.pdf. 
DCLG (Government of the United Kingdom Department for 
Communities and Local Government). (2002)  Leaving Care: A Time for 
Change; Government Response.  London, Crown copyright, April 2002. 
Available at http://www.communities.gov.uk/archived/publications/
housing/timeforchange. 
 DCLG (Government of the United Kingdom Department for 
Communities and Local Government). (2008).  Statutory Homelessness in 
England: The Experiences of Families and 16–17 Year Olds (Homelessness 

References 109
Research Summary Number 7, 2008). London, Crown copyright, March 
2008. Available at http://www.communities.gov.uk/publications/
housing/experienceoffamilies. 
 DCLG (Government of the United Kingdom Department for 
Communities and Local Government).  No One Left Out: Communities 
Ending Rough Sleeping; Good Practice Notes—Developing a Strategic 
Response to Prevent and Tackle Rough Sleeping.  London, Crown copyright, 
September 2009. Available at http://www.communities.gov.uk/
publications/housing/developingstrategicresponse. 
 Demographia.  6th Annual Demographia International Housing Affordability 
Survey: 2010 Ratings for Metropolitan Markets. Belleville, IL: Demographia, 
2010. Available at http://www.demographia.com/dhi.pdf. 
 Denmark Ministry of the Interior and Social Affairs . The Government’s 
Homelessness Strategy—a Strategy to Reduce Homelessness in Denmark 
2009–2012. Copenhagen, 2009 . Available at http://www.feantsa.org/
files/freshstart/National_Strategies/Danish_strategy_Pjece%20om%20
hjeml%C3%B8sestrategien_EN.pdf. 
 FEANTSA (European Federation of National Organizations Working 
with the Homeless). ETHOS: European Typology on Homelessness and 
Housing Exclusion. Brusells, Belgium: FEANTSA, 2010a. Available at 
http://www.feantsa.org/code/en/pg.asp?Page=484 
 FEANTSA (European Federation of National Organizations Working 
with the Homeless). “European Parliament Calls upon the EU for 
Concrete Action Towards Ending Homelessness.”   (2010b). Available at 
http://www.feantsa.org/files/freshstart/Communications/Press%20
Releases/2010/101221_WD61_Adoption_PressRelease.pdf. 
 FEANTSA (European Federation of National Organizations Working 
with the Homeless).  European Research Conferences.  Brussels, Belgium: 
FEANTSA, 2010c. Available at http://eohw.horus.be/code/EN/
pg.asp?Page=1113. 
 FEANTSA (European Federation of National Organizations Working 
with the Homeless). Strategies to Combat Homelessness, 2010d. 
Available at http://www.feantsa.org/code/en/pg.asp?Page=1169. 
 Ghosh, Aparisim. “Down and Out in Europe,”  Time , February 10, 
2003. Available at http://www.time.com/time/europe/magazine/
2003/0210/homeless/story.html. 
 Government of Ireland Department of the Environment, Heritage 
and Local Government.  The Way Home: A Strategy to Address Adult 
Homelessness in Ireland 2008–2013. Dublin, Ireland: Department of the 
Environment, Heritage and Local Government, 2008. Available at 

110 Worldwide Perspective
http://www.environ.ie/en/Publications/DevelopmentandHousing/
Housing/FileDownLoad,18192,en.pdf. 
 Government of Norway.  The Pathway to a Permanent Home.  Oslo, 
Norway, 2004 . Available at http://www.feantsa.org/files/freshstart/
National_Strategies/The_Pathway_to_a_permanent_home_2005_
Norway.pdf. 
 Government of Sweden.  Homelessness, Multiple faces, Multiple 
Responsibilities—a Strategy to Combat Homelessness and Exclusion from 
the Housing Market, 2007–2009. Stockholm, Sweden, 2007 . Available 
at http://www.feantsa.org/files/freshstart/National_Strategies/
Homelessness_multiplefaces_multipleresponsibilities2007_Sweden.pdf. 
 Homeless Agency.  A Key to the Door: The Homeless Agency Partnership 
Action Plan on Homelessness in Dublin. Dublin, Ireland: Homeless 
Agency, 2007. Available at http://www.homelessagency.ie/Research-
and-Policy/Publications/Action-Plans—Homeless-Agency/A-key-to-
the-door—Action-Plan-on-Homelessness-in-.aspx. 
 HRSDC (Government of Canada Human Resources and Skills 
Development Canada).  The Homelessness Partnering Strategy. (2010). 
Available at http://www.hrsdc.gc.ca/eng/homelessness/index.shtml. 
 HUD (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development). “U.S. 
Department of Housing and Urban Development Statement on the 
U.S. Participation in the United Nations’ Universal Periodic Review” 
(press statement). Washington, D.C.: HUD, November 5, 2010. Available 
at http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/press/speeches_
remarks_statements/2010/statement-110510. 
 Hulchanski, David J., Philippa Campsie, Shirley B.Y. Chau, Stephen W. 
Hwang, and Emily Paradis. Finding Home: Policy Options for Addressing 
Homelessness in Canada. (2009). Toronto: University of Toronto Cities 
Centre Press. 
Irish Penal Reform Trust (IPRT). “ It’s like Stepping on a Landmine . . .”: 
Reintegration of Prisoners in Ireland. Dublin, Ireland: Irish Penal Reform 
Trust, 2010. Available at http://www.iprt.ie/contents/1685. 
 Laird, Gordon.  SHELTER: Homelessness in a Growth Economy; Canada’s 
21st Century Paradox. Calgary, Alberta, Canada: Sheldon Chumir 
Foundation for Ethics in Leadership, 2007. 
 O’Connell, James J., Shawn Mattison, Christine M. Judge, H. Josiyn 
Strupp Allen, and Howard K. Koh. “A Public Health Approach to 
Reducing Morbidity and Mortality among Homeless People in Boston.” 
 Journal of Public Health Management Practice,  Volume 11, Issue 4   (2005). 

References 111
 ODPM (Government of the United Kingdom Office of the Deputy 
Prime Minister).  2002 Blocking the Fast Track from Prison to Rough 
Sleeping.  London, Crown copyright, March 2002. Available at 
http://www.communities.gov.uk/documents/housing/pdf/
prisontoroughsleeping.pdf. 
 RSU/ESAG (Government of the United Kingdom, Rough Sleepers 
Unit and Ex-Service Action Group on Homelessness).  Resources for Ex-
Service Personnel in London. London, Crown copyright, January 2004. 
Available at http://www.communities.gov.uk/documents/housing/
pdf/138010.pdf. 
 Scottish Government. New funding for innovative ways to prevent 
homelessness (press statement). 2005. Available at http://www.
scotland.gov.uk/Topics/Built-Environment/Housing/access/homeless. 
 Scottish Parliament. Homelessness, etc. (Scotland) Act 2003 and 2001. 
Available at http://www.legislation.gov.uk/asp/2001/10/contents. 
 SEU (Government of the United Kingdom Social Exclusion Unit). 
 Coming in from the Cold: The Government’s Strategy on Rough Sleeping. 
London, Crown copyright, December 1999. 
 Thomsen,  Britta, Elizabeth Lynne, Ilda Figueiredo, Karima Delli, 
and Jacek Protasiewicz, Members. Written Declaration pursuant 
to Rule 123 Rules of Procedure on an EU homelessness strategy 
(6.9.2010). Strasbourg, France; European Parliament, 2010. Available 
at http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=//
EP//NONSGML+WDECL+P7-DCL-2010-0061+0+DOC+PDF+V0//
EN&language=EN. 
 U.K. Department of Health.  Me, Survive, Out There? New Arrange-
ments for Young People Living in and Leaving Care. London, Crown 
copyright, July 1999. Available at http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/
Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicy
AndGuidance/DH_4010312. 
 Welsh Assembly Government Housing Directorate.  10-Year Plan 
Homelessness Plan for Wales 2009–2019. Cardiff, Wales, Crown copyright, 
2009. Available at http://www.feantsa.org/files/freshstart/National_
Strategies/Wales.pdf. 

This page intentionally left blank 

113
 4 
 Chronology 
 K
ey events during the last decade demonstrate the steadily 
accelerating momentum that resulted from new initiatives, 
new ideas, and new results in preventing and ending home-
lessness. 
 This chapter includes key events from the start of the last de-
cade, as new developments in research and planning produced 
new focus on homelessness in public policy and investment at 
the federal, state, and local government level in the United States 
and elsewhere. In addition to highlighting new regular federal 
meetings of cabinet officials, new state interagency councils on 
homelessness to coordinate state resources and policy, and new 
city and county 10-year plans to create strategies, the chapter in-
corporates news reports, research, and other events. Included are 
selected examples that demonstrate diversity (states large and 
small taking action, cities and counties developing creative ap-
proaches to involve partners), momentum (inaugural events for 
policy makers, regional and intergovernmental events to de-
velop coordination), and results (announcements of reductions in 
homelessness). 
2001
Department of Housing and Urban Development 
secretary Mel Martinez tells the National Alli-
ance to End Homelessness annual conference 
that “the challenge in ending homelessness is 
great but so is our dedication. I say it is time to 
dedicate ourselves to the next great new Ameri-
can enterprise.”

114 Chronology
February 4, 
2002
The president’s FY 2003 budget includes a new 
“top objective” to end chronic homelessness in 
10 years. The proposed federal budget is for the 
federal fiscal year of October 1, 2002, to Septem-
ber 30, 2003.
March 15, 
2002
U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness ex-
ecutive director Philip Mangano of Massachu-
setts is sworn in by Department of Housing 
and Urban Development (HUD) secretary Mel 
Martinez, council chair. Mangano brings more 
than two decades of experience in homeless pro-
grams for individuals and families, public policy, 
and business to his new appointment.
July 18, 2002
Council Chair Martinez, with Department of 
Health and Human Services (HHS) secretary and 
council vice chair Tommy Thompson, convenes 
first full council meeting of revitalized Inter-
agency Council in six years. Four secretaries will 
rotate duties as chair: HUD, HHS, Veterans Af-
fairs, and Labor.
July 19, 2002
Council Chair Martinez gives a progress report 
to the National Alliance to End Homelessness an-
nual conference, telling the audience, “President 
Bush has made combating homelessness a top do-
mestic priority.”
December 5, 
2002
Chair Martinez and Vice Chair Thompson gather 
Interagency Council members at the White 
House for collaborative efforts to reduce street 
homelessness and strengthen homeless preven-
tion. Federal agencies report on intraagency, in-
teragency, and intergovernmental collaborations. 
A new $55 million joint funding effort by the de-
partments of Housing and Urban Development 
(HUD), Health and Human Services (HHS), and 
Veterans Administration (VA) will create perma-
nent housing and services for chronically home-
less persons.
January 21, 
2003
Chicago mayor Richard Daley embraces a 10-year 
plan to end homelessness in the third-largest city 
in the nation.

Chronology 115
January 23, 
2003
Addressing the plenary session of the U.S. Con-
ference of Mayors at their winter meeting in 
Washington, Interagency Council director Man-
gano challenges 100 mayors to develop 10-year 
plans to end homelessness in their cities.
February 3, 
2003
The president’s FY 2004 budget is released and 
affirms “the commitment made in 2003 to end 
chronic homelessness within a decade” and pro-
poses the Samaritan Initiative to provide new fed-
eral resources for chronically homeless persons.
March 2003
Mayor Shirley Franklin unveils Atlanta’s Blue-
print to End Homelessness. Convened by the 
United Way in Atlanta and chaired by Horace 
Sibley, a regional commission invested months 
to create a plan that would engage the whole At-
lanta community.
March 28, 
2003
HHS secretary Tommy Thompson becomes fed-
eral Interagency Council chair, marking the first 
time that HHS chairs the council. The council 
hears results in developing a federal strategy 
to end chronic homelessness and initiatives to 
engage elected officials from states, cities, and 
counties.
May 12, 2003
Blair government officials discuss how they were 
able to reduce “rough sleeping” by two-thirds. 
In the Indian Treaty Room at the White House, 
four senior Blair government officials and senior 
policy officials from the Interagency Council, 
HUD, HHS, Labor, VA, Social Security Adminis-
tration, and other federal agencies meet to dis-
cuss prevention and intervention strategies 
to end chronic homelessness. Led by Gordon 
Campbell, head of the U.K. Homelessness Di-
rectorate, and Louise Casey, former head of the 
“Rough Sleepers Unit,” the policy delegation 
describes their successful effort to reduce the 
number of homeless persons “sleeping rough” 
on the streets. These initial bilateral discussions 
form the basis for what becomes an ongoing 

116 Chronology
2003 (cont.)
international dialogue among governments 
adopting similar strategies.
June 6, 2003
The U.S. Conference of Mayors in their annual 
meeting in Denver adopts a resolution to encour-
age cities to create and implement performance-
based, results-oriented strategic plans to end 
chronic homelessness in 10 years.
July 15, 2003
The National Association of Counties at their 
annual conference in Milwaukee passes a reso-
lution supporting the Bush administration’s ef-
forts to end chronic homelessness and endorses a 
10-year planning processes for counties.
July 16, 2003
Senior officials from 40 cities come to Wash-
ington for a council-sponsored focus group on 
developing 10-year plans to end chronic home-
lessness. Also discussed is the importance of 
using street counts to ensure performance out-
comes. A toolkit for developing 10-year plans is 
unveiled.
July 17, 2003
Interagency Council director Mangano ad-
dresses the annual conference of the National 
Alliance to End Homelessness attended by 
more than 1,300 people. He introduces keynote 
speaker VA secretary and council vice chair An-
thony Principi.
July 17, 2003
A new $13.5 million federal interagency funding 
initiative is announced to focus on employment 
and housing for chronically homeless people.
October 1, 
2003
The U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness, 
chaired by Health and Human Services secre-
tary Tommy Thompson, announces the award of 
11 grants for an unprecedented joint federal 
agency announcement of $55 million by the coun-
cil, HUD, HHS, and VA for the Collaborative 
Initiative to Help End Chronic Homelessness. 
Departments of Labor and Housing announce 
demonstration grant awards to five community 
partnerships to end chronic homelessness and

Chronology 117
integrate persons with disabilities into the work-
force.
November 
21, 2003
Mayor Michael Bloomberg announces that the 
City of New York, in partnership with leaders 
from the business and nonprofit communities, 
will develop a 10-year plan to end chronic home-
lessness.
December 13, 
2003
The National League of Cities officially adopts a 
resolution supporting the Bush administration 
goal of ending chronic homelessness in the 
United States in 10 years and pledging to “ help 
advance” efforts to create 10-year plans. The Na-
tional League of Cities becomes the third major 
association of city and county government offi-
cials to support the Bush administration’s call to 
end chronic homelessness in 10 years.
December 19, 
2003
The Bush administration announces a record 
$1.27 billion in federal funds to be awarded to 
local programs to end homelessness.
January 13, 
2004
Just days after being sworn in as mayor of San 
Francisco, Gavin Newsom pledges to end home-
lessness in the city within the next 10 years. He 
names election opponent Angela Alioto to chair 
the plan.
February 2, 
2004
With the release of the president’s FY 2005 pro-
posed budget, the administration again affirms 
the federal effort to end chronic homelessness, 
stating, “The Administration continues the com-
mitment made in 2002 to end chronic homeless-
ness within a decade.”
February 13, 
2004
The City of Philadelphia, which won a $3.3 mil-
lion grant from the federal government to end 
chronic homelessness, announces that, just four 
months later, the first participant in the “Home 
First” program has signed his lease.
February 25, 
2004
At a press conference that includes representa-
tives of the United Way, Deloitte, and the Metro 
Dallas Homeless Alliance, Dallas mayor Laura

118 Chronology
2004 (cont.)
Miller unveils a new draft 10-year plan and makes 
Dallas the 15th community in the nation to have 
developed a plan. Over 70 other cities and coun-
ties are in the process of creating plans.
February 
2004
The Interagency Council launches a new weekly 
e-newsletter to support partners from the pub-
lic and private sector in preventing and ending 
homelessness.
March 26, 
2004
At the invitation of the Interagency Council, rep-
resentatives of the governments of the United 
States, England, and South Africa meet in 
Washington to discuss national government re-
sponses to homelessness. The new government-
to-government colloquy is an unprecedented 
opportunity for exchange on topics including 
innovative programs, best practices, and perfor-
mance results in ending homelessness.
April 1, 2004
Secretary Anthony Principi becomes the first 
VA secretary to chair the federal Interagency 
Council, underscoring the needs of the veteran 
population. Federal agencies announce new in-
vestment targeted to the goal of ending chronic 
homelessness, including an announcement by 
the Social Security Administration of $6.6 mil-
lion in awards to 34 sites for the HOPE (Home-
less Outreach and Project Evaluation) program 
to assist homeless individuals who apply for So-
cial Security or SSI benefits. SSA estimates that 
5,000 homeless persons will be served through 
the programs receiving these funds over the next 
three years.
Council meeting guests Minnesota governor 
Tim Pawlenty and Chattanooga mayor Bob 
Corker describe their new initiatives to end 
chronic homelessness as they partner with the 
Interagency Council to create state interagency 
councils on homelessness and jurisdictional 
10-year plans to end chronic homelessness.
June 16, 2004
D.C. mayor Anthony Williams unveils a 10-year 
plan to end homelessness for the nation’s capital.

Chronology 119
June 23, 2004
Nonprofit and public sector leaders release the 
New York City plan with Mayor Michael Bloom-
berg, who commits his administration to the goal 
of ending chronic homelessness.
June 30, 2004
San Francisco mayor Gavin Newsom, commu-
nity leaders, members of the Ten-Year Planning 
Council to End Chronic Homelessness, and local 
citizens unveil the city’s new 10-year plan. The 
San Francisco Plan to Abolish Chronic Home-
lessness calls for 3,000 new permanent support-
ive housing units.
July 12, 2004
The House of Representatives Financial Ser-
vices Subcommittee on Housing and Commu-
nity Opportunity holds a hearing on H.R. 4057, 
the Samaritan Initiative Act of 2004, new legisla-
tion proposed by the administration that would 
authorize new federal resources to promote and 
support community efforts to end chronic home-
lessness.
July
Representatives of the 11 community collabora-
tions funded under the inaugural federal collabo-
ration to end chronic homelessness, including 
housing providers, substance abuse treatment 
and mental health counselors, outreach workers 
and case management staff, meet in Washington 
to examine progress.
September 3, 
2004
Longtime civic leader and businessman Tom 
Dunning is named to lead Dallas’s effort to 
prevent and end homelessness in the eighth-
largest city in the nation. The announcement of 
Mr. Dunning’s appointment as “homeless czar” 
for the city is made by Mayor Laura Miller. The 
city’s recently adopted Ten Year Plan to end 
chronic homelessness made Dallas the first city 
in the state of Texas to have developed such 
a plan.
September 
29, 2004
VA secretary Principi chairs a meeting of the U.S. 
Interagency Council on Homelessness, where 
over $160 million in new federal resources is

120 Chronology
2004 (cont.)
announced. Council members hear from provid-
ers of services to veterans who have benefited 
from expanded resources.
Horace Sibley, who led Atlanta mayor Shirley 
Franklin’s 10-year planning effort to end chronic 
homelessness, and Craig Chancellor, president 
of Triangle United Way in North Carolina, dis-
cuss the commitment of the United Way to the 
goal of ending chronic homelessness and their 
role in helping bring resources and partnership 
from the business community.
October 2004
San Francisco mayor Gavin Newsom creates the 
first Project Homeless Connect to engage and 
welcome homeless people back into the com-
munity.
October 11, 
2004
An inaugural meeting of “thought leaders and 
visionaries, civic and government leaders who 
have committed themselves to ending chronic 
homelessness in their localities, and innovators 
from business and non-profits” convenes in New 
York City under the partnership of Common 
Ground, the Rockefeller Foundation, and the 
federal Interagency Council on Homelessness. 
Leaders from Denver, Atlanta, San Francisco, 
Dallas, Indianapolis, Nashville, Minnesota, and 
Massachusetts hear from business thinker Mal-
colm Gladwell and Blair government leader 
Louise Casey.
January 18, 
2005
Mayors sign a new agreement on ending chronic 
homelessness when 39 mayors representing cit-
ies from Anchorage to Key West sign a covenant 
of partnership with each other and with the U.S. 
Interagency Council on Homelessness, agreeing 
to collaborate in the exchange of data, share best 
practices, and welcome other cities to join the 
collaboration. The signing is at a meeting of the 
Hunger and Homelessness Task Force at the U.S. 
Conference of Mayors Winter Meeting in Wash-
ington.

Chronology 121
February 7, 
2005
In an otherwise austere federal budget in which 
funding for nonsecurity-related discretionary 
spending would be reduced by nearly 1 percent, 
total funding for targeted homeless assistance 
programs would increase by 8.5 percent.
February 17, 
2005
The continuing national innovation group con-
venes in New York City to focus on ending street 
deaths. Dr. James O’Connell of Boston Health 
Care for the Homeless and Philadelphia director 
of homeless services Robert Hess review success-
ful strategies.
March 2, 2005
At their annual winter meeting in Washington, 
the nation’s governors adopt a new policy state-
ment on affordable housing, homeless assistance, 
and community development that supports the 
goal of ending chronic homelessness and “the ef-
forts of the United States Interagency Council on 
Homelessness to create a working partnership 
that includes multiple federal agencies, states 
and localities.”
March 21, 
2005
HUD releases a funding announcement for a 
new $10 million two-year Housing for People 
Who Are Homeless and Addicted to Alcohol 
Initiative that will develop new housing ap-
proaches.
April 28, 2005
The national innovators group convenes in New 
York City to continue dialogue on solutions, 
cost-benefit analysis, and progress in addressing 
street deaths. A specific focus is the integration 
of street-based feeding programs into larger juris-
dictional strategies.
August 11, 
2005
The Department of Housing and Urban Devel-
opment and the federal Interagency Council an-
nounce $10 million in funding for 11 cities in the 
new demonstration program called Housing for 
People Who Are Homeless and Addicted to Al-
cohol. The initiative will assist 555 homeless 
people with chronic alcoholism who have been 
living on the streets for at least 365 days over the 
last five years.

122 Chronology
September 
15, 2005
Reno, Nevada, joined by Sparks and Washoe 
County, becomes the 200th jurisdiction to com-
mit to a 10-year plan to end chronic homeless-
ness. Reno is where Murray Barr of Malcolm 
Gladwell’s “Million-Dollar Murray” lived on the 
streets.
October 26, 
2005
The Center for Mental Health Services (CMHS) of 
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices convenes the Third National Conference 
Addressing Homelessness for People with Men-
tal Illnesses and/or Substance Use Disorders in 
Washington, D.C.
December 8, 
2005
Thirty cities across the country partner with the 
U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness for 
the first National Project Homeless Connect 
Day, bringing volunteers from nonprofits, cor-
porations, federal, state, and local government 
agencies, faith-based organizations, and home-
less service programs to one-stop events for per-
sons experiencing homelessness with services 
and housing to end their homelessness.
December 20, 
2005
A record number of nearly 5,000 local programs 
that house and assist persons experiencing 
homelessness are awarded a record $1.33 billion 
in funding in an announcement made by the 
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Devel-
opment secretary.
February 6, 
2006
Stating that the “2007 Budget continues the 
Administration’s commitment to end chronic 
homelessness,” the Bush administration an-
nounces an unprecedented sixth consecutive 
year of increased funding for targeted federal 
programs serving persons who are homeless, 
proposing over $4 billion in assistance. The pres-
ident continues the federal commitment to the 
Samaritan Initiative for housing people who are 
chronically homeless.
February 13, 
2006
Author Malcolm Gladwell, in the New Yorker, 
examines the economics of homelessness. 

Chronology 123
Gladwell’s article, “Million-Dollar Murray,” 
whose title reflects the example of one chroni-
cally homeless man in Reno, Nevada, examines 
cost-benefit analyses across the nation that are 
revealing the public cost of homelessness.
February 15, 
2006
During a street outreach and services event to 
engage people who are homeless, the City of 
San Juan, Puerto Rico, unveils its new 10-year 
plan to end chronic homelessness at a ceremony 
hosted by San Juan mayor Jorge Santini. The 
Iniciativa Hacia La Esperanza (“Initiative for 
Hope”) is a mobile one-stop event providing in-
tensive services, treatment, and detoxification in 
areas of the city frequented by people experi-
encing homelessness.
February 18, 
2006
Writer Malcolm Gladwell is interviewed on 
National Public Radio’s Weekend Edition with 
Scott Simon, where he discusses the Bush ad-
ministration’s partnership with cities focusing 
on chronic homelessness and showing results, 
noting, “The thing that’s driving this strategy 
towards homelessness is the notion that we 
have a very limited amount of money, a very lim-
ited amount of political will. And what are we 
going to do with that? Well, we’re going to con-
centrate it on the worst part of the problem in the 
place where we can save the most money in the 
short term.”
March 2, 2006
Mayors and 10-year plan leaders from 18 cities 
gather in San Diego for the first mayors’ summit: 
Preventing and Ending Homelessness Among 
Veterans, convened by the federal Interagency 
Council on Homelessness with Common Ground 
and the Rockefeller Foundation.
April 4, 2006
The federal Interagency Council on Homeless-
ness holds it second meeting following the Gulf 
Coast hurricanes. HHS estimates that 500,000 
people may be in need of counseling services in 

124 Chronology
2006 (cont.)
the region. The Department of Education re-
ports on school rebuilding efforts and assistance 
for students at every level.
May 10, 2006
With reports of decreases in chronic homeless-
ness being documented across the country, the 
U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness holds 
a national summit for jurisdictional leaders: 
“Moving From Good to Better to Great in Sustain-
ing Ten-Year Plans to End Chronic Homelessness” 
in Denver, Colorado. The summit brings together 
jurisdictional leaders developing 10-year plans, 
innovators, and practitioners to focus on results.
June 20, 2006
The first-ever Oregon Leadership Summit on 
Ending Chronic Homelessness convenes in the 
capital city of Salem with over 100 participants 
including mayors of Portland, Salem, Eugene, 
Corvallis, and Hillsboro, city councilors, county 
commissioners, federal, state and local govern-
ment agency officials, 10-year plan leaders, rep-
resentatives of several United Way chapters, and 
innovative service providers.
July 10, 2006
The federal Interagency Council on Homeless-
ness convenes. The Department of Health and 
Human Services reports that the Administration 
for Children and Families is finalizing a study 
of “promising strategies to end youth homeless-
ness,” which was drafted in consultation with the 
Interagency Council at the request of Congress.
Denver releases a Year One report card to the 
community on progress in implementing Den-
ver’s Road Home. The city reports that it met or 
exceeded all eight of its first-year goals. The re-
port card notes that progress was built on the 
spirit of Mayor John Hickenlooper’s promise that 
the strategy would allow local government to 
say, “Here’s your investment; here’s what we 
delivered” and would “end much of the frustra-
tion of just throwing money at the problem with-
out having any results.”

Chronology 125
October 24, 
2006
Sixty new 10-year plans are unveiled at a state-
wide event in Michigan, marking the first time 
all geography—83 counties in Michigan—in a 
state is covered by a plan. A two-day Michigan 
Homeless Summit held in Lansing attended by 
more than 650 people marks the official launch of 
Michigan’s Campaign to End Homelessness.
December 4, 
2006
The federal Interagency Council’s Annual Proj-
ect Homeless Connect event expands to a Na-
tional Project Homeless Connect Week, with 
40 cities partnering with over 9,500 volunteers 
who welcome almost 22,000 homeless persons. 
Some of the participating cities host “opinion 
leader” screenings offered by SONY/Columbia 
Pictures for the feature film The Pursuit of Happy-
ness. Starring Will Smith as Chris Gardner, the film 
depicts the true story of a homeless single father 
who becomes a successful broker.
January 2007
Springfield, Massachusetts, mayor Charles V. 
Ryan describes his city’s new 10-year plan, 
Homes Within Reach, as a demonstration of a 
new outlook and commitment to “not housing 
after shelter, not housing never, but housing 
first.”
February 5, 
2007
The president’s proposed 2008 budget “contin-
ues the administration’s commitment to end 
chronic homelessness by creating new support-
ive housing options for these individuals.” The 
Bush administration proposes an unprecedented 
seventh consecutive year of increased funding 
for targeted federal programs serving persons 
who are homeless.
March 1, 2007
The departments of Health and Human Ser-
vices and Housing and Urban Development and 
the Interagency Council on Homelessness con-
vene the National Symposium on Homelessness 
Research in Washington, the first such confer-
ence in a decade. Research papers presented in-
clude topics of cost studies, historic perspectives, 

126 Chronology
2007 (cont.)
consumer involvement, homeless families and 
children, youth, chronic homelessness, rural 
homelessness, housing, employment, incarcera-
tion, and mainstream services.
March 5, 2007
The U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness 
convenes its 10th meeting, now under the lead-
ership of Department of Health and Human 
Services secretary Michael Leavitt as chair. Di-
rector Philip Mangano notes that the meeting 
coincides with the 20th anniversary of the pas-
sage of the McKinney Act, which established 
the federal intervention in homelessness and 
the Interagency Council, and marks five years 
since revitalization of the council by President 
Bush in March 2002 after a six-year dormancy.
The Department of Housing and Urban De-
velopment reports that the HUD/HHS/VA 
Collaborative Initiative to Help End Chronic 
Homelessness created over 600 permanent sup-
portive housing tenancies with only 4 percent 
of homeless clients returning to the streets; all 
participants in the HUD/DOL Ending Chronic 
Homelessness Through Housing and Employ-
ment Initiative have retained their housing.
March 7, 2007
The federal Interagency Council on Homeless-
ness’s third national summit for jurisdictional 
leaders welcomes over 200 state and local juris-
dictional leaders for “The Pursuit of Solutions: 
Second Annual National Summit on Innova-
tion for Jurisdictional Leaders.” The program in-
cludes remarks by Louise Casey, government 
architect of England’s successful “rough sleep-
ers” initiative, which successfully reduced street 
homelessness by 75 percent, and Chris Gardner, 
depicted in the feature film, The Pursuit of Happy-
ness, with Will Smith.
March 15, 
2007
Miami mayor Manny Diaz announces a 50 per-
cent reduction in the number of homeless people 
between July 2006 and January 2007. Included

Chronology 127
in the reduction is a 27 percent decrease in the 
number of persons experiencing chronic home-
lessness.
March 29, 
2007
Fort Myers and Lee County, Florida, become the 
300th jurisdictional commitment to a 10-year 
plan, in the same week that Duluth and St. Louis 
County, Minnesota, adopt a plan and San Fran-
cisco announces a 38 percent reduction in home-
lessness since 2004.
April 2007
Dallas, in its third year of plan implementation 
in the nation’s ninth largest city, reports fur-
ther reductions in chronic homelessness. A new 
23 percent reduction in chronic homelessness 
and a 9 percent overall reduction in homeless-
ness are reported, bringing the reported de-
crease in chronic homelessness over two years to 
43 percent.
April 19, 2007
Fort Worth, Texas, convenes its first Project 
Homeless Connect event and reports a 42 per-
cent decrease in its unsheltered population.
May 25, 2007
University of Pennsylvania researcher Dr. Den-
nis Culhane releases new research results on 
family homelessness, showing how the needs of 
families and their social service histories relate 
to the level of service and length of stay they ex-
perience in homeless programs. Data show that 
most families (75 percent) leave quickly and 
don’t return to shelter but that a small number 
(5–8 percent) return repeatedly.
May 31, 2007
Mayors and city councilors and other elected of-
ficials from more than 1,200 Canadian cities meet 
in Calgary for the Big City Mayors Caucus and the 
Federation of Canadian Municipalities’ (FCM) 
70th Annual Conference. A key conference focus 
is the U.S. partnership to end homelessness.
June 11, 2007
The new members of the Central Florida Re-
gional Commission on Homelessness, estab-
lished by elected officials from the City of

128 Chronology
2007 (cont.)
Orlando and Orange, Osceola, and Seminole 
counties, meet to focus on their 10-year plan, 
Ten2End. The commission includes executives 
from Disney World and the Orlando Magic.
November 
16, 2007
Mayors and county officials from across the na-
tion sign a 12-point statement of principles and 
actions to end chronic homelessness at a sum-
mit convened by Denver mayor John Hicken-
looper, Interagency Council on Homelessness 
executive director Philip Mangano, and Melville 
Charitable Trust president Robert Hohler and 
sponsored by Fannie Mae.
December 3, 
2007
The Third Annual National Project Homeless 
Connect sponsored by the federal Interagency 
Council on Homelessness commences with 
events in 25 cities including Bridgeport, Con-
necticut, San Francisco (its 19th event), Miami, 
Nashua, New Hampshire, Oakland, California, 
Orlando, New York City, San Jose, Califor-
nia, and Detroit. More than 10,000 people who 
are homeless are welcomed at events.
January 2008
With the New Year comes a new 2008 federal 
budget, delayed but in place with new resources. 
Budget language emphasizes the importance of 
coordinating and integrating federal Department 
of Housing homeless resources with main-
stream entitlement, benefit, and service resources. 
Rapid rehousing strategies are the focus of new 
investment, with $25 million for a demonstra-
tion program for rapid rehousing of homeless 
families.
January 2008
Massachusetts’ Joint Legislative-Executive State 
Commission to End Homelessness releases its 
five-year plan to end homelessness, identifying 
as a defining principle “targeting the right re-
sources to the right people at the right time” to 
reduce reliance on shelters and increase housing 
opportunity. State Representative Byron Rushing

Chronology 129
cochaired the commission with Tina Brooks, 
undersecretary of the Commonwealth’s De-
partment of Housing and Community Devel-
opment.
March 2008
The Department of Health and Human Services 
names Pathways to Housing, the innovative 
Housing First technology pioneered by Dr. Sam 
Tsemberis, as an evidence-based practice. Hous-
ing First, which has achieved housing stability 
and recovery for persons experiencing chronic 
homelessness, showed that about 80 percent of 
Housing First participants were stably housed 
after two years.
March 4, 2008
Ten-year plan community champions from New 
England gather in Boston for a first-ever summit 
convened by the federal Interagency Council to 
measure progress in 10-year plans and in the 
development of local community champions. 
Champions are one of the key innovations as-
sociated with plans, engaging business and civic 
leaders.
March 6, 2008
Department of Veterans Affairs secretary James 
Peake becomes chair of the U.S. Interagency 
Council on Homelessness at its eleventh meet-
ing, with Secretary Peake committing to con-
tinue the council’s leadership commitment on 
the issue of homelessness and a focus on “goals 
and measured results.” HHS releases a new in-
ventory of federal programs to serve families, 
showing key information on 73 programs across 
11 federal agencies.
The Social Security Administration, whose three-
year Homeless Outreach Projects and Evalua-
tion (HOPE) initiative operates at 41 sites, reports 
that more than 9,000 individuals have enrolled 
under the initiative.

130 Chronology
Norfolk mayor Paul Fraim reports to the council 
that his city’s Blueprint to End Chronic Homeless-
ness, now in its second year of implementation, 
focuses on regional solutions and includes the in-
novations of rapid rehousing, Housing First, and 
Project Homeless Connect, and permanent hous-
ing for ex-offenders. Norfolk has achieved results 
of a 25 percent reduction in overall homelessness 
and a 40 percent reduction in street homelessness 
as well as projecting to double local permanent 
supportive housing capacity this year.
March 9, 2008
New York City announces a third year of decreas-
ing street homelessness in the city, with a 12 per-
cent reduction since 2007 and an overall 25 percent 
decline in street homelessness since 2005.
March 11, 
2008
Officials from city, county, and state govern-
ment in California, Arizona, Utah, and Hawaii 
meet in Phoenix under the leadership of the 
federal Interagency Council on Homelessness 
for a peer-to-peer summit on innovation and re-
sults in preventing homelessness.
March 31, 
2008
Australian First Lady Therese Rein and federal 
Interagency Council on Homelessness executive 
director Philip Mangano meet to discuss strategic 
partnerships, innovation, outcome measures, and 
results in ending homelessness during a visit of 
Prime Minster Kevin Rudd to Washington. Ms. 
Rein, a business leader, has specialized in employ-
ment services for persons with special needs.
April 9, 2008
President Bush signs the Second Chance Act, 
new bipartisan legislation that addresses suc-
cessful prisoner reentry with support from state 
and local government, law enforcement, correc-
tions, and the courts. Ensuring successful reen-
try will reduce and prevent homelessness and 
recidivism to jails and prisons. The new initia-
tive provides grants to government agencies 
and nonprofit organizations for employment 
assistance, substance abuse treatment, housing, 

Chronology 131
family programming, mentoring, victims sup-
port, and other services.
April 9, 2008
“America’s Road Home: Future Directions for 
Policy and Investment in Abolishing Homeless-
ness—Partnering for Results in Ten-Year Plans” 
welcomes over 250 state and local government 
partners, community champions, and business 
and community leaders to the Third Annual Na-
tional Summit Homelessness in Washington. 
The National Press Club is the site of the event 
convened by the U.S. Interagency Council on 
Homelessness, which includes a special “Inno-
vators Symposium” of experts from across the 
nation.
April 11, 2008
British Columbia’s Leadership Prayer Breakfast 
in Vancouver focuses on homelessness as more 
than 1,200 government, business, political, politi-
cal, labor, education, religious, and civic leaders 
assemble to welcome U.S. Interagency Coun-
cil on Homelessness executive director Philip 
Mangano, invited to keynote the annual event.
April 23, 2008
“A Partnership to House Every North Dakotan” 
is convened by the federal Interagency Council 
on Homelessness and the North Dakota Gov-
ernor’s Interagency Council on Homelessness 
created by Governor James Hoeven. The event 
includes the 10-year-plan cities of Bismarck, 
Dickinson, Mandan, Fargo, Jamestown, and 
Minot, Williston. The first Native American 
tribal authority to create a plan, the Turtle Moun-
tain Band of Chippewa, takes part; the three affili-
ated tribes are developing a plan.
May 22, 2008
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd announces a new 
Australian strategy, with the release of a green 
paper for discussion at a national homelessness 
conference in Adelaide.
June 3, 2008
Canada’s capital city of Ottawa, Ontario, brings 
together a broad partnership to announce a new

132 Chronology
2008 (cont.)
10-year plan, under the leadership of Mayor 
Larry O’Brien and the Leadership Table on 
Homelessness. The group hears an address by 
U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness ex-
ecutive director Philip Mangano and brings to-
gether business leaders, government officials, 
representatives of community agencies, and the 
faith community to address the issue of chronic 
homelessness in Ottawa.
The European Parliament, the sole elected body 
of the European Union, adopts a resolution to 
end street homelessness by 2015. Signed by 438 
of 785 members, the resolution calls for a univer-
sal definition of homelessness across the EU, the 
collection and reporting of standard data, use of 
winter emergency plans as part of larger strate-
gies, and creation of annual progress reports on 
results.
June 2008
The Fort Worth City Council, with the support of 
the Fort Worth Chamber of Commerce, Down-
town Fort Worth, Inc., and others in the business 
community, votes unanimously to adopt Direc-
tions Home, a new city-county 10-year plan.
June 12, 2008
Street Sense, D.C.’s street newspaper, inaugurates 
annual journalism awards at the National Press 
Club. Interagency Council on Homelessness 
executive director Philip Mangano and Wash-
ington Post columnist Courtland Milloy deliver 
remarks.
June 19, 2008
A total of 120 state and local elected officials, 
provider agencies, and homeless advocates rep-
resenting the 12 10-year plans in Oregon gather 
in the state’s capital city of Salem. The Oregon 
Ending Homelessness Advisory Council releases 
the state’s plan called “A Home for Hope.”
June 23, 2008
The nation’s mayors, in their annual meeting, 
unanimously affirm the goal of ending homeless-
ness and expanded their bipartisan partnership

Chronology 133
with the U.S. Interagency Council on Homeless-
ness to end homelessness in the nation.
July 2008
A new $25 million, three-year Rapid Re-Housing 
for Families Demonstration Program is an-
nounced by the Department of Housing. The 
demonstration program will help HUD learn 
more about how to best serve families who are 
homeless and also contribute to research on 
families.
July 15, 2008
County officials from across the nation gather in 
Kansas City at their annual conference and sup-
port resolutions on innovations that are reducing 
and ending chronic homelessness in communi-
ties across the nation. The National Association of 
Counties (NACo) endorses innovative initiatives 
in 10-year plans, including rapid rehousing and 
Housing First strategies, and focuses on home-
less veterans, cost-benefit analysis, and Project 
Homeless Connect. The national jurisdictional 
partnership to end homelessness, America’s Road 
Home, is affirmed by resolution and supported 
by new signatories; mayor and county official 
signatories number more than 335 jurisdictional 
leaders.
July 29, 2008
Federal officials announce a second year of re-
duction in chronic homelessness, averaging a 
15 percent decline annually from 2005 to 2007. 
The Annual Homeless Assessment Report 
(AHAR) is based on reports from a single Point 
in Time count from 3,800 cities and counties. 
AHAR for the first time reports on the scope 
of homelessness over a full-year period, find-
ing that nearly 1.6 million persons experienced 
homelessness and found shelter between Octo-
ber 1, 2006, and September 30, 2007.
September 
2008
Atlanta mayor Shirley Franklin launches a new 
“donation parking meter” initiative called “Give 
Change That Makes Sense,” as a way for com-
munity residents and tourists to support the

134 Chronology
2008 (cont.)
city’s goals to end homelessness. The meters on 
downtown streets accept donations as an alter-
native to giving money to people on the street.
Toronto pilots a new initiative that creates part-
nerships with shelters for rapid and success-
ful housing placements, creating a “Shelter to 
Home” trajectory for single adults and youth 
who are frequent users of shelter. The new initia-
tive shows an 88 percent housing stability rate 
one year after its launch.
October 3, 
2008
The Paul Wellstone-Pete Domenici Mental 
Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008 
(H.R. 6983) becomes law when signed by Presi-
dent Bush. The new bipartisan mental health 
measure will provide expanded insurance cover-
age for mental health treatment and addiction.
October 6, 
2008
The Department of Housing and Urban Devel-
opment releases $3.92 billion in funds under the 
new Housing and Economic Recovery Act’s 
Neighborhood Stabilization Program (NSP). NSP 
resources can be used to purchase foreclosed 
homes and rehabilitate or redevelop them. The 
resources represent an opportunity for 10-year-
plan communities to apply the new resources to 
produce housing outcomes that prevent and end 
homelessness.
October 15, 
2008
Housing and employment are the focus of 
“Housing Works” for Utah under its 10-year 
business plan to end chronic homelessness ad-
opted in 2005. At an annual homeless summit of 
over 300 state and local leaders, service provid-
ers, and other private sector and philanthropic 
leaders, Utah leaders reported over 2,100 housing 
units created as well as results of a cost study 
with Salt Lake City police.
October 20, 
2008
The federal Interagency Council on Homeless-
ness convenes its 12th and final meeting of 
the Bush administration. Meeting at the White

Chronology 135
House, Department of Veterans Affairs secretary 
and council chair Dr. James Peake leads federal 
agencies in summarizing results and the invest-
ment of record federal resources for people who 
are homeless. Secretary Peake reports a 40 percent 
decrease in the number of homeless veterans.
December 1, 
2008
The Interagency Council launches its Fourth 
Annual National Project Homeless Connect 
Week, as communities across the country wel-
come homeless people to one-day, one-stop 
events to create access to needed resources. Proj-
ect Homeless Connect, promoted as a field-tested 
innovation by the council, has been adopted by 
over 200 communities in the United States, Can-
ada, and Australia.
January 13, 
2009
Jurisdictional 10-year-plan leaders from 18 cities 
and counties across Northern California—part 
of California KEYS—meet at the newest site of 
San Francisco’s Direct Access to Housing initia-
tive. KEYS works to strengthen partnership and 
share innovations with 10-year plan leaders from 
across California.
January 17, 
2009
More than 250 of the nation’s mayors hold their 
77th annual winter meeting in the capital, under 
the leadership of the United States Conference 
of Mayors (USCM) president and Miami mayor 
Manny Diaz. The Mayors’ Task Force on Hun-
ger and Homelessness, chaired by San Francisco 
mayor Gavin Newsom, meets to affirm the na-
tional partnership.
February 12, 
2009
In Springfield, Massachusetts, mayor Domenic 
Sarno announces the second straight year of a 
decrease in homelessness, with a 35 percent drop 
in street homelessness and a 9 percent overall 
decrease in the number of individuals.
February 17, 
2009
President Obama signs the American Recov-
ery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) with new 
resources to prevent and end homelessness. 

136 Chronology
2009 (cont.)
Resources in targeted homeless programs in-
clude the Emergency Shelter Grants program 
($1.5 billion), FEMA’s Emergency Food and 
Shelter Program ($100 million), Education of 
Homeless Children and Youth program ($70 mil-
lion), and Violence against Women transitional 
residential program ($50 million) and total 
$1.72 billion.
February 18, 
2009
The Obama administration announces $1.6 bil-
lion in record targeted homeless assistance grant 
funding from the U.S. Department of Housing 
and Urban Development to more than 6,300 lo-
cal programs to provide housing, shelter, and 
supportive services to individuals and families. 
Twenty-three new sites for a national Rapid Re-
Housing for Families Demonstration Program 
are also announced.
February 25, 
2009
The New York City Department of Homeless 
Services (DHS) announces that street homeless-
ness in New York City is down 30 percent since 
last year and 47 percent since 2005, the first year 
the city conducted the Homeless Outreach Popu-
lation Estimate (HOPE) count citywide.
March 19, 
2009
The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the 
Washington State partners of the Washington 
Families Fund announce a commitment to re-
duce family homelessness in the state by 50 per-
cent in the next decade though coordination 
with 10-year plans and use of promising prac-
tices in prevention, rapid rehousing, and service 
coordination.
April 1, 2009
Seattle reports a 50 percent reduction in costs 
and $4 million in savings from its Housing First 
initiative at 1811 Eastlake. Findings are pub-
lished in the Journal of the American Medical As-
sociation. The housing success for 95 chronic 
inebriates shows that the residents previously 
cost local taxpayers $8.2 million in hospitaliza-

Chronology 137
tions, emergency services, jail time, detox, and 
sobering center visits.
April 24, 2009
The U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness 
partners with Paramount and Participant Media 
to offer “opinion leader” screenings of the new 
Jamie Foxx and Robert Downey Jr. movie, The 
Soloist, in 58 cities engaged in 10-year plans. 
The film depicts homeless musician Nathaniel 
Ayres and his life on Skid Row and Los Angeles 
Times columnist Steve Lopez.
May 20, 2009
President Barack Obama signs new federal leg-
islation that reauthorizes the McKinney-Vento 
Homeless Assistance programs for the first time 
in almost two decades. The Homeless Emer-
gency Assistance and Rapid Transition to Hous-
ing (HEARTH) Act now has an authorization 
level of $2.2 billion. More than a decade of work 
went into the new law, which emerged this year 
with the leadership of Senators Jack Reed and 
Christopher Bond and Representatives Barney 
Frank and Maxine Waters.
June 18, 2009
The U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness 
(USICH) convenes its first meeting in the Obama 
administration, with Department of Veterans Af-
fairs secretary Eric Shinseki as chair. Housing 
and Urban Development secretary Shaun Dono-
van is elected chairperson for the coming year, 
and labor secretary Hilda Solis is elected vice 
chairperson.
July 9, 2009
The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban 
Development issues the 2008 Annual Homeless 
Assessment report to Congress. HUD concludes 
that overall homelessness remained almost un-
changed from 2007 to 2008, but the number of 
homeless families, particularly those living in 
suburban and rural areas, increased.
The U.S. Department of Labor Veterans’ Em-
ployment and Training Service (DOL-VETS) an-
nounces FY 2009 and FY 2010 funds to support

138 Chronology
2009 (cont.)
local stand-down events for homeless veterans. 
Stand-downs are community-based events tar-
geted to homeless veterans. They offer a welcom-
ing and safe environment and access to a broad 
range of services. Stand-downs are derived from 
the military practice of “standing down” from 
customary activity or the front line.
December 8, 
2009
The U.S. Conference of Mayors Task Force on 
Hunger and Homelessness releases its annual 
report on more than 20 cities, finding that there 
is increased need for food assistance, increased 
family homelessness, and decreased or steady 
numbers of homeless individuals. According to 
the mayors, “Most of the cities that experienced 
drops in individual homelessness attribute the 
decline to a policy strategy by federal, state and 
local governments of instituting 10-year plans to 
end chronic homelessness among single adults.”
March 25, 
2010
The Department of Housing and Urban De-
velopment releases new studies on the costs of 
“first-time” homelessness; life after transitional 
housing for homeless families; and strategies for 
improving access to mainstream benefits pro-
grams.
June 16, 2010
The Department of Housing and Urban Devel-
opment releases its fifth Annual Homeless As-
sessment Report (AHAR) for Congress. The new 
report includes data from 2009 counts across the 
nation and demonstrates that from 2005 to 2009, 
there was a 36 percent decrease in chronic home-
lessness. Reflecting overall economic conditions, 
family homelessness increased.
June 22, 2010
The federal Interagency Council on Homeless-
ness and the departments of Housing and Urban 
Development (HUD), Labor (DOL), Health and 
Human Services (HHS), and Veterans Affairs 
(VA) release the new federal strategy, Opening 
Doors: Federal Strategic Plan to Prevent and End 
Homelessness.

Chronology 139
July 22, 2010
The federal departments of Housing and Urban 
Development and Veterans Affairs announce a 
new $15 million demonstration program called 
Veterans Homelessness Prevention Demonstra-
tion Program (VHPD) to prevent homelessness 
for veterans. Investments in five communities 
near military bases will target those returning 
from the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, to pro-
vide housing assistance and supportive services 
to veterans who might otherwise be living in 
homeless shelters or on the streets.
September 
2010
The eighth annual Homeless World Cup of soc-
cer concludes with host team Brazil winning both 
the men’s and women’s titles. Sixty-four coun-
tries field teams.
September 
22, 2010
National and local leaders join former president 
Bill Clinton on stage for the first homelessness-
related commitment of the Clinton Global Ini-
tiative. Deb De Santis, CEO of the Corporation 
for Supportive Housing, Tod Lipka of Step Up 
in Los Angeles, Philip Mangano of the Ameri-
can Round Table to Abolish Homelessness, and 
real estate developer Steve Bing represent the 
Step Up partnership, which will develop green 
units of permanent supportive housing.

This page intentionally left blank 

141
 5 
 Biographical Sketches 
 A 
number of individuals have had significant influence on the 
direction of homelessness research, policy, partnership, and 
investment over the last several decades. Some are in the pub-
lic arena in positions as government policy makers and appointed 
and elected officials in the United States and elsewhere. Others 
are in academia or research; their work sometimes attracts media 
or government attention. Some individuals have been associated 
with local initiatives or studies of importance. Some figures are in 
the public eye because of their advocacy efforts in organizing or 
litigation. 
 Included in this chapter are biographical sketches of some 
of the key contemporary figures as well as select biographies of 
individuals who helped establish the importance of the issue of 
homelessness historically. Perhaps the most recognized name of a 
person who was homeless during this time is that of Murray Barr, 
the “Million-Dollar Murray” whose life and death on the streets 
of Reno, Nevada, became shorthand for the new field of cost anal-
ysis and the chronically homeless population. The details of his 
story identify the individual human circumstances at the heart of  
the issue of homelessness. 
 Angela Alioto 
 Alioto belongs to one of San Francisco’s most prominent politic-
al families and is the community champion of the city’s Ten-Year 
Plan to End Chronic Homelessness. She chairs the city’s Ten-Year 
Plan Council formed by Mayor Gavin Newsom. 

142 Biographical Sketches
 Angela Alioto was born in San Francisco; her father Joseph 
was mayor from 1968 to 1976. She received a law degree from the 
University of San Francisco in 1983. She was elected to the board 
of supervisors and served from 1988 to 1997, and she was board 
president from 1993 to 1995. While on the board, Alioto led anti-
tobacco, AIDS, homelessness, and health initiatives. She ran for 
mayor in 1991, 1995, and 2003. She previously was vice chair of 
the California Democratic Party. She serves as chair of the board 
of directors for the National Shrine of St. Francis of Assisi. 
 Alioto maintains a law practice in the firm that bears her 
father’s name, the Law Offices of Mayor Joseph L. Alioto and 
Angela Alioto. Her firm is known for its expertise in civil rights 
and employment law, representing individuals in cases regarding 
workplace discrimination due to race, age, disability, gender, reli-
gion, and sexual orientation. 
 In the 2003 mayoral election, Alioto came in third in a race 
where Supervisor Gavin Newsom, who had been active in is-
sues regarding homelessness, won. Mayor Newsom turned to 
his election opponent to lead his new homelessness initiative. 
One month into his term, he appointed Alioto to lead the effort. 
The partnership demonstrated by such an appointment elevates 
the issue in visibility and underscores the importance of the plan-
ning partnership. 
 More than 35 partners from the public and private sector 
worked collaboratively to develop the plan. Mayor Newsom an-
nounced in 2010 that San Francisco’s Housing First focused plan, 
called “Changing Directions” and released in 2004, had resulted 
in 12,000 people leaving homelessness. Alioto co-chairs the “Cal-
ifornia KEYS” network of leaders of 10-year-plan cities in the 
state, providing a model of intergovernmental collaboration and 
peer-to-peer partnership. 
 Murray Barr 
 Murray Barr lived and died on the streets of Reno, Nevada. His 
story was reported in the Malcolm Gladwell article for the Febru-
ary 13, 2006,  New Yorker,  “Million-Dollar Murray,” which looked 
at the economics of homelessness and new solutions. 
 Gladwell reported both on Barr’s alcoholism and frequent 
use of services as well as the compassionate relationship of two 
street patrol officers, Patrick O’Bryan and Steve Johns, who knew 

Biographical Sketches 143
Barr well. “I’ve been a police officer for 15 years,” O’Bryan’s 
partner, Steve Johns, said in the article. “I picked up Murray my 
whole career. Literally.” Officer Johns’s wife, Marla Johns, was a 
hospital emergency room social worker who frequently saw Barr 
being brought in when he was so inebriated that he needed med-
ical care. 
 After years of encountering Barr and soon after the city be-
gan enforcing a new antipanhandling ordinance, the officers con-
tacted ambulance services and local hospitals. They identified 
three people who were all chronic inebriates and frequently ar-
rested. Using records from just one hospital, the officers noted that 
in just six months since being released from jail one individual 
(Murray Barr) had accumulated $100,000 in hospital bills. Adding 
in the officers’ knowledge of use of the second city hospital and 
addiction treatment and other costs, they determined that Murray 
Barr “ran up a medical bill as large as anyone in the state of Ne-
vada.” As stated by Officer O’Bryan, “It cost us one million dollars 
not to do something about Murray.” 
 Murray Barr died on the streets in 2005. His story as re-
ported by Malcolm Gladwell became a tool passed hand to hand 
by policy makers and 10-year-plan partners making the new eco-
nomic argument common to every city. 
 Ellen Bassuk, MD 
 Bassuk is managing director of the Center for Social Innovation 
(previous founder and president of the National Center on Fam-
ily Homelessness) and associate professor of psychiatry at Har-
vard Medical School. The center operates the Department of 
Health and Human Services Homelessness Resource Center, an 
online resource for training and technical assistance. 
 A board-certified psychiatrist, she has published many ar-
ticles, monographs, and books on the issue that report her work 
on some of the key research about homeless families and children. 
Her research and writing examines risks of family homelessness 
and the impact of homelessness on the mental and physical health 
of women and their children. She has focused on the relation-
ship among mental illness, substance abuse, family violence, and 
social support in poor families. She has received many research 
grants and has served on national and regional health policy com-
mittees. 

144 Biographical Sketches
 Bassuk received her BA from Brandeis University and her 
MD from Tufts Medical School and completed a residency in 
psychiatry at Beth Israel Hospital, where she was director of the 
Continuing Care Clinic and Psychiatric Emergency Services. Bas-
suk was a fellow at the Bunting Institute, Radcliffe College. She 
served as editor for the  American Journal of Orthopsychiatry  and has 
received numerous awards and recognitions for her work. 
 Ellen Baxter 
 Baxter is founder and executive director of Broadway Housing 
Communities and is nationally known for her vision, innovation, 
and dedication to creating comprehensive, replicable model pro-
grams to address the problem of homelessness and disadvantage. 
She founded Broadway Housing Communities in 1983 with the 
renovation of an abandoned building in the Washington Heights 
area of Manhattan. Broadway Housing now operates seven devel-
opments, which adhere to its model of integrated housing, where 
residents with different specific challenges and histories live in 
the same building. 
 In 1981, Baxter and coauthor Kim Hopper released a report 
titled  Private Lives, Public Spaces: Homeless Adults on the Streets of 
New York City,  which generated significant public attention to the 
issue of homelessness and the experiences of people living on the 
streets. The report was based on their firsthand work visiting and 
talking with men and women who were homeless. 
 Baxter serves on the boards of the New York Coalition for the 
Homeless and the Corporation for Supportive Housing as well 
as St. Francis Friends of the Poor and Common Ground. She has 
a BA from Bowdoin College, an MA from Columbia University, 
School of Public Health, and honorary doctorates of humane let-
ters from Mount Holyoke College and Bowdoin College. 
 Martha M. Burt, PhD 
 Burt is an affiliated scholar at the Urban Institute’s Center on 
Labor, Human Services, and Population. She retired as director 
of the Social Services Research Program at the Urban Institute in 
Washington, D.C. 
 In 1983, she began research on homelessness with a study of 
the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s work. In 1987 she 

Biographical Sketches 145
directed the first national survey of homeless individuals. The 
survey focused on meal programs and shelters in cities with pop-
ulations of over 100,000, and the results were published in 1989 
as  America’s Homeless: Numbers, Characteristics, and the Programs 
That Serve Them.  In 1992 Burt wrote  Over the Edge: The Growth of 
Homelessness in the 1980s,  and she is the author of  Practical Methods 
for Counting Homeless People: A Manual for State and Local Jurisdic-
tions.  She helped plan and conduct the National Survey of Home-
less Assistance Providers and Clients, published in 1999. Her book, 
 Helping America’s Homeless: Emergency Shelter or Affordable Hous-
ing?  (2001), was based on the National Survey of Homeless As-
sistance Providers and Clients. 
 Burt earned her PhD in sociology in 1972 from the University 
of Wisconsin–Madison. 
 Louise Casey 
 Under British prime minister Tony Blair, who appointed her in 
1999, Louise Casey led the successful initiative to reduce the num-
ber of “rough sleepers” and led the Homelessness Directorate in 
the Office of the Deputy Prime Minister. The work of the Blair gov-
ernment to reduce “rough sleeping” by two-thirds in five years 
and its success in reaching that goal ahead of schedule provided a 
model for U.S. efforts which followed. 
 Casey is the victims’ commissioner for the Ministry of Jus-
tice, a position to which she was named by the prime minister in 
2010. Under Prime Minister Gordon Brown she headed a cabinet 
office review of the criminal justice system, proposing tougher 
penalties. Casey served beginning in 2002 as the director of the 
Anti-Social Behavior Unit, the government’s strategy to address 
antisocial behavior and the issuance of “Asbos,” or anti-social be-
havior orders. She was previously the government’s coordinator 
for respect, a cross-government task force based in the Home Of-
fice and focused on problem families. 
 Casey began her professional career with the former De-
partment of Health and Social Security, which oversees benefit 
payments to homeless people. She was later coordinator of the 
St. Mungo Association, managing the provision of services to 
homeless adult men. She ran the Homeless Network in London 
and in 1992 became deputy director of Shelter, a national home-
less organization established in 1966. 

146 Biographical Sketches
 In 1997, she was appointed to head the rough sleepers unit 
and was outspoken on the role of charitable organizations in main-
taining a status quo approach to homelessness. With her govern-
ment partners, she traveled to Washington, D.C., to address the 
newly revitalized federal Interagency Council on Homelessness 
in 2002, regularly participated in multilateral dialogues estab-
lished by the council with the United States and Canada, and was 
recognized with the council’s “Inspiration” award at its national 
summit in 2007. In accepting the award, she observed, “We were 
a collection of voices who said we were doing the right thing, that 
we had to hold our nerve. We had to be focused and clear, unnerv-
ing and unswerving in our utter and complete determination to 
make sure we reduced the number of people who were sleeping 
rough on our streets. To be unrelenting in our determination to 
get that number down when people wavered toward the path of 
the popular. . . . So as I stand before you, the number of human 
beings that face early death, sickness, loneliness, and a poverty of 
spirit, let alone a financial and social poverty as rough sleepers, 
are less than 700 across the whole of the United Kingdom.” 
 Henry Cisneros 
 Cisneros was secretary of the U.S. Department of Housing and 
Urban Development in the first term of the Clinton administra-
tion. He was appointed by President Bill Clinton in January 1993 
and served until 1997. As HUD secretary, Cisneros, who had 
walked the streets of downtown Washington, D.C., and talked 
with homeless people, announced that homelessness would be 
the agency’s top priority. He proposed increased spending and re-
alignment of the agency’s programs for homeless people. In May 
1993, President Clinton signed an executive order on homeless-
ness to create a “single coordinated Federal plan for breaking the 
cycle of existing homelessness and preventing future homeless-
ness.” This report was issued in March 1994 and is called  Priority 
Home! The Federal Plan to Break the Cycle of Homelessness. 
 In 1981, Cisneros was the first Hispanic mayor of a major U.S. 
city when he became mayor of San Antonio, Texas, the nation’s 
10th-largest city. As a four-term mayor, serving from 1981 to 1989, 
he rebuilt the city’s economic base. He served as president of the 
National League of Cities, chairman of the National Civic League, 

Biographical Sketches 147
deputy chair of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, and as a board 
member of the Rockefeller Foundation. 
 Cisneros left government to become president of Univision 
Communications, a Spanish language television network. He re-
mained in that position until August 2000, when he resigned to 
form American CityVista, a joint venture with one of the largest 
homebuilders in the United States. Now called CityView, the ven-
ture concentrates on investment to develop housing affordable to 
average families. He is the only former HUD secretary to be in-
volved in the issue of housing. 
 Cisneros graduated from Texas A&M with a BA and an MA 
in urban and regional planning. He earned a second graduate de-
gree in public administration from the Kennedy School of Gov-
ernment at Harvard University. He received a PhD in public 
administration from George Washington University. 
 Jim Collins 
 Collins is a business thinker and writer whose book,  Good to Great: 
Why Some Companies Make the Leap . . . and Others Don’t , provided a 
model for understanding the challenges of implementing 10-year 
plans over time. Collins spent five years studying companies that 
moved from good to great and those that didn’t. He consulted 
with jurisdictional leaders at the first national summit convened 
by the federal Interagency Council on Homelessness to focus on 
his insights about “disciplined people, disciplined thought, disci-
plined action” and the importance of “the right people on the bus” 
for success. These principles were applied in a council toolkit on 
10- year plans, “Good . . . to Better . . . to Great: Innovations in 
10-Year Plans to End Chronic Homelessness in Your Community.” 
 Dennis P. Culhane, PhD 
 Culhane is professor of social policy in the University of Penn-
sylvania School of Social Policy and Practice and director of Re-
search, National Center on Homelessness among Veterans of the 
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. 
 His primary area of research is homelessness, and he has 
been responsible for some of the most influential data in the last 
decade regarding including shelter use, population typologies, 

148 Biographical Sketches
and costs for both individuals and families. Culhane’s research 
indentifying the chronic, transitional, and episodic populations of 
individuals reshaped thinking about the needs and costs associ-
ated with homelessness as well as solutions. 
 Culhane has also studied geographic and housing market 
factors associated with housing instability and the design and 
evaluation of homeless prevention programs. He has studied the 
mental health and substance abuse service histories of homeless 
adults in Philadelphia. His work includes studies of the impact 
of homelessness on utilization of Medicaid services, public hos-
pitals, state psychiatric hospitals, jails, prisons, and behavioral 
health treatment in New York City and studies of the dynamics of 
public shelter use in New York and Philadelphia. 
 Culhane helped develop a management information system 
for tracking utilization of homeless services for the federal gov-
ernment. He completed studies of housing and neighborhood 
factors related to the distribution of homeless persons’ prior ad-
dresses in New York, Philadelphia, and Washington, D.C. He be-
came involved in homelessness and housing issues as a shelter 
worker in Philadelphia in 1982. He was an organizer for the Union 
of the Homeless in 1986–1988 and served as director of technical 
assistance and organizing for the National Union of the Homeless 
in 1987–1988. 
 Culhane earned a PhD in social psychology from Boston 
College and a BA from St. Bonaventure University. He was rec-
ognized with the 2009 Michael B. Katz Award for Excellence in 
Teaching from the University of Pennsylvania, with the 2006 Na-
tional Partner Award by the United States Interagency Council 
on Homelessness, and the 2003 John W. Macy Award for Individ-
ual Leadership awarded by the National Alliance to End Home-
lessness. 
 Andrew M. Cuomo 
 Cuomo became secretary of the U.S. Department of Housing and 
Urban Development in 1997, after serving as assistant secretary 
for Housing and Community Development from 1993 to 1996 
under Secretary Henry Cisneros. Cuomo served until 2001, sub-
sequently becoming New York State attorney general in 2007. He 
was elected governor in November 2010. 
 Cuomo went to HUD from New York City, where he headed 
the New York City Commission on the Homeless in 1991. The 

Biographical Sketches 149
New York commission’s report first defined the “continuum of 
care” concept later adopted by HUD for federal homeless pro-
grams. He built and operated housing for homeless people and 
was seen as the first HUD secretary to have experience in produc-
ing housing, as founder of Housing Enterprise for the Less Privi-
leged (HELP) in 1986 and the Genesis Project. 
 He served as special assistant to his father, Governor Mario M. 
Cuomo (D-N.Y.), who advanced state initiatives to address home-
lessness in the 1980s. Cuomo graduated from Fordham Univer-
sity in 1979 and received a law degree from Albany Law School 
in 1982. 
 Deborah De Santis 
 De Santis is president and CEO of the Corporation for Support-
ive Housing (CSH), a position she has held since 2007. CSH is a 
national organization that partners with communities in creating 
permanent supportive housing. 
 Deborah De Santis came to her national role after leading the 
New Jersey CSH program for several years. In her state position, 
she increased CHS’s lending, supported the creation of the state’s 
$200 million Special Needs Housing Trust Fund, and took part 
in the development of Homes for New Jersey, an organization 
supporting development of 100,000 affordable units, including 
10,000 units of supportive housing. 
 De Santis was previously COO and executive director of the 
New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency, where she 
partnered in investment with state agencies including the Health 
Care Facilities Finance Agency and the Department of Human 
Services. 
 De Santis served as deputy chief of staff to New Jersey gov-
ernor Christine Todd Whitman from 1996 to 1998 and also as dep-
uty commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Community 
Affairs. Education Ms. De Santis received a BS in business ad-
ministration from Babson College. 
 Manual Diaz 
 As Miami mayor from 2001 to 2009, Manual Diaz declared home-
lessness “an issue of critical importance to our city” during his 
2004 State of the City Address. Shortly after, he released  Help-
ing Hands, Mending Lives,  the city’s 10-year plan to end chronic 

150 Biographical Sketches
homelessness .  The plan called for a public/private partnership 
and interagency collaboration. Steadily implementing its action 
items, Mayor Diaz announced a 50 percent reduction in the num-
ber of homeless people between July 2006 and January 2007, 
including a 27 percent decrease in the number of persons experi-
encing chronic homelessness. By the time he left office, the city 
had achieved over an 80 percent reduction. 
 Mayor Diaz’s commitment made him a leader among may-
ors, ensuring continuing focus and partnership on the issue of 
homelessness at the U.S. Conference of Mayors, of which he was 
president in 2008. When the city adopted the innovation of Project 
Homeless Connect in “Miami Cares” events, Mayor Diaz person-
ally welcomed homeless neighbors at the door. The city’s Home-
less Assistance Program aims to identify and engage homeless 
individuals and to secure housing, employment, and stability for 
individuals. 
 Many local services are supported by the innovative dedi-
cated revenue of the Miami-Dade County 1 percent food and 
beverage tax in 1993 to establish a dedicated revenue source for 
homeless initiatives. Almost $12 million was collected in 2007 for 
the Miami-Dade Homeless Trust. 
 A native of Cuba, Diaz received his BA in political science in 
1977 from Florida International University. In 1980, he earned his 
JD degree from the University of Miami School of Law. 
 Maria Foscarinis 
 Foscarinis is founder and executive director of the National Law 
Center on Homelessness and Poverty (NLCHP) in Washington. 
She has been involved in legal and legislative issues affecting 
homeless people since the mid-1980s, when she left the Wall Street 
firm of Sullivan and Cromwell to litigate full-time on behalf of 
homeless people. Using rights-based strategies that focus on com-
mon experiences of people living on the streets, Foscarinis ad-
dresses meal programs, punitive laws, and access rights. 
 Foscarinis worked with the National Coalition for the Home-
less before starting the law center in 1989. At NLCHP she has been 
a public voice on issues affecting homeless children’s education 
and the criminalization of homeless people in public places. Her 
efforts have increased access to educational development pro-
grams for homeless children; forced compliance with McKinney 

Biographical Sketches 151
Act provisions by state administrators and federal agencies; and 
increased the conversion of closed military bases into shelters, job 
training, child care, and food program sites. Foscarinis graduated 
from Barnard College and Columbia University Law School. 
 Mayor Paul Fraim 
 Paul Fraim was first elected mayor of Norfolk, Virginia, in 1994. 
As mayor, Fraim appointed a commission to develop the city’s 
10-year plan released in 2005. A new Office to End Homelessness 
was created by the mayor and partners proceeded with the im-
plementation and adoption of field-tested innovations to prevent 
and end homelessness. Among Norfolk’s strategies were Project 
Homeless Connect, Rapid Re-Housing and Central Intake for 
families, Housing First, regional partnerships, and reentry initia-
tives. Norfolk’s commitment resulted in a more than 40 percent 
reduction in its homeless census. 
 Mayor Fraim was recognized with the federal Interagency 
Council on Homelessness Mayor’s Award. He is a member of 
the board of directors of the Hampton Roads Partnership and 
the Hampton Roads Economic Development Alliance. He has re-
cently been chair of Hampton Roads Mayors and Chairs Caucus. 
He is a past member of the board of directors of the Hampton 
Roads Chamber of Commerce, the Kiwanis Club of Ocean View, 
the Norfolk Sports Club, and the Navy League. He has been a 
member of the Hampton Roads Planning District Commission 
since 1990, and he is a member of the board of directors of the 
Greater Norfolk Corporation. 
 Mayor Fraim is a Norfolk native. He received a BA from Vir-
ginia Military Institute, his MEd from the University of Virginia, 
and his JD from the University of Richmond. 
 Shirley Franklin 
 Shirley Franklin was elected mayor of Atlanta in 2001 as a first-
time candidate for public office. She launched a 10-year plan ini-
tiative cochaired by local business and civic leader Horace Sibley, 
whom Mayor Franklin appointed as community champion, and 
the United Way. 

152 Biographical Sketches
 The key initiative of the plan, which was supported by At-
lanta and the counties of Clayton, Cobb, DeKalb, Douglas Fulton, 
Gwinnett, and Rockdale, was the 24/7 Gateway Center, which 
opened in 2005 to serve as a central point of services and reaches 
500 people a day in collaboration with dozens of community part-
ners. Over $22 million in new private funds were raised for plan 
goals. A model reunification initiative assisted 6,000 people in the 
first five years to return to family and friends, leaving homeless-
ness and Atlanta. 
 Atlanta’s creative strategy for financing new housing relied 
on the issue of a tranche of Homeless Opportunity Bonds issued 
by the Atlanta Development Authority. In total $22 million in 
Homeless Opportunity Bonds are invested in 17 capital housing 
projects resulting in over 485 permanent supportive housing 
units. Involved in the creation of the new revenue stream were a 
wide range of players, including the Atlanta Development Au-
thority, a Phillips Arena parking garage, existing bonds, and a tax 
increment. 
 Mayor Franklin is the William and Camille Cosby Profes-
sor at Spelman College. She was a cochair of the 2008 National 
Democratic Convention. She has held leadership roles in the U.S. 
Conference of Mayors, including as the chair of the Women’s 
Caucus. 
 Mayor Franklin earned her BA degree in sociology from 
Howard University and was awarded her MA degree in sociol-
ogy from the University of Pennsylvania. She has received honor-
ary degrees from Howard University, the Atlanta College of Art, 
Cambridge College, Spelman College, Morehouse College, Clark 
Atlanta University, Tuskegee University, Oglethorpe University, 
and the University of Pennsylvania. 
 Malcolm Gladwell 
 Malcolm Gladwell is a staff writer with the  New Yorker  magazine, 
a position he has held since 1996. His writing often focuses on 
unusual ideas or counterintuitive findings, and two of his works 
have particularly influenced strategies on homelessness. 
 Gladwell is the author of  The Tipping Point: How Little Things 
Make a Big Difference,  released in 2000. For many working on the 
issue of homelessness, the idea of reaching a “tipping point” that 
could produce new results was captured in Gladwell’s work. 

Biographical Sketches 153
Gladwell particularly made the point that modest new resources 
had to be concentrated on the most visible part of a social problem 
to achieve the visible result that could lead to greater investment. 
 Gladwell’s writing and his exposure to homelessness in New 
York City led him to address a 2004 launch meeting of public and 
private partners focused on innovation and economics and con-
vened by New York’s Common Ground, the Rockefeller Founda-
tion, and the federal Interagency Council on Homelessness. From 
his exposure to the local specifics of these leaders came his 2006 
 New Yorker  article, “Million-Dollar Murray,” which used the story 
of Murray Barr, who lived and died on the streets of Reno, Ne-
vada, as an illustration of, as the article’s subtitle stated, “Why 
problems like homelessness may be easier to solve than to man-
age.” Gladwell reported on several of the local examples where 
Housing First was resulting in better outcomes for individuals 
and better stewardship of public resources. “Million-Dollar Mur-
ray” became required reading and was shorthand for the reality 
of frequent users of public and private services in the community 
by people experiencing homelessness. 
 In 2009, Gladwell published  What the Dog Saw  as a compila-
tion of his personally selected writings from the  New Yorker.  He 
included “Million-Dollar Murray” in the book, noting that it was 
one of his favorite pieces and in keeping with his belief that a 
writer’s role is to start conversations. 
 In 2005 Gladwell was named one of  Time  magazine’s 100 
Most Influential People. He had previously worked from 1987 to 
1996 as a reporter with the  Washington Post.  He reported on busi-
ness and science and served as the New York City bureau chief. 
He graduated from the University of Toronto, Trinity College, 
with a degree in history. Gladwell grew up in rural Ontario. 
 Rosanne Haggerty 
 Haggerty is the president and founder of Common Ground, a 
New York City nonprofit housing development and management 
organization that creates supportive housing for homeless and 
low-income individuals. Common Ground has over 3,000 units 
of permanent and transitional housing in New York City, Connecti-
cut, and upstate New York. Its Street to Home initiative to engage 
people living in Times Square reduced homelessness by 87 per-
cent in a 20-block area. 

154 Biographical Sketches
 Common Ground’s efforts are focused on those who are 
chronically homeless; intensive transitional housing programs 
designed to move chronic homeless adults into permanent hous-
ing within a six-month period; scattered site housing programs 
targeted to the chronic homeless; and homelessness-prevention 
programs focused on high-risk families, recent veterans, and 
young people leaving foster care. 
 Haggerty founded Common Ground in 1990 to rehabilitate 
the Times Square Hotel, a single-room occupancy site. Common 
Ground has since developed numerous other transitional and 
permanent housing sites. Common Ground partnered in a suc-
cessful outreach and housing initiative for the chronic homeless 
population living on the streets surrounding Times Square. A 
key component of Common Ground’s innovative approach to 
homelessness is the establishment of ancillary services at its facili-
ties including job training and placement programs, health care, 
computer centers, and other services. Haggerty’s work to spread 
Common Ground’s success has led to partnerships with other cit-
ies through the 100,000 Homes campaign to house the nation’s 
most vulnerable individuals by 2013. 
 Haggerty is a recipient of the MacArthur Foundation Fellow-
ship for her work on the problem of homelessness in the United 
States and an Ashoka Fellow for social entrepreneurship. She 
won the 1998 Peter F. Drucker Award for Nonprofit Innovation. 
Prior to founding Common Ground, Haggerty held the position 
of coordinator of housing development at Brooklyn Catholic 
Charities, operating in Brooklyn and Queens. She is a graduate of 
Amherst College and studied for a graduate degree in real estate 
and development at Columbia University Graduate School of Ar-
chitecture, Planning and Historic Preservation. 
 Robert M. Hayes 
 Hayes filed the landmark New York City right-to-shelter case  Cal-
lahan v. Carey in 1979 while an attorney at the Wall Street firm of 
Sullivan and Cromwell, where he concentrated on banking, secu-
rities, and antitrust litigation. He subsequently left the firm in 1982 
and founded both the Coalition for the Homeless, oriented to New 
York City issues, and the National Coalition for the Homeless, a 
legal and policy advocacy organization with offices in Washing-

Biographical Sketches 155
ton, D.C., and New York City. Hayes directed major class-action 
lawsuits, organized advocacy groups across the country, and led 
legislative campaigns before Congress and state legislatures. 
 He is a graduate of Georgetown University and New York 
University School of Law. He received a MacArthur Foundation 
Fellowship in 1985 and numerous awards from state and national 
bar associations. He was named one of the nation’s 10 most influ-
ential lawyers for the 1980s by the  American Lawyer  magazine, and 
the  National Law Journal  named him among the nation’s 50 leading 
attorneys of his generation. 
 Robert Hess 
 Hess served as New York City’s Commissioner of Homeless Ser-
vices from 2006 to 2010. During his tenure, the number of people 
living on the streets in New York City declined by 49 percent and 
over 100,000 people moved from shelters to permanent housing 
in a period of four years. He oversaw a federal-city partnership 
to decrease homelessness among veterans as well as managing 
new initiatives to reduce family homelessness, support employ-
ment and education, and prevent homelessness. He joined the 
Doe Fund as vice president in 2010. 
 Prior to working in New York, Hess was deputy managing 
director for special needs housing for the City of Philadelphia, 
where his leadership on reducing homelessness in Center City led 
to greater visibility for jurisdictional officials. Hess developed the 
mayor’s 10-Year Plan to End Homelessness, reduced the number 
of individuals living on the streets by over 60 percent, and created 
the first Housing First programs for chronically homeless indi-
viduals. Hess’s approaches to the Center City street population 
relied on data collection and new engagement strategies. During 
his tenure Philadelphia won one of 11 federal awards under the 
HUD-HHS-VA Collaborative Initiative to Help End Chronic 
Homelessness, putting the Housing First approach to work in the 
City. Hess instituted “code” protocols to reduce deaths during 
hot, cold, and wet weather for people living on the streets. 
 Hess previously served as the president and CEO of the Cen-
ter for Poverty Solutions in Baltimore, Maryland, and the presi-
dent and CEO of the Maryland Food Committee. He earned a BS 
from the University of Maryland and served in the U.S. Army. 

156 Biographical Sketches
 John W. Hickenlooper 
 John Hickenlooper was elected mayor of Denver in 2003 and 
reelected in 2007. A local businessman and former geologist, he 
was a first-time candidate for public office. Mayor Hickenlooper 
launched a 10-year plan initiative by appointing the Denver Com-
mission to End Homelessness in 2003. He was elected governor in 
November 2010. 
 Denver’s Road Home, the city’s plan, adopted innovations 
ranging from Housing First to Project Homeless Connect, recruit-
ing private sector partners including professional sports teams, 
academia, and business. Mayor Hickenlooper established a repli-
cable faith partnership that brings teams from local congregations 
into ongoing support roles for families leaving homelessness. 
 In making a 2009 progress report on the plan, Mayor Hick-
enlooper stated, “The most important thing we’ve learned, is A: 
It’s possible to succeed at this; and B: To do so makes economic 
sense.” In 2008 he announced that, having documented savings in 
public systems, the city would reinvest $20 million in additional 
housing. 
 In November 2005, Mayor Hickenlooper was named by  Gov-
erning  magazine as one of the top public officials of the year. In 
April 2005  Time  magazine named him one of the top five “ big-
city ” mayors in America. Mayor Hickenlooper graduated from 
Wesleyan University, where he received a BA degree in English in 
1974 and a MA in geology in 1980. 
 William Hobson 
 Hobson is executive director of Seattle’s Downtown Emergency 
Service Center (DESC). The Center’s 1811 Eastlake project, a con-
troversial Housing First initiative begun in 2005 for 75 homeless 
men and women with chronic alcohol addiction, has demon-
strated $4 million in cost savings for taxpayers, according to re-
search published in the  Journal of the American Medical Association. 
 Under Hobson’s leadership, DESC received a Best Practice 
Award from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Devel-
opment, an Exemplary Program Award from the U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services, and two MetLife Awards for 
Excellence in Affordable Housing. The program was also recog-

Biographical Sketches 157
nized with an Innovator’s Award by the federal Interagency Coun-
cil on Homelessness. The 1811 Eastlake program was selected by 
the Fannie Mae Foundation and Partnership to End Long Term 
Homelessness for the 2007 “Maxwell Award of Excellence.” 
 Nearly half of the residents of the 1811 site have a co-occurring 
mental illness, and almost all have other chronic and disabling 
health conditions. While addiction treatment and mental health 
services are provided on site, residents are encouraged, but not 
required, to participate in treatment. The housing approach was 
characterized by one local talk show host as “bunks for drunks,” 
drawing enormous media focus to the initiative. 
 Hobson began his work at DESC as a shelter counselor in 1984 
and became executive director in 1988. He is an adjunct professor 
at Seattle University, teaching on homelessness. He received a BA 
in history and philosophy (Phi Beta Kappa) and an MA in political 
science from Baylor University. 
 Kim Hopper, PhD 
 Hopper is professor of clinical sociomedical sciences at Columbia 
University’s Mailman School of Public Health. He has been ac-
tive in local and national initiatives to address homelessness since 
1980. Hopper is a medical anthropologist and a research scientist 
at the Nathan S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research. There 
he codirects the Center for the Study of Issues in Public Mental 
Health. Hopper is the author of  Reckoning with Homelessness,  a ret-
rospective on 20 years of research and advocacy. 
 Hopper served as president of the National Coalition for the 
Homeless from 1991 to 1993. He earned his PhD from Columbia 
University. He received the Anthony Leeds Awards in Urban 
Anthropology in 2003 and was a finalist for the C. Wright Mills 
Award in 2003. 
 Jack Kemp 
 Kemp was a Republican political figure, former professional ath-
lete, and former secretary of the U.S. Department of Housing and 
Urban Development and the U.S. Interagency Council on Home-
lessness chair in the George H.W. Bush administration. 

158 Biographical Sketches
 Kemp became HUD secretary and council chair in Febru-
ary 1989, serving until 1993. The McKinney Act had been passed 
less than two years before, creating a federal response to homeless-
ness and establishing the Interagency Council. Once confirmed 
as secretary, Kemp undertook a tour of East Coast cities orga-
nized by Robert Hayes of the National Coalition for the Homeless 
to see and hear the experiences of people who were homeless. 
 Secretary Kemp committed to interagency collaboration and 
with former Department of Veterans Affairs secretary Ed Derwin-
ski moved forward the HUD-VASH permanent housing initiative 
in 1990. In March 1992, Secretary Kemp and Council vice chair 
and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services secretary 
Louis Sullivan released  Outcasts on Main Street,  a report outlining 
a national strategy to eradicate homelessness among people with 
severe mental illness. The report presented more than 50 steps 
federal agencies would take to improve substantially the system 
of care and housing options for the nation’s homeless mentally 
ill individuals. The report proposed two major federal initiatives: 
Safe Havens and the Access to Community Care and Effective 
Services and Supports (ACCESS) program. 
 Philip F. Mangano 
 Mangano is president and CEO of the American Round Table to 
Abolish Homelessness, a national nonprofit organization whose 
mission is to be a strategic partner with every level of government 
and every element of the private and faith-based sectors to pre-
vent and end homelessness. Internationally recognized for his 
bold leadership on an issue seen as intractable, Mangano’s blend 
of business experience, public service, and personal commitment 
energized partners to focus on solutions. The round table is com-
mitted to strategies that are research and data driven, perfor-
mance based, consumer centric, and results oriented and to rapid 
dissemination of innovation, information, and inspiration to its 
partners. 
 From 2002 to 2009, under both the Bush and Obama ad-
ministrations, Mangano led the national strategy to prevent and 
end homelessness in his position as the executive director of the 
United States Interagency Council on Homelessness. Mangano 
was appointed as the council’s executive director in 2002, when 

Biographical Sketches 159
the newly independent agency was charged to forward the ad-
ministration’s goal of ending chronic homelessness. Mangano’s 
successful results-oriented strategies and innovative initiatives 
focused the council’s mission to coordinate the federal response 
to homelessness and to create partnerships throughout govern-
ment and the private sector to end homelessness. 
 Mangano’s new strategies resulted in an unprecedented na-
tional partnership of 20 federal agencies, 53 governors, and over 
1,000 mayors and county executives partnered in over 350 local 
jurisdictional 10-year plans. With his leadership, new interagency 
and community collaborations were established across the coun-
try. The prioritization of prevention of homelessness and rapid 
rehousing of homeless people focused federal policy and encour-
aged local plans and investments from the public and private 
sectors. 
 Mangano led the application of cost-benefit analysis and busi-
ness planning to the issue of homelessness. His work at the council 
gained the attention of mainstream media and some of the fore-
most business thinkers in the nation. Mangano has spoken across 
the country on the abolition of homelessness and in Canada, En-
gland, Scotland, Australia, New Zealand, Germany, and Denmark, 
at United Nations and European Union sponsored events, and at 
national meetings in a number of countries. In 2004 he initiated 
international dialogue on homelessness, which included peers 
from the Blair government’s successful Rough Sleepers Initiative, 
on which the United States modeled its strategy, and Canadian 
and Australian counterparts. 
 Mangano’s work has been nationally honored by a public 
and private sector, media, academic, business, and community 
partners. He was honored in May 2009 with a doctor of humane 
letters degree (honoris causa) by the University of Puget Sound. 
He was nominated as one of  Time magazine’s 100 Most Influential 
People in 2007. He was recognized by the International Downtown 
Association (IDA) in 2008 with a Lifetime Achievement Award,  
 IDA’s most prestigious award, for “leadership, dedication, and 
generosity.” He was named in 2006 by  Governing  magazine as the 
first and only federal official ever to be honored with its Public 
Official of the Year Award.   His work was named by Harvard Uni-
versity’s John F. Kennedy School of Government one of the 2009 
“Top 50 Government Innovations” in the nation, recognition also 
awarded in 2007. He was presented with the National Alliance 

160 Biographical Sketches
to End Homelessness Private Sector Award in 2001. Mangano is 
a member of the board of directors of the Dalai Lama Center for 
Ethics and Transformative Values at MIT. He is a Knight of La 
Nuova Porziuncola of St. Francis of Assisi in San Francisco. 
 Mangano was founding executive director of the Massachu-
setts Housing and Shelter Alliance, a position he held with the 
statewide advocacy organization from 1990 to 2002. He began his 
work in homelessness in the 1980s, after leaving behind a success-
ful business career in the music industry, starting as a full-time 
volunteer on a Boston breadline. Mangano holds an MA from 
Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary in Massachusetts, a BS 
from Boston University, and certificates in business law and en-
tertainment law from UCLA. 
 Mel Martinez 
 Martinez became the first secretary of Housing and Urban Devel-
opment in the Bush administration in January 2001 and chair of 
the newly revitalized Interagency Council on Homelessness. He 
served as secretary until 2003 when he resigned to run for the U.S. 
Senate. 
 Under Martinez’s leadership, the new Bush administration 
goal to end chronic homelessness in 10 years resulted in new 
interagency initiatives to test new strategies including Housing 
First. A $55 million initiative of the council, HUD, HHS, and VA 
was awarded to 11 cities to address chronic homelessness and 
an employment and housing initiative in five cities. More than 
40 cities were awarded Social Security Administration funds to 
increase access to benefits for chronically homeless individuals. 
 Martinez had previously served as the chairman of Orange 
County, Florida, the elected chief executive of the regional govern-
ment. He was first elected to a four-year term in 1998, and he began 
a series of initiatives emphasizing public safety, growth manage-
ment, the needs of children and families, clean neighborhoods, im-
proved transportation, and streamlining government. In 1962, at 
age 15, he left his birthplace of Cuba and went to Florida as part of 
an organized evacuation of young people. He was reunited with 
his family in Orlando in 1966. He graduated from Florida State 
University College of Law in 1973. He practiced law in Orlando for 
25 years. Martinez is chairman of JP Morgan Chase operations in 
Florida, Mexico, Central America, and the Caribbean. 

Biographical Sketches 161
 George T. McDonald 
 McDonald is founder and president of the Doe Fund in New York 
City, an employment and housing innovation to break the cycle of 
homelessness, addiction, and incarceration. McDonald’s model is 
notable for his emphasis on work, or, as his program motto states, 
“Work works,” to achieve self-sufficiency and stability. 
 Over 3,000 formerly homeless individuals and ex-offenders 
have graduated from the Doe Fund’s Ready, Willing & Able 
(RWA) program, where the “men in blue” are seen on the more 
than 150 miles of New York streets which they clean daily. Trainees 
have access to programs in culinary arts, security services, busi-
ness services, pest control, resource recovery, building mainte-
nance, animal care, and computer education. The Doe Fund also 
operates a targeted program for veterans. 
 RWA has been recognized by the federal Department of Hous-
ing and Urban Development, receiving the Community Service 
Excellence Award, the Outstanding Partnership Award, and the 
first ever Best Practices Award. McDonald received the New York 
Post Liberty Medal; the 2008 William E. Simon Lifetime Achieve-
ment Award, given annually by the Manhattan Institute’s Social 
Entrepreneurship Initiative; St. John’s University’s 2008 Spirit of 
Service award; the 2008 Honor of Hope award from the White 
House Faith-Based and Community Initiatives; and the 2008 In-
novator of Special Merit award from the U.S. Interagency Council 
on Homelessness. 
 McDonald was appointed in 1991 to Mayor David Dinkins’ 
Commission on Homelessness, headed by Andrew Cuomo. The 
commission created  The Way Home,  a model for addressing home-
lessness that has influenced homeless policy locally and nation-
ally. He is chair of the New York State Independent Committee on 
Reentry and Employment, cochair of the Employment Committee 
of the Discharge Planning Collaboration developed by the New 
York City Departments of Correction and Homeless Services, and 
a member of the New York City Workforce Investment Board’s 
Prisoner Reentry Steering Committee. 
 Representative Stewart B. McKinney 
 McKinney, for whom the McKinney Homeless Assistance Act was 
named, was a Republican member of the House of Representatives 

162 Biographical Sketches
at the time of his death from AIDS in 1987. McKinney represented 
Connecticut’s 4th District for over 16 years. From 1983 until his 
death, he was the ranking Republican member of the Banking Sub-
committee on Housing and Community Development, where he 
fought to preserve domestic programs in the 1980s. It is believed 
that he contracted fatal AIDS-related pneumonia from being out-
doors in the cold during the demonstrations for the homeless that 
occurred at the U.S. Capitol during the winter of 1987, when the 
bill first introduced as “The Urgent Relief for the Homeless Act” 
was being considered. 
 Gavin Newsom 
 Mayor Gavin Newsom took office in 2004 as San Francisco’s 
youngest mayor in 100 years. He immediately launched a 10-year 
plan initiative, naming his election opponent Angela Alito to head 
a new plan for one of the city’s most vexing issues. 
 More than 35 partners from the public and private sector 
worked collaboratively to develop the plan, which was unveiled 
in 2004. Mayor Newsom announced in 2010 that San Francisco’s 
Housing First focused plan, called Changing Directions, had re-
sulted in 12,000 people leaving homelessness, including those re-
united with friends and family elsewhere. 
 The one-day, one-stop innovation called Project Homeless 
Connect was developed in San Francisco to support the plan’s 
focus on consumers and the goal of engagement, which was part 
of every action step in the 10-year plan. San Francisco developed 
an effective and replicable model of mobilizing civic will through 
volunteerism, to involve thousands of community residents who 
embraced the opportunity to welcome homeless neighbors in a 
dignified and accessible setting that offers many needed resources. 
 Project Connect, which has occurred 35 times from 2004 to 
2010, is a field-tested model of effective engagement and delivery 
of services and benefits for people who are homeless. The federal 
Interagency Council on Homelessness recognized Project Home-
less Connect as national innovation. Project Connect has been vis-
ited by planners from across the country and adopted in more 
than 250 cities in the United States, Canada, and Australia. 
 In 2005, Mayor Newsom earned an honorable mention as 
one of  Time  magazine’s Best Big City mayors. He was a successful 

Biographical Sketches 163
businessman before taking office. He was elected lieutenant gov-
ernor in November 2010. Mayor Newsom was a member of the 
San Francisco Board of Supervisors, 1996–2004. He received a BA 
from Santa Clara University in 1989 in political science. 
 James O’Connell, MD 
 O’Connell is president of Boston Health Care of the Homeless, 
where he serves as a physician, and medical director of the An-
drew House Dual Diagnosis Detoxification Unit as well as medi-
cal director of Bay Cove Substance Abuse Center. 
 O’Connell graduated from Harvard Medical School in 1982 
and completed his residency in internal medicine at Massachu-
setts General Hospital in 1985. In 1985, he began working full-
time with people experiencing homelessness at the Boston Health 
Care for the Homeless Program. The program now serves over 
11,000 homeless persons each year in three hospital-based clinics 
and over 80 shelters and other outreach sites in Boston. O’Connell 
holds positions as clinical assistant professor of Medicine at Bos-
ton University, clinical instructor in medicine at Harvard Medical 
School, assistant in medicine at Massachusetts General Hospital, 
and attending physician at Boston Medical Center. 
 In 1999, O’Connell undertook research on the deaths of more 
than a dozen people who were chronically homeless in down-
town Boston and died within a few months. He identified a com-
mon profile that included specific factors for risk, with multiple 
major medical problems key among them. This groundbreaking 
work to identify vulnerability has been translated to a “vulner-
ability index” now used in many communities to identify and list 
those most at risk on the streets in order to prioritize individuals 
to move to Housing First locations. O’Connell is nationally recog-
nized for the leadership and results of his work to develop and 
train practitioners and clinicians on successful strategies to secure 
Social Security benefits for homeless people. 
 In 1993, O’Connell founded the Barbara McInnis House, a 
medical respite program that has grown to over 100 beds and pro-
vides acute, rehabilitative, recuperative, and palliative care for 
homeless men and women. Working with the Massachusetts 
General Hospital Laboratory of Computer Science, O’Connell 

164 Biographical Sketches
designed the first computerized medical records for a homeless 
program in 1995. 
 O’Connell was the national program director of the Robert 
Wood Johnson Homeless Foundation Families Program from 1989 
to 1996. He sits on the boards of directors of the Massachusetts 
Shelter Alliance, the Albert Schweitzer Fellowship and the Urban 
Health Project at Harvard Medical School. In addition to his Har-
vard Medical School training, O’Connell received a MA in theol-
ogy from Cambridge University and a BA as salutatorian of his 
class at Notre Dame. He has written extensively on medical issues 
for people who are homeless. Boston Health Care for the Home-
less has undertaken research on the chronic population, medical 
respite care, utilization of hospital care, health outcomes for peo-
ple housed after chronic homelessness, and integrated care. 
 M. Dene Oliver 
 Oliver is the chair of the Leadership Committee for the Plan to End 
Chronic Homelessness in the City of San Diego and community 
champion of the plan. San Diego’s plan was chaired with the sup-
port of San Diego County and the United Way and a leadership 
council of business and civic partners. Oliver has helped define 
the role of champion, including as co-convener of the California 
KEYS network of 10-year plan leaders. Under his leadership, San 
Diego developed a plan that emphasizes regionalism, data and 
evaluation, Housing First, and prevention strategies. 
 A native of San Diego, Oliver is the CEO of Oliver McMillan, 
an award-winning commercial development firm he established 
in 1978 with a lifelong friend. He is a graduate of the University 
of California at Berkeley where he received a BS in real estate and 
urban land economics from the School of Business Administra-
tion. He graduated from the University of Southern California 
School of Law and attended the University of Southern California 
Graduate School of Business Administration. 
 Barton “Bart” R. Peterson 
 Peterson was mayor of Indianapolis, Indiana, from 1999 to 2007. 
He was the earliest mayor in the nation to support a jurisdictional 
plan. Indianapolis’s Blueprint to End Homelessness was a Hous-

Biographical Sketches 165
ing First and prevention-oriented plan that called for new strate-
gies. “Can the Indianapolis community really end homelessness? 
Those who have worked on the Blueprint are absolutely convinced 
that homelessness can, in fact be ended. . . . Setting our sights any 
lower—concluding, in essence, that some level of homelessness is 
acceptable or inevitable—is unworthy of the caring community 
known as Indianapolis.” 
 A native of Indianapolis, Peterson attended Purdue Univer-
sity and the University of Michigan law school. 
 Michael S. Rawlings 
 Since 2005, Rawlings has been the community champion of the 
Dallas Ten-Year Plan, bringing a lengthy business history to the 
leadership and results of the initiative, which was announced in 
2003. Dallas’s plan has resulted in decreased homelessness, a new 
service center and housing placement initiative, and reductions in 
community costs. Downtown crime rates, hospital use, and arrests 
and jail stays were reduced, with a reported $2.7 million savings 
to Dallas County. Rawlings has been active in national initiatives 
to share results among community champions and innovators. 
 Rawlings is managing partner of CIC Partners LP in Dallas, a 
large private equity fund. He previously served as president and 
chief concept officer for Pizza Hut, Inc., the world’s largest pizza 
chain, from 1997 until 2003, creating dramatic increases in sales 
and profits. He also leads Dallas’s Parks and Recreation Board. 
Rawlings graduated magna cum laude from Boston College with 
a degree in philosophy and communications. 
 Priscilla Ridgway, PhD 
 Ridgway is credited as the innovator of the idea of permanent 
supported housing. Her emphasis on consumer choice, the con-
cept of recovery, and the importance of “home” in ending home-
lessness underscores the priority she assigns to identifying the 
aspirations of those in recovery from mental illness and the criti-
cal role of services. 
 Dr. Ridgway is assistant professor, Department of Psychiatry 
Program for Recovery & Community Health, at Yale University 
School of Medicine, where her work includes developing and 

166 Biographical Sketches
evaluating consumer recovery education in Connecticut. She has 
done innovative work on consumer preference, created supported 
housing models, and conducted housing research including on 
evidence-based practices. 
 Dr. Ridgway has worked in the field of mental health for 
more than 30 years, in roles ranging from psychiatric aide, case 
manager, advocate for psychiatric inpatients, and program direc-
tor in a psychosocial rehabilitation agency to coordinator of re-
search and planning for a state mental health department. For the 
last 20 years her work has focused on building knowledge about 
recovery, including at the Center for Psychiatric Rehabilitation 
at Boston University, the University of Kansas Office of Mental 
Health Research and Training, and Advocates for Human Poten-
tial, Inc. 
 She earned a BA from the University of Southern Maine, an 
MSW degree from the University of Connecticut, and a PhD in 
social welfare from the University of Kansas. She identifies herself 
as a consumer, having had the personal experience of recovery 
from brain trauma and post-traumatic stress disorder. She is the 
co-author of  Pathways to Recovery: A Strengths Self-Help Workbook 
for personal recovery. She has worked with a team primarily of 
consumer researchers on the project What Helps and What Hin-
ders Recovery? Her work includes recovery and resilience, hope, 
and spirituality; defining recovery; and development of recovery 
performance indicators. 
 Debra J. Rog, PhD 
 Rog is vice president of the Rockville Institute, a position she as-
sumed in 2007 at the research and evaluation organization. She 
is an associate director with Westat, a statistical services research 
corporation. She is known both as a researcher on homelessness 
and as a leading expert on program evaluation. Dr. Rog was 2009 
president of the American Evaluation Association (AEA). She has 
expertise in family and individual homelessness, mental health, 
and cost issues as well as experience in evaluating collaborative 
initiatives. 
 In 1990 she became director of the Washington Office of the 
Center for Mental Health Policy of the Vanderbilt Institute for 
Public Policy Studies, a position she held for 17 years. Dr. Rog 
has published and presented widely and edited books, series, and 

Biographical Sketches 167
journals. She has been project manager for research initiatives sup-
ported by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the Department 
of Health and Human Services’ Center for Mental Health Services 
and Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administra-
tion, the National Institute of Mental Health, the National Mental 
Health Association, and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. 
 Dr. Rog received a BS in psychology from American Inter-
national College, an MA in social psychology from Kent State 
University, and a PhD in social psychology from Vanderbilt Uni-
versity. 
 Nan Roman 
 Roman is president of the National Alliance to End Homelessness 
(NAEH). She was previously vice president for policy and pro-
grams with the alliance, where she has worked since 1987. She 
has helped build the organization into a leading voice on home-
lessness in Washington, D.C., with more than 2,000 nonprofit 
members. She oversees all program and policy activities, includ-
ing congressional and federal agency advocacy, training, technical 
assistance, and research. 
 Roman was part of the U.S. delegation to Habitat II in Is-
tanbul. She received the Miss America Woman of Achievement 
Award, which is awarded annually to a woman who has demon-
strated zeal, devotion, and contribution to an issue of benefit to 
American society. In 2000 she unveiled a 10-year alliance plan to 
end homelessness around which NAEH hoped to organize sup-
port for new programs. She has been active in antipoverty and 
community organizing activity at the local and national levels for 
over 20 years. Roman received her BA and MA from the Univer-
sity of Illinois. 
 Sister Mary Scullion 
 Scullion of Philadelphia belongs to the Sisters of Mercy religious 
order. She is cofounder and executive director of Project HOME 
and has more than 35 years of experience working with people 
who are homeless, especially people with mental illness. Sister 
Mary has been active in advocacy for people who are homeless 

168 Biographical Sketches
and mentally ill, and she cochaired the Philadelphia 10-year plan 
steering committee. 
 In 1985 she cofounded Woman of Hope, a program of perma-
nent housing and services for women. She helped establish the 
Outreach Coordination Center in 1988 to improve coordination 
of public and private organizations doing outreach to people who 
are chronically homeless. 
 Sister Mary was named as one of  Time  magazine’s most influ-
ential people in 2009 and has been recognized by the Philadelphia 
Bar Association, presented with the Prudential National Nonprofit 
Leadership Award and the 1992 Philadelphia Award. In 2002, she 
was a national awardee of the Ford Foundation “Leadership for a 
Changing World” award. She earned a BA from St. Joseph’s Uni-
versity in psychology and an MSW from Temple University. 
 Marybeth Shinn, PhD 
 Shinn is professor of human and organizational development at 
Vanderbilt University. Her research focuses on poverty, homeless-
ness, and mental illness. She has been involved in research to iden-
tify effective prevention strategies, successful housing models for 
homeless families, and homelessness among older adults. She is 
currently involved in an evaluation of the federal multisite initia-
tive to develop rapid rehousing models for homeless families. 
 Prior to her Vanderbilt position, Shinn held positions at New 
York University’s Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, and 
Human Development, as professor of applied psychology and 
public policy, at the Robert F. Wagner School of Public Service, as 
professor of psychology and public policy, on the Faculty of Arts 
and Science as chair, Department of Psychology. 
 Shinn focuses on the use of research to guide public policy. 
She has done collaborative studies with New York City’s Depart-
ment of Homeless Services, Human Resources Administration, 
and Department of Health. She has participated in state policy 
academies run by the federal Interagency Council on Homeless-
ness and served on research advisory panels for the New York 
City Department of Homeless Services and the National Low In-
come Housing Coalition, among others. 
 Shinn earned her PhD from the University of Michigan in 
community and social psychology, an MA in social psychology 
from Michigan, and a BA in social relations from Radcliffe Col-
lege, Harvard University. 

Biographical Sketches 169
 Horace Sibley 
 Sibley retired in 2009 as chair of the Atlanta Regional Commission 
on Homelessness, the implementing body of the Blueprint to End 
Homelessness in Atlanta in Ten Years. Having recently retired as 
a partner at Atlanta’s King & Spalding law firm, Sibley helped 
develop the regional plan as community champion appointed by 
former mayor Shirley Franklin in 2002. Sibley’s leadership and 
partnership with other cities helped define the potential of com-
munity champions and the importance of their private sector 
partnerships in ending homelessness. 
 The commission worked for 90 days to develop the plan ad-
opted in early 2003. Over $30 million in private investments has 
been leveraged into the plan to date. Outstanding accomplish-
ments of the partners include creation of the Gateway Center as 
a focus of services, new housing developed with a bond issue, 
development of housing secured from Fort McPherson when it 
closed, and a model reunification initiative that helps people re-
turn to their community of origin. 
 Mr. Sibley, a native of Philadelphia, has numerous civic and 
charitable involvements. He was one of the original group of 
Atlanta citizens who organized to bring the 1996 Summer Olym-
pics to Atlanta. He was on the executive committee of the Atlanta 
Organizing Committee and chairman of the International Af-
fairs Committee, serving as general counsel to and as a member of 
the board of directors of the Atlanta Committee. He has served on 
the Carter Center board of advisors and serves on the board of the 
Calloway Gardens Foundation. 
 Sibley received a BA from Vanderbilt University; an LLB 
from the University of Georgia; and an MBA from Georgia State 
University. He served as a captain in the U.S. Army Third Infantry 
Division in Germany. 
 Mitch Snyder 
 Snyder was a member and highly visible spokesperson for the 
Community for Creative Non-Violence (CCNV) in Washing-
ton, D.C., which he joined in 1973 to open a small residence for 
homeless people who would otherwise be held in jail because 
they lacked a fixed address. 
 He had recently been released from federal prison, where 
he had met antiwar activists who influenced his thinking about 

170 Biographical Sketches
social justice. Snyder was born in Brooklyn, New York, and quit 
school as a teenager. He committed numerous acts of nonviolent 
civil disobedience, fasted publicly, and lived on the streets for ex-
tended periods of time to draw attention to the needs of homeless 
people. 
 He engaged the interest and participation of many policy 
makers and celebrities who joined and supported some of the 
more visible protests against homelessness, including the land-
mark HOUSING NOW! March in Washington, D.C., in 1989. He 
led the campaign for Initiative 17, a D.C. ballot measure that was 
passed with a 72 percent vote in support of providing shelter for 
all in need in 1984. He led the 1986–1987 campaign to develop 
and pass comprehensive federal legislation to help homeless peo-
ple. As part of this effort, he slept outside the U.S. Capitol from 
the time the bill was introduced until its ultimate passage as the 
Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act. Advocates, pro-
viders, and homeless people joined the effort by traveling to 
Washington and sleeping outside the Capitol at night and visiting 
members of Congress during the day. 
 He co-authored  Homelessness in America: A Forced March to 
Nowhere  with Mary Ellen Hombs. He was well-known as an orga-
nizer and activist as well as a speaker on poverty and homeless-
ness. He committed suicide in 1990. 
 Sam J. Tsemberis, PhD 
 Tsemberis is founder and CEO of the innovative Pathways to 
Housing program created in 1992. Pathways has since defined the 
widely adopted Housing First strategy for people experiencing 
chronic homelessness. Pathways to Housing provides immedi-
ate access to independent permanent apartments to individuals 
who are homeless and who have psychiatric disabilities and sub-
stance use disorders. More than 85 percent of individuals have 
succeeded in their housing. The strategy was named an evidence-
based practice by the federal Department of Health and Human 
Services in 2007. Tsemberis authored  Housing First: The Pathways 
Model to End Homelessness for People with Mental Illness and Addic-
tion  published in 2010 as a guide to creating Housing First. 
 Pathways has been replicated in Philadelphia and Washing-
ton, D.C., and is under development in numerous other cities 
worldwide. Pathways to Housing has been widely profiled by na-

Biographical Sketches 171
tional media, including NPR, PBS, the  New York  Times,  the  Wash-
ington  Post, and the  Christian Science Monitor. 
 Tsemberis, who had worked as part of a New York psychiatric 
street outreach team prior to establishing Pathways, has served 
as principal investigator for several federally funded studies of 
homelessness, mental illness, and substance abuse. He has pub-
lished numerous articles and book chapters on the topics of effec-
tive housing and treatment interventions for individuals who are 
homeless and have psychiatric disabilities and consumer choice. 
 His work has been widely recognized, including by the fed-
eral Interagency Council on Homelessness, New School for So-
cial Research, National Alliance for the Mentally Ill, American 
Psychiatric Association, and National Alliance to End Homeless-
ness. Tsemberis earned a BA in psychology and English from Sir 
George Williams University, an MA in psychology from the New 
School for Social Research, and a PhD in psychology from New 
York University. He completed internships in psychology at Bel-
levue Hospital, NYU Medical Center. 
 Representative Bruce Vento 
 Vento was a 12-term Democratic member of the U.S. House of 
Representatives from St. Paul, Minnesota. He served on the Hous-
ing and Community Opportunity Subcommittee, where he helped 
lead congressional efforts to assist homeless people by establish-
ing the Emergency Shelter Grants program and sponsoring legis-
lation on homeless programs throughout the 19080s and 1990s. 
 Vento was elected to the House of Representatives in 1976. 
He was born in St. Paul and attended the University of Minne-
sota and Wisconsin State University. He was a science and social 
studies teacher before being elected to a seat in the state legisla-
ture in 1970. 
 Vento died in October 2000 of a rare type of cancer caused 
by inhaling asbestos fibers. Upon his death, the McKinney Act, 
named for his late colleague Stewart McKinney, was renamed the 
McKinney-Vento Act. 

This page intentionally left blank 

173
 6 
 Data and Documents 
 Introduction 
 T
his chapter provides a documentary overview of modern 
homelessness that highlights key data, speeches, testimony, 
and government reports and plans from the past decade. Key 
policy, research, and legislative documents that demonstrate 
some of the primary facets of homelessness and the response to 
it in the United States are included here. The focus of this chap-
ter is primarily on the United States, though the initiatives of the 
European Union, Canada, the United Kingdom, and Australia are 
introduced here. Further coverage of strategies outside the United 
States is provided in chapter 3. 
 Collecting Data on Homelessness Nationally 
 The federal initiatives to develop and aggregate local data that 
could be reported nationally began to shows results during the 
first decade of the 21st century. HUD’s Homeless Management 
Information System (HMIS), which collects data from local users, 
is based on two categories of information: universal data collected 
by service agencies from all clients and program-specific data, 
which programs that receive certain types of funding must collect. 
 Universal data elements include name, date of birth, race, eth-
nicity, gender, veteran’s status, Social Security number, prior resi-
dence, and disabling conditions. Program-specific data elements 
are amount and sources of income, receipt of noncash benefits, 
physical and developmental disabilities, HIV status, mental ill-
ness, substance abuse status, and domestic violence status. Special 

174 Data and Documents
provisions apply to data collected from domestic violence pro-
grams. 
 Congress directed that data be reported from HUD annually, 
and in 2007, HUD released the first analysis of data from a sample 
of communities participating in HMIS in a report called the An-
nual Homeless Assessment Report (AHAR). 
 Since communities needed several years to implement their 
HMIS systems, locating financial, staff, and computer resources to 
produce the required data, HUD also established a nationally rep-
resentative sample of communities that could move ahead with 
reporting to produce unduplicated estimates of users of emer-
gency shelter and transitional programs. (An unduplicated figure 
means that each person is counted once during a given time pe-
riod, even if the person is served multiple times or seen at mul-
tiple programs.) 
 AHAR uses two data sources described here in the 2008 HUD 
report. Continuum of care applications are submitted to HUD 
annually as part of the competitive funding process and provide 
one-night, Point-in-Time (PIT) counts of both sheltered and un-
sheltered homeless populations. The PIT counts are based on the 
number of homeless persons on a single night during the last 
week in January, and the most recent PIT counts for which data 
are available nationally were conducted in January 2008. 
 Homeless Management Information System (HMIS) are elec-
tronic administrative databases that are designed to record and 
store client-level information on the characteristics and service 
needs of homeless persons. HMIS data is used to produce counts 
of the sheltered homeless population over a full year—that is, 
people who used emergency shelter or transitional housing pro-
grams at some time during the course of a year. 
 According the first AHAR, “Since 2005, communities have 
been submitting unduplicated counts of shelter users as well as 
other information about their demographic characteristics and 
patterns of service use for analysis and reporting in the AHAR. 
HUD has supported local efforts to submit data to the AHAR by 
providing technical assistance on how to increase participation in 
HMIS among homeless service providers and on improving the 
accuracy and reliability of the data.” 
 To date, five AHAR reports have been submitted to Congress. 
The 2005 AHAR covered a three-month period in 2005 and used 
HMIS data reported by 63 communities. The 2006 AHAR covered 

Introduction 175
six months, January through June 2006, and included information 
from 74 communities. 
 The 2007 AHAR was the first report to cover an entire year, 
October 2006–September 2007, and serves as the baseline for ana-
lyzing trends over time. The number of communities providing 
useable data had increased to 98. The 2008 AHAR used HMIS 
data provided by 222 communities nationwide, covering about 
40 percent of the total U.S. population, to produce nationwide es-
timates of sheltered homelessness. The report covers the period 
from October 2007 through September 2008. 
 The 2009 AHAR, which covers the period from October 2008 
to September 2009, reports an increase of 66 percent in the number 
of participating communities when compared to 2008. A total of 
2,988 counties and 1,056 cities contributed data. 
 Finally, as part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment 
Act of 2009, Congress allocated $1.5 billion for a Homelessness 
Prevention Fund, which supports HPRP. The purpose of HPRP is 
to provide homelessness prevention assistance to households who 
would otherwise become homeless—many due to the economic 
crisis—and to provide assistance to rapidly rehouse persons who 
are homeless. HPRP data are included in HUD’s Pulse Report. 
 What the AHAR Data Reveal 
 Here are key findings from the 2009 AHAR, reporting data 
through September 30, 2008. 
 Data from Point-in-Time Estimates of Homeless Persons 
in 2008   On a single night in January 2009 when counts were con-
ducted across the nation, there were an estimated 643,067 people 
experiencing homelessness (including both sheltered and unshel-
tered people). More than 60 percent were in shelter or transitional 
programs, and 37 percent were living on the streets or in places 
unfit for human habitation according to the homeless definition. 
Just 31.8 percent were from rural or suburban areas. 
 Individuals accounted for 63 percent of the population, and 
37 percent of those counted were in a family. Just 21 percent of 
family members were without shelter, compared to almost half 
of all homeless individuals. The estimate of people experiencing 
chronic homelessness was 110,917, demonstrating over a 10 per-
cent decrease from the 2008 count of 124,135 chronically homeless 

176 Data and Documents
people, and a total 36 percent drop in chronic homelessness since 
2005. All of the 2009 decrease was among unsheltered chronically 
homeless people. 
 Per the findings of research, a chronically homeless person 
is defined as an unaccompanied homeless individual with a dis-
abling condition who has either been continuously homeless for 
a year or more or has had at least four episodes of homelessness 
in the past three years. To be considered chronically homeless, a 
person must have been on the streets or in emergency shelter (e.g., 
not in transitional or permanent housing) during these stays. 
 The reported data for 2009 were collected in the context of the 
effects of the economic downturn, which was expected to show 
more widespread effects for families. 
 AHAR estimates the number of people who experience 
homelessness in the course of a year. The 2009 AHAR reported 
that almost 1.56 million people used either emergency shelter or a 
transitional program during the year. Two-thirds of those counted 
were individuals, and one-third were members of families. Thir-
teen of sheltered homeless people were veterans. 
 As was true in 2008, the number of homeless families in shel-
ter increased, and the number of homeless individuals in shel-
ter dropped. In 2009, approximately 1,035,000 individuals used 
sheltered or transitional programs at some time during the year. 
About 535,000 people who were part of a family used these pro-
grams. (A family is a household that includes an adult 18 years of 
age or older and at least one child. All other sheltered homeless 
people are counted as individuals.) 
 The profile of homeless individuals is also revealed by the 
data: “A typical sheltered homeless person in 2009 was an adult 
male, a member of a minority group, middle-aged, and alone. 
Men are overrepresented in the sheltered homeless population—
63.7 percent of homeless adults are men, compared to 40.5 percent 
of adults in poverty. African Americans make up 38.7 percent of 
the sheltered homeless population, about 1.5 times their share of 
the poverty population. Only 2.8 percent of the sheltered home-
less population is 62 years old or older. Homeless people have 
higher rates of disability than either the poverty population or the 
total U.S. population; slightly over two-thirds of sheltered home-
less adults have a disability, according to HMIS data.” 
 Adults in sheltered homeless families have a very different 
profile. Most families are headed by women under age 31. Very 
few of these women are either veterans or have a disability. Some 

Introduction 177
60 percent of family members are children, with the majority un-
der age 6. 
 Most people who were counted stayed fairly briefly in shel-
ter. For individuals, the median length of stay was 17 days, and 
for families it was 36 days. 
 Homeless individuals and families are also identified by ge-
ography, and analysis shows that they offer a very different pic-
ture from both the general population and the poverty population. 
Homeless people in shelter in cities are nearly twice the num-
ber of people in poverty, 68.2 percent versus 35.6 percent. Over 
70 percent of homeless individuals are in cities, versus just over 
60 percent of homeless families. 
 Besides demographics and the location of people who were 
counted, there is also data on where people came from to the lo-
cation where they were counted. Almost 40 percent of those in 
shelter or transitional programs came from other homeless situa-
tions. Another 40 percent came to shelter for housing of their own 
or shared housing, and the balance of those counted were either 
in institutions or settings such as motels. Families were more 
likely to have been in housing before coming to shelter. Of more 
than 6o percent who were in housing, 20 percent were in their 
own housing, 29 percent were with family, and 14 percent were 
with friends. 
 HUD found that more homeless individuals came to shelter 
from places not meant for human habitation than in 2008. Ac-
cording to HUD, “This may suggest that communities are hav-
ing some success in getting people off the ‘street’ and into shelter 
or other forms of housing, especially since the overall number of 
unsheltered homeless individuals reported by communities in 
the PIT count did not go up.” 
 HUD analyzed some of the trends as follows: 
 The overall number of sheltered homeless people in-
creased slightly between 2007 and 2008 before dropping 
slightly—by about 2 percent or 35,000 people—between 
2008 and 2009. The continued rise in family homeless-
ness across the three years, from 131,000 families in 2007 
to 170,000 families in 2009, is almost certainly related 
to the recession. However, the increase was more pro-
nounced between 2007 and 2008, even through unem-
ployment rates remained high during the 2009 reporting 
period (October 2008 through September 2009). It may 

178 Data and Documents
be that many families already at risk of becoming home-
less lacked sufficient support networks and became 
homeless almost immediately after the economy turned 
down. A much larger group turned to family and friends 
and may be doubled up and still at great risk of becom-
ing homeless. The percentage of adults in families who 
reported that they had been staying with families be-
fore entering shelter increased steadily over the three-
year period, from 24.2 percent in 2007 to 29.4 percent in 
2009, as did the total percentage reporting that they had 
been in some sort of ‘housed’ situation before becoming 
homeless, reaching 62.5 percent in 2009. 
 HUD counted and analyzed the resources to shelter peo-
ple. In 2009, data showed a total of 643,423 “beds” nationwide 
in 20,065 shelter, transitional programs, permanent supportive 
housing, and safe haven programs. HUD uses the term “beds” 
to apply to all these settings. HUD noted that 2009 data show the 
first increase in permanent housing (versus shelter) in the count. 
According to data, permanent supportive housing—key to reduc-
ing chronic homelessness—increased by almost 60,000 beds in the 
period 2006–2009. 
 Various geographic patterns are identified in the data. AHAR 
found that the largest numbers of people who are homeless are 
counted in specific coastal states: California, New York, and Flor-
ida account for 39 percent of those enumerated in the one-night 
count in 2009. HUD analyzed the regional percentage of the total 
homeless population counted and found the following distribu-
tions. The Northeast counted 18 percent of the total homeless 
population, the same percentage of the total U.S. population that 
it represents. The Midwest had 12 percent of the homeless popula-
tion and 22 percent of the U.S. population. The South reported 
32 percent of the homeless population and 37 percent of the gen-
eral population. Finally, the West showed 37 percent of the home-
less population and just 23 percent of the U.S. population. 
 Homelessness in the States 
 The 2009 AHAR provides insights into the number of people who 
are homeless on a state-by-state basis and compares the data to 
the entire homeless population and establishes a rate of homeless-
ness in the state. The five states with the largest homeless popula-
tion are listed in Table 6.1. 

Introduction 179
 Measuring homelessness as a percentage of total state pop-
ulation, the five states with the highest percentage are listed in 
Table 6.2. 
 When comparing the number of people counted as homeless, 
HUD also examined the ratio of available shelter and other beds 
by state by population. Washington, D.C., while not a state, has 
the highest ratio, at 17.1 beds per 1,000 people. New York reports 
4.8 beds per 1,000 and reports the largest inventory (94,500) in the 
nation, in part because of the requirement that many people be 
sheltered. California follows with 88,688, and then the numbers 
drop dramatically to 32,000. California and New York together 
have 29 percent of the nation’s capacity. Wyoming has the small-
est number of beds (835), and Mississippi the fewest per capita 
(0.6 per 1,000). 
 The Homelessness Pulse Project 
 HUD began a new limited data project with quarterly reports to 
look at possible trends in more current time than the annual col-
lection reported in AHRA. Called the Homelessness Pulse Project, 
the data for May 2010 showed the following. 
TABLE 6.1
The five states with the largest homeless population
California
133,129
New York
61,067
Florida
55,599
Texas
36,761
Washington
22,782
TABLE 6.2
Measuring homelessness as a percentage of total state population, 
the five states with the highest percentage
Nevada
0.55 percent
Hawaii
0.45 percent
Oregon
0.45 percent
California
0.36 percent
Washington
0.34 percent

180 Data and Documents
 Pulse reports the number of people homeless, the number of 
newly homeless people served during the quarter, and certain so-
cioeconomic data. Nine sites were involved in the 2009 launch of 
the project: Bridgeport, Connecticut; Cleveland, Ohio, Kentucky; 
New York; Phoenix; Polk County, Florida; Richmond, Virginia; 
Shreveport, Louisiana; and Washington, D.C. 
 Data are reported for shelters and transitional programs, 
along with existing point-in-time count data. For new clients, data 
includes household type, disability, veteran status, living arrange-
ments before coming to shelter, and length of stay in prior living 
situation. 
 All sites experienced increased unemployment in 2009. How-
ever, six of the nine sites reported improvements in late 2009, with 
having reporting declining unemployment and one reporting 
stable numbers. Shreveport, Louisiana, reported the largest de-
cline. Other sites reported increased unemployment. 
 Other findings include the following. The December 2009 
point-in-time count found a slight decrease in the total sheltered 
homeless population from the previous quarterly count. For seven 
sites that reported data for four quarters, the total number of 
persons in families decreased by 1.6 percent in the last quarter. 
The total number of individuals decreased by 1.3 percent. Five 
of the eight sites reported more new homeless individuals than 
new family members among newly sheltered homeless persons. 
Thirty-two percent of new clients were children (1 percent were 
unaccompanied youth). 
 All Homelessness Pulse Reports are available at http://www.
hudhre.info/documents/HomelessnessPulseProjectMay10.pdf. 
 The 2010 AHAR Report 
 According to HUD, “The 2010 AHAR will continue to provide 
Congress and the nation with updated counts of homelessness 
nationwide, including counts of individuals, persons in families, 
and special population groups such as chronically homeless peo-
ple and persons with disabilities. These topics will be explored 
using data from an ever-expanding group of communities that 
participate in the AHAR, which now includes the majority of con-
tinuums of care nationwide. The 2010 AHAR also will add another 
full-year of HMIS data to further highlight trends in homelessness 
and identify any long-term impacts of the economic recession.” 
 The 2010 AHAR will be released in 2011 and will include 
new data on people served in permanent supportive housing pro-

Recent Issues in Federal, State, and Local Government Programs  181
grams in addition to the existing data from emergency shelter and 
transitional programs. The 2010 AHAR will examine homeless-
ness among veterans, comparing the 2009 supplemental report on 
homeless veterans with the 2010 supplemental report. 
 All AHAR reports are available at http://www.hudhre.info. 
 Recent Issues in Federal, State, 
and Local Government Programs 
 Passage and Implementation of the Federal 
HEARTH Act 
 Reauthorization of the McKinney-Vento program and fundamen-
tal change to their structure and approach occurred with passage 
of the Homeless Emergency Assistance and Rapid Transition to 
Housing (HEARTH) Act of 2009. The legislation was incorporated 
in the Helping Families Save Their Homes Act, signed into law 
by President Barack Obama on May 20, 2009. This section provides 
highlights of the program changes. 
 The HEARTH Act consolidates the existing McKinney-Vento 
homeless assistance programs; codifies HUD’s continuum of care 
process in use since the 1990s as the local provider process for 
developing projects and preparing funding applications; and es-
tablishes a goal that families who become homeless return to per-
manent housing within 30 days. Applications will be more focused 
on performance, including reducing lengths of homeless episodes, 
reducing returns to homelessness, reducing the number of people 
who become homeless, and emphasizing prevention, rapid re-
housing, chronic homelessness, a focus on outcomes, and rural 
flexibility. The legislation continues the requirement that people 
who are homeless participate in decision-making bodies about 
these resources. 
 Defining Homelessness 
 One key change to federal programs was the expansion of the 
definition of homelessness and the addition of several other defi-
nitions, including one to determine eligibility for prevention re-
sources. 

182 Data and Documents
 Under the HEARTH Act, being implemented for the 2011 
federal funding competition, the term “homeless,” “homeless in-
dividual,” and “homeless person” means— 
 (1) an individual or family who lacks a fixed, regular, and 
adequate nighttime residence; 
 (2) an individual or family with a primary nighttime 
residence that is a public or private place not 
designed for or ordinarily used as a regular sleeping 
accommodation for human beings, including a car, park, 
abandoned building, bus or train station, airport, or 
camping ground; 
 (3) an individual or family living in a supervised publicly 
or privately operated shelter designated to provide 
temporary living arrangements (including hotels and 
motels paid for by Federal, State, or local government 
programs for low-income individuals or by charitable 
organizations, congregate shelters, and transitional 
housing); 
 (4) an individual who resided in a shelter or place not 
meant for human habitation and who is exiting an 
institution where he or she temporarily resided; 
 (5) an individual or family who— 
 (A) will imminently lose their housing, including 
housing they own, rent, or live in without paying 
rent, are sharing with others, and rooms in hotels 
or motels not paid for by Federal, State, or local 
government programs for low-income individuals 
or by charitable organizations, as evidenced by—
(i) a court order resulting from an eviction action 
that notifies the individual or family that they must 
leave within 14 days; (ii) the individual or family 
having a primary nighttime residence that is a room 
in a hotel or motel and where they lack the resources 
necessary to reside there for more than 14 days; or 
(iii) credible evidence indicating that the owner or 
renter of the housing will not allow the individual 
or family to stay for more than 14 days, and any 
oral statement from an individual or family seeking 
homeless assistance that is found to be credible shall 
be considered credible evidence for purposes of this 
clause; 

Recent Issues in Federal, State, and Local Government Programs  183
 (B) has no subsequent residence identified; and 
 (C) lacks the resources or support networks needed to 
obtain other permanent housing; and 
 (6) unaccompanied youth and homeless families with 
children and youth defined as homeless under other 
Federal statutes who— 
 (A) have experienced a long term period without living 
independently in permanent housing, 
 (B) have experienced persistent instability as measured 
by frequent moves over such period, and 
 (C) can be expected to continue in such status for 
an extended period of time because of chronic 
disabilities, chronic physical health or mental 
health conditions, substance addiction, histories of 
domestic violence or childhood abuse, the presence 
of a child or youth with a disability, or multiple 
barriers to employment. 
 Defining at Risk 
 “At risk of homelessness” is also defined, and this is especially 
important in a new national dialogue about homelessness preven-
tion, what works to prevent homelessness, and the use of federal 
recovery resources for prevention. The HEARTH Act defined “at 
risk of homelessness” as a family or individual with income below 
30 percent of median income for the geographic area (referred to 
as “extremely low income” in housing programs); with insuffi-
cient resources immediately available to attain housing stability 
and having moved frequently because of economic reasons; liv-
ing in the home of another because of economic hardship; already 
notified that their right to occupy their current housing or living 
situation will be terminated; living in a hotel or motel or severely 
overcrowded housing; exiting an institution; or otherwise lives in 
housing that has characteristics associated with instability and an 
increased risk of homelessness. 
 Defining Chronic Homelessness 
 The HEARTH Act put into law a definition of “chronic homeless-
ness,” which expanded the definition that had been in use under 
targeted federal initiatives since 2003 and that had been used to 
identify those individuals whose long-term homelessness—often 

184 Data and Documents
on the streets—was accompanied by disability (defined as a phys-
ical, mental, or emotional impairment, including an impairment 
caused by alcohol or drug abuse, post-traumatic stress disorder or 
brain injury, a developmental disability, or AIDS). Families were 
added to the definition. 
 The new definition is summarized as: “The term ‘chronically 
homeless’ means, with respect to an individual or family, that the 
individual or family (i) is homeless and lives or resides in a place 
not meant for human habitation, a safe haven, or in an emergency 
shelter; (ii) has been homeless and living or residing in a place not 
meant for human habitation, a safe haven, or in an emergency shel-
ter continuously for at least 1 year or on at least 4 separate occasions 
in the last 3 years; and (iii) has an adult head of household (or a 
minor head of household if no adult is present in the household) 
with a diagnosable substance use disorder, serious mental illness, 
developmental, post-traumatic stress disorder, cognitive impair-
ments resulting from a brain injury, or chronic physical illness or 
disability, including the co-occurrence of 2 or more of those condi-
tions.” 
 The new law noted, “A person who currently lives or resides 
in an institutional care facility, including a jail, substance abuse or 
mental health treatment facility, hospital or other similar facility, 
and has resided there for fewer than 90 days shall be considered 
chronically homeless.” 
 Eligible Activities for New Funding 
 Eligible activities for funding under HEARTH include construction 
of new housing for transitional or permanent housing; acquisition 
or rehabilitation to provide supportive services or transitional or 
permanent housing; leasing property for supportive services or 
transitional or permanent housing; rental assistance to provide 
transitional or permanent housing, including project-based, tenant-
based, and sponsor-based assistance; and operating costs for tran-
sitional or permanent housing. 
 Supportive services for individuals or families who are home-
less, who were homeless up to six months ago, or who are in per-
manent supportive housing are also eligible. Supportive services 
are defined as child care services program for homeless families; 
employment assistance, including providing job training; outpa-
tient health services, food, and case management; assistance in 
obtaining permanent housing, employment counseling, and nu-

Recent Issues in Federal, State, and Local Government Programs  185
tritional counseling; outreach services, advocacy, life skills train-
ing, and housing search and counseling services; mental health 
services, trauma counseling, and victim services; assistance in ob-
taining other federal, state, and local assistance available for resi-
dents of supportive housing (including mental health benefits, 
employment counseling, and medical assistance, but not includ-
ing major medical equipment); legal services for purposes in-
cluding requesting reconsiderations and appeals of veterans and 
public benefit claim denials and resolving outstanding warrants 
that interfere with an individual’s ability to obtain and retain hous-
ing; transportation services that facilitate an individual’s ability 
to obtain and maintain employment; and health care; and other 
supportive services necessary to obtain and maintain housing, in-
cluding housing search, mediation or outreach to property own-
ers, credit repair, providing security or utility deposits, rental 
assistance for a final month at a location, assistance with moving 
costs, or other activities that help homeless people move immedi-
ately into housing or would benefit people who have moved into 
permanent housing in the last six months. 
 Emergency Solutions Program (ESG)  
 The HEARTH Act 
made major changes to the prior ESG program, renaming it the 
Emergency Solutions Grants Program. Allocations will be made 
to local government. 
 Programmatically, the HEARTH Act also made the following 
changes summarized here. 
 The act authorized eligible homeless assistance activities: 
shelter and street outreach, short-term rental assistance, medium-
term rental assistance, security deposits, utility deposits and pay-
ments, and moving costs. It identified housing relocation and 
stabilization services as a focus for both homeless assistance and 
homeless prevention, including outreach, housing search, legal 
services, and credit repair. It also established rapid rehousing as a 
major focus for homeless assistance. Rapid rehousing helps peo-
ple experiencing homelessness return to permanent housing as 
soon as possible. 
 Improving Discharge Planning 
 The HEARTH Act directs that the HUD secretary may not provide 
a grant for any governmental entity unless there is developed 
and implemented to the maximum extent practicable and where 

186 Data and Documents
appropriate policies and protocols for the discharge of persons 
from publicly funded institutions or systems of care (such as 
health care facilities, foster care or other youth facilities, or correc-
tion programs and institutions) in order to prevent such discharge 
from immediately resulting in homelessness for such persons. 
 Incentives for High-Performing Communities 
 HEARTH created a funding category for communities that score 
well and will be eligible for a bonus for proven strategies, includ-
ing for permanent supportive housing for individuals or families 
with children experiencing chronic homelessness, rapid rehous-
ing that serves homeless families, and other activities that HUD 
determines are effective at reducing homelessness. 
 The HUD secretary will annually identify 10 high-performing 
communities as measured by reliable data for five requirements: 
mean length of episodes of homelessness for that geographic area 
is less than 20 days; or for individuals and families in similar cir-
cumstances in the preceding year was at least 10 percent less than 
in the year before. Of individuals and families who leave home-
lessness, fewer than 5 percent of such individuals and families be-
come homeless again at any time within the next two years; or in 
similar circumstances who leave homelessness, the percentage of 
such individuals and families who become homeless again within 
the next two years has decreased by at least 20 percent from the 
preceding year. 
 The communities that compose the geographic area have ac-
tively encouraged homeless individuals and families to partici-
pate in homeless assistance services available in that geographic 
area, and included each homeless individual or family who 
sought homeless assistance services in the data system used by 
that community. If recipients in the geographic area have used 
funding in previous years, the activities were effective at reducing 
the number of individuals and families who became homeless in 
that community. 
 New Rural Program 
 The HUD secretary will establish a new rural housing stabil-
ity grant program for rehousing or improving the housing sit-
uations of individuals and families who are homeless or in the 
worst housing situations in the geographic area; stabilizing the 
housing of individuals and families who are in imminent danger 

Recent Issues in Federal, State, and Local Government Programs  187
of losing housing; and improving the ability of the lowest-income 
residents of the community to afford stable housing. Half of the 
funds will go to communities under 10,000 in population with 
priority to communities with fewer than 5,000 people and com-
munities receiving little federal aid. 
 Rural funds may be used to provide rent, mortgage, or utility 
assistance after two months of nonpayment in order to prevent 
eviction, foreclosure, or loss of utility service; security deposits, 
rent for the first month of residence at a new location, and reloca-
tion assistance; short-term emergency lodging in motels or shel-
ters, construction of new housing units to provide transitional or 
permanent housing, acquisition or rehabilitation of a structure to 
provide supportive services or to provide transitional or perma-
nent housing, other than emergency shelter, leasing of property 
for use in providing transitional or permanent housing or provid-
ing supportive services; provision of rental assistance to provide 
transitional or permanent housing, payment of operating costs 
for housing; development of comprehensive and coordinated 
support services that use and supplement, as needed, community 
networks of services, including outreach services to reach eligible 
recipients; case management; housing counseling; budgeting; 
job training and placement; primary health care; mental health 
services; substance abuse treatment; child care; transportation; 
emergency food and clothing; family violence services; educa-
tion services; moving services; entitlement assistance; and refer-
rals to veterans services and legal services; and costs associated 
with making use of federal inventory property programs to house 
homeless families, including the program established under title 
V of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act and the 
Single Family Property Disposition Program. 
 Federal Strategic Plan 
 The HEARTH Act directed the U.S. Interagency Council on Home-
lessness to develop a federal strategy on homelessness and up-
date it annually. The strategy was released in June 2010. As stated 
in President Obama’s introductory letter: 
 Since the founding of our country, “home” has been the center of 
the American dream. Stable housing is the foundation upon which ev-
erything else in a family’s or individual’s life is built—without a safe, 
affordable place to live, it is much tougher to maintain good health, get 
a good education or reach your full potential. 

188 Data and Documents
 When I took office in January 2009, too many of our fellow citizens 
were experiencing homelessness. We took decisive action through the 
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act by investing $1.5 billion in 
the new Homelessness Prevention and Rapid Re-Housing Program. 
We have made record Federal investments in targeted homeless 
assistance in the FY2010 budget and FY2011 budget request. And the 
recently passed Affordable Care Act will provide new and more effec-
tive methods for targeting uninsured, chronically ill individuals as well 
as children, youth, and adults experiencing homelessness. In addition, 
through the leadership of the United States Interagency Council on 
Homelessness, we are coordinating and targeting existing homelessness 
resources, as well as mainstream programs that can help prevent home-
lessness in the first place. 
 But there is still much more work to do. Veterans should never find 
themselves on the streets, living without care and without hope. It is 
simply unacceptable for a child in this country to be without a home. 
The previous Administration began the work to end chronic homeless-
ness. Now is the time to challenge our Nation to aspire to end homeless-
ness across  all  populations—including families, youth, children, and 
veterans. 
 This will take a continued bipartisan effort, as Republicans and 
Democrats in Congress have collaborated for years to make progress on 
fighting homelessness. 
 And preventing and ending homelessness is not just a Federal 
issue or responsibility. It also will require the skill and talents of people 
outside of Washington—where the best ideas are most often found. 
Tremendous work is going on at the State and local level—where States, 
local governments, nonprofits, faith-based and community organiza-
tions, and the private and philanthropic sectors are responsible for 
some of the best thinking, innovation, and evidence-based approaches 
to ending homelessness. These State and local stakeholders must be ac-
tive partners with the Federal Government, and their work will inform 
and guide our efforts at the national level. 
 As we undertake this effort, investing in the status quo is no lon-
ger acceptable. Given the fiscal realities that families, businesses, State 
governments, and the Federal Government face, our response has to 
be guided by what works. Investments can only be made in the most 
promising strategies. Now more than ever, we have a responsibility to 
tackle national challenges like homelessness in the most cost-effective 
ways possible. Instead of simply responding once a family or a person 
becomes homeless, prevention and innovation must be at the forefront 
of our efforts. 
 I was excited to receive  Opening Doors: Federal Strategic Plan to 
Prevent and End Homelessness. The goals and timeframes set forth in the 
Plan reflect the fact that ending homelessness in America must be a  na-
tional  priority. Together—working with the Congress, the United States 

Recent Issues in Federal, State, and Local Government Programs  189
Interagency Council on Homelessness, mayors, governors, legislatures, 
nonprofits, faith-based and community organizations, and business and 
philanthropic leaders across our country—we will make progress on en-
suring that every American has an affordable, stable place to call home. 
 Vision, Goals, and Themes  
 Following are the vision, goals, 
and themes from the federal strategy,  Opening Doors. 
 Vision: No one should experience homelessness—no one should 
be without a safe, stable place to call home. 
 Goals:  Finish the job of ending chronic homelessness in 5 years 
 Prevent and end homelessness among Veterans in 5 years 
 Prevent and end homelessness for families, youth, and children in 
10 years 
 Set a path to ending all types of homelessness 
 Themes:  Increase Leadership, Collaboration, and Civic En-
gagement 
 Objective 1: Provide and promote collaborative leadership at all 
levels of government and across all sectors to inspire and energize 
Americans to commit to preventing and ending homelessness 
 Objective 2: Strengthen the capacity of public and private organiza-
tions by increasing knowledge about collaboration, homelessness, and 
successful interventions to prevent and end homelessness 
 Increase Access to Stable and Affordable Housing 
 Objective 3: Provide affordable housing to people experiencing or 
most at risk of homelessness 
 Objective 4: Provide permanent supportive housing to prevent and 
end chronic homelessness 
 Increase Economic Security 
 Objective 5: Increase meaningful and sustainable employment for 
people experiencing or most at risk of homelessness 
 Objective 6: Improve access to mainstream programs and services 
to reduce people’s financial vulnerability to homelessness 
 Improve Health and Stability 
 Objective 7: Integrate primary and behavioral health care services 
with homeless assistance programs and housing to reduce people’s vul-
nerability to and the impacts of homelessness 
 Objective 8: Advance health and housing stability for youth aging 
out of systems such as foster care and juvenile justice 
 Objective 9: Advance health and housing stability for people expe-
riencing homelessness who have frequent contact with hospitals and 
criminal justice 
 Retool the Homeless Crisis Response System 
 Objective 10: Transform homeless services to crisis response sys-
tems that prevent homelessness and rapidly return people who experi-
ence homelessness to stable housing 

190 Data and Documents
 The federal Interagency Council, which developed the strat-
egy, identified six core values: 
 
1. Homelessness is unacceptable. 
 
2. There are no “homeless people,” but rather people who 
have lost their homes who deserve to be treated with 
dignity and respect. 
 
3. Homelessness is expensive; it is better to invest in 
solutions. 
 
4. Homelessness is solvable; we have learned a lot about 
what works. 
 
5. Homelessness can be prevented. 
 
6. There is strength in collaboration and USICH can make a 
difference. 
 The council decided that the development of the strategy 
should be guided by several key principles. It should be collabor-
ative, solutions driven and evidence based, cost effective, imple-
mentable and user friendly, lasting and scalable; and measurable, 
with clear outcomes and accountability. 
 The implications for existing systems were identified based 
on analysis of the populations experiencing homelessness. Ac-
cording to the strategy, 
 We need coordinated leadership at the federal, state, and 
• 
local levels. 
 There must be more program coordination and 
• 
simplification. Mainstream programs, those not targeted 
to homeless populations, need to be a part of the solution 
rather than a set of uncoordinated targeted programs as 
has been the approach historically. 
 Programs must adapt to meet the unique needs of people 
• 
who have experienced homelessness. Systems must be 
organized to meet the needs of people with histories 
of trauma and violence and must be responsive to the 
special needs of other populations. 
 Interventions—mainstream and targeted—must focus 
• 
on prevention and achieving the outcome of housing 
stability. 
 People must have better access to affordable housing, 
• 
health, and behavioral health care as well as income and 
work supports. 

Recent Issues in Federal, State, and Local Government Programs  191
 The strategy does not include more than general timelines for 
ending homelessness among several populations, does not incor-
porate percentage reductions as benchmarks of progress, and does 
not reflect individual federal agency commitments of resources to 
be invested in the goals. Each strategic goal is explained, and fed-
eral agencies are identified for key responsibilities. 
 The entire strategy is available at http://www.usich.gov/. 
 The Federal Role and Results 
 U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development secretary 
Shaun Donovan was the first chair of the U.S. Interagency Coun-
cil on Homeless in the Obama administration. Following are ex-
cerpts from remarks he made to a national homeless conference in 
2009, in which he draws on the “Million-Dollar Murray” article of 
writer Malcolm Gladwell. 
 By developing the “technology” of combining housing and sup-
portive services—delivering permanent supportive housing via a 
targeted pipeline of resources—we’ve “moved the needle” on chronic 
homelessness, reducing the number of chronically ill, long-term home-
less by nearly a third in the three years since  Million Dollar Murray was 
published. 
 The fact is, we have now proven that we can house anyone. 
 Our job now is to house everyone—to prevent and end home-
lessness. 
 All homelessness. 
 . . . And here’s why. For the general public, Murray Barr’s story 
captured something this audience is all too familiar with: 
 The cost of homelessness—not only in the dollars we spend as 
taxpayers, but also in the terrible price individuals and families experi-
encing homelessness pay when we spend those dollars in a disjointed, 
fragmented way. 
 It wasn’t that the system wasn’t spending enough money on Mur-
ray. As the title of the article suggests, the bill paid by the local, state, 
and Federal government reached seven figures. 
 Nor was it that no one cared about Murray. In fact, when he died, 
police officers in Reno gave him a moment of silence. 
 Think about that for a moment—city police officers, bowing their 
heads in silence in honor of a homeless man. 
 From cops and social workers to doctors and nurses, a lot of people 
cared about Murray Barr. 
 What was missing wasn’t money. 
 It wasn’t compassion. 
 What was missing was leadership—leadership that recognized 
when we harness public resources and the enormous wellspring of 

192 Data and Documents
human capital in this country we can provide everyone-from the most 
capable to the most vulnerable-the opportunity to reach their full poten-
tial (HUD, 2009). 
 Lessons Learned from the National Partnership 
 Former U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness executive di-
rector Philip Mangano, who went on to establish the American 
Round Table to Abolish Homelessness, has continued to take the 
lessons of the national partnership constellated by the council 
from 2002 to 2009 to local jurisdictions that are developing and 
implementing plans. Following are excerpts from 2009 remarks 
he made to the Vancouver Board of Trade on what’s working and 
what doesn’t work. 
 Whether for moral and spiritual reasons, or quality of life, or social 
and humanitarian, or just to rid our community of the nuisance, or for 
obvious economic reasons, we are united in our appetite to end home-
lessness, beginning with those who are on our streets and long term in 
shelters. 
 The research tells us that the majority of those who experience 
homelessness do so only once or twice, move beyond fairly quickly, and 
once out into the stability of housing, never return again. 
 Our focus is then on those who are long term or chronically home-
less, who without an intervention would live on our streets or languish 
in our shelters. 
 So what has worked over the past seven years to achieve the reduc-
tions we all seek? 
 Nothing has created more public interest or generated more politi-
cal will than understanding the economics of homelessness, especially 
for those experiencing chronic homelessness. People with one or more 
disabilities and living on the streets or in shelters … to know that it costs 
$35,000 to $150,000 to maintain people in ad hoc crisis interventions, 
versus $13,000 to $25,000 to solve homelessness through housing with 
support services, is the compelling argument. 
 In the work we’ve done in the States to change the national mind 
set on homelessness, to fashion strategic plans shaped around business 
principles and practices, and to create reductions in street homelessness 
in cities coast to coast, border to border, we learned what the key ele-
ments were that correlated with solution oriented reductions … 
 The single most important factor in reducing street homelessness 
in those cities was the determined and unflinching political will of the 
jurisdictional CEO. When mayors in major metropolitan centers part-
nered with us in the creation of strategic plans informed by business 

Recent Issues in Federal, State, and Local Government Programs  193
and economic principles and practices and extended their political will 
to reduce and end street homelessness, results were achieved … 
 Second was a reframing of the issue from the social service frame 
of the previous two decades to the business and economic frame of the 
past seven years. 
 For two decades we have looked through the lens of a social service 
frame, seeing homeless people and wondering how to service them, the 
approach when government ceded the issue to well intentioned pro-
vider agencies. 
 For the last half decade we added a business frame and when we 
look through the lens of that frame and see homelessness, we wonder, 
how can we solve that problem. 
 It is that evolution from servicing to solving that has captured the 
imagination of the public and private sector across the United States 
and now cities here in Canada … 
 Now, having worked with hundreds of mayors and communities 
across America, when that will is extended and the rhetoric embold-
ened, there is an expectation of change. Rapid change. As if daring to 
utter the bold goal was in itself the solution. It’s not. 
 But it is a most important first step without which results will not 
follow. 
 So the expectation that some may have that visible and real change 
can come in a month or six months or even a year fails to understand 
that this is a problem that’s been incubating in most places for two de-
cades. And that policy failings of the past and institutionalized policy 
and program missteps have only contributed to a status quo of manag-
ing, maintenancing, and accommodating. 
 That turnaround from servicing to solving takes times. We wish it 
could happen quickly, of course. But what we have seen in the States is 
that the kind of tangible, quantifiable outcomes of street reductions on a 
community-wide basis took between a year and a half and 2½ years to 
begin. 
 But once the change began to happen, the results continued to 
mount. Whether in New York which has experienced four consecutive 
years of reductions representing a 46 percent decrease or Denver’s three 
years and 36 percent reduction or Oakland’s recent 18 percent reduc-
tion, St. Louis and other cities are seeing that multi-year reduction even 
in the face of the downturn in the economy. 
 What are the other factors that have created and sustained the in-
creases? What works? And, as importantly, what doesn’t? 
 Here is some of what we’ve learned has not worked to reduce street 
homelessness on a community-wide basis: 
 
 1.  Ad hoc, uncoordinated crisis interventions only correlate with 
increased homelessness and economic irresponsibility. With-
out a plan, things only get worse. Worse on our streets, in our

194 Data and Documents
 
 emergency rooms, for police, firefighters, judges, and jailers. 
That shuffling of homeless people through crisis intervention 
after crisis intervention is ineffective and inefficient. 
 
 The research now tells us that it is morally wrong, morale de-
flating, and economically irresponsible. 
 
2.  We’ve learned that good intentions don’t get the job done. If 
good intentions, well meaning programs, and humanitarian 
gestures could end homelessness, it would have been history 
decades ago. They don’t and it isn’t. 
 
 Now the moral and spiritual and humanitarian are most im-
portant to the vast majority of those of us concerned with this 
issue. But if they don’t correlate with the strategies that remedy 
and cure and end the human tragedy and long misery, we need 
a new strategy. 
 
3.
 Just increasing resources doesn’t create the reduction. We’ve 
increased resources targeted to homelessness between 1987 and 
2002 by 500% and the numbers of homeless people increased 
dramatically. Outside of a strategic plan, increased resources do 
not correlate with a community-wide decrease. 
  
4.
 Implementing innovative program ideas has not correlated with 
community-wide decreases. 
 
 Only in the past five years have we seen these initiatives, con-
textualized in a strategic plan and part of the reduction strategy, 
have their intended impact of reducing numbers. 
 
5.  A refined intervention strategy without a priority on prevention 
doesn’t work to reduce the numbers. We simply bail the leaking 
boat of homelessness. Some move beyond, others fall in. 
 
6.  Provider driven responses and programs do not correlate with 
community-wide reductions. Only when contextualized in 
larger, jurisdictionally led, business informed plans. 
 
 Well, what does work? What has demonstrated in the real 
world, on city streets results? What is beyond conjecture and 
anecdote and has demonstrated visible and quantifiable reduc-
tions? 
 I’ve already identified the two most important factors: 
 
1.  The leadership and political will of the jurisdictional CEO. 
Without which we are left with ad hoc crisis interventions or 
plans that migrate to a shelf and are subject to a future public 
policy archeological dig. 
 
2.
And a strategic, time limited plan informed by business 
principles and practices and shaped by economic analysis. 
 
 
 Additionally what works for a community includes: 
 
3.
Identification and investment only in field-tested, evidence-
based initiatives. Innovations that can be visited and supported 

Recent Issues in Federal, State, and Local Government Programs  195
by the research. The assurance that when you invest, there will 
be a return. 
 
4.  Business community involvement to foster a business mind set. 
To move the response from servicing to solving, from managing 
to ending. And from inputs to outcomes; from process to per-
formance; from anecdote to data; from conjecture to research. 
 
5.  Read and disseminate cost studies and cost benefit analysis and 
engage to do a local one. We had long hoped that moral, spiri-
tual, and humanitarian arguments would drive political will to 
remedy the problem. 
 Not in one place has that happened. The economic data has stimu-
lated unprecedented political will to solve the problem as a cost effec-
tive strategy (Mangano, 2009). 
 The Role of the States 
 With the commitment of the Bush administration in the FY 03 
budget of a new “top objective” to end chronic homelessness in 
10 years and the revitalization of the U.S. Interagency Council on 
Homelessness in 2002, a new emphasis was placed on the role of 
each level of government—federal, state, and local. 
 To demonstrate their support for these new initiatives, the 
National Governors Association in 2003 passed the following res-
olution: 
 The Governors support the goal of ending chronic home-
lessness and recognize the shared responsibility that 
state and local governments and the federal government 
have in combating this social problem. This recognition 
of shared responsibility has been made tangible by the 
establishment of State Interagency Councils on Home-
lessness in 50 states and territories to date. These State 
Interagency Councils establish a framework at the high-
est level for coordinating and focusing state resources 
on performance-based and results-oriented policies to 
prevent and combat homelessness and for ensuring that 
the state is coordinating its efforts effectively with the 
federal government and with local efforts including ten-
year planning efforts to end chronic homelessness. The 
Governors support the efforts of the United States In-
teragency Council on Homelessness to create a work-
ing partnership that includes multiple federal agencies, 

196 Data and Documents
states, and localities. Programs that help states and local-
ities invest in supportive housing for homeless persons 
with special needs must be adequately funded. The Gov-
ernors recognize that ending homelessness contributes 
to economic development and improves the quality of 
life for everyone in the community. 
 State Government Initiatives 
 Both state interagency councils on homelessness and state gov-
ernments have contributed new initiatives in partnership with 
federal efforts and local jurisdictions. Here are summaries of a few 
examples. 
 Alabama—State Leadership for Partnership and Planning   
In 2005, Governor Bob Riley signed an executive order creating 
the Governor’s Statewide Interagency Council on Homelessness 
to develop and implement a plan to prevent and end homeless-
ness in Alabama and to serve as a statewide planning and policy 
development resource. The council was established within the 
Governor’s Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives and 
maintains standing agenda item to identify and address barriers to 
preventing and ending homelessness, resulting in initiatives such 
as the resolution of access issues to identification for reentering 
prisoners. 
 In 2006, the council released its “Blueprint Toward a Ten Year 
Plan to End Homelessness” citing fiscal optimization, increasing 
access to permanent housing/Housing First, and developing com-
prehensive and accessible statewide data on homelessness as key. 
In 2008, policy makers identified a “pressing need” for accurate 
statewide baseline data about homelessness, resulting in a new 
statewide data report. In 2006 the state’s leadership prompted 
convening an alliance of more than 40 Alabama counties with 
largely rural populations to pursue the plan. 
  California—State Social Services Undertakes Intergov-
ernmental and Interagency Initiatives Replicable Nation-
ally 
 In 2007, state agencies undertook an intergovernmental 
initiative with federal and state partners to create SSI access for 
aging out foster care youth with disabilities. Youth cannot apply 
for SSI while in foster care, so they often face instability upon dis-
charge and a long wait for a successful SSI application. In 2008, 
federal and state partners identified a solution allowing applica-
tion and determination for target youth to ensure receipt of SSI 

Recent Issues in Federal, State, and Local Government Programs  197
upon age-out. The policy was adopted in 2010 as a national SSA 
policy. Federal, state, and county partners also announced state-
wide implementation of pilot project to ensure improved access to 
SSI and medical exams for chronically homeless persons by pro-
viding real-time exams and needed supports such as transporta-
tion at time of application. 
 Colorado—Emphasizing Partnership and Vulnerable Pop-
ulations  In 2007, Governor Bill Ritter signed a new executive or-
der to expand the state interagency council to make “cross-agency 
and community cooperation the norm” and create and implement 
evidence-based plans to address homelessness. The council was to 
facilitate “tighter partnerships and linkages” among service pro-
viders. 
 Governor Ritter expanded Medicaid coverage to aging-out 
foster care youth and signed as his first bill called “Bridging the 
Gap”—a consumer-driven foster care family preservation mea-
sure designed, written, and advocated for by foster care youth. 
 Kentucky—Action Based on Research  
 In 2006 the Kentucky 
governor unveiled a 10-year business plan calling for Kentucky 
Housing Corporation to develop 2,400 permanent supportive 
housing units. Based on research showing treatment as the great-
est unmet need, the governor called for establishing 10 housing 
recovery centers throughout Kentucky for homeless and reentry 
populations with 1,000 new transitional residential placements. In 
2007, the state opened the first Recovery Kentucky site on donated 
land in a joint effort by the Governor’s Office of Local Develop-
ment, the Department of Corrections, the Office of Drug Control 
Policy, and the Kentucky Housing Corporation. 
 Massachusetts—the Right Resources at the Right Time   In 
2007 a new joint executive-legislative commission was charged to 
create five-year state plan. Its report calls for a new approach: “The 
right resources to the right people at the right time.” The common-
wealth committed to invest $10 million to establish a pool of flex-
ible resources to develop and test new strategies. In 2009, new 
regional networks are identified for investment of state resources. 
 Michigan—Starting a Statewide Campaign of Planning 
  In 2006, the Michigan governor’s leadership drove the creation 
of 60 10-year plans for all 83 Michigan counties; plans were un-
veiled at a statewide summit. State housing funds were tied to the 

198 Data and Documents
10-year plans by the Michigan State Housing Development Au-
thority, with new planning grants for innovations, including Proj-
ect Homeless Connect. 
 Minnesota—Business Plan Calibrated for Results   In 2004, 
the governor unveiled a 10-year business plan partnering the de-
partments of Human Services and Corrections and the Minnesota 
Housing Finance Agency with $10 million investment in support-
ive housing services for 1,500 Minnesotans in 37 counties and six 
tribal reservations for two years. The 2006–2007 budget supported 
$23.3 million for Homeless Prevention and Supportive Housing 
activities, including a new emergency response system that shifted 
the focus to prevention of homelessness and a rapid move to hous-
ing and a record $17.5 million bond for permanent supportive 
housing, transitional programs, and new supportive housing for 
veterans. In 2007, the state issued a progress report and recalibra-
tion showing that results exceed goals in years one through three. 
The Heading Home Minnesota private-public partnership was 
formed to support the plans. 
 New Jersey—Partnership and Innovation for Hous-
ing   In November 2008, the governor signed an executive order 
creating the New Jersey Interagency Council on Preventing and 
Reducing Homelessness. New Jersey’s Special Needs Housing 
Trust Fund targets housing opportunity to extremely low income 
people through $200 million bonds underwritten by fines and 
tickets collected by the courts from convictions for unsafe driv-
ing violations. Seventy-five percent of the resources are targeted 
to develop special needs housing and residential opportunities 
as alternatives to institutionalization or homelessness for people 
below 30 percent AMI. 
 North Carolina—State Leadership for Local Planning 
 In 
2003, North Carolina became the first state to designate a state 
“point person” for homeless policy and coordination of the state’s 
interagency council. The state’s 2006 “Housing 400” Initiative cre-
ated 400 units of independent and supportive housing for very low 
income persons with disabilities, affordable for persons at SSI in-
come levels. A state council leadership summit for all 10-year plan 
leaders includes new resources to strengthen local 10-year plan 
efforts, such as specialized technical assistance, support to adopt 
Project Homeless Connect, and a $2.1 million to fund three pilot 

Recent Issues in Federal, State, and Local Government Programs  199
sites to create housing support teams to work with people who 
have a history of homelessness and cycling through publicly 
funded systems. 
 North Dakota—State Leadership Spurs Plans  
 In 2004, the 
governor revitalized the state interagency council and directed it 
to create North Dakota’s 10-Year Plan to End Long Term Home-
lessness by encouraging and working with local communities and 
reservations to develop local plans that would be “collectively 
rolled up” into a statewide plan. Fargo became the first North Da-
kota city to develop a 10-year plan. The Housing Finance Agency 
offered technical assistance to encourage and assist other com-
munities and reservations to develop 10-year plans in areas with 
the largest concentrations of homelessness in the state. By 2008, 10 
new plans were created. 
 Utah—Regional Approaches Supported by State   In 2003, 
Utah state government unveiled its business plan to end home-
lessness. Officials set a goal to develop 12 local homeless coor-
dinating committees chaired by mayors or county officials. The 
state launched initiatives to develop chronic homelessness pilot 
programs, with the first pilot in Salt Lake City placing 17 chroni-
cally homeless individuals in existing housing inventory using the 
Housing First model with supportive services. By 2007, the state 
reported that eight pilots were underway and 500 units identi-
fied. In 2010 Utah reported further reductions in chronic home-
lessness. 
 Washington—Statewide Initiative to Support 10-Year 
Plans 
 The 2005 Homeless Housing and Assistance Act set a goal 
of reducing homelessness in the state by 50 percent by July 2015. 
The act directed resources to projects consistent with the state and 
local 10-year plans that will reduce homelessness; demonstrate 
cost savings; employ evidence-based approaches; are replicable; 
and include strong performance measurements. In 2007, the state 
announced nearly $11 million in state Homeless Grant Assistance 
Program (HGAP) awards to help fund three-year model projects 
and programs in nine counties implementing 10-year plans. The 
state ICH undertook new initiatives to facilitate successful of-
fender reentry and prevent youth exiting the foster care system 
from becoming homeless. 

200 Data and Documents
 Local Jurisdictional Leaders Support 10-Year Plans 
 Mayors and officials were encouraged by the U.S. Interagency 
Council on Homelessness to address homelessness at the local 
level with new strategies including 10-year plans to end homeless-
ness. The national organization of mayors—the U.S Conference 
of Mayors—passed a 2003 resolution endorsing the goal of end-
ing chronic homelessness and endorsing 10-year plans. 
 U.S. Conference of Mayors 
 June 2003 
 Endorsing 10 Year Planning Process to End Homelessness 
 
1.  WHEREAS, the Bush Administration has called for a 10 Year 
Initiative to End Chronic Homelessness; and 
 
2.  WHEREAS, chronically homeless individuals and families, those 
with the most persistent forms of homelessness, are afflicted not 
only by poverty but also by chronic conditions such as mental 
illness and substance abuse; and 
 
3.  WHEREAS, many of these individuals and families cycle 
repeatedly through our local shelters, hospital emergency rooms, 
psychiatric wards, detox programs, and even criminal justice 
system; and 
 
4.  WHEREAS, there exists new research findings, housing 
programs and discharge planning models that demonstrate that 
ending chronic homelessness is within the nation’s grasp; and 
 
5.  WHEREAS, mayors and cities are on the front lines of response 
to homelessness; and 
 
6.  WHEREAS, the abolition of chronic homelessness requires 
collaboration and coordination of resources at all levels of 
government, together with community institutions, businesses, 
and faith-based organizations, to best determine how to imple-
ment prevention and intervention strategies; and 
 
7.  WHEREAS, the federal government is coordinating policies 
and resources to assist the efforts to end chronic homelessness 
through the Interagency Council on Homelessness; and 
 
8.  WHEREAS, a number of major cities across the country, in-
cluding Chicago, Atlanta, Indianapolis and Phoenix, have al-
ready created and committed to 10 year plans to end chronic 
homelessness, 
 
9.  NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that the U.S. Conference 
of Mayors will, in partnership with the Federal government, 
work to meet the challenge of the Bush Administration’s goal of 
having 100 ten-year city plans to end chronic homelessness in 
place by January 2004; and 
 
10.  NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the U.S. 
Conference of Mayors will work with the Interagency Council 

Recent Issues in Federal, State, and Local Government Programs  201
on Homelessness to ensure policies and resources support the 
elimination of chronic homelessness; and 
 
11.  BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED   that the U.S. Conference of Mayors 
supports the 10-year planning process and strongly encour-
ages cities to create and implement performance based, results 
oriented strategic plans to end chronic homelessness in 10 years 
(USCM, 2003). 
  The above is reprinted courtesy of the United States Confer-
ence of Mayors (usmayors.org). 
 America’s Road Home  
 In a 2007 summit of mayors and county 
officials convened in Denver, local jurisdictional officials—who by 
2009 numbered over 1,000—signed a new statement of commit-
ment that demonstrated the evolution of key principles and in-
novations through planning and partnership. The key principles 
follow. Titled “America’s Road Home,” the statement was signed 
by more than 300 officials by 2009 (USICH, 2009). 
 America’s Road Home Statement of Principles and Action 
 Whereas: More than 2 million Americans across our country each 
year experience homelessness in our local communities, compromising 
the quality of life of the person, and the community; and 
 Whereas:  As elected Mayors and County officials, we are on the 
frontlines of homelessness and accountable to our communities for the 
well-being of all citizens; and 
 Whereas:  We recognize that no one level of government can remedy 
homelessness alone; and 
 Whereas: We affirm that we will work together with our partners in 
state and federal government as well as in the foundation community 
and private sector to maintain and enhance the sustainable investment 
of resources needed to respond; and 
 Whereas: We have taken action to create jurisdictionally-led, 
community-based 10 Year Plans to end chronic homelessness in our com-
munities in partnership with the United States Interagency Council on 
Homelessness (USICH), the U.S. Conference of Mayors (USCM), and the 
National Association of Counties (NACo) to end the disgrace; 
 Now, therefore,   we resolve to work together in a national partnership 
of every level of government and the private sector, with our fellow 
cities and counties and the United States Interagency Council on Home-
lessness to identify, adopt, and create innovative initiatives to advance 
the following principles and actions: 
  
1.  End the homelessness of our most vulnerable and disabled 
citizens who reside on our streets and in our shelters, those 

202 Data and Documents
 
 experiencing chronic homelessness, especially including 
homeless veterans. 
 
 2.  With the support of our partners work to shorten the time any 
person is homeless. 
 
 3.  Accept jurisdictional responsibility for accountability and 
results in the broader partnership that includes other levels of 
government and the private sector for an issue that is visible, 
expensive, and unacceptable in our communities. 
  
 4.  Affirm our jurisdictionally-led, community-based 10 Year 
Plans as the community’s primary planning strategy to effect 
accountability and results in ending and preventing home-
lessness. 
 
 5.  Develop these plans to ensure that the measurable outcomes 
are sustainable and render lasting solutions to homelessness 
  
 6.  Endorse housing solutions as our primary investment to end 
homelessness, recognizing that shelter and punitive responses 
are often expensive and ineffective in reducing numbers and 
restoring lives and affirm that permanent supportive housing 
and rapid rehousing models offer our most disabled citizens 
the housing and services they need in a cost effective response. 
 
 7.  Affirm the work of faith and community based agencies for 
the work they have done on the frontlines for decades and 
partner with them to fashion innovative responses that are 
results-oriented. 
 
 8.  Invite the business and philanthropic communities to be a 
partner in our efforts, especially local business associations, 
foundations, Business Improvement Districts, the United Way, 
and Chambers of Commerce. 
 
 9.  Work with the United States Interagency Council on Home-
lessness, the United States Conference of Mayors Task Force on 
Hunger and Homelessness, the National Association of Coun-
ties (NACo), and the Partnership to End Long Term Homeless-
ness to assure rapid dissemination of innovations that ensure 
that every community will have equal access to the best ideas 
that create results in ending homelessness. 
 
10.  Create Project Homeless Connect events, the one-day, one-
stop, targeted to homeless people in offering an array of hous-
ing, employment, and treatment services along with quality of 
life resources, as a component of our 10 Year Plan response. 
 
11.  Support all local, state, and federal legislation and resources 
that will offer new capabilities for investment in results. 
 
12. Invite other communities to join us in this national effort. 
 We, the undersigned Mayors and County officials, do hereby com-
mit to this Statement of Principles and Actions, embrace its goals, and 
announce our intention to work in partnership in bringing the home-

Recent Issues in Federal, State, and Local Government Programs  203
lessness of our most vulnerable and disabled neighbors to an end in the 
United States. 
 Previous Federal Initiatives 
 In May 1993, President Bill Clinton signed an executive order 
on homelessness to create a “single coordinated Federal plan for 
breaking the cycle of existing homelessness and preventing future 
homelessness.” This plan was issued in March 1994 and is called 
 Priority Home! The Federal Plan to Break the Cycle of Homelessness. 
This document dates from the period before the new business-
oriented sense of planning had emerged and reflects an even 
earlier period of addressing homelessness without the new data, 
innovations, investments, and partnerships that later created na-
tional results in ending homelessness. Excerpts from the federal 
plan follow; citations have been edited for brevity. 
 Priority Home! The Federal Plan to Break The Cycle of Home-
lessness 
 The Face of Homelessness: No Longer a Poor Apart 
 It profits us nothing as a nation to wall off homelessness as a novel 
social problem made up of a distinctly “different” population. Nor is it 
something that requires separate and distinctive mechanisms of redress, 
isolated from mainstream programs. In fact, the more we understand 
about the root causes of homelessness, the greater our sense of having 
been here before. 
 To put it plainly, homelessness in the 1990s reveals as much about 
the unsolved social and economic problems of the 1970s as it does about 
more recent developments. This Plan reveals and documents that the 
crisis of homelessness is greater than commonly known or previously 
acknowledged. Researchers have found that as many as 600,000 people 
are homeless on any given night. Recent research reveals the startling 
finding that about seven million Americans experienced being home-
less at least once in the latter half of the 1980s. Hence, its resolution will 
require tackling the enduring roots of poverty, as well as complications 
introduced by psychiatric disability, substance abuse, and infectious 
disease. That task is rendered more difficult by today’s economic reali-
ties and severe budget constraints. 
 By the middle of the 1980s, the number of homeless people had 
surpassed anything seen since the Great Depression. Disability, disease, 
and even death were becoming regular features of life on the streets and 
in shelters. For the first time, women and children were occupying quar-
ters formerly “reserved” for skid-row men. Psychiatric hospitals contin-
ued to discharge people with little hope of finding, let alone managing, 
housing of their own. Crack cocaine emerged as a drug of choice for 

204 Data and Documents
those on the margins of society. A new scourge—HIV/AIDS-joined an 
old one-tuberculosis—to become a major affliction of the homeless poor. 
 Yet for all that, there remained something disconcertingly familiar 
about this new homelessness. What America glimpsed on the streets 
and in the shelters in the 1980s was the usually hidden face of poverty, 
dislodged from its customary habitat. 
 Homelessness can be understood as including two broad, some-
times overlapping, categories of problems. The first category is expe-
rienced by people living in crisis poverty. Their homelessness tends to 
be a transient or episodic disruption in lives that are routinely marked 
by hardship. For such people, recourse to shelters or other makeshift 
accommodations is simply another way of bridging a temporary gap in 
resources. Their housing troubles may be coupled with other problems 
as well—dismal employment prospects because of poor schooling and 
obsolete job skills, domestic violence, or poor parenting or household 
management skills—all of which require attention if rehousing efforts 
are to be successful. But their persistent poverty is the decisive factor 
that turns unforeseen crises, or even minor setbacks, into bouts of home-
lessness. 
 For those individuals who fall in the second category—homeless 
men and women with chronic disabilities—homelessness can appear 
to be a way of life. Although a minority of those who become homeless 
over the course of a year, it is this group that is most visible and tends to 
dominate the public’s image of homelessness. Alcohol and other drug 
abuse, severe mental illness, chronic health problems or long-standing 
family difficulties may compound whatever employment and housing 
problems they have. Lacking financial resources and having exhausted 
whatever family support they may have had, they resort to the street. 
Their homelessness is more likely to persist. Disability coupled with the 
toll of street-living make their situation more complex than that of those 
who are homeless because of crisis poverty. Those with chronic disabili-
ties require not only economic assistance, but rehabilitation and ongoing 
support as well. 
 For the most part, homelessness relief efforts remain locked in an 
“emergency” register. Many existing outreach, drop-in, and shelter pro-
grams address the symptoms of homelessness and little else. Although 
of proven promise in dealing with the disabled homeless poor, support-
ive housing options remain in scarce supply. Increasingly, it has become 
clear that efforts to remedy homelessness cannot be fully effective if 
they are isolated from a broader community-based strategy designed to 
address the problems of extreme poverty and the inadequate supply of 
housing affordable by the very poor. Lasting solutions to homelessness 
will be found only if the issue is productively addressed in ongoing de-
bates concerning welfare reform, health-care reform, housing, commu-
nity and economic development, education, and employment policy. 

Recent Issues in Federal, State, and Local Government Programs  205
 The previous section provided the context of the federal re-
port, and the following section examines causes of homelessness. 
 Causes of Homelessness 
 A decade of research and practical experience has confirmed that 
there are many varieties of contemporary homelessness. Manifold in 
its causes, duration, consequences, and coexisting disabilities, its steady 
growth in the early 1980s reflected the confluence of a number of 
factors. 
 In accounting for homelessness, it is useful to distinguish among 
a number of levels of causation. Understanding the structural causes 
of homelessness is especially important when considering preventive 
strategies. When fashioning measures to reach those who are currently 
on the street, personal problems that contribute to the prolongation of 
homelessness must be addressed. 
 If stable residence is the goal of policy, appreciating the role of risk 
factors is essential. Psychiatric disability, substance abuse, domestic 
violence and chronic illness not only add to the likelihood that someone 
will become homeless, but complicate the task of rehousing someone 
already on the street. Among generic risk factors, poverty is the com-
mon denominator, but other circumstances have also been identified 
that increase the likelihood of homelessness: prior episodes of homeless-
ness; divorce or separation among men, and single parenthood among 
women; leaving home or “aging out” of foster care among unattached 
youth; a history of institutional confinement in jails, prisons, or psychi-
atric hospitals; and weak or overdrawn support networks of family and 
friends. 
 We must focus more attention on individual risk factors and the 
underlying structural causes potentiating these factors if the cycle of 
homelessness is to be broken. 
 The previous report analyzed the relationship of the causes of 
homelessness to its widespread appearance in the nation. The fol-
lowing section analyzes the relationship of these causes to a form 
of homelessness rapidly emerging in the nation. 
 Why These Factors Translate into Homelessness 
 A number of analysts have suggested that the situation of house-
holds at risk of homelessness may be likened to a game of musical chairs. 
Too many people are competing for too few affordable housing units. 
In such a game, those troubled by severe mental illness, addiction, or 
potentially lethal infections, as well as those simply inexperienced in the 
delicate balancing act that running a household in hard times requires, 
are at a serious disadvantage. 

206 Data and Documents
 Under such circumstances, the changes sketched above—in kin-
ship, government support and work—greatly complicate the task of 
relocating people who have been displaced from their homes. Tradition-
ally, as noted earlier, extended households were on hand as the recourse 
of last resort in difficult times. Those among the poor who were without 
family could make do in sections of central business districts where 
rooms were cheap and food could be had through the efforts of local 
charities. Even difficult behavioral problems could be accommodated: 
such people simply moved frequently, in effect spreading the burden 
throughout the marginal housing sector. For those still able, spot work 
opportunities provided a source of income. 
 But extended families are finding it difficult to make ends meet. 
The slack in cheap housing is gone. And studies suggest that what is left 
of the casual labor market prefers more compliant recruits. 
 Faced with these changes, Federal homelessness policy must be 
both preventive and remedial in scope. It must do more than merely 
relocate those who are currently homeless. It must also stabilize such 
housing placements once made, while securing the residences of those 
who are precariously housed. Government must seek, in effect, to do 
with deliberation and planning what the private market once accom-
plished: make housing work again. In today’s environment, to make 
housing work will frequently require an infusion of fiscal resources and 
support services. Such services should be viewed, not as “add-on” frills, 
but as essential enabling ingredients—on a par with debt service, insur-
ance or fire control measures—that are needed for some housing to be 
feasible at all. 
 The federal report proposed several solutions, which are out-
lined in the document that follows. 
 Building on What We Have Learned 
 Over a decade has passed since homelessness began its unprec-
edented postwar growth. During that time, social service agencies, 
advocates, and researchers acquired a wealth of experience in dealing 
with homelessness. This collective experience has taught us that home-
lessness is more complex and deeply rooted than some had originally 
forecast. Responsible policy must seek to address both the fundamental 
structures of poverty and the complicating risk factors specific to home-
lessness. 
 Solving homelessness will thus mean confronting the traditional 
sources of impoverishment: declining wages, lost jobs, poor school-
ing and persistent illiteracy, racial discrimination, public entitlements 
outpaced by inflation, chronically disabling health and mental health 
problems, the scarcity of affordable housing, and the increasingly con-
centrated nature of poverty. It will also mean confronting relatively new 

Homelessness in Europe 207
social phenomena that are adding to the costs of poverty: changes in 
family and household structures, the decline in traditional kin-based 
sources of support, and the proliferation of new drugs (such as crack 
cocaine) and socially-stigmatized infections, i.e., HIV and tuberculosis. 
 Accordingly, a comprehensive approach will have to mount initia-
tives on a number of fronts simultaneously. Homelessness will not be 
solved by simply outlawing the most visible evidence of its presence 
on the streets. Solving homelessness will require durable means of 
arresting the sources of residential instability—both structural and 
personal—that lie at its root. For virtually every homeless person, this 
will mean dealing with the affordability and availability of housing. For 
some, restoration of family ties and attention to the skills and resources 
needed to manage a household may be indicated. For others, appropri-
ate treatment of mental illnesses and/or substance abuse problems will 
be essential if they are to be stably housed. 
 Accommodating the diversity and range of assistance needs among 
homeless persons will require the development of comprehensive, yet 
flexible, community-based continuums of care, much like those VA is 
working to develop through its Comprehensive Homeless Centers. 
 If we look further ahead, an even more ambitious agenda can be 
seen. This agenda will encompass long-term community and economic 
development, education, training and job opportunities, the reinstate-
ment of support services as part of the “welfare” apparatus, and attention 
to such neighborhood facilities as health clinics and day care centers. 
But budgetary constraints require a transition to this larger agenda that 
fully addresses poverty and its accompanying ills. Welfare and health 
care reform should begin to address many of these ills. In the short 
run, we will need to direct resources to ensure that those who are cur-
rently homeless receive the appropriate range of services and housing 
as needed and that those poised on the brink of homelessness can be 
brought back from the edge (HUD, 1994). 
 Homelessness in Europe 
 This section introduces some of the initiatives in European coun-
tries, Canada, and Australian. In all of these settings national 
government has introduced new initiatives in the last decade to 
prevent and end homelessness. Each has had interaction with U.S. 
initiatives. 
 The emphasis of the European homelessness literature is on 
the provision of housing as the means to address the “social 
exclusion” resulting from homelessness. However, joblessness 
is the prominent theme of European analysis. Relative to U.S. 

208 Data and Documents
discussion and due to the differences in government safety net 
and social welfare programs, European resources make less men-
tion of the role of chronic disability (including physical disabil-
ity, mental illness, and substance abuse), and continuity in public 
systems of care, treatment, and custody (including child welfare, 
hospitals, prisons, treatment facilities). However, European, Ca-
nadian, and Australian strategies all address the various issues 
presented by the range of “historic” or First people, indigenous 
groups, Aboriginal people, immigrants, migrants, and the Roma 
and Traveler populations. More coverage of other nations is pro-
vided in chapter 3. 
 Homelessness in England 
 England’s New Strategy on Street Homelessness 
 In 1999, British prime minister Tony Blair issued a new plan for 
addressing the needs of the country’s “rough sleepers” or people 
living outside. The report was titled  Rough Sleeping: The Govern-
ment’s Strategy  and was issued by the country’s Department of the 
Environment, Transport and the Regions. 
 The “rough sleepers” initiatives provided many key lessons 
for new U.S. efforts. Just one year after the U.S. Interagency 
Council on Homelessness was revitalized with the mission to end 
chronic homelessness, council-member federal agencies hosted a 
delegation led by Gordon Campbell, head of the Homelessness 
Directorate, and Louise Casey, former head of the “Rough Sleep-
ers Unit.” This meeting marked the first several annual bilateral 
and multilateral meetings to share national government strategies 
and results. 
 The British delegation identified several factors as being key 
to their success in achieving a reduction, including: (1) having a 
“single, clear target with top-level commitment to reduce rough 
sleeping by two thirds by 2002”; (2) creating a Rough Sleepers 
Unit as a “cross cutting office with an integrated budget” involv-
ing housing, drug, alcohol and mental health programs; (3) the 
use of repeated street counts “as a well tested, independent meth-
odology” to establish a baseline and measure progress toward the 
target; (4) creating a data collection system to determine service 
demands and track outcomes; (5) establishing specific perfor-
mance targets for providers and holding them accountable for 
meeting the targets; and (6) funding of multidisciplinary contact 
and assessment teams to carry out intensive street outreach efforts 
to help people “sleeping rough” to move into accommodation. 

Australian Government Initiatives 209
 The rough sleepers populations was described as young 
(the majority of individuals were under age 25); overwhelmingly 
male; formerly in care (at least 25 percent had been in care); liv-
ing with alcohol (50 percent) and drug (20 percent) issues; and 
living with mental health issues (30–50 percent)  (SEU, 1999). 
 European Homeless Initiatives 
 FEANTSA developed a toolkit for the launch of the European 
“Ending Homelessness” campaign in 2010. FEANTSA’s toolkit for 
developing an integrated strategy to tackle homelessness included 
10 approaches to addressing homelessness. These included an 
evidence-based, comprehensive approach that is multidimen-
sional and rights based as well as participatory. The strategic ap-
proach is statutory, seeking legislative authority for initiatives, 
designed as sustainable, and intended as needs-based for the in-
dividual. Approaches should be bottom up from the local level 
(FEANTSA, 2010). 
 Canada’s National Partnership 
 The Homelessness Partnering Strategy (HPS) is Canada’s na-
tional government model to address homelessness. HPS requires 
local communities to identify needs and develop solutions. HPS 
resources are invested in specific communities that have under-
taken planning and support transitional programs and support-
ive housing. HOS also supports community efforts to prevent and 
end homelessness and seeks partnerships and collaborations be-
tween levels of government. 
 The 10 most affected communities were identified in 1999, 
and 51 additional communities were selected in 2000 in consulta-
tion with provinces and territories. Communities that are selected 
must have plans for long-term solutions to prevent and end home-
lessness. HPS’s strategy includes pilot projects, development of 
an information system, and use of federal surplus property. 
 Australian Government Initiatives 
 In 2008, the new government of Australian prime minister Kevin 
Rudd launched a national government initiative to develop a new 

210 Data and Documents
strategy on homelessness. More detail is provided in chapter 3, 
Worldwide Perspective. 
 The Rudd government’s first green paper for “consultation” 
around the country was to be followed by a final “white paper” of 
a plan to 2020. The green paper identified several possible goals 
for Australia in addressing homelessness. They included decreas-
ing the number of people moving from housing to emergency shel-
ter, increasing housing stability for victims of domestic violence, 
decreasing the number of people who experience homelessness 
as children and again as adults, and increasing school stability for 
children experiencing homelessness. 
 The subsequent white paper, issued under Prime Minister 
Rudd, who is currently foreign secretary after a shift in govern-
ment leadership, sought to answer several key questions. The 
white paper focused on goals, targets, best strategies, key research 
priorities, business involvement, community participation, and 
the role of philanthropy. 
 More information is provided in chapter 3. The Australian 
documents can be found at http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/sa/hous
ing/progserv/homelessness/whitepaper/Pages/default.aspx. 
 References 
 FEANTSA (European Federation of National Organisations Working 
with the Homeless). Ending Homelessness: A Handbook for 
Policymakers, 2010. Available at http://www.feantsa.org/files/
freshstart/Campaign_2010/background_docs/FEANTSA_handbook_
EN_FINAL.pdf. 
 HUD (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development).  Priority 
Home! The Federal Plan to Break the Cycle of Homelessness.  Washington, 
D.C.: HUD ,  March 1994. 
 HUD (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development). Prepared 
Remarks for Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Shaun 
Donovan at the National Alliance to End Homelessness Annual 
Conference, July 30, 2009. 
 Mangano, Philip. The Business Case for Ending Homelessness. Remarks 
to the Vancouver Board of Trade. July 16, 2009. 
 SEU (Government of the United Kingdom Social Exclusion Unit). 
 Coming in from the Cold: The Government’s Strategy on Rough Sleeping. 
London, Crown copyright, December 1999. 

References 211
 USCM (U.S. Conference of Mayors). Resolution Endorsing 10 Year 
Planning Process to End Homelessness. 71st Annual Meeting, June 2003. 
 USICH (U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness). “America’s 
Road Home Statement of Principles and Actions . ” Washington, D.C.: 
USICH, 2009. Available at http://www.ich.gov/newsletter/Interactive_
Statement_Action_Only.pdf. 
 

This page intentionally left blank 

213
 7 
 Directory of Organizations, 
Associations, and Agencies 
 Introduction 
 T
his chapter provides a selected list of national organizations 
and federal, state, and local references for organizations and 
public agencies with a significant level of involvement in the 
issue of homelessness. Also include are national and local govern-
ment entities for a few international resources as well as key non-
governmental organizations. These listings provide access points 
to much of the material described elsewhere. 
 Innovators whose work is being carried out under strategies 
for families and individuals for national and international replica-
tion are also included. Innovators highlighted here are in the areas 
of street engagement, housing, and employment. Innovations 
must be field tested and evidence based and operating in more 
than one location. Finally, there are listings for state and local 10-
year-plans both in the United States and select countries, where 
the state or local plan is one often cited by practitioners as provid-
ing a results-oriented model for planning. The selected locations 
are generally referenced elsewhere in the book and represent a 
range of population and geography. These references include Web 
sites where the plan’s results are being reported. 

214 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies 
 U.S. Government Agencies 
 Federal Agencies 
 U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) 
 Web site: http://www.usda.gov 
 USDA manages two mainstream federal investments that benefit 
people who are homeless: food and nutrition programs and rural 
housing and development. USDA’s Food and Nutrition Service 
(FNS) administers 15 nutrition assistance programs, including the 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) (formerly 
the Food Stamp Program), the National School Lunch and School 
Breakfast Programs, the Child and Adult Care Food Program, and 
the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, 
and Children (WIC). USDA rural development initiatives include 
the Single Family Housing program, the Community Facilities 
program, and disaster assistance provisions. 
 U.S. Department of Commerce 
 Web site: http://www.2010.census.gov 
 The Census Bureau in the Department of Commerce administers 
the decennial efforts to enumerate people who are homeless. In 
2010, service-based enumerations of people who are homeless 
were conducted in shelters and meal programs. 
 U.S. Department of Defense (DOD)
 Web site: http://www.oea.gov 
 The Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) process requires local 
planners to address the needs of people who are homeless when 
planning the reuse of property from closure of military facilities. 
DOD also donates personal-property items (such as sleeping bags 
and blankets). 
 U.S. Department of Education (USED) 
 Web site: http://www2.ed.gov/programs/homeless/index.html 
 The McKinney Education for Homeless Children and Youth pro-
gram provides allocation to states based on reported data on 
homeless children enrolled in school. The funds are used to sup-

U.S. Government Agencies 215
port access and assist with services to benefit enrollment and the 
work of school liaisons in every district. 
 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) 
 Web sites: http://www.hhs.gov/homeless and http://www.
homeless.samhsa.gov/ 
 HHS oversees the McKinney Act program to provide primary 
health care to homeless people through the Health Care for the 
Homeless Program, grants to provide access and increase services 
for mental health and addiction treatment, and programs for 
homeless and runaway youth. HHS operates the Medicaid and 
Medicare programs. 
 U.S. Department of Homeland Security/Federal 
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 
 Web site: http://www.efsp.unitedway.org/ 
 FEMA’s 25-year-old Emergency Food and Shelter Program (EFSP) 
allocates funds to every state and county for nondisaster uses in-
cluding food, shelter, rent, mortgage and utility assistance. Local 
boards are chaired by the United Way. Local allocations are made 
based on population and unemployment and poverty levels at the 
national and local level. 
 U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)  
 Web sites: http://www.hud.gov and http://portal.hud.gov/
poral/page/portal/HUD/topics/homelessness 
 HUD administers the McKinney homeless programs as well as 
the HEARTH Act programs passed in 2009 to reorganize federal 
housing funding. It publishes a variety of reports and research 
on housing and homelessness. Its Homelessness Resource Ex-
change houses all program materials, local reports and award in-
formation, and guidances. 
 U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ)
 Web sites: http://www.ovw.usdoj.gov/ and http://www.
reentry.gov/ 
 DOJ’s Office on Violence Against Women implements federal pro-
grams for financial and technical assistance to local communities 

216 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies 
across the country to address domestic violence, dating violence, 
sexual assault, and stalking. DOJ also provides funds and techni-
cal assistance for special courts, such as reentry courts and drug 
courts and the Second Chance prisoner reentry initiative. 
 U.S. Department of Labor (DOL)
 Web site: http://www.dol.gov/dol/audience/aud-home 
less.htm 
 DOL’s homeless strategy emphasizes job readiness by address-
ing access to mainstream employment assistance and services 
and identifying skills that promote self-sufficiency. Its programs 
include the Homeless Veterans’ Reintegration Program, the Vet-
erans’ Workforce Investment Program, Job Corps, and reentry 
initiatives. 
 U.S. Department of the Treasury/Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
 Web site: http://www.eitc.irs.gov/central/main 
 IRS provides information and technical support for the Earned 
Income Tax Credit, a targeted antipoverty measure that allows 
lower-income working individuals and families to receive cash 
refunds based on income and family size, reducing their taxes. 
 U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)
 Web site: http://www1.va.gov/homeless/ 
 The VA, which announced a five-year plan to end veteran home-
lessness in 2009, is the largest federal investor in homelessness re-
lated spending. The VA operates veterans’ reintegration program 
and the McKinney Act domiciliary care program to use surplus 
space in VA hospitals as shelter beds for homeless veterans and 
health care and transitional facilities. 
 Social Security Administration (SSA)
 Web site: www.ssa.gov/homeless 
 SSA provides income support programs for elderly and disabled 
persons. The federal agency has focused its efforts on identifying 
and removing barriers that homeless individuals face in apply-

State, Provincial, and Local 10-Year Plans  217
ing for SSDI or SSI benefits and developing and expanding SSDI/
SSI outreach and application assistance through a Web site. SSA 
supported the application outreach program HOPE (Homeless 
Outreach Projects and Evaluation), the Department of Justice’s 
“Going Home” project, which focuses on serious and violent of-
fenders; the Department of Health and Human Services’ project 
to provide training for case managers; and the Health Care for the 
Homeless programs. 
 U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness (USICH)  
 Web site: http://www.usich.gov 
 The Interagency Council was reauthorized by the HEARTH Act in 
2009 with substantially changed duties from its work during the 
last decade. The council has coordinated the development of the 
Federal Strategic Plan to Prevent and End Homelessness released 
in 2010. It provides local examples of strategies, information on 
federal funding, and other resources. 
 Grants.gov 
 Web site: http://www.grants.gov 
 The federal government operates an on-line system for learning 
about federal funding opportunities in homelessness, prevention, 
and mainstream programs. Grants.gov is available to any reader 
for searches by federal agency or other topic, including basic grant 
information and program highlights. Application links and back-
ground materials are generally included with site materials. 
 State, Provincial, and Local 
10-Year Plans 
 This section contains listings for state and local 10-year plans both 
in the United States and in select countries, where the state or 
local plan is one often cited by practitioners as providing a results-
oriented model for planning. The selected locations are generally 
referenced elsewhere in the book and represent a range of popula-
tion and geography. These references include Web sites where the 
plan’s results are being reported. 

218 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies 
 States 
 Kentucky 
 Web site: http://www.kyhousing.org/KICH/ 
 The Commonwealth of Kentucky has undertaken to create a resi-
dential drug treatment program in every area of the state, based 
on needs identified through research for its Ten-Year Plan to End 
Homelessness. 
 Massachusetts 
Web site: http://www.mass.gov
 Massachusetts’s joint executive-legislative commission made 
recommendations to the state’s interagency council that have re-
sulted in the development of eight regional networks to consoli-
date and reorganize the way homeless assistance and housing is 
delivered while reducing the need for shelter. 
 Michigan 
 Web site: http://www.thecampaigntoendhomelessness.org/ 
 Michigan launched a statewide campaign to end homelessness 
with 10-year plans created for every part of the state. 
 North Dakota 
 Web site: http://www.ndhomelesscoalition.org/ 
 North Dakota state leadership created incentives for 10 jurisdic-
tions, including tribes, to develop 10-year plans. 
 Utah 
 Web site: http://housingworks.utah.gov/ 
 Utah supported development of regional boards to create housing 
solutions to end homelessness. 
 Washington 
 Web site: http://www.commerce.wa.gov/site/478/default.aspx 
 State legislation required counties to develop 10-year plans and 
provides local communities with revenue from document record-
ing fees to do so. 

State, Provincial, and Local 10-Year Plans  219
 Cities and Counties 
 Asheville/Buncombe County, NC:  Looking Homeward: The 10-Year 
Plan to End Homelessness in Asheville and Buncombe County 
 Web site: http://www.ashevillenc.gov/residents/housing/home 
less/default.aspx?id=1584 
 Atlanta, GA:  Blueprint to End Homelessness in Atlanta in Ten Years 
 http://www.unitedwayatlanta.org/OurWork/Homelessness/
Pages/HOMELESSNESS.aspx 
 Boise, ID: Boise’s 10 Year Plan to Reduce and Prevent Chronic Home-
lessness 
 Web site: http://www.cityofboise.org/Departments/Mayor/PDF/ 
10-YearPlanFinal.07SP.pdf 
 Chicago, IL:  There’s No Place Like a Home 
 Web site: http://www.cityofchicago.org/city/en/depts/fss/supp_
info/10_year_plan_to_endhomelessness.html 
 Denver, CO:  Denver’s Road Home: Denver’s  Ten Year Plan to End 
Homelessness 
 Web site: http://www.denversroadhome.org/ 
 Fort Worth, TX:  Directions Home: Making Homelessness Rare, Short-
Term and Non-Recurring in Fort Worth, Texas within Ten Years 
 Web Site: http://www.fortworthgov.org/homelessness/ 
 Indianapolis, IN:  Blueprint to End Homelessness 
 Web site: http://www.chipindy.org/Blueprint.php 
 Minneapolis/St., Paul, MN:  Heading Home Hennepin: The Ten Year 
Plan to End Homelessness in Minneapolis and Hennepin County 
 Web site: http://hennepin.us/headinghomehennepin 
 Norfolk, VA:  Blueprint to End Homelessness 
 Web site: http://www.norfolk.gov/homelessness/ 

220 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies 
 San Francisco, CA:  The San Francisco Plan to Abolish Chronic Home-
lessness 
 Web site: http://www.ich.gov/slocal/plans/sanfrancisco.pdf 
 Sioux Falls, SD:  Blueprint: Ten-Year Plan to End Homelessness in 
Sioux Falls 
 Web site: http://www.minnehahacounty.org/hab/docs/docs.aspx 
 Springfield, MA:  Homes within Reach 
 Web site: http://www.springfieldcityhall.com/housing/homeless 
ness.0.html 
 Canada 
 Calgary, Alberta 
 Web sites: http://content.calgary.ca/CCA/City+Hall/
Business+Units/Community+and+Neighbourhood+Se
rvices/Social+Research+Policy+and+Resources/Affor
dable+Housing+and+Homelessness and http://www.
calgaryhomeless.com 
 Ottawa, Ontario 
 Web site: http://www.ottawa.ca/residents/housing/
homeless ness/index_en.html 
 Vancouver, BC 
 Web site: http://www.streetohome.org/ 
 Innovators 
 Common Ground 
 Web site: http://www.commonground.org 
 Common Ground pioneered a new model of permanent sup-
portive housing that combines affordability, good management 
and design, and employment opportunity for people who are 
homeless. Development projects often restore properties to being 
neighborhood assets, and more than 4,000 individuals have been 

Innovators 221
assisted to date. Projects are in New York City and State, Con-
necticut, and Australia. Common Ground conducts vulnerability 
index events in many communities. 
 Corporation for Supportive Housing 
 Web site: http://www.csh.org 
 CSH is a national organization focused on permanent supportive 
housing for people who are homeless, those with mental illness, 
and the reentry population. CSH works in 11 states and with local 
communities as an intermediary that combines research, best 
practices in development and operations, and resources for local 
partners. 
 The Doe Fund 
 Ready, Willing & Able 
 Web site: http://www.doe.org 
 “Work works” is the motto of the Ready, Willing, & Able employ-
ment, housing, and recovery program, which reaches single men 
in New York City and Philadelphia who have long histories of 
homelessness, addiction, and incarceration. Founder and Presi-
dent George McDonald describes the “men in blue” who enroll 
as those who are ready to work to succeed in a program of em-
ployment, counseling, recovery, and community. RWA has suc-
cessfully graduated over 4,000 individuals to date with the key 
metrics of success measured as housing stability, employment, 
and sobriety. 
 Family Promise 
 Web site: http://www.familypromise.org/ 
 Family Promise (Interfaith Hospitality Network) operates in part-
nership in communities in 40 states. The Family Promise models 
partners with local faith organizations to provide shelter, volun-
teers, social service support, and day programs to assist families 
in stabilizing and leaving homelessness. 

222 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies 
 Family and Senior Homeless Initiative of Denver 
 Web site: http://www.fshi.org 
 Denver’s Road Home, the city’s 10-year plan, and Denver Rescue 
Mission are the major partners with the local faith community. 
The mayor called on congregations to “embrace, befriend, and 
guide” 1,000 families experiencing homelessness over the course 
of the 10-year plan through mentoring teams from congregations 
who commit to provide a set of new relationships for families in 
need as they move from homelessness to stability. Teams also 
focus on financial management and self-sufficiency. 
 Pathways to Housing 
 Web site: http://www.pathwaystohousing.org 
 Pathways to Housing originated the Housing First innovation, 
which focuses on consumer preference for housing and access. 
Housing is provided first with the consumer choosing the services 
and the delivery of services. Pathways, named an evidence-based 
practice by HHS, has been replicated in New York, Philadelphia, 
and Washington, D.C., as well as in Canada and other countries. 
 Project Homeless Connect 
 Web site: http://www.projecthomelessconnect.com 
 Project Homeless Connect (PHC), a one-day event sponsored by 
mayors and other community leaders, mobilizes civic will to end 
homelessness and engages volunteers from all walks of life to 
meet, support, and assist people in accessing services and leaving 
the streets. Project Homeless Connect originated in San Francisco 
in 2004 and is designed to provide housing, services, and hospital-
ity in a convenient one-day, one-stop model for people experienc-
ing homelessness. More than 250 cities across the United States 
and globally have adopted the innovation. Project Homeless Con-
nect   is similar in spirit and substance to the successful volunteer 
one-stop service centers organized in communities across the 
country to assist Hurricane Katrina evacuees and to the service 
model provided by stand-downs. 

National Organizations 223
 National Organizations 
 American Bar Association (ABA) 
 Commission on Homelessness and Poverty
 Web site: www.abanet.org/homeless 
 The ABA commission, established in 1991, consists of a staff attor-
ney and 13 volunteer attorneys appointed by the ABA president 
to assist both the legal community and the general public in un-
derstanding and addressing legal and other problems of poor and 
homeless people through pro bono (volunteer) programs. These 
activities include training for lawyers and assistance in address-
ing local issues as well as work with state and federal government. 
The commission has created resources for attorneys on state and 
local programs to meet legal needs of homeless people, homeless 
“problem-solving” courts, education of homeless children, and is-
sues affecting homeless youth. 
 American Round Table to Abolish 
Homelessness (ART) 
 Web site: http://www.abolitionistroundtable.com 
 The American Round Table is a national initiative to replicate 
innovative practices with state and local jurisdictional leaders 
implementing 10-year plans. ART provides expertise in building 
partnerships, knowledge of research, and peer-to-peer opportuni-
ties for leaders to learn about strategies. 
 Bazelon Center for Mental Health Law 
 Web site: http://www.bazelon.org 
 The Bazelon Center is a legal advocacy and public education or-
ganization for the rights of mentally disabled people including 
on fair housing issues. The center focuses its work on reform of 
public systems for people with mental disabilities, access to hous-
ing, health care, and support services, and protection against dis-
crimination. 

224 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies 
 Catholic Charities USA 
 Web site: http://www.catholiccharitiesusa.org/NetCommunity/ 
 Catholic Charities USA is a national federation of more than 600 
private social services agencies, including many that traditional 
assist people facing hunger or homelessness. Catholic Charities 
is committed to reduce poverty in America by half by the year 
2020, including measurable goals to reduce the number of fami-
lies in emergency shelters and increase the number of affordable 
housing units available to low income people. 
 Center on Budget and Policy Priorities (CBPP) 
 Web site: www.cbpp.org 
 The center focuses on federal and state fiscal policy and programs 
for people of low and moderate income. CBPP publishes analy-
sis of federal budget and tax initiatives at both the executive and 
legislative level and studies the impact of federal and state invest-
ment and state budget choices on populations of interest, includ-
ing people living in poverty. Programs include Medicaid and the 
Children’s Health Insurance Program, food stamps, Temporary 
Assistance to Needy Families, WIC and child nutrition, low-
income housing programs, low-income tax credits, including the 
Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) and the Child Tax Credit. The 
center conducts a national outreach campaign on EITC with more 
than 600 government and community-based partners. 
 Child Welfare League of America (CWLA) 
 Web site: http://www.cwla.org 
 CWLA is an association of more than 1,000 public and private 
nonprofit agencies that assist over 2.5 million abused and ne-
glected children and their families each year with a wide range 
of services. CWLA works on issues of adolescent pregnancy and 
parenting, chemical dependency, parents in prison, foster care, 
health care, housing, and homelessness. 
 Children’s Defense Fund (CDF) 
 Web site: http://www.childrensdefense.org/ 

National Organizations 225
 CDF’s goal is to educate policy makers about the needs of poor 
and minority children. It monitors federal and state policy and 
legislation on health, education, child welfare, mental health, teen 
pregnancy, and youth employment. 
 Funders Together to End Homelessness 
 Web site: http://funderstogether.org/ 
 Funders Together to End Homelessness brings together foun-
dations, corporate, and other investors focused on preventing 
and ending homelessness. The organization emphasizes research 
and collaboration and developed a statement of principles for 
funders. 
 Housing Assistance Council (HAC) 
 Web site: http://www.ruralhome.org 
 HAC has long been a voice on rural issues. The organization pro-
vides technical assistance, loans, research, and information on 
rural low-income housing development, especially Farmers Home 
Administration programs. It publishes regular reports on federal 
rural programs and trends in rural poverty and development. 
 International Downtown Association (IDA) 
 Web site: https://www.ida-downtown.org/eweb/ 
 The International Downtown Association represents many busi-
ness improvement districts and downtown associations, many of 
whom take part in initiatives to end homelessness. IDA provides 
technical assistance and case studies on best practice housing so-
lutions and panhandling issues. 
 National Alliance to End Homelessness (NAEH) 
 Web site: httpo://www.naeh.org 
 The alliance is a coalition of corporations, service providers, and 
individuals that sponsors   conferences and uses research and pub-
lic education in its efforts to address homelessness. 

226 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies 
 National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) 
 Web site: http://www.nami.org 
 This national advocacy and research organization for people 
with mental illness and their friends and families seeks to create 
a coordinated system of care. NAMI has been active in federal 
legislative initiatives on housing and health care for people with 
disabilities. 
 National Association for the Education of Homeless 
Children and Youth (NAEHCY) 
 Web site: http://www.naehcy.org 
 The organization provides support to state and local education of-
ficials on the federal education requirements for children who are 
homeless. It publishes awareness and best practice materials for 
ensuring children are enrolled, supported, and attend school. 
 National Association of Counties (NACo) 
 Web site: http://www.naco.org 
 NACo represents the nation’s more than 3,000 counties. In some 
states, counties have responsibilities and resources for health and 
human services as well as social services and corrections. In its 
annual meetings, NACo has supported resolutions on ending 
homelessness. 
 National Center on Housing and Child Welfare (NCHCW) 
 Web site: http://www.nchcw.org/ 
 The center focuses on housing policy solutions to improve the 
lives of families in the welfare system and youth. Key among these 
initiatives is support for the Family Unification Program (FUP), 
which provides housing vouchers to keep families together and 
children out of foster care. 
 National Center on Family Homelessness 
 Web site: http://www.familyhomelessness.org/ 

National Organizations 227
 The center evolved from an early partnership with  Better Homes 
and Gardens  magazine. Its work focuses on homeless families and 
children. 
 National Coalition for the Homeless (NCH) 
 Web site: http://www.nationalhomeless.org/ 
 NCH is a national network of homeless persons, activists, service 
providers, and others committed to addressing homelessness 
through public education, policy advocacy, grassroots organizing, 
and technical assistance. It focuses on civil rights and consumer 
involvement. 
 National Coalition for Homeless Veterans (NCHV) 
 Web site: www.nchv.org 
 NCHV serves as a liaison between branches of the federal gov-
ernment and community-based homeless veteran service provid-
ers. NCHV provides technical assistance on federal programs and 
funding for community organizations serving veterans in emer-
gency, supportive services, and housing. 
 National Council of State Housing Agencies 
 Web site: http://www.ncsha.org/advocacy-issues/homeless-
assistance 
 The council represents the state agencies where many federal 
housing resources combine with state investments. 
 National Governors Association (NGA) 
 Web site: http://www.nga.org 
 NGA represents the elected executive leadership of states. Its Cen-
ter for Best Practices provides current information on evidence-
based initiatives and offers expertise to states facing similar issues. 
NGA published a summary of state strategies for ending chronic 
homelessness. 

228 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies 
 National Health Care for the 
Homeless Council (NHCHC) 
 Web site: http://www.nhchc.org/ 
 NHCHC represents more than 100 federal Health Care for the 
Homeless projects across the nation. The projects provide pri-
mary health care, mental health services, and drug and alcohol 
services, and the council coordinates their public policy initia-
tives. NHCHC publishes detailed bibliographies and manuals for 
practitioners and guidance on policy issues, such as health care 
reform and use of Medicaid. 
 National Law Center on 
Homelessness & Poverty (NLCHP) 
 Web site: http://www.nlchp.org 
 The National Law Center monitors federal agency action on sev-
eral McKinney Act programs, including homeless children’s edu-
cation and federal surplus property and focuses on international 
human rights and civil rights for people who are homeless. 
 National League of Cities (NLC) 
 Web site: http://www.nlc.org 
 NLC represents over 190,000 smaller-sized towns and cities. It 
is a partner to municipal leagues in the states, which convene 
their cities and towns on a statewide basis. NLC provides elected 
officials with training, technical assistance, and models for local 
solutions. 
 National Low Income Housing Coalition (NLIHC) 
 Web site: http://www.nlihc.org 
 NLIHC is a national organization focused on education, public 
policy, and organizing for low-income housing. The coalition 
publishes resources on housing programs and policy as well as an 
annual report on housing affordability. 

National Organizations 229
 National Network for Youth (NN4Y) 
 Web site: http://www.nn4youth.org/ 
 NN4Y supports community-based organizations and young peo-
ple who are experiencing abuse, neglect, or homelessness. More 
than 1,000 local shelter agencies and state networks are members 
of this national network, which sponsors training, offers informa-
tion on model programs, and sponsors a national telecommunica-
tions system for youth programs. 
 National Policy and Advocacy Coalition 
on Homelessness (NPACH) 
 Web site: http://www.npach.org/ 
 NPACH is a national policy organization representing commu-
nity providers on issues related to federal homelessness policy 
and investment. 
 National Student Campaign against 
Hunger & Homelessness 
 Web site: http://www.studentsagainsthunger.org 
 The student organization sponsors a national hunger and home-
lessness awareness week every year, to educate the campus 
community, increase community service, and build campus and 
community coalitions. Campuses and communities participate 
during the week before Thanksgiving each year by organizing 
education, service, and advocacy events. 
 United States Conference of Mayors (USCM) 
 Web site: http://www.usmayors.org 
 The United States Conference of Mayors is a national organiza-
tion of the mayors of the cities in the United States over 30,000 
in population. USCM provides support and partnership on the 
issue of homelessness and has passed numerous resolutions in 
support of key strategies to prevent and end homelessness. The 
Task Force on Hunger and Homelessness conducts an annual sur-
vey of member cities. 

230 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies 
 State and Local 
Homeless Organizations 
 Most states have at least one nonprofit organization focused on 
issues of homelessness and housing for homeless or low-income 
people. In addition, most large and medium-sized cities have at 
least one of these organizations. State coalitions can provide in-
formation on specific activities, such as state legislative action or 
initiatives on behalf of homeless people. Most of the state orga-
nizations as well as the local coalitions publish newsletters and 
actively seek volunteers and other resources. They can also pro-
vide referrals to organizations and services operated by homeless 
people for other homeless people. 
 Directories of state and local homeless organizations can be 
found at the Web site of the National Coalition for the Homeless 
at http://www.nationalhomeless.org/. 
 International Organizations 
 Comité Européen de Coordination de l’Habitat 
Social (CECODHAS) European Liaison Committee 
for Social Housing 
 Web site: http://www.cecodhas.org 
 CECODHAS is a nonprofit organization that promotes the work 
of 45 regional and national social housing organizations in the 
European Union. It fosters the exchange of ideas and experience 
among its members, provides an information service for its mem-
bers, and promotes good practice through conferences, seminars, 
reports and other activities. CECODHAS monitors developments 
in European community law, provides its members with im-
proved access to European funding, and campaigns for the right 
to a decent home for all Europeans. 
 European Anti-Poverty Network 
 Web site: http://www.eapn.org 
 EAPN brings together grassroots nongovernmental organizations 
representing people affected by social exclusion in all the mem-

International Organizations 231
ber-states of the European Union. EAPN provides members with 
training, policy analysis, and representation. 
 European Federation of National Organizations 
Working with the Homeless (Fédération 
Européenne d’Associations Nationales 
Travaillant Avec Les Sans-Abri) (FEANTSA) 
 Web site: http://www.feantsa.org 
 FEANTSA is an international nongovernmental organization that 
brings together charitable and not-for-profit organizations that 
provide a wide range of vital services to homeless people in all the 
European Union member-states and also in other European coun-
tries. Its goal is to promote and support the work of nongovern-
mental organizations that provide services to meet the needs of 
homeless people. FEANTSA aims to raise public awareness about 
the situation of homeless people and of the need to recognize and 
realize the right to decent and affordable housing. 
 Habitact 
 Web site: http://www.habitact.eu/ 
 Habitact is a new peer-to-peer initiative for policy exchange re-
garding local homeless strategies and was launched with FEANT-
SA’s support. Habitact was a response to the need for best practice 
information and strategies from local authorities in Europe. A key 
feature of the EU’s social inclusion strategy is the so-called Open 
Method of Coordination (OMC), which seeks to support compari-
sons across national boundaries. With similarities to the U.S. idea 
of seeing homelessness as a national problem with local solutions, 
Habitact was founded by cities to improve the exchange of ideas 
and results in initiatives to address homelessness. 
 International Network of Street Newspapers 
 Web site: http://www.streetnewsservice.org/ 
 People who are homeless in a variety of countries contribute to 
and distribute “street newspapers,” which offers a media voice 
to their stories and viewpoints. Volunteer news professionals and 
others support the work of street newspapers. 

232 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies 
 Sisters of Mercy 
 Web site: http://www.sistersofmercy.org 
 The international work of the Sisters of Mercy is focused on the 
housing needs of people, especially women, people who are 
homeless, and elders. Mercy Housing and the Mercy Foundation 
operate in North and South America, Australia, Great Britain, 
and Ireland, home of the order’s founder, Catherine McCauley. In 
Australia, for example, the Mercy Foundation has been a leader in 
national initiatives to prevent and end homelessness. 
 United Nations Centre for Human 
Settlements (UNCHS) 
 Web site: http://www.unchs.org 
 UNCHS is the lead agency concerned with issues of housing and 
shelter. The United Nations Human Settlements Program, UN-
HABITAT, promotes adequate shelter in all parts of the world. 
Key documents about the UN effort include the Vancouver Dec-
laration on Human Settlements, the Habitat Agenda, the Istanbul 
Declaration on Human Settlements, and the Declaration on Cit-
ies and Other Human Settlements in the New Millennium. World 
Habitat Day is marked on the first Monday of every October. 
 England 
 Department of Communities and Local Government 
 Web site: http://www.communities.gov.uk/housing/
homelessness 
 The department houses the homelessness initiatives of the national 
government as well as research and progress reports. Materials 
are available on the Rough Sleepers Initiative, youth homeless-
ness, and the work of local government, 
 Shelter 
 Web site: www.shelter.org.uk 

Australia 233
 SHELTER is the largest homelessness charity in the United King-
dom and publishes a variety of fact sheets and self-help resources 
on homelessness. It maintains a national help line that tracks the 
demand for shelter. It publishes a variety of reports on policy, in-
cluding Best Value and Homelessness. 
 Canada 
 Human Resources and Skills Development 
Canada (HRSDC) 
 Web site: http://www.hrsdc.gc.ca/eng/homelessness/ 
 Human Resources and Skills Development Canada (HRSDC) is 
a department of the Government of Canada. Canada’s Home-
lessness Partnering Strategy (HPS) is a responsibility of the de-
partment. HPS invests in Housing First, provides support to 
communities, and fosters partnership and collaboration. 
 Federation of Canadian Municipalities (FCM) 
 Web site: http://www.fcm.ca/English 
 FCM represents local government, including large, small, and 
rural jurisdictions. FCM’s action plan on homelessness is focused 
on housing and chronic homelessness. Its Big City Mayors Cau-
cus includes mayors who have developed local 10-year plans. 
 Australia 
 Department of Families Housing, Community Services, 
and Indigenous Affairs 
 Web site: http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/sa/housing/overview/
Pages/default.aspx 
 The department oversees the national government’s homeless ini-
tiative, launched with a white paper in 2008 and focuses on the 
three goals of prevention, improving services, and breaking the 
cycle of homelessness. 

234 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies 
 Homelessness Australia 
 Web    site:    http://www.homelessnessaustralia.org.au/site/
index.php 
 Homelessness Australia is a key national nongovernmental or-
ganization that has been central to development of the country’s 
national government white paper. The organization represents 
people who are homeless, their service providers, and other 
partners. 

235
 8 
 Resources 
 Introduction 
 T
his chapter covers general reference materials on homeless-
ness. Literally thousands of books, research articles, news sto-
ries, and dissertations have been written on homelessness in 
the United States, though print coverage of all sorts diminished 
during the 1990s and then saw a resurgence as new national ini-
tiatives gained traction. In the last decade, daily headlines on 
homelessness and its solutions have once again become standard. 
Many resources related to homelessness now exist only as elec-
tronic tools. 
 While most of the resources included here are from the last 
decade, others are important print contributions that have stood 
the test of time and continue to offer insight into the roots of 
homelessness and the responses to it. The goal of this chapter is 
to identify key resources that are accessible and nontechnical and 
together offer a variety of views, including first-person accounts. 
Entries that offer an introduction or pathway to some of the nu-
merous topics associated with individual and family homeless-
ness are included, but resources that are hard to locate or highly 
technical have been kept to a minimum. 
 This list includes a few special issues of professional journals 
that have been devoted to the issue, but the chapter does not in-
clude the numerous articles published in mainstream media or 
academic journals or the useful, detailed reports issued by many 
of the organizations listed in chapter 7. Those organizations often 
publish regular newsletters and Web listings of the materials 
they distribute, and, increasingly, provide access to publications 

236 Resources
solely via their Web sites. The Web sites of major U.S. govern-
ment agencies are included, recognizing that many agencies now 
make their reports and guides available electronically and that 
some agencies and organizations utilize Webcasts, Webinars, and 
audio conferences to disseminate information. A few agencies 
support free-standing electronic clearinghouses on homelessness 
resources. 
 General References 
 Barak, Gregg.  Gimme Shelter: A Social History of Homelessness . 
New York: Praeger, 1992. 
 The author is a criminologist who analyzes homelessness as a 
crime against those who experience it. He also examines the his-
tory of advocacy efforts, both in public education and litigation. 
 Baumohl, Jim, editor.  Homelessness in America . Phoenix, AZ: 
Oryx Press, 1996. 
 This collection of articles by advocates, researchers, providers, 
and academics focuses on causes, known data, and solutions for 
contemporary homelessness. Included are discussions of defini-
tion, rural homelessness, veterans, and children. 
 Baxter, Ellen, and Kim Hopper.  Private Lives/Public Spaces: 
Homeless Adults on the Streets of New York City.  New York: 
Community Service Society, New York, 1981. 
 This early study primarily reports on the causes of contemporary 
homelessness as they were first revealed in New York and other 
cities. It describes in detail the procedures and operations of the 
existing public and private shelters and the ways that homeless 
persons survive on the streets. 
 Blodgett, Lynn.  Finding Grace:  The Face of America’s Homeless . 
San Rafael, CA: Earth Aware Editions, 2007. 
 Photographer Lynn Blodgett, also a businessman, has traveled 
across the United States both for his work and to raise funds for 
homeless programs. He began photographing people he met who 
were homeless. The results are combined here with narrative. 

General References 237
 Bratt, Rachel G., Michael E. Stone, and Chester Hartman.  A Right 
to Housing: Foundation for a New Social Agenda . Philadelphia: 
Temple University Press, 2006. 
 The authors are all academics with long-term involvement in 
housing policy and research. This volume of essays examines a 
broad range of housing issues and actors and the potential for 
universal access to housing. 
 Brickner, Philip, Linda Keen Scharer, Barbara Conanan, Alexan-
der Elvy, Marianne Savarese, editors.  Health Care of Homeless 
People.  New York: Springer Publishing Company, 1985. 
 An overview of health issues for homeless people is presented, 
with special sections on medical disorders, mental health and ill-
ness, the organization of health services, and models of health 
care for homeless poor people. The offerings are by a total of 
24 different authors or collaborators, with expertise on subjects 
ranging from infestations to alcoholism to nutrition. 
 Burt, Martha R., Laudan Y. Aron, Edgar Lee, and Jesse Valente, 
editors.  Helping America’s Homeless: Emergency Shelter or Af-
fordable Housing.  Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute Press, 
2001. 
 The data from the National Survey of Homeless Assistance Pro-
viders and Clients (NSHAPC), is the basis of this book. Included 
in the content is an examination of the size of the homeless popu-
lation, the distribution of the population, causes of their homeless-
ness, and the duration of their homelessness. Homeless assistance 
programs are discussed in communities of various sizes. 
 Burt, Martha R.  Over the Edge: The Growth of Homelessness in 
the 1980s. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute Press and Russell 
Sage Foundation, 1991. 
 Persistent homelessness is related to structural changes in the 
nation, according to the author, who surveyed numerous cities 
and interviewed homeless people seeking services. She calls for 
increased low-rent housing production, more housing subsidies, 
restructured employment (including education and training), and 
more community-based care. 

238 Resources
 Burt, Martha, Laudan Aron, Toby Douglas, Jesse Valente, Edgar 
Lee, and Britta Iwen.  Homelessness: Programs and the People 
They Serve. Findings of the National Survey of Homeless Assis-
tance Providers and Clients (NSHAPC).  Washington, D.C.: The 
Urban Institute, 1999. 
 The authors analyze the results of a 1996 survey of homeless pro-
grams and homeless people that was sponsored by 12 federal 
agencies. 
 Cisneros, Henry, Jack Kemp, Nicolas Retsinas, and Kent W. 
Colton.  Our Communities, Our Homes: Pathways to Hous-
ing and Homeownership in America’s Cities and States. Cam-
bridge, MA: Joint Center for Housing Studies at Harvard 
University, 2007.  
 The authors are former HUD secretaries Cisneros and Kemp, As-
sistant Secretary Retsinas, and National Association of Home-
builders CEO Colton. Their wide-ranging knowledge and insight 
on housing issues includes an examination of successful strate-
gies to end chronic homelessness. 
 Cisneros, Henry, Jack Kemp, Nicolas Retsinas, and Kent W. 
Colton.  Opportunity and Progress: A Bipartisan Platform for 
National Housing Policy.  Cambridge, MA: Joint Center for 
Housing Studies at Harvard University, 2004. 
 Innovation in solving housing problems in the nation can tran-
scend partisan debate, according to the authors, who have been 
leaders in policy in federal and business positions. Housing must 
be a national priority based on partnership across the public and 
private sectors. 
 Coates, Robert C.  A Street Is Not a Home: Solving America’s 
Homeless Dilemma . Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1990. 
 The author served for many years as a San Diego municipal court 
judge, giving him unique exposure to many of the issues related 
to homelessness. Coates’s personal and professional experience 
add depth to considerable research on the myriad problems of 
America’s homeless. Judge Coates supports solution-oriented 
strategies, including community support and resources to ad-
dress mental illness. 

General References 239
 Collins, Jim.  Good to Great:  Why Some Companies Make the 
Leap . . . and Others Don’t. New York: HarperBusiness, 2001. 
 Collins is a business thinker and writer whose spent five years 
studying more than 1,400 companies that moved from good to 
great and those that didn’t. He consulted with jurisdictional lead-
ers at the first national summit convened by the federal Inter-
agency Council on Homelessness to focus on his insights about 
“disciplined people, disciplined thought, disciplined action” and 
the importance of “the right people on the bus” for success. 
 Culhane, Dennis P., and Steven Hornburg, editors.  Understand-
ing Homelessness: New Policy and Research Perspectives.  Wash-
ington, D.C.: Fannie Mae Foundation, 1997. 
 The three sections of this book represent the work of some of 
the key researchers who have studied the growth of homeless-
ness and its characteristics. Here they examine means of defining 
homelessness, counting and tracking homeless people, the causes 
and prevention of homelessness, and possible policy and research 
initiatives. 
 Currie, Elliott.  Reckoning: Drugs, the Cities, and the America Fu-
ture. New York: Hill and Wang, 1993. 
 The epidemic of urban drug use is already known as a symptom 
of larger social ills, but the author dissects the documentation on 
when drug use occurs in poor families, especially immigrants, 
and how this plague has been increased by the destruction of 
poor communities through economic policy, housing loss, and 
other factors. He suggests ways that employment and redirected 
spending can end or prevent the resulting problems, including 
homelessness. 
 Day, Dorothy.  The Long Loneliness: An Autobiography . New 
York: Harper and Row, 1981. 
 In the decades preceding the 1980s, there were two significant 
sources of help for homeless people: the traditional missions and 
Salvation Army establishments and the Catholic Worker Houses 
of Hospitality spread around the nation. This book, by the co-
founder of the CW movement and its newspaper editor for over 
30 years, tells the story of the Depression-era founding of the 
small shelters and soup lines that still exist today and the story 

240 Resources
of her longtime leadership on issues of social justice, peace, and 
racial equality. 
 Devine, Joel, Beth Rubin, and James Wright.  Beside the Golden 
Door: Policy Politics, and the Homeless.  New Brunswick, NJ: 
Aldine Transaction, 1998. 
 This book is written for a broad audience and covers issues rang-
ing from poverty to the loss of housing affordable to those with 
little income, from enumeration issues to factors such as mental 
illness and substance abuse. Urban and rural issues are examined, 
and there is coverage of street homelessness among children in 
both North and Latin America. 
 Crowley, Sheila.  Out of Reach: Renters in the Great Recession, 
the Crisis.  National Low Income Housing Coalition, Septem-
ber 2010. Washington, D.C.: National Low Income Housing 
Coalition.  
 Detailed information is provided on the state-by-state basis of 
the gap between the cost of decent housing and what people can 
afford to pay as determined by HUD’s annual fair market rent 
levels. Profiles are offered of the gap faced by persons earning 
the minimum wage in various housing markets as well as those 
renters who rely on public assistance for their income. 
 Ellen, Ingrid Gould, and Brendan O’Flaherty.  How to House the 
Homeless . New York: Russell Sage Publications, 2010. 
 The authors examines pathways out of homelessness as well as 
prevention strategies. The housing market and the role of regula-
tion are highlighted, and a section is devoted to “managing risk” 
that people necessarily face in life, or the role of “bad luck” in 
homelessness. 
 Gardner, Chris.  The Pursuit of Happyness.  New York: Amistead, 
2006. 
 Chris Gardner tells his story of life as a homeless single father on 
the streets of San Francisco. With almost unrelenting optimism in 
his search for stability, Gardner studies at night and wins a pres-
tigious internship in a financial firm while caring for his son be-
tween shelters, hotels, and the bus station. 

General References 241
 Gladwell, Malcolm.  The Tipping Point: How Little Things Can 
Make a Big Difference. Boston: Back Bay Books, 2002. 
 Gladwell’s writing often focuses on unusual ideas or counterin-
tuitive findings, and this book particularly influenced strategies 
on homelessness. For many working on the issue, the idea of 
reaching a “tipping point” that could produce new results was 
captured in this work. Gladwell particularly made the point that 
modest new resources had to be concentrated on the most visible 
part of a social problem to achieve the visible result that could 
lead to greater investment. 
 Hattery, Angela.  Prisoner Re-entry and Social Capital: The 
Long Road to Reintegration.  Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 
2010.  
 Reentry is a national issue impacting homelessness, as ex-
prisoners need stable and legal housing, income, and necessary 
services to reintegrate successfully. Twenty-five men and women 
who were recently released from prison were interviewed for this 
book, which explores barriers as well as needs. The book also em-
phasizes social capital as a factor in reentry. 
 Hombs, Mary Ellen, and Mitch Snyder.  Homelessness in Amer-
ica: A Forced March to Nowhere. 2nd ed.  Washington, D.C.: Com-
munity for Creative Non - Violence, 1983. 
 This national survey of homelessness and its origins was first re-
leased in conjunction with the original 1982 congressional hear-
ings of the same title. When it was subsequently updated the 
following year, it included the estimates of national homelessness 
that engendered national controversy. 
 Hopper, Kim.  Reckoning with Homelessness . Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 2003. 
 Hopper was one of two anthropologists talking to people on 
New York City’s streets in the early 1980s. Here he combines 20 
years of professional work with a long history of activism, to put 
homelessness into historical perspective and highlight the Afri-
can American population generally overlooked in contemporary 
literature. Hopper includes individual stories of people living on 
the streets and finding refuge elsewhere. 

242 Resources
 Hubbard, Jim.  Lives Turned Upside Down: Homeless Children 
in Their Own Words and Photographs.  Fullerton, CA: Aladdin, 
2007. 
 As a professional news photographer working across the world 
in a long career, Hubbard understood the power of pictures to tell 
stories and also the eye that children have for their own world. In 
starting the Shooting Back Media Center with professional volun-
teer photographers to mentor homeless young people, Hubbard 
provided a positive framework for children and their families to 
communicate their everyday life. This book is suitable for young 
readers. 
 Interagency Council on Homelessness.  Priority Home! The Fed-
eral Plan to Break the Cycle of Homelessness.  Washington, D.C.: 
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, 1994. 
 This report was produced after a lengthy national process in re-
sponse to the Executive Order on Homelessness signed by Presi-
dent Clinton at the beginning of his administration. This report 
combines data with the insights of provider and policymakers 
across the nation. 
 Jencks, Christopher.  The Homeless . Boston: Harvard University 
Press, 1995. 
 The author focuses on the “visible homeless” and discusses the 
size of the population and possible solutions for their home-
lessness. 
 Joint Center for Housing Studies at Harvard University.  The 
State of the Nation’s Housing 2010.  Cambridge, MA: Joint Cen-
ter for Housing Studies at Harvard University, 2010. 
 The center annually looks at factors influencing housing costs, the 
housing market, and the nation’s stock, especially of housing that 
is affordable. In this report with a background as the economy 
begins to add jobs and housing prices shift in the wake of foreclo-
sures and short sales, the challenges in rental housing and hom-
eownership are identified. 
 Joint Center for Housing Studies at Harvard University.  Amer-
ica’s Rental Housing: The Key to a Balanced National Policy . 

General References 243
Cambridge, MA: Joint Center for Housing Studies at Harvard 
University, 2008. 
 Rental housing, whether assisted or not, will provide the hous-
ing solution for people experiencing homelessness or at risk of 
homelessness. This report looks at affordability, production, and 
demand for rental units in the nation. 
 Katz, Michael.  In the Shadow of the Poorhouse: A Social History 
of Welfare in America . New York: Basic Books, 1996. 
 Katz is an historian at the University of Pennsylvania and ex-
amines the history of welfare programs in the United States. He 
focuses on the often competing goals of initiatives and the pos-
sibility of reform in the light of 200 years of history. 
 Kozol, Jonathan.  Rachel and Her Children: Homeless Families in 
America . New York: Three Rivers Press, 2006. 
 This vivid account of life in the welfare hotels of New York City, 
first published in 1989, demonstrates not only the financial waste 
of this method for serving homeless families but also the damage 
done to young lives and struggling parents. Alongside the per-
sonal stories told by mothers, fathers, and children are the chilling 
statistics that explain how poverty works in daily life. 
 Kusmer, Kenneth L.  Down and Out, on the Road: The Homeless 
in American History . New York: Oxford University Press, 2003. 
 Homelessness of the 19th and early 20th century is a focus in this 
book, which offers an historical perspective. Issues such as work 
and criminalization and events such as the Civil War and Great 
Depression provide context. 
 LeMieux, Richard.  Breakfast at Sally’s: One Homeless Man’s In-
spirational Journey . New York: Skyhorse Publishing, 2009. 
 Before a fall into homelessness precipitated by a failed business 
and family breakup, the author had his own publishing company 
and a home and possessions reflecting his success. After he was 
evicted, at age 60, he was homeless and eating breakfast at “Sal-
ly’s” as the Salvation Army is often called. His writing was done 
on a typewriter and reflected his encounters and thoughts as he 
weathered the experience with a determined sprit. 

244 Resources
 Levinson, David.  Encyclopedia of Homelessness . Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage Publishing, 2004. 
 This two-volume work with contributions by authors from every 
field related to homelessness includes detailed lists of a variety of 
resources, such as films, biographies, and street newspapers, as 
well as brief essays on hundreds of topic areas. 
 Levy, Jay S.  Homeless Narratives & Pretreatment Pathways: 
From Words to Housing . Ann Arbor, MI: Loving Healing Press, 
2010. 
 The author offers stories of individuals that convey the necessary 
elements of effective engagement on the streets with people with 
mental illness. The challenges and principles that accompany pre-
treatment work with mental illness, addiction, and health prob-
lems are addressed, as are case management and advocacy and 
integration of services and housing. 
 Liebow, Elliot.  Tell Them Who I Am . New York: Penguin, 1995. 
 The author wrote the groundbreaking and widely hailed  Tally’s 
Corner  in 1967 to describe the life of so-called street corner men in 
a black neighborhood of Washington, D.C. After years of volun-
teering, observing, and interviewing homeless women in shelters 
in the Maryland suburbs of Washington, D.C., he provides this 
picture of the women’s individual stories as homeless persons as 
well as his own views of the broader economic, social, and politi-
cal forces that cause and continue homelessness. 
 Lopez, Steve.  The Soloist . New York: Berkley Trade, 2010. 
 Los Angeles Times  columnist Steve Lopez happens on homeless 
cellist Nathaniel Ayres on the city’s streets. Ayres was once a 
promising musician who was beset by schizophrenia and became 
homeless. When a bond forms as Lopez writes about Ayres, op-
portunities develop for housing and support, as well as family re-
connection. This book represents the larger story related by Lopez 
in a series of columns and eventually seen in a feature film. 
 McNamee, John P.  Diary of a City Priest.  Kansas City: Sheed & 
Ward, 1993. 
 For more than 25 years, Father John McNamee was a priest in a 
poor parish in Philadelphia. Here he tells of the daily events at 

General References 245
his door, as he meets and supports those who are his neighbors 
in need. 
 Miller, William.  Dorothy Day: A Biography . New York: Harper 
and Row, 1982. 
 This biography of Catholic Worker co-founder Dorothy Day of-
fers a candid portrait of her life and work in the social justice 
movement. 
 Murray, Liz.  Breaking Night: A Memoir of Forgiveness, Survival, 
and My Journey from Homeless to Harvard . New York: Hype-
rion, 2010. 
 Liz Murray first came to the nation’s attention when a made-for-TV 
movie told her story. Homeless at 15 and later enrolled in Harvard 
University, Murray became an example of personal determination 
and triumph. When Liz’s mother, who suffers from schizophrenia 
and drug abuse, is institutionalized, Liz and her sister stay with 
their addicted father. When their mother returns, also diagnosed 
with AIDS, the family is torn apart by circumstances and eventu-
ally Liz becomes homeless. Determined to succeed, she focuses 
on school and wins a  New York Times  scholarship that allows her 
to attend Harvard. 
 National Academy of Science, Institute of Medicine.  Home-
lessness, Health and Human Needs.  Washington, D.C.: National 
Academy Press, 1988. 
 This controversial report had a congressional mandate to assess 
the provision of health care services to homeless people. The re-
sulting work provides background data and recommendations on 
housing, income, employment, mental illness, and deinstitution-
alization as these subjects relate to the problem. The document 
was debated on its release, when 10 of the 13 experts who contrib-
uted to it released a dissenting report, calling for national action 
on housing, wages, and benefits in order to fight homelessness. 
 Rader, Victoria.  Signal Through the Flames: Mitch Snyder and 
America’s Homeless . Kansas City, MO: Sheed & Ward, 1986. 
 The work of Washington, D.C.’s Community for Creative Non-
Violence is explored here from a campaign viewpoint, with the 
development of the organization’s various public efforts for 

246 Resources
peace and justice explored from inception to retrospective anal-
ysis. Significant insight into the workings of the community re-
sult from community members as well as the use of the group’s 
extensive archives on its work. 
 Rossi, Peter.  Without Shelter: Homelessness in the 1980s . New 
York: Priority Press Publications, a Twentieth Century Fund 
paper, 1989. 
 This volume examines some of the recent growth of homeless-
ness, with a focus on research studies that have attempted to as-
sess the problem. 
 Rowe, Michael.  Crossing the Border: Encounters between Home-
less People and Outreach.  Los Angeles: University of California 
Press, 1999. 
 The first lengthy study of outreach work to the mentally ill home-
less, this book depicts both a particular group of homeless people 
and their interactions with those who try to help them. The author 
was Director of the New Haven ACCESS outreach project. 
 Scott, Susan.  All Our Sisters: Stories of Homeless Women in Can-
ada . Aurora, ON: Garamond Press, 2007. 
 The author interviewed more than 60 women who represent the 
range of circumstances in which homelessness and risk is present. 
Among the situations addressed are poverty, domestic violence, 
addiction, abuse, and substandard housing. 
 Seider, Scott.  Shelter: Where Harvard Meets the Homeless . New 
York: Continuum, 2010. 
 For more than 25 years, Harvard students have volunteered at the 
nation’s only student-run night shelter. The effort unites two very 
disparate populations in Harvard Square. 
 Sheehan, Susan.  Is There No Place on Earth for Me?  New York: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1982. 
 This carefully detailed account of the repeated hospitaliza-
tion and treatment of Sylvia Frumkin, a chronically mentally ill 
woman in New York, paints a careful portrait of the deficiencies 

General References 247
of the public mental health system and the toll of mental illness 
on one family. 
 Shipler, David K.  The Working Poor: Invisible in America . New 
York: Knopf, 2004. 
 Widely published as a reporter at major mainstream media, Ship-
ler here offers insight into the lives of the working poor, those 
working on the margins of the U.S. economy, and the risk they 
face in struggling to survive. The book won a Pulitzer Prize. 
 Slesnick, Natasha.  Our Runaway and Homeless Youth: A Guide 
to Understanding . Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger, 2004. 
 Young adults who are homeless, whether runaways, throwaways, 
or living outside families, are underserved with strategies and 
resources specific to their needs. The stories of four such young 
adults are used to describe the reasons for their homelessness and 
the realities of homeless life. 
 Tidwell, Mike.  In the Shadow of the White House . Rocklin, CA: 
Prima Publishing, 1992. 
 Images of homeless single men as users of drugs and alcohol 
abound; for those who work to pull themselves out of addiction, 
the road is hard and unwelcoming: a daily struggle with recovery, 
no transportation, no resume, few chances at employment that 
pays enough to acquire housing or reunite a family. The author 
tells in gritty detail the efforts—frequently unsuccessful—of the 
men he encountered as a drug counselor in a transitional housing 
program in Washington, D.C. 
 Torrey, E. Fuller.  Nowhere to Go: The Tragic Odyssey of the Home-
less Mentally Ill . New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1988. 
 The careless depopulation of public mental hospitals resulted in 
the creation of community mental health centers and a vast new 
federal government structure of ready financing. But the seriously 
mentally ill, whose plight was supposed to be bettered by these 
developments, instead were displaced by the “worried well” who 
sought treatment at these facilities, and they found themselves 
unable to reenter hospitals that had tightened admissions stan-
dards. 

248 Resources
 Tsemberis, Sam.  Housing First: The Pathways Model to End 
Homelessness for People with Mental Illness and Addiction . 
Center City, MN: Hazelden Publishing, 2010. 
 A step-by-step manual and DVD on the policies, practices, and 
structure of a Housing First program that conforms to the Path-
way to Housing model. The book includes client stories, informa-
tion on structure for support teams, and useful lessons. 
 Wolf, Geralyn.  Down and Out in Providence: Memoir of a Home-
less Bishop . New York: Crossroad Publishing Company, 2005. 
 Bishop Geralyn Wolf was the first Episcopal female dean of a ca-
thedral in the United States and is bishop of Rhode Island. Prepar-
ing for a sabbatical after 25 years of ministry, Wolf moves to the 
streets of Providence, RI, for a month, experiencing shelters and 
meal programs, winter weather, and friendship. 
 Wright, James.  Address Unknown: The Homeless in America . 
New Brunswick, NJ: Aldine Transaction, 2009. 
 The author has published on homelessness since the mid-1980s, 
addressing many facets of the issue, including housing, mental 
addiction, and health care, as well as the populations of children, 
families, elders, veterans, and youth. Here he looks at the hous-
ing market role that he believes would render many poor people 
homeless absent any disability or challenge 
 Homelessness Policy and Research 
 Journals 
 Housing Policy Debate 
 This research and policy journal was published for most of the last 
20 years by the Fannie Mae Foundation and then by the Metro-
politan Institute at Virginia Tech (MI). The commercial publisher 
Routledge will begin issuing the journal for MI in 2010 as a print 
subscription and on-line download.  Housing Policy Debate  is peer 
reviewed and includes original research on key topics of U.S. pol-
icy on housing and homelessness. 
 Following are selected articles from the journal relevant to 
homelessness. 

Homelessness Policy and Research 249
 Franklin J. James, “Counting homeless persons with surveys of users of 
services for the homeless,” Housing Policy Debate, 2152-050X, Volume 2, 
Issue 3 (1991): 733–753. 
 Kim Hopper, “Homelessness old and new: The matter of definition,” 
Housing Policy Debate, 2152-050X, Volume 2, Issue 3 (1991): 755–813. 
 Deborah L. Dennis, Irene S. Levine, and Fred C. Osher, “The physical 
and mental health status of homeless adults,” Housing Policy Debate, 
2152-050X, Volume 2, Issue 3(1991): 815–835. 
 Barrett A. Lee, Bruce G. Link, and Paul A. Toro, “Images of the 
homeless: Public views and media messages,” Housing Policy Debate, 
2152-050X, Volume 2, Issue 3 (1991): 649–682. 
 Eleanor Chelimsky, “Politics, policy making, data, and the homeless,” 
Housing Policy Debate, 2152-050X, Volume 2, Issue 3 (1991): 683–697. 
 Michael L. Dennis, “Changing the conventional rules: Surveying 
homeless people in nonconventional locations,” Housing Policy Debate, 
2152-050X, Volume 2, Issue 3 (1991): 699–732. 
 James Baumohl and Robert B. Huebner, “Alcohol and other drug 
problems among the homeless: Research, practice, and future 
directions,” Housing Policy Debate, 2152-050X, Volume 2, Issue 3 (1991): 
837–866. 
 Eric N. Lindblom, “Toward a comprehensive homelessness-prevention 
strategy,” Housing Policy Debate, 2152-050X, Volume 2, Issue 3 (1991): 
957–1025. 
 Peter H. Rossi, “Strategies for homeless research in the 1990s,” Housing 
Policy Debate, 2152-050X, Volume 2, Issue 3 (1991): 1027–1055. 
 Cushing N. Dolbeare, “Federal homeless social policies for the 1990s,” 
Housing Policy Debate, 2152-050X, Volume 2, Issue 3 (1991): 1057–1094. 
 Charles D. Cowan. “Estimating census and survey undercounts through 
multiple service contacts,” Housing Policy Debate, 2152-050X, Volume 2, 
Issue 3 (1991): 867–882. 
 Douglas L. Anderton, “Using local longitudinal records to estimate 
transient and resident homeless populations,” Housing Policy Debate, 
2152-050X, Volume 2, Issue 3 (1991): 883–900. 
 James D. Wright and Beth A. Rubin, “Is homelessness a housing 
problem?” Housing Policy Debate, 2152-050X, Volume 2, Issue 3 (1991): 
937–956. 
 Anna Kondratas, “Estimates and public policy: The politics of 
numbers,” Housing Policy Debate, 2152-050X, Volume 2, Issue 3 (1991): 
629–647. 

250 Resources
 Christopher Walker, “Federal homeless information needs and local 
practice,” Housing Policy Debate, 2152-050X, Volume 2, Issue 3(1991), 
617–627. 
 David S. Cordray and Georgine M. Pion, “What’s behind the numbers? 
Definitional issues in counting the homeless,” Housing Policy Debate, 
2152-050X, Volume 2, Issue 3 (1991): 585–616. 
 Dennis P. Culhane, Edmund F. Dejowski, Julie Ibañez, Elizabeth 
Needham, Irene Macchia, “Public shelter admission rates in 
Philadelphia and New York City: The implications of turnover for 
sheltered population counts,” Housing Policy Debate, 2152-050X, 
Volume 5, Issue 2 (1994): 107–140. 
 Leonard F. Heumann, “Assisted living in public housing: A case study 
of mixing frail elderly and younger persons with chronic mental illness 
and substance abuse histories,” Housing Policy Debate, 2152-050X, 
Volume 7, Issue 3 (1996): 447–471. 
 Dennis P. Culhane, Chang-Moo Lee, and Susan M. Wachter, “Where 
the homeless come from: A study of the prior address distribution 
of families admitted to public shelters in New York City and 
Philadelphia,” Housing Policy Debate, 2152-050X, Volume 7, Issue 2 
(1996): 327–365. 
 Ellen L. Bassuk, Jennifer N. Perloff, and Ree Dawson, “Multiply 
homeless families: The insidious impact of violence,” Housing Policy 
Debate, 2152-050X, Volume 12, Issue 2 (2001): 299–320. 
 Martha R. Burt, “Homeless families, singles, and others: Findings from 
the 1996 national survey of homeless assistance providers and clients,” 
Housing Policy Debate, 2152-050X, Volume 12, Issue 4 (2001): 737–780. 
 Rae Bridgman, “Housing chronically homeless women: ‘Inside’ a safe 
haven,” Housing Policy Debate, 2152-050X, Volume 13, Issue 1 (2002): 
51–81. 
 Dennis P. Culhane, Stephen Metraux, and Trevor Hadley, “Public 
service reductions associated with placement of homeless persons with 
severe mental illness in supportive housing,” Housing Policy Debate, 
2152-050X, Volume 13, Issue 1 (2002): 107–163. 
 Lenore Monello Schloming and Skip Schloming, “Comment on Chester 
Hartman and David Robinson’s ‘Evictions: The hidden housing 
problem,’” Housing Policy Debate, 2152-050X, Volume 14, Issue 4 
(2003): 529–540. 
 Ellen L. Bassuk and Stephanie Geller, “The role of housing and services 
in ending family homelessness,” Housing Policy Debate, 2152-050X, 
Volume 17, Issue 4 (2006): 781–806. 

Homelessness Policy and Research 251
 Dennis P. Culhane, Stephen Metraux, Jung Min Park, Maryanne 
Schretzman, and Jesse Valente, “Testing a typology of family 
homelessness based on patterns of public shelter utilization in four U.S. 
jurisdictions: Implications for policy and program planning,” Housing 
Policy Debate, 2152-050X, Volume 18, Issue 1 (2007): 1–28. 
 Martha R. Burt, “Comment on Dennis P. Culhane et al.’s ‘Testing a 
typology of family homelessness based on patterns of public shelter 
utilization in four U.S. jurisdictions: Implications for policy and 
program planning,’” Housing Policy Debate, 2152-050X, Volume 18, 
Issue 1 (2007): 43–57. 
 Fred Karnas, “Comment on Dennis P. Culhane et al.’s ‘Testing a 
typology of family homelessness based on patterns of public shelter 
utilization in four U.S. jurisdictions: Implications for policy and 
program planning,’” Housing Policy Debate, 2152-050X, Volume 18, 
Issue 1 (2007): 59–67. 
 Ellen L. Bassuk, “Comment on Dennis P. Culhane et al.’s ‘Testing a 
typology of family homelessness based on patterns of public shelter 
utilization in four U.S. jurisdictions: Implications for policy and 
program planning,’” Housing Policy Debate, 2152-050X, Volume 18, 
Issue 1(2007): 29–41. 
 Hilary Botein; Andrea Hetling, “Permanent supportive housing for 
domestic violence victims: program theory and client perspectives,” 
Housing Policy Debate, 2152-050X, Volume 20, Issue 2 (2010): 
185–208. 
 Special Journal Issues 
 American Journal of Orthopsychiatry. Special section on homelessness 
and parenting. Vol. 79, No. 3 (2009): 291. 
 Journal of Behavioral Health Services & Research. Vol. 37, No. 2 (April 
2010). 
 Special issue on the Federal Collaborative Initiative to End Chronic 
Homelessness. Publication of the National Council for Community 
Behavioral Healthcare. 
 Journal of Primary Prevention. Special Issue on Homelessness and 
Mental Illness (2007): 28. 
 The Open Health Services and Policy Journal (2010): 3, 53–70. Olivet, 
Jeffrey, Ellen Bassuk, Emily Elstad, Rachael Kenney, and Lauren Jassil, 
authors. Outreach and Engagement in Homeless Services: A Review 
of the Literature. 

252 Resources
 Nonprint Resources 
 Materials that are important reference sources for understanding 
homelessness are increasingly available through nonprint sources. 
Over the last decade, many sectors addressing homelessness have 
turned to purely electronic means of distribution. Some of the pri-
mary resources on DVDs and accessible through the Internet are 
included in this chapter. 
 DVDs 
 Several strong films on homelessness have emerged in the last 
several years, many starting as feature films depicting true stories. 
DVDs now make these and other works broadly available. While 
there are numerous local productions, the selected list included 
here focuses on some of the popular media with well-known 
names that allowed a range of people to be depicted: a homeless 
father, homeless youth, people with mental illness, and families. 
 Some of the issues associated with homelessness include ad-
diction, mental illness, street life, family violence, and death. These 
can be challenging images for people of all ages and backgrounds. 
It is highly recommended that films and videos be screened be-
fore use in any group setting. Many distributors have additional 
on-line information about the films, and some productions rou-
tinely include discussion guides and advocacy material to assist 
viewers with understanding the material shown. Librarians can 
also provide assistance in locating appropriate viewing material 
for various audiences. 
 The Blind Side (2009) 
 Directed by John Lee Hancock, this is the true story of Michael 
Oher, homeless as a young adult in Memphis and depicted here 
by Quinton Aaron. Oher’s mother used drugs and his father was 
in and out of prison. Sandra Bullock plays Leigh Anne Touhy, 
who offers a room to the young man and then adopts him. His 
new father enrolls him in high school football, and the film tells 
the story of his struggles. Oher succeeds to become a first-round 
draft pick for the Baltimore Ravens in the 2009 NFL draft. 
 Dark Days (2001) 
 Directed by Marc Singer, who also appears in the film, this story 
reveals the lives of people who are homeless and living in tunnels 

Nonprint Resources 253
and underground spaces in New York City. Filmed over two years, 
it depicts some of the individuals transformed by their eventual 
move into housing of their own when forced out by sweeps of the 
area. The film won the Grand Jury prize for cinematography, the 
Freedom of Expression award, and an audience award at the 2000 
Sundance Film Festival. 
 Empress Hotel (2009) 
 Directed by Irving Saraf and Allie Light, this film tells the story 
of individuals leaving homelessness and living in the Empress 
Hotel. The Empress is one of the San Francisco housing initiatives 
called Direct Access to Housing, which has innovated a model 
that succeeds for some of the longest term and mostly costly peo-
ple experiencing homelessness. 
 Entertaining Angels (1996) 
 Directed by Michael Brindley, this is the feature film story of the 
life and work of Dorothy Day, young journalist and cofounder of 
the Catholic Worker. Featuring Moira Kelley as Day and Martin 
Sheen as Peter Maurin, her colleague, the film shows his vision for 
the work and his life of poverty. 
 Homeless: The Motel Kids of Orange County (2010) 
 Filmmaker Alexandra Pelosi made this documentary that ex-
plores the life of homeless children whose families are living in 
motels, playing in parking lots, and digging through dumpsters. 
Within walking distance of Disneyland, families tell their stories 
of economic struggle. 
 Homeless to Harvard (2003) 
 The true story of Liz Murray, who was homeless at 15 and later 
enrolled in Harvard University. When Liz’s mother, who suffers 
from schizophrenia and drug abuse, is institutionalized, Liz and 
her sister stay with their addicted father. When their mother re-
turns, also diagnosed with AIDS, the family is torn apart by cir-
cumstances and eventually Liz becomes homeless. Determined to 
succeed, she focuses on school and wins a  New York Times scholar-
ship that allows her to attend Harvard. The film, originally made 
for TV, was directed by Peter Levin. 
 Kicking It (2008) 
 This documentary of the annual Homeless World Cup follows 
six homeless players as they go to South Africa to play soccer. 

254 Resources
Directed by Susan Koch and Jeff Werner and narrated by Colin Far-
rell, the film premiered at the Sundance Film Festival. The stories of 
Najib from Afghanistan; Alex from Kenya; Damien and Simon from 
Dublin, Ireland; Craig from Charlotte, North Carolina; Jesus from 
Madrid, Spain; and Slavan from St. Petersburg, Russia are told. 
 The Pursuit of Happyness (2006) 
 Will Smith and his son depict the true story of Chris Gardner, a 
homeless single father on the streets of San Francisco. Directed by 
Gabriele Muccino, the film shows Gardner’s almost unrelenting 
optimism in his search for stability, as he studies at night and wins 
a prestigious internship in a financial firm while caring for his son 
between shelters, hotels, and the bus station. 
 The Soloist (2009) 
 Robert Downey, Jr. stars as  Los Angeles Times  columnist Steve 
Lopez, who happens on homeless cellist Nathaniel Ayres (played 
by Jamie Foxx) on the city’s streets. Ayres was once a promising 
musician who was beset by schizophrenia and became homeless. 
When a bond forms as Lopez writes about Ayres, opportunities 
develop for housing and support. The film was directed by Joe 
Wright. 
 Where God Left His Shoes (2008) 
 Salvatore Stabile directs and John Leguizamo stars as Gulf War 
veteran and former prizefighter Frank Diaz, head of an evicted 
family in New York City. As Christmas approaches, Frank needs 
to have a steady job to secure an available apartment. 
 Databases 
 Census Data 
 http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/housing/ahs/ahs.html 
 The American Housing Survey (AHS) is the largest regular na-
tional housing sample survey in the United States. The U.S. Census 
Bureau conducts the AHS to obtain up-to-date housing statistics 
for the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
Data includes housing types, family composition, income, hous-
ing and neighborhood quality, and housing costs. National data 

Web Sites 255
are collected every other year, from a fixed sample of about 50,000 
homes. 
 Housing Cost and Income Data 
 U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development—Fair 
Market Rents http://www.huduser.org/portal/datasets/fmr/
fmrs/docsys.html&data=fmr11 
 Fair market rents are set annually by HUD to identify subsidy 
levels for every community. 
 Litigation 
 Sargent Shriver National Center for Poverty Law 
 www.povertylaw.org 
 A searchable database of poverty law cases is available, including 
civil rights, consumer law, criminal law, disability, economic de-
velopment, education, employment, family law, food programs, 
health, housing, immigration, juveniles, mental health, prisons, 
rural issues, Social Security, veterans, and welfare. 
 Poverty Data 
 http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/poverty/poverty.html 
 Web Sites 
 Policy and Research 
 Center on Budget and Policy (CBPP) 
 http://www.cbpp.org 
 CBPP is a public policy research organization focuses on federal 
and state budget issues and provides concise analysis of pro-
grams. Many analyses and reports are distributed on-line, and 
some of the most relevant recent publications are listed here. 
 A Quick Guide to Food Stamp Eligibility And Benefits 
 The Earned Income Tax Credit 
 Food Stamps On-Line: A Review of State Government Food 
Stamp Websites 

256 Resources
 Introduction to the Federal Budget Process 
 Introduction to the Food Stamp Program 
 Introduction to Medicaid 
 Online information about key low-income benefit programs: 
links to policy manuals, descriptive information, and applications 
for state food stamps, TANF, child care, Medicaid, and SCHIP 
programs: 
 Pulling Apart: A State-By-State Analysis of Income Trends 
 State Earned Income Tax Credits 
 Streamlining and Coordinating Benefit Programs’ 
Application Procedures 
 The ABCs of State Budgets 
 Dr. Dennis Culhane, University of Pennsylvania 
 http://works.bepress.com/dennis_culhane/subject_areas.
html#Frequently Requested 
 Dr. Culhane has conducted important research on homelessness 
among families, individuals, and veterans during the last decade. 
His published work, including reports commissioned by govern-
ments and others, is consolidated on his Web site. 
 Dr. Sam Tsemberis, Pathways to Housing 
 http://works.bepress.com/sam_tsemberis/ 
 Dr. Tsemberis is a clinical-community psychologist and the inno-
vator of the Housing First strategy through Pathways to Housing. 
He serves on the faculty of the Department of Psychiatry at Co-
lumbia University Medical Center. 
 Media 
 San Francisco Chronicle 
 http://www.sfgate.com/homeless/ 
 While local print news series focused on homelessness, cost stud-
ies, and 10-year plans that emerged during the last decade, the 

Web Sites 257
 San Francisco Chronicle  published “Shame of the City,” reflecting 
the experience of reporter Kevin Fagan and photographer Brant 
Ward, who spent four months on the streets and interviewing the 
health care workers, police, tourists, residents, business people, 
and commuters who encounter homelessness. The series has been 
maintained on the Web site with the paper’s other coverage of the 
issue. 
 Federal Government Web Resources 
 As many federal agencies move to all-electronic documents, these 
Web sites, as well as the electronic clearinghouses that several 
agencies operate, provide a resource to identify funds, research, 
and publications. 
 U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) 
 http://www.usda.gov 
 USDA is responsible for the Supplemental Nutrition Assis-
tance Program (SNAP), school breakfast and lunch programs, the 
WIC nutrition program, and rural housing programs. 
 U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census 
 http://www.commerce.gov/category/news-type/economic-
news?er=true 
 The decennial census and the American Housing Survey pro-
duce data related to housing and homelessness. Data is used in 
formulas that determine the distribution of federal funds to states 
and localities. 
 U.S. Department of Defense (DOD)
 http://www.defense.gov/brac/ 
 The Base Realignment and Closure process of 2005 resulted 
in plans addressing the needs of homeless people in communities 
across the nation. DOD also manages the surplus personal prop-
erty that benefits people who are homeless. 
 U.S. Department of Education (USED) 
 http://www2.ed.gov/programs/homeless/index.html 
 The Department of Education is responsible for the state and 
local contacts who ensure the education rights of children who 
are homeless. 

258 Resources
 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)
 http://www.hhs.gov/homeless/ 
 HHS has a homeless page that provides access to research, 
grants, and publications from the agency. 
 http://aspe.hhs.gov/hsp/09/HomelessnessDataHHS/ 
 This research link examines how states collect data on home-
lessness and housing when they use HHS funds. Interviews were 
conducted with TANF and Medicaid directors in all 50 states 
and the District of Columbia, and there is also a review of data-
collection practices in nine other HHS mainstream programs. 
 HHS Substance Abuse and Mental Health Administration 
 http://www.nrchmi.samhsa.gov/ 
 HHS Substance and Mental Health Services Administration 
operates the Homelessness Resource Center as a one-stop on-line 
resource of resource materials, fact sheets, and training models. 
 U.S. Department of Homeland Security/Federal Emergency 
Management Agency  (FEMA)
 http://www.fema.gov/ 
 FEMA administers the Emergency Food and Shelter Program 
(EFSP), which provides formula funds to states and counties for 
people who are homeless. 
 FEMA Emergency Food and Shelter Program (EFSP) 
 http://www.efsp.unitedway.org/ 
 EFSP is a public-private partnership created in 1983 to sup-
port local organizations providing emergency services and food 
assistance. Local boards chaired by the United Way distribute the 
funds. Local allocations in historical tables are available. 
 U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
 http://portal.hud.gov/portal/page/portal/HUD/topics/
homelessness 
 HUD provides web access to research, housing data, and 
homelessness program information. 
 Homelessness Resource Exchange (HRE) 
 http://www.hudhre.info/ 
 HRS is the one-stop shop for homelessness-related guidance 
from HUD, funding information, local homeless data includ-

Web Sites 259
ing federal funds, and archives of Webcasts and briefings. HUD 
awards homeless assistance grants through the Continuum of 
Care (CoC) and Emergency Shelter Grants (ESG). HRE provides 
information to locate CoCs around the country, find CoC con-
tacts, find report data, and view CoC and ESG awardees since 
2005. 
 HUD Neighborhood Stabilization Program (NSP) 
 http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/communitydevelopment/
programs/neighborhoodspg/statelinks.cfm 
 NSP allocated recovery funds to states and local communities 
to purchase foreclosed housing. A percentage of funds had to be 
used for special needs housing opportunities. 
 U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) 
 http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/ 
 DOJ’s Office of Justice Programs provides federal, state, and 
local authorities with data, training, and resources to address and 
prevent crime. OJP works on reentry issues, mental health and 
substance abuse among offenders. 
 DOJ’s National Institute of Justice (http://www.ojp.usdoj.
gov/nij) provides research and information on evidence-based 
practices. DOJ oversees the federal Violence Against Women Act 
(VAWA). 
 U.S. Department of Labor (DOL) 
 http://www.dol.gov/dol/audience/aud-homeless.htm 
 DOL provides data on employment and jobs and grants for 
training, including for veterans and young adults. 
 U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) 
 http://www1.va.gov/HOMELESS/index.asp 
 VA maintains a site on homelessness among veterans that in-
cludes both the VA plan to end homelessness and locally devel-
oped data on homelessness. 
 U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness (USICH)
 http://www.usich.gov/ 
 The Council released a 2010 strategy to end homelessness. A 
Web site offers an archive of weekly newsletters, tool kits for plan-
ning, and an index of cost studies. 

260 Resources
 Corporation for National and Community Service (CNS) 
 http://www.nationalservice.gov 
 The corporation provides support to the volunteer sector and 
operates the nation’s formal volunteer initiatives, including Se-
nior Corps, AmeriCorps, Learn and Serve America, and the Mar-
tin Luther King Day of Service. 
 General Services Administration (GSA) 
 http://www.gsa.gov/portal/content/105035 
 GSA oversees disposal of real estate and buildings in the fed-
eral inventory. Some of these properties are found suitable for use by 
homeless programs under provisions of the McKinney-Vento Act. 
 Government Accountability Office (GAO) 
 http://www.gao.gov/ 
 The Government Accountability Office (GAO) performs fact-
based reporting on federal programs and spending for the U.S. 
Congress. Many of the topics of its reports and testimonies result 
from requests by members of Congress or from direction in legis-
lative language. 
 GAO reports offer background reading that provides useful 
information on the origin of programs, legislative history, and re-
lated GAO reports. Reports are issued electronically on a daily 
basis, and printed copies can be purchased. GAO offers a daily 
e-mail of new releases. Following is a selected list of recent reports 
concerning homelessness, grouped by subject matter. 
 Homelessness 
 Homelessness: A Common Vocabulary Could Help Agencies 
Collaborate and Collect More Consistent Data, GAO-10-702, 
June 30, 2010. 
 Homelessness: Information on Administrative Costs for 
HUD’s Emergency Shelter Grants Program, GAO-10-491, 
May 20, 2010. 
 Homelessness: Improving Program Coordination and Client 
Access to Programs, GAO-02-485T, March 6, 2002. 
 Homelessness: HUD Funds Eligible Projects According to 
Communities’ Priorities, RCED-00-191, July 24, 2000. 
 Homelessness: Barriers to Using Mainstream Programs, 
RCED-00-184, July 6, 2000. 

Web Sites 261
 Homelessness: Consolidating HUD’s McKinney Programs, 
T-RCED-00-187, May 23, 2000. 
 Homelessness: Grant Applicants’ Characteristics and Views 
on the Supportive Housing Program, RCED-99-239, August 
12, 1999. 
 Homelessness: State and Local Efforts to Integrate and 
Evaluate Homeless Assistance Programs. RCED-99-178, 
June 29, 1999. 
 Homelessness: Overview of Current Issues and GAO 
Studies, T-RCED-99-125, March 23, 1999. 
 Homelessness: Coordination and Evaluation of Programs 
Are Essential, RCED-99-49, February 26, 1999. 
 Rural Homelessness: Better Collaboration by HHS and HUD 
Could Improve Delivery of Services in Rural Areas, GAO-
10-724, July 20, 2010. 
 Youth and Children 
 Runaway and Homeless Youth Grants: Improvements 
Needed in the Grant Award Process, GAO-10-335, May 10, 
2010. 
 Support for Low-Income Individuals and Families: A 
Review of Recent GAO Work, GAO-10-342R, February 22, 
2010. 
 Foster Care: State Practices for Assessing Health Needs, 
Facilitating Service Delivery, and Monitoring Children’s 
Care, GAO-09-26, February 6, 2009. 
 Young Adults With Serious Mental Illness: Some States 
and Federal Agencies Are Taking Steps to Address Their 
Transition Challenges, GAO-08-678, June 23, 2008. 
 Child Welfare: HHS Actions Would Help States Prepare 
Youth in the Foster Care System for Independent Living, 
GAO-07-1097T, July 12, 2007. 
 Youthbuild Program: Analysis of Outcome Data Needed to 
Determine Long-Term Benefits, GAO-07-82, February 28, 2007. 
 Foster Care: Effectiveness of Independent Living Services 
Unknown, HEHS-00-13, November 10, 1999. 

262 Resources
 Census 
 2010 Census: Operational Changes Made for 2010 
Position the U.S. Census Bureau to More Accurately 
Classify and Identify Group Quarters, GAO-10-452T, 
February 22, 2010. 
 Decennial Census: Methods for Collecting and Reporting 
Data on the Homeless and Others without Conventional 
Housing Need Refinement, GAO-03-227, January 17, 
2003. 
 Decennial Census: Overview of Historical Census Issues, 
GGD-98-103, May 1, 1998. 
 Decennial Census: 1995 Test Census Presents Opportunities 
to Evaluate New Census-Taking Methods, T-GGD-94-136, 
September 27, 1994. 
 TANF and Welfare Reform 
 Temporary Assistance for Needy Families: Implications of 
Caseload and Program Changes for Families and Program 
Monitoring, GAO-10-815T, September 21, 2010. 
 Temporary Assistance for Needy Families: Implications 
of Recent Legislative and Economic Changes for State 
Programs and Work Participation Rates, GAO-10-525, 
May 28, 2010. 
 Temporary Assistance for Needy Families: Implications of 
Changes in Participation Rates, GAO-10-495T, March 11, 
2010. 
 Temporary Assistance for Needy Families: Fewer Eligible 
Families Have Received Cash Assistance Since the 1990s, 
and the Recession’s Impact on Caseloads Varies by State, 
GAO-10-164, February 23, 2010. 
 Welfare Reform: Better Information Needed to Understand 
Trends in States’ Uses of the TANF Block Grant, GAO-06-
414, March 3, 2006. 
 Welfare Reform: More Information Needed to Assess 
Promising Strategies to Increase Parents’ Incomes, GAO-06-
108, December 2, 2005. 

Web Sites 263
 Child Care: Additional Information Is Needed on Working 
Families Receiving Subsidies, GAO-05-667, June 29, 2005. 
 TANF and SSI: Opportunities Exist to Help People with 
Impairments Become More Self-Sufficient, GAO-04-878, 
September 15, 2004. 
 Welfare Reform: Rural TANF Programs Have Developed 
Many Strategies to Address Rural Challenges, GAO-04-921, 
September 10, 2004. 
 Welfare Reform: Information on Changing Labor Market 
and State Fiscal Conditions, GAO-03-977, July 15, 2003. 
 Child Care: Recent State Policy Changes Affecting the 
Availability of Assistance for Low-Income Families, GAO-
03-588, May 5, 2003. 
 Welfare Reform: Former TANF Recipients with Impairments 
Less Likely to Be Employed and More Likely to Receive 
Federal Supports, GAO-03-210, December 6, 2002. 
 Welfare Reform: With TANF Flexibility, States Vary in How 
They Implement Work Requirements and Time Limits, 
GAO-02-770, July 5, 2002. 
 Welfare Reform: States Provide TANF-Funded Work 
Support Services to Many Low-Income Families Who Do 
Not Receive Cash Assistance, GAO-02-615T, April 10, 2002. 
 Welfare Reform: States Provide TANF-Funded Services to 
Many Low-Income Families Who Do Not Receive Cash 
Assistance, GAO-02-564, April 5, 2002. 
 Workforce Investment Act: Coordination Between TANF 
Programs and One-Stop Centers Is Increasing, but 
Challenges Remain,GAO-02-500T, March 12, 2002. 
 Welfare Reform: States Are Using TANF Flexibility to Adapt 
Work Requirements and Time Limits to Meet State and 
Local Needs, GAO-02-501T, March 7, 2002. 
 Veterans 
 VA Faces Challenges in Providing Substance Use Disorder 
Services and Is Taking Steps to Improve These Services for 
Veterans, GAO-10-294R, March 10, 2010. 

264 Resources
 Formula Grants: Funding for the Largest Federal Assistance 
Programs Is Based on Census-Related Data and Other 
Factors, GAO-10-263, December 15, 2009. 
 VA Real Property: VA Emphasizes Enhanced-Use Leases to 
Manage Its Real Property Portfolio, GAO-09-776T, June 10, 
2009. 
 Federal Real Property: Authorities and Actions Regarding 
Enhanced Use Leases and Sale of Unneeded Real Property, 
GAO-09-283R, February 17, 2009. 
 Rental Housing: Information on Low-Income Veterans’ 
Housing Conditions and Participation in HUD’s Programs, 
GAO-08-324T, December 5, 2007. 
 Homeless Veterans Programs: Bed Capacity, Service, and 
Communication Gaps Challenge the Grant and Per Diem 
Program, GAO-07-1265T, September 27, 2007. 
 Homeless Veterans Programs: Improved Communications 
and Follow-up Could Further Enhance the Grant and Per 
Diem Program, GAO-06-859, September 11, 2006. 
 Homeless Veterans: Job Retention Goal Under Development 
for DOL’s Homeless Veterans’ Reintegration Program, GAO-
05-654T, May 4, 2005. 
 Veterans Affairs Homeless Programs: Implementation of the 
Transitional Housing Loan Guarantee Program, GAO-05-
311R, March 16, 2005. 
 Homeless Veterans: VA Expands Partnerships, but 
Effectiveness of Homeless Programs Is Unclear, T-HEHS-99-
150, June 24, 1999. 
 Homeless Veterans: VA Expands Partnerships, but 
Homeless Program Effectiveness Is Unclear, HEHS-99-53, 
April 1, 1999. 
 Other 
 Disaster Assistance: Federal Efforts to Assist Group Site 
Residents with Employment, Services for Families with 
Children, and Transportation, GAO-09-81, December 11, 2008. 
 Leveraging Federal Funds for Housing, Community, and 
Economic Development, GAO-07-768R, May 25, 2007. 

Web Sites 265
 Drug Offenders: Various Factors May Limit the Impacts of 
Federal Laws That Provide for Denial of Selected Benefits, 
GAO-05-238, September 26, 2005. 
 Food Stamp Program: States’ Use of Options and Waivers 
to Improve Program Administration and Promote Access, 
GAO-02-409, February 22, 2002. 
 Workforce Investment Act: Coordination of TANF Services 
Through One-Stops Has Increased Despite Challenges, 
GAO-02-739T, May 16, 2002. 
 Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service: 
Food Stamp Program: Non-Discretionary Provisions 
of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity 
Reconciliation Act of 1996, OGC-01-9, November 7, 2000. 
 Managing for Results: Barriers to Interagency Coordination, 
GGD-00-106, March 29, 2000. 
 Military Bases: Reuse Plans for Selected Bases Closed in 
1988 and 1991, NSIAD-95-3, November 1, 1994. 
 Drug Abuse Treatment: Data Limitations Affect the 
Accuracy of National and State Estimates of Need, HEHS-
98-229, September 15, 1998. 
 Grants.gov 
 This site provides access to federal agency announcements of 
funding opportunities; listings are updated daily. 
 Office of Management and Budget (OMB) 
 http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/budget 
 The White House Office of Management and Budget (OMB) over-
sees all documentation of the federal budget, including agency 
spending. OMB’s site contains an archive of federal budgets. 
 President’s New Freedom Commission on Mental Health 
 http://www.mentalhealthcommission.gov/index.html 
 The President’s New Freedom Commission on Mental Health was 
created in 2002 to address inequalities in everyday life for people 

266 Resources
with disabilities. The commission’s report identifies federal, state 
and local government opportunities to maximize use of resources, 
improve treatment and service coordination, and promote suc-
cessful community integration for adults with a serious mental 
illness and children with a serious emotional disturbance. 
 Social Security Administration (SSA) 
 http://www.socialsecurity.gov/homelessness 
 SSA’s homeless site provides an overview of the agency’s initia-
tives to reach homeless beneficiaries and persons who are insti-
tutionalized or incarcerated and to coordinate with key partners. 
Evaluation of its efforts is posted, along with annual reports. 
 U.S. Congress 
 thomas.loc.gov 
 The Library of Congress houses all legislative documents, includ-
ing proposed legislation, enacted legislation, hearing records, and 
more. 
 Key State Government Sites 
 Council of State Governments, National Reentry Resource 
Center 
 http://www.nationalreentryresourcecenter.org/ 
 National Association of State Alcohol and Drug Abuse 
Directors 
 http://www.nasadad.org/index.php?base_id=283 
 National Association of State Medicaid Directors 
 http://www.nasmd.org/links/state_medicaid_links.asp 
 National Association of State Mental Health Directors 
 http://www.nasmhpd.org/ 
 State Housing Finance Agencies 
 http://www.ncsha.org/housing-help 

Web Sites 267
 Key Local Government Sites 
 National Association of Counties (NACo) 
 http://www.naco.org 
 NACo represents the nation’s more than 3,000 counties. In some 
states, counties have responsibilities and resources for health and 
human services as well as social services and corrections. In its an-
nual meetings, NACo has supported resolutions on ending home-
lessness. The Web site offers access to county sites and elected 
officials. 
 National League of Cities (NLC) 
 http://www.nlc.org 
 NLC represents over 190,000 smaller-size towns and cities. It is 
a partner to municipal leagues in the states, which convene their 
cities and towns on a statewide basis. NLC provides elected of-
ficials with training, technical assistance, and models for local so-
lutions. The Web site offers research, analysis, and best practice 
information. 
 U.S. Conference of Mayors (USCM) 
 http://www.usmayors.org 
 The Conference of Mayors is a national organization of the mayors 
of the cities in the United States over 30,000 in population. USCM 
provides support and partnership on the issue of homelessness 
and has passed numerous resolutions in support of key strategies 
to prevent and end homelessness. The Task Force on Hunger and 
Homelessness conducts an annual survey of member cities. The 
Web site provides access to profiles of mayors, past reports from 
the Mayors Task Force on Hunger and Homelessness, and resolu-
tions adopted by the mayors. 
 Nongovernmental Organizations 
 Boston Health Care for the Homeless 
 http://www.bhchp.org/BHCHP%20Manual/index.html 
 O’Connell, James K., MD, Stacy E. Swain, MPH, Christine Loeber 
Daniels, and Joslyn Strupp Allen, MSW, editors.  The Health Care 

268 Resources
of Homeless Persons: A Manual of Communicable Diseases & Common 
Problems in Shelters & on the Streets . Boston: The Boston Health Care 
for the Homeless Program, 2004. The authors, all practitioners of 
health services for people who are homeless, have compiled the 
definitive work on the key issues facing the population. Heavily 
illustrated with graphic examples and detailed medical informa-
tion, the manual offers treatment guidance, disease management 
information, and bilingual information. 
 National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) 
 http://www.nami.org/gtsTemplate09.cfm?Section=Grading_
the_States_2009 
 NAMI has numerous materials on evidence-based approaches 
and a state grading system on mental health services. 
 National Alliance to End Homelessness (NAEH) 
 http://www.endhomelessness.org/section/library/?type=34 
 The alliance is a coalition of corporations, service providers, and 
individuals, that sponsors conferences and uses research and pub-
lic education in its efforts to address homelessness. It maintains 
an extensive on-line library of fact sheets, research briefs, confer-
ence presentations, and other electronic materials. 
 National Coalition for the Homeless (NCH) 
 http://www.nationalhomeless.org/index.html 
 NCH is a national network of homeless persons, activists, service 
providers, and others committed to addressing homelessness 
through public education, policy initiatives, grassroots organizing, 
and technical assistance. It focuses on civil rights and consumer 
involvement. On-line directories of national organizations, state 
and local policy groups, and homeless services are available. 
 National Law Center on Poverty and Homelessness (NLCHP) 
 http://wiki.nlchp.org/display/Manual/
Homelessness+Advocacy+Manual 
 The National Law Center monitors federal agency action on 
several McKinney Act programs, including homeless children’s 
education and federal surplus property. The center focuses on 

Web Sites 269
international human rights and civil rights for people who are 
homeless. The Homeless Advocacy Manual is a tool for attorneys 
to access information on the rights of homeless people and litiga-
tion strategies. 
 International Resources 
 Australia 
 http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/sa/housing/progserv/
homelessness/Pages/default.aspx 
 The national government’s on-line resources include both the 
green paper and white paper issued by the Rudd government in 
2008 as well as research links and information on the Prime Min-
ister’s Council on Homelessness. 
 Mental Illness Fellowship of Australia (MIFA) 
 http://www.mifa.org.au/ 
 MIFA has member organizations of families, friends, and mental 
health consumers in the states and territories and sponsors an an-
nual awareness event across the country. 
 Canada National Homeless Hub 
 http://www.homelesshub.ca/Default.aspx 
 Canada launched its Homeless Hub as a national web-based re-
search library and information center of the Canadian Homeless-
ness Research Network (CHRN). 
 Homeless Partnering Strategy 
 http://www.hrsdc.gc.ca/eng/homelessness/index.shtml 
 The Homeless Partnering Strategy is the national government’s 
initiative to prevent and end homelessness. 
 U.K. Department of Communities and Local Government 
 http://www.communities.gov.uk/housing/homelessness/ 
 The lead agency for homeless initiatives maintains this site with 
current research, data, government reports and strategies, and 
publications. 

270 Resources
 European Commission on Employment, Social Affairs, and Equal 
Opportunities 
 http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=751&langId=en 
 The European Commission’s Directorate-General for Employ-
ment, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities works for improved 
employment opportunity and social inclusion. 
 European Federation of National Organizations Working with the 
Homeless (Fédération Européenne d’Associations Nationales Travaillant 
avec les Sans-Abri) (FEANTSA) 
 http://www.feantsa.org 
 FEANTSA is a network of European organizations focused on 
homelessness. The Web site includes the FEANTSA magazine and 
newsletter and documents on the Ending Homelessness Cam-
paign. Member organizations represent more than 30 countries. 

271
 Glossary 
 A
ny discussion of homelessness involves multiple systems and 
sectors, such as the housing market, government programs 
addressing addiction and child welfare, and policy and bud-
get processes. Use of the Internet makes it easier to identify and 
understand the many government agency and program acronyms 
used in policy and budget discussion. The new terms that have 
entered the language used to discuss homelessness and its solu-
tions over the last decade are provided in this chapter. 
  AHAR (Annual Homeless Assessment Report)  HUD submits an annual 
report to Congress documenting the nature and extent of homelessness. 
Included are yearly homelessness counts from localities, demograph-
ics, trends, and service use. AHAR compares prior year data to identify if 
homelessness in increasing or decreasing. 
 Affordable housing Housing costs are considered affordable if a house-
hold will pay no more than 30 percent of income for housing. 
 Appropriations Funding provided for a program or budget line item in 
a given year. Language in a budget document sometimes sets the terms 
under which funds may be spent. 
  Assertive Community Treatment (ACT) Teams  ACT’s multidisci-
plinary teams are key to the success of Housing First. ACT teams include 
case managers, formerly homeless people, and specialists in mental 
health and addiction, social work, nursing, and vocational rehabilita-
tion. The work of teams uses an assertive approach that supports client 
choice and delivers services where individuals are, either at home or on 
the streets. 
 Authorization Legislation that establishes or continues a federal pro-
gram or agency, specifies its general goals and conduct, and usually sets 
a ceiling on the amount of money that can be appropriated for it. 
 Block Grants Funding allocations from the federal government to 
states that can be used for a variety of purposes. Block grants are usually 

272 Glossary
allocated by formula to provide considerable flexibility to governors for 
delivering the services outlined in the block grant. 
 Case management  Coordination of an individual’s use of social and 
other services, often by a consistent individual case manager who assists 
with access to health and mental health services, substance use services, 
and training and employment. 
 Chronic homelessness  A definition of chronic homelessness was de-
veloped as a result of research that demonstrated that just 10 percent of 
homeless adults use 50 percent of homeless resources, because of their 
disability and length of stay in homelessness. When the federal HEARTH 
Act became effective in 2010, chronic homelessness was expanded to in-
clude families as well as individuals where the person(s) involved have 
been living on the streets or in shelter continuously for at least one year 
or on at least four separate occasions in the last three years and there is 
an adult head of household (or a minor head of household if no adult is 
present in the household) with one or more disabilities. A person who 
currently lives or resides in an institutional care facility, including a jail, 
substance abuse or mental health treatment facility, hospital, or other 
similar facility and has resided there for fewer than 90 days is considered 
chronically homeless if such person meets all of the other requirements. 
 Continuum of care  A concept of the U.S. Department of Housing and 
Urban Development used to define the relation of homeless programs 
and services in a community. The continuum was introduced as a linear 
organizing principle for programs and services, beginning with outreach 
and emergency services, moving to transitional programs, and becoming 
“housing ready” for permanent housing. A continuum is also the group 
of local service providers who convene to seek federal funding. 
 Criminalization  The act of attaching criminal charges and penalties to 
common outdoor activities of homeless people, such as sleeping in public 
places (parks, etc.). Some jurisdictions have passed such punitive laws as 
well as laws against sleeping or camping for extended periods in parks 
or on beaches with little effect in solving homelessness. 
 Couch surfing  Homeless and runaway youth often live in temporary 
situations where they rely on couches or spare bedrooms of friends or 
family members as an alternative to the streets or shelters. 
 Day labor  Usually manual labor jobs are available to homeless and 
poor workers on a temporary basis. Workers are paid very low wages, 
are charged for their equipment (such as gloves, brooms, etc.), and are 
not protected from unsafe conditions or practices. Workers wait at desig-
nated locations or go to hiring halls to seek jobs. 
 Deinstitutionalization  Officially defined by the National Institute of 
Mental Health (NIMH) as the prevention of inappropriate mental hospi-
tal admissions through the provision of community alternatives for treat-

Glossary 273
ment, the release to the community of all institutionalized patients who 
have been given adequate preparation for such discharge, and the estab-
lishment and maintenance of community support systems for noninstitu-
tionalized people receiving mental health services in the community. 
 Disability  A person is determined to have a disability if an individual 
has a physical, mental, or emotional impairment that is expected to be of 
continued and indefinite duration, substantially impedes his or her abil-
ity to live independently, and is of such a nature that the ability could be 
improved by more suitable housing conditions; or has a developmental 
disability. 
 Discharge planning  The practice of preparing a person in an institu-
tion or system of care or custody for release and successful integration 
into the community upon entry into the institution or system. 
 Domestic violence  Verbal, emotional, financial, and sexual abuse may 
be present in personal relationships of all kinds. The abusive person or 
partner is usually referred to as a batterer and may be a spouse, live-in 
partner, significant other, boyfriend/girlfriend, or an ex-spouse or past 
partner. 
 Doubled up  An accommodation to housing need in which one or more 
households share housing with family or friends. 
 Drop-in center  Usually a daytime service for homeless clients that in-
cludes meals, clothing and laundry facilities, showers, support groups, 
and service referrals but does not provide overnight accommodations. 
 Dual diagnosis  Sometimes referred to as co-occurring disorders and 
usually defined as the presence of both a substance abuse and mental 
health problem. 
 Emergency shelter  Facilities that provide a temporary place to stay, 
usually only at night. Some shelters operate on a first-come, first-served 
basis where shelter residents must leave in the morning and have no 
guaranteed bed for the next night. Some programs have a definite length 
of stay and only offer a specific number of nights to each person. Some 
programs serve only one group (domestic violence, youth, veterans) and 
some operate only during winter months. Access to shelter in some com-
munities is through a single point of entry or intake. 
 Entitlement Program mandating the payment of benefits to any person 
meeting eligibility requirements established by statute. Entitlement pro-
grams include Social Security, Medicare, TANF, and Medicaid. 
 Extremely low income  A household income below 30 percent of area 
median income, as defined by HUD. 
  Fair Market Rent (FMR)  HUD’s annual estimate of the market rent for 
a specific size housing unit in a given area. Fair market rents are then 
used to calculate payments for low income tenants using assisted housing 

274 Glossary
programs, where HUD will pay the difference between 30 percent of the 
person’s income and the FMR. 
  Family unification or reunification  Efforts or resources to return adults 
or children to the home or to the city of origin through the provision of 
travel funds, adequate housing, or other measures than prevents or ends 
separation and homelessness. 
 Fiscal year (FY)  The federal government’s accounting period, which 
begins October 1 and ends September 30. States and localities often use 
July 1 fiscal-year accounting. 
 Food bank  A nonprofit clearinghouse for surplus or salvaged food that 
is usually redistributed to soup kitchens, meal programs, food pantries, 
and shelters. 
 Homeless Management Information System (HMIS)  An HMIS is a 
computerized data collection system to collect information on the char-
acteristics and needs of men, women, and children experiencing home-
lessness. An HMIS may cover a statewide or regional area. 
 Homeless person  The McKinney Homeless Assistance Act, first passed 
in 1987, defined a homeless person as “1) an individual who lacks a fixed, 
regular, and adequate nighttime residence that is a) a supervised pub-
licly or privately operated shelter designed to provide temporary liv-
ing accommodations (including welfare hotels, congregate shelters, and 
transitional housing for the mentally ill); b) an institution that provides a 
temporary residence for individuals intended to be institutionalized; or c) 
a public or private place not designed for, or ordinarily used as, a regular 
sleeping accommodation for human beings.” With the implementation of 
the new federal HEARTH Act at HUD in 2011, a homeless individual will 
be defined by a newly expanded set of factors that will include people 
who are living in defined situations of unstable housing as well as those 
considered homeless under other federal agency definitions. 
 Homelessness prevention  Activities including use of short-term sub-
sidies for rent and utility payments for families with eviction or utility-
termination notices; security deposits or first month’s rent so that a 
homeless family can move into its own housing; mediation programs for 
landlord-tenant disputes; legal services programs for eviction proceed-
ings; and payments to prevent foreclosure. 
  Homeless, runaway, and throwaway youth  There is no single defini-
tion for this population, which includes youth with unstable or inad-
equate housing who stay at least one night in a place not their home 
because they could not stay at home, ran away from home, did not have 
a home, were asked to leave home, and/or stayed at a shelter, outdoors, 
or in a temporary arrangement with another person (couch surfing). This 
group may also include current and former foster youth and youth with 
mental health or other issues. 

Glossary 275
 Housing First  Housing First is one of the field-tested, evidence-based 
innovations of the last decade that has successfully moved thousands 
of people experiencing chronic homelessness to permanent supportive 
housing. Housing First, pioneered by Dr. Sam Tsemberis at Pathways to 
Housing in New York City, places people who are homeless and living 
with disabilities, and most often living on the streets, directly into perma-
nent supportive housing. 
 McKinney-Vento  A general term for the set of federal programs cre-
ated by the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act in 1987. 
  Medicaid  Medical benefits for eligible low-income and disabled people 
provided under guidelines established by the federal government, with 
program requirements created by each state. Medicaid is funded through 
state and federal funds. Coverage will be expanded by new federal health 
care reform. 
  NIMBY (Not In My Back Yard)  The resistance of neighborhoods to the 
siting or location of any facility or residence identified as undesirable; in 
this case, programs or housing for people who are leaving homelessness 
or living with special needs, such as mental health issues or addiction 
recovery issues, or reentry from prison. 
  NOFA (Notice of Funding Availability)  The means by which several 
federal government agencies announce the availability of funds, publish 
applications and other information, and distribute funds through com-
petitive processes. Called a Solicitation for Grant Applications (SGA) in 
other agencies. 
 Outreach  Usually street-based engagement activities programs that 
contact homeless clients to offer food, blankets, or other necessities to 
support individuals in moving off the streets and into housing or ser-
vices. 
 Permanent supportive housing  Permanent affordable housing with 
support services designed to help tenants who are homeless, very low in-
come, or have disabilities or other chronic health conditions to maintain 
their housing and achieve maximum independence. 
  PIT (Point in Time)  A count of homelessness on a single night or 
24-hour period. 
 Poverty line  An official government measure produced by the U.S. De-
partment of Health and Human Services to define the income needed to 
provide basic necessities. 
 Safe Haven  A “low-demand” program intended to help engage men-
tally ill homeless people who might be wary of traditional shelters or 
other settings. 
 Safety net  A general term for the array of benefits and assistance avail-
able to meet basic needs, such as food, housing, income, and health care. 

276 Glossary
 Section 8     T he chief federal rent subsidy program that provides monthly 
rental assistance to low-income individuals residing in privately owned 
units. 
 Skid Row  A general term for an impoverished urban area where peo-
ple who are homeless are living and where cheap housing, day labor, and 
other marginal businesses could be found. Many Skid Row areas have 
been wiped out by gentrification. 
  SNAP (Special Nutrition Assistance Program)  Formerly known as 
food stamps, SNAP is a national program to improve the ability of poor 
families to purchase food by providing monthly benefits for a specific 
dollar amount to be used in most grocery stores. 
 Soup kitchen  A food program that includes soup kitchens, food lines, 
and programs distributing prepared breakfasts, lunches, or dinners. 
 SRO (single-room occupancy)  Inexpensive rental units in hotel set-
tings, where tenants share bath and kitchens facilities if available. 
 Stand Down  A local or regional event with a variety of social and other 
services provided to homeless veterans, created to offer a welcoming 
environment, a safe gathering place, and easy access. Stand-downs are 
derived from the military practice of ‘standing down” from customary 
activity or the front line. 
  Supplemental Security Income (SSI)  A federally administered income 
assistance program providing monthly cash payments for the needy 
aged, blind, and disabled. 
 Supportive services  Programs providing job training, alcohol or drug 
treatment services, case management assistance, educational services, 
and the like. Services may be provided in conjunction with housing or 
shelter or in a different site. 
  Temporary Assistance For Needy Families (TANF)  Block grant to 
states created by federal welfare reform under the Personal Responsibil-
ity and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996, which established 
a new welfare system. The TANF block grant replaced Aid to Families 
with Dependent Children (AFDC). 
 Transitional programs  Residential programs that provide a placement 
for persons before moving to permanent housing. A program may have a 
specific target population, such as persons with mental illnesses, runaway 
youths, victims of domestic violence, homeless veterans, and so on. 

277
 Access to Community Care and 
Effective Services and 
Supports (ACCESS) 
program, 158 
 Affordable Care Act, 188 
 Alabama state plans, 196 
 Alcohol abuse issues, 12, 23, 
84 –85, 93, 121 
 Alioto, Angela, 117, 141–42 
 American Bar Association (ABA), 
28, 68–69, 223 
 American Evaluation Association 
(AEA), 166 
 American Journal of Public Health, 
62 
 American Prospect, 55 
 American Recovery and 
Reinvestment Act (ARRA), 
30–32, 64, 135–36, 175, 188 
 American Round Table to Abolish 
Homelessness, 139, 158, 
192, 223 
 Americans with Disabilities Act 
(ADA), 72 
 America’s Road Home, 10, 131, 
201–3 
 Andrew House Dual Diagnosis 
Detoxification Unit, 163 
 Annual Homeless Assessment 
Report (AHAR), 8, 19, 
22, 52, 133, 138, 174 –75, 
180–81 
 Anti-Social Behavior Unit, 145 
 Area Median Income (AMI), 
50–51 
 Assertive community treatment 
(ACT) teams, 102 
 Atlanta Development Authority, 
63, 152 
 Atlanta Regional Commission on 
Homelessness, 169 
 “At risk of homelessness,” 183 
 Australia, homelessness, 33–34, 
79, 106–7, 159, 208, 209–10 
 Banishment practices, 28, 68–69 
 Barbara McInnis House, 163 
 Barr, Murray (“Million-Dollar 
Murray”), 11, 141, 142–43, 
153, 191 
 Bassuk, Ellen, 143–44 
 Baxter, Ellen, 144 
 Bay Cove Substance Abuse 
Center, 163 
 Bazelon Center for Mental Health 
law, 223 
 Better Way to Give campaign, 
69–70 
 Bill and Melinda Gates Foun-
dation, 136 
 Bing, Steve, 139 
 Blair, Tony, 4, 32, 79, 80–81, 115, 
145, 208 
 Bloomberg, Michael, 117 
Index

278 Index
 Blueprint to End Homelessness, 
164 –65 
 Blunt, Crispin, 89 
 Bond, Christopher, 137 
 Boston Health Care for the 
Homeless Program, 12, 163 
 Broadway Housing 
Communities, 144 
 Brown, Gordon, 145 
 Burt, Martha M., 144 – 45 
 Bush, George W. (administration): 
and chronic homelessness, 
3–4, 15; mental health 
concerns, 134; New Free-
dom Commission, 71–72; 
reducing homelessness, 17, 
54, 56, 114, 116–17, 158, 195; 
Second Chance Act, 130 
 Cabinet Office of the Deputy 
Prime Minister (ODPM), 
81 
 California state plans, 119, 135, 
141–42, 164, 196–97 
 Callahan v. Carey, 154 
 Campbell, Gordon, 115 
 Canada: homelessness strategies 
in, 103–6, 159, 208; national 
plan for homelessness, 
34 –35, 79, 209; ten-year 
plans in, 104 –6, 131–32, 
220 
 Care leaving packages, 88, 94 
 Casey, Louise, 115, 145–46 
 Catholic Charities USA, 224 
 Census Bureau (U.S.), 49, 51, 53 
 Center for Mental Health Services 
(CMHS), 122 
 Center for Poverty Solutions, 
155 
 Center for Social Innovation, 143 
 Center on Budget and Policy 
Priorities (CBPP), 50, 224 
 Center on Labor, Human 
Services, and Population, 
144 
 Centre for Human Settlements 
(UNCHS), 232 
 Chafee Foster Care Independence 
Act, 20 
 Chancellor, Craig, 120 
 Child homelessness, 21, 45, 196 
 Children’s Defense Fund (CDF), 
224 –25 
 Child Welfare League of America 
(CWLA), 224 
 Chronic homelessness: among 
children, 186; among 
disabled persons, 3–4, 6–7, 
43, 52, 85, 176, 180, 184; 
among veterans, 188; and 
Bush, George W., 3–4, 15; 
defining, 183–84; ending, 
10–11, 27, 44, 53–59, 81, 
159–16, 195–96; funding 
for, 13–14, 192; government 
support for, 195; and hous-
ing, 27–28, 45, 154, 178, 181, 
191; and income, 29–30; 
 Opening Doors strategy for, 
189; rates of, 8, 150, 175–76; 
research on, 5–7, 17–18, 43, 
85; ten-year plans for, 17, 
141, 147, 199–200 
 Cisneros, Henry, 25, 57, 146–47 
 CityView venture, 147 
 Civil rights issues, 27–28, 59, 
67–71, 227, 228 
 Clinton, Bill (administration), 26, 
139, 146, 203 
 Coalition for the Homeless, 
154 
 Collaborative Initiative to 
Help End Chronic 
Homelessness, 116, 155 
 Collins, Jim, 45, 147 
 Colorado state plans, 156, 197 
 Colton, Kent, 58 
 Coming in from the Cold: The 
Government’s Strategy on 
Rough Sleeping (SEU), 
81–82 

Index 279
 Comité Européen de 
Coordination de l’Habitat 
Social (CECODHAS), 230 
 Commission on Homelessness & 
Poverty (ABA), 28, 68 
 Common Ground housing 
development, 153–54, 
220–21 
 Community for Creative Non-
Violence (CCNV), 169 
 Community health centers, 62, 66 
 Comprehensive Homeless 
Centers, 207 
 Conference of Mayors (USCM), 
229 
 Continuum of Care, 47, 174 
 Corker, Bob, 118 
 Corporation for Supportive 
Housing (CSH), 149, 221 
 Council for Socially Marginalised 
People (Denmark), 101–2 
 Criminalization alternatives, 27, 
67–68, 150 
 Crist, Charlie, 70–71 
 Critical time intervention (CTI), 
102 
 Culhane, Dennis, 6–7, 53–54, 85, 
127, 147–48 
 Cuomo, Andrew M., 148–49, 161 
 Daley, Richard, 114 
 Data and documentation: on 
national homelessness, 
173–81; on national part-
nership, 192–95;  Opening 
Doors strategy, 20, 188–91; 
Point-in-Time estimates, 
175–78; state-by-state, 
178–79.  See also Homeless 
Emergency Assistance 
and Rapid Transition to 
Housing 
 Deaths: Barr, Murray (“Million-
Dollar Murray”), 11, 141, 
142–43, 153, 191; causes 
of, 12; reducing, 155; risks 
for, 45, 85, 163; of rough 
sleepers, 146; street deaths, 
12, 25, 66, 85–86, 163 
 Dellums, Ron, 23 
 Demonstration grants, 14, 116 
 Denmark, 101–2, 159 
 Denver Donation Meter Program, 
69–70 
 Denver’s Road Home (DRH), 69, 
222 
 Department for Communities 
and Local Government 
(DCLG), 81 
 Department of Agriculture 
(USDA), 22, 31, 214 
 Department of Commerce, 214 
 Department of Communities and 
Local Government, 91, 232 
 Department of Defense, 214 
 Department of Education 
(USED), 124, 214 –15 
 Department of Families Housing, 
Community Services, and 
Indigenous Affairs, 233 
 Department of Health and 
Human Services (HHS): 
funding by, 13, 29, 65–66, 
145; income standards, 
50; initiatives by, 92, 167; 
programs by, 20, 143, 156, 
215, 217; research by, 17, 
62, 88, 158; strategies by, 
130, 138, 170 
 Department of Homeland 
Security, 25, 215 
 Department of Housing and 
Urban Development 
(HUD): Area Median 
Income, 50–51; demon-
stration grants from, 14; 
and HEARTH Act, 43; 
homelessness defined by, 
43; and housing, 31, 51, 
64, 121; and mental health 
issues, 122; programs by, 
20, 114, 148–49, 174; 

280 Index
reducing homelessness, 
16–17, 25, 113; research by, 
46, 138; resources for, 60, 
62; and rural homelessness, 
22; and shelter discharges, 
65–67; strategies by, 3, 7; 
and urban communities, 
108.  See also McKinney-
Vento Act 
 Department of Justice (DOJ), 20, 
22, 31, 215–16 
 Department of Labor (DOL), 
20, 29–30, 66–67, 116, 
137, 216 
 Department of Veterans Affairs, 
13, 19–20, 129, 137–38, 147, 
158, 216 
 Derwinski, Ed, 158 
 De Santis, Deborah, 149 
 Diaz, Manual (“Manny”), 126, 
135, 149–50 
 Disabled persons: children, 196; 
and chronic homelessness, 
3–4, 6–7, 43, 52, 85, 176, 
180, 184; data on, 173, 
180; employment of, 87; 
housing for, 51, 63, 72–73, 
106, 170–71, 198–208; 
resources for, 47–48, 71, 
192; shelter users, 17; 
single adults, 44, 53; social 
exclusion of, 94; treatment 
of, 157; veterans, 25, 
32, 42 
 Discharge issues, 65–67, 89, 
185–86 
 Doe Fund, 161, 221 
 Domestic violence, 21–22, 31, 48 
 Donovan, Shaun, 137, 191 
 Downtown Emergency Service 
Center (DESC), 156–57 
 Drug abuse issues, 23, 84 –85, 
203–4 
 Dublin Homeless Agency, 
99–100 
 Dunning, Tom, 119 
 Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), 
32, 216 
 Eastlake Housing First initiative, 
13, 44 
 Economic crisis impact, 30–32, 42, 
66–67 
 Education of Homeless Children 
and Youth program, 136 
 Emergency Food and Shelter Pro-
gram (EFSP), 25, 136, 215 
 Emergency Shelter Grants (ESG), 
31, 64, 136, 185 
 Emergency Solutions Grants 
Program, 185 
 Employment and Training 
Service (DOL-VETS), 
137–38 
 Ending Homelessness: A Handbook 
for Policy Makers 
(FEANTSA), 33, 209 
 Engagement strategies, 86–87 
 England, 1, 4, 32, 79–92, 159, 
208–9, 232–33 
 Europe, homelessness: data 
on, 97–98; human rights 
issues, 107; initiatives in, 
32–33; and migrant issues, 
92; overview, 207–10; 
research on, 79; and social 
exclusion, 94 –97; strategies 
against, 98–103.  See also 
individual European 
countries 
 European Anti-Poverty Network 
(EAPN), 230–31 
 European Federation of National 
Organisations Working 
with the Homeless 
(FEANTSA), 32–33, 95–97, 
231 
 European Observatory on Home-
lessness, 96 
 European Union, 33, 80, 94 –98, 
132, 159, 173 
 Ex-Service Action Group on 
Homelessness (ESAG), 90 

Index 281
 Fair Housing Act, 72–73 
 Family Promise (Interfaith 
Hospitality Network), 
221 
 Family Unification Program,
 65 
 Federal Emergency Management 
Agency (FEMA), 25, 31, 64, 
136, 215 
 Federal funding approaches, 
13–14, 24, 30, 60–61, 
187–89 
 Federal programs.  See 
Government programs 
 Federal Register, 14 
 Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities (FCM), 
233 
 Finding Home (SSHRC), 105–6 
 Finland, 102–3 
 Finneran, T. D. Michael, 99 
 Food and Nutrition Service 
(FNS), 214 
 Food Stamp Program (SNAP), 28, 
31, 214 
 Fortune, 56 
 Foscarinis, Maria, 150–51 
 Foster Care Independent Living 
Vouchers, 66 
 Fraim, Paul, 151 
 Franklin, Shirley, 115, 133–34, 
151–52, 169 
 Funders Together to End 
Homelessness, 225 
 Funding: for chronic 
homelessness, 13–14, 192; 
by Department of Health 
and Human Services, 13, 
29, 65–66, 145; federal 
approaches, 13–14, 24, 30, 
60–61, 187–89; for HEARTH 
Act, 184 –85; for housing, 
54 –55, 184, 186–87; and 
Interagency Council on 
Homelessness, 13, 60, 
187–89; and McKinney-
Vento Act, 47–48, 52, 
54, 60 
 Furman Center for Real Estate 
and Urban Policy, 72 
 Gateway Center, 169 
 Germany, homelessness, 95, 159, 
169 
 Gladwell, Malcolm, 11, 45, 
56–57, 122–23, 142, 152–53, 
191 
 Good to Great (Collins), 45 
 Gormley, John, 99 
 Governing magazine, 27, 156 
 Government Accountability 
Office (GAO), 22–23, 29, 
60–61 
 Government programs: and 
demonstration grants, 14, 
116; and economic crisis 
impact, 30–32; federal 
funding approaches, 
13–14, 24, 30, 60, 187–89; 
HEARTH Act, 22–23, 
26–27; initiatives, 203–7; 
jurisdictional partnership 
with, 9–11; McKinney-Vento 
Act, 7, 21, 24 –29; recent 
issues with, 26–32; and 
research, 45–47; state-by-
state, 196–99.  See also Fund-
ing; specific programs 
 Great Depression, 41, 203 
 Habitact, 98, 231 
 Haggerty, Rosanne, 153–54 
 Hate crimes, 70–71 
 Hayes, Robert M., 154 –55, 158 
 Health Care for the Homeless 
programs, 62, 66 
 Health care reform, 61–62, 207 
 HEARTH Act.  See Homeless 
Emergency Assistance and 
Rapid Transition to Hous-
ing (HEARTH) Act 
 Hess, Robert, 155 

282 Index
 Hickenlooper, John, 13, 124, 128, 
156 
 Hobson, William, 156–57 
 Hoeven, James, 131 
 Hohler, Robert, 128 
 Homeless and Domestic Violence 
Tax, 63 
 Homeless Emergency Assistance 
and Rapid Transition to 
Housing (HEARTH) Act: 
community incentives, 186; 
criminalization measures, 
67–68; and economic crisis, 
30–32; federal strategy, 
184 –85, 217; funding, 
184 –85; homelessness 
defined, 181–83; and 
income access, 29–30; legal 
issues over, 27–28;  Opening 
Doors strategy, 20, 30, 
188–91; overview, 181; 
passage of, 26–27, 43, 48; 
and resources, 28–29; for 
rural housing, 22–23, 186–87 
 Homeless Management Infor-
mation System (HMIS), 
7–8, 22, 52, 64, 174 
 Homelessness: alcohol abuse 
by, 12, 23, 84 –85, 93, 121; 
banishment practices, 28, 
68–69; causes of, 205–6; in 
children, 21, 45; costs of, 
83; data on, 4 –5, 7–9, 42; 
defined, 29, 42–44, 92, 
99–100, 181–84; and domes-
tic violence, 21–22, 31, 48; 
drug abuse by, 23, 84 –85, 
203–4; ending, 11–12, 60–63, 
149–50; legal issues over, 
27–28, 67–71; prevention 
strategies, 64 –67, 99; rates 
of, 1, 51–53; reducing, 
16–17, 25, 53–60, 206–7; 
shelter concerns, 6, 17, 45, 
65–67; types of, 6–7.  See 
also Chronic homelessness; 
Resources, for homeless-
ness;  and individual countries  
 Homelessness, historical per-
spectives: early responses 
to, 23–26; federal funding 
approaches, 13–14, 24, 30; 
and innovation, 14 –16; 
international develop-
ments, 32–35; overview, 
1–4; policy development, 
4 –9; reductions in, 16–17; 
resources for, 17–23; in U.S., 
2–32.  See also Government 
programs; Partnership/
investment/innovation 
 Homelessness, research: on 
children, 21, 45; on chronic 
homelessness, 5–7, 17–18, 
43, 85; by Department 
of Health and Human 
Services, 17, 62, 88, 158; by 
Department of Housing 
and Urban Development, 
46, 138; on domestic 
violence, 21–22; in Europe, 
79; on families, 17–19; and 
government programs, 
45–47; nationally, 174 –75; 
overview, 5–7, 17–23, 
125–26; in rural areas, 
22–23; on veterans, 19–20; 
on young adults, 20–21 
 Homelessness Australia, 233 
 Homelessness Partnering Strat-
egy (HPS), 34, 103–4, 209 
 Homelessness Prevention and 
Rapid Rehousing Program 
(HPRP), 31, 64, 67 
 Homelessness Pulse Project, 8, 
179–80 
 Homeless Opportunity Bonds, 
63, 151 
 Homeless Outreach Projects and 
Evaluation (HOPE), 30, 
129, 136 
 Homeless World Cup, 139 

Index 283
 Hopper, Kim, 144, 157 
 Housing and Economic Recovery 
Act, 134 
 Housing Assistance Council 
(HAC), 225 
 Housing Certificate Fund, 
58–59 
 Housing First initiatives: in Cali-
fornia, 142, 162–64; in Can-
ada, 105; and civil rights, 
67; in Colorado, 13; in 
Finland, 103; funding for, 
34 –35; in Indiana, 164 –65; 
need for, 58; and Pathways 
to Housing, 170–71, 222; 
as strategy, 80, 98, 151, 160, 
170, 196; success of, 15, 28, 
153, 155–56; in Utah, 199; 
in Washington, 13, 44 
 Housing issues: for chronic home-
lessness, 27–28, 45, 154, 
178, 181, 191; for disabled 
persons, 51, 63, 72–73, 106, 
170–71, 198–208; in Fin-
land, 103; funding for, 
54 –55, 184, 186–87; perma-
nent supportive, 165, 178, 
184 –85; property values, 72; 
rental housing, 31, 63–65; 
rental subsidies, 64 –65; 
wages, 51; in Washington 
State, 136–37 
 HOUSING NOW! March, 170 
 Human Resources and Skills 
Development Canada 
(HRSDC), 103–4, 233 
 Human rights treaties, 107–8 
 Hunger and Homelessness Task 
Force, 120 
 Hurricane Katrina, 2, 21, 85, 
123–24 
 Hurricane Rita, 2, 21, 85, 123–24 
 Incarceration, 19, 89 
 Income issues: Area Median 
Income, 50–51; for chronic 
homelessness, 29–30; 
Earned Income Tax Credit, 
32; with ex-service mem-
bers, 90; income standards, 
50; increasing access, 29–30; 
for low-income Americans, 
55; Supplemental Security 
Income, 28, 197 
 Interagency Council on 
Homelessness: and cost 
studies, 12; creation of, 3, 
24, 217; criminalization 
alternatives by, 27, 67–68; 
ending homelessness, 9–10, 
48, 56–57, 118, 124, 126, 
132–33, 158–59, 196; and 
funding, 13, 60, 187–89; 
and national partnership 
lessons by, 192–95; and 
natural disasters, 123–24; 
 Opening Doors strategy, 
190–91; policy academies 
by, 168; resources from, 
119–20; strategies by, 15, 
19, 79, 115, 121, 138, 147, 
200–201; and ten-year plans, 
53–59, 195–96.  See also  
Mangano, Philip 
 International Downtown 
Association (IDA), 69, 225 
 International Network of Street 
Newspapers, 231 
 International perspectives: in 
Australia, 33–34, 79, 
106–7; in Denmark, 101–2; 
developments, 32–35; in 
Europe, 94 –98; on human 
rights treaties, 107–8; in 
Ireland, 98–101; in other 
Scandinavian countries, 
102–3; overview, 79–80.  See 
also specific countries 
 Ireland, 98–101 
 Irish Council of Social Housing, 
100 
 Irish Penal Reform Trust, 101 

284 Index
 Johns, Steve, 142–43 
 Joint Center for Housing Studies, 
57 
 Journal of the American Medical 
Association (JAMA), 13, 156 
 Jurisdictional partnerships, 9–11 
 Kemp, Jack, 57, 157–58 
 Kentucky state plans, 197, 218 
 Key to the Door, A (Dublin 
Homeless Agency), 99–100 
 Leavitt, Michael, 126 
 Legal issues of homelessness, 
27–28, 67–71 
 Lipka, Todd, 139 
 Long-term (chronic) homeless. 
 See Chronic homelessness 
 Low-income Americans, 55 
 Low Income Housing Tax Credit 
programs, 58 
 Mainstream resources, 28–29, 
60–63 
 Mangano, Philip: biography of, 
158–60; and discharge 
planning, 66; on national 
partnership, 9, 192–95; 
plans/programs by, 10, 
48–49, 67.  See also Inter-
agency Council on Home-
lessness 
 Martinez, Mel, 3, 113, 114, 160 
 Massachusetts Housing and 
Shelter Alliance, 66 
 Massachusetts state plans, 197, 
218 
 Mayors Task Force on Hunger 
and Homelessness, 138 
 McDonald, George T., 161 
 McKinney, Stewart B., 161–62 
 McKinney-Vento Act, 7, 21, 24 –29, 
43; compliance of, 150–51; 
and funding, 47–48, 52, 54, 
60; passage of, 126, 158, 
171; resources for, 44 
 Medicaid, 13, 14, 20, 61, 148 
 Mental health concerns, 12, 72, 
84 –85, 93, 122, 134, 166, 
167–68, 205 
 Metro Dallas Homeless Alliance, 
117–18 
 Miami-Dade County Homeless 
Trust, 63 
 Michigan state plans, 197–98, 218 
 Millennial Housing Commission, 
58 
 Miller, Laura, 117–18, 119 
 “Million-Dollar Murray.”  See 
Barr, Murray 
 Ministerial Working Group on 
Preventing and Tackling 
Homelessness, 91 
 Minnesota state plans, 30, 171, 
198 
 National Alliance on Mental 
Illness (NAMI), 226 
 National Alliance to End 
Homelessness (NAEH), 
9–10, 113, 114, 116, 159–60, 
167, 225 
 National Association for the 
Education of Homeless 
Children and Youth 
(NAEHCY), 226 
 National Association of Counties 
(NACo), 10, 116, 133, 202, 
226 
 National Association of Home 
Builders, 58 
 National Center for Homeless 
Education, 21 
 National Center for Housing and 
Child Welfare (NCHCW), 
65 
 National Center on Family 
Homelessness, 226–27 
 National Center on 
Homelessness, 147 
 National Coalition for Homeless 
Veterans (NCHV), 227 

Index 285
 National Coalition for the 
Homeless, 59, 154, 158, 
227 
 National Council of State 
Housing Agencies, 227 
 National Governors Association, 
195–96, 227 
 National Health Care for 
the Homeless Council 
(NHCHC), 61–62, 228 
 National homelessness, 173–75 
 National Housing Trust Fund, 62 
 National Law Center on 
Homelessness and Poverty 
(NLCHP), 150, 228 
 National League of Cities, 10, 117, 
228 
 National Low Income Housing 
Coalition (NLIHC), 228 
 National Network for Youth 
(NN4Y), 229 
 National Policy and Advocacy 
Coalition on Homelessness 
(NPACH), 59, 229 
 National Project Homeless 
Connect Week, 125, 135 
 National Review, 55 
 National Student Campaign 
against Hunger & 
Homelessness, 229 
 Natural disasters, 2, 21, 85, 
123–24 
 Neighborhood Stabilization 
Program (NSP), 31, 134 
 New Freedom Commission, 
71–72 
 New Jersey state plans, 198 
 New Yorker, 11, 122–23, 142, 152 
 New York Times, 56, 72 
 Newsom, Gavin, 117, 119–20, 
141–42, 162–63 
 New Zealand, 159 
 North Carolina state plans, 
198–99 
 North Dakota state plans, 199, 
218 
 Norway, 102–3 
 Not In My Backyard (NIMBY), 
71–72 
 Obama, Barack (administration), 
26, 135, 137, 158, 191 
 O’Brien, Larry, 132 
 O’Bryan, Patrick, 142–43 
 O’Connell, James, 12, 45, 66, 
85–86, 121, 163–64 
 Office of Juvenile Justice and 
Delinquency Prevention 
(OJJDP), 20 
 Office of Rural Economic and 
Community Development 
(RCED), 22 
 Office to End Homelessness, 
151 
 Oliver, M. Dene, 164 
 Opening Doors strategy, 20, 30, 
188–91 
 Open Method of Coordination 
(OMC), 98 
 Outreach Coordination Center, 
168 
 Outreach workers.  See Volun-
teers/outreach workers 
 Panhandling, 69–70, 143 
 Parking meter revenues, 63, 
133–34 
 Partnership/investment/
innovation: cost-analysis 
studies, 12–13; to end/
reduce homelessness, 11–12, 
16–17; federal funding 
approaches, 13–14; iden-
tifying and adopting, 
14 –16; judicial, 9–11; and 
research, 17–23 
 Pathways to Housing program, 
170–71, 222 
 Paul Wellstone–Pete Domenici 
Mental Health Parity and 
Addiction Equity Act, 134 
 Pawlenty, Tim, 118 

286 Index
 Peake, James, 135 
 Permanent supportive housing, 
165, 178, 184 –85 
 Peterson, Barton “ Bart   ” R., 
164 –65 
 Point-in-Time (PIT), 52, 174, 
175–78 
 Poverty: and homelessness, 68; 
overview, 49–51; rates of, 
50; and social exclusion, 
94 –96; and stability, 2; of 
veterans, 19 
 Prevention of homelessness, 
64 –67, 99 
 Prevention Opportunities Map-
ping and Planning Toolkit 
(PrOMPT), 91 
 Principi, Anthony, 118–20 
 Priority Home!, 203–4 
 Prisoner issues, 89 
 Problems/controversies/solu-
tions: defining homeless-
ness, 42–44; federal funding 
approaches, 60; homeless-
ness rates, 51–53; overview, 
41; poverty, 49–51; and 
prevention strategies, 
64 –67; and resources, 
44 – 49, 60–63; ten-year 
plans, 53–59 
 Project HOME, 167 
 Project Homeless Connect, 15–16, 
68, 150, 202, 222 
 Puerto Rico, 123 
 Punitive measures, 27–28, 67–68 
 Pursuit of Happyness, The (film), 
125 
 Rapid Re-Housing for Families 
Demonstration Program, 
133 
 Rawlings, Michael S., 165 
 Ready, Willing & Able (RWA) 
program, 161 
 Reagan, Ronald (administration), 
24 
 Reauthorization Act (DOJ), 
22 
 Recovery Act (ARRA), 61 
 Reed, Jack, 137 
 Rein, Therese, 130 
 Re-integration of Ex-Offenders 
program (REXO), 21 
 Rental housing, 31, 63–65 
 Research.  See Homelessness, 
research 
 Resources, for homelessness: for 
Department of Housing 
and Urban Development, 
60, 62; for disabled persons, 
47–48, 71, 192; federal fund-
ing approaches, 13–14, 24, 
30; historical perspective 
on, 17–23; increasing, 
44 – 49; from Interagency 
Council on Homelessness, 
119–20; mainstream, 60–63; 
McKinney-Vento Act, 44; 
and problems/contro-
versies/solutions, 44 – 49, 
60–63; for rough sleepers, 
84 –86; for veterans, 66–67. 
 See also Funding 
 Retsinas, Nick, 58 
 Ridgeway, Priscilla, 165–66 
 Riley, Bob, 196 
 Rog, Debra J., 166–67 
 Roman, Nan, 167 
 Rough sleepers: overview, 4, 
79–80; policy changes over, 
82–84; prevention of, 87–92, 
208–9; resources for, 84 –86; 
and stability, 87; strategies 
for, 80–82, 86–87, 145–46 
 Rough Sleepers Initiative/Unit 
(England), 4, 32, 81, 89–90, 
115, 159 
 Rudd, Kevin, 33–34, 106–7, 130, 
209–10 
 Runaway and Homeless Youth 
Act, 20 
 Rural areas, 22–23, 186–87 

Index 287
 Rural Housing Stability 
Assistance Program, 22 
 Rushing, Byron, 128–29 
 Ryan, Charles V., 125 
 Safe Havens initiative, 158 
 Samaritan Initiative Act, 119 
 San Francisco Plan to Abolish 
Chronic Homelessness, 119 
 Scotland, 93–94, 159 
 Scullion, Sister Mary, 167–68 
 Second Chance Act, 130, 216 
 Service members, 89–90 
 Shapps, Grant, 89 
 Shelter (UK), 232–33 
 Shelter concerns, 6, 17, 45, 65–67 
 Shinn, Marybeth, 168 
 Shinseki, Eric, 137 
 Sibley, Horace, 115, 120, 169 
 Sisters of Mercy, 232 
 Snyder, Mitch, 169–70 
 Social exclusion, 94 –97 
 Social Exclusion Unit (SEU), 
81–83 
 Social Sciences and Humanities 
Research Council of 
Canada (SSHRC), 105–6 
 Social Security Administration 
(SSA), 29–30, 61, 118, 129, 
160, 197, 216–17 
 Solis, Hilda, 137 
 Soloist, The (film), 137 
 Special Supplemental Nutrition 
Program for Women, 
Children, and Infants 
(WIC), 31 
 SSI/SSDI Outreach, Access, and 
Recovery (SOAR), 30, 61 
 State-by-state programs, 2–3, 
178–79, 230.  See also 
individual states 
 Step Up partnership, 139 
 Stewart B. McKinney Homeless 
Assistance Act, 170 
 Street deaths, 12, 25, 66, 85–86, 
163 
 Sullivan, Louis, 158 
 Supplemental Nutrition 
Assistance Program 
(SNAP), 28, 31, 214 
 Supplemental Poverty Measure, 
49 
 Supplemental Security Income 
(SSI), 28, 197 
 Sweden, homelessness, 33, 95, 98, 
102–3 
 Temporary Assistance for Needy 
Families (TANF), 20, 32 
 Ten-year plans: benefits of, 80; in 
California, 119, 135, 141; 
in Canada, 104 –6, 131–32; 
for chronic homelessness, 
17, 141, 147, 199–200; in 
Colorado, 156, 222; by 
Interagency Council on 
Homelessness, 53–59, 
195–96; in Kentucky, 218; 
in Massachusetts, 129, 218; 
in Michigan, 218; in New 
York, 117; in North Dakota, 
218; in Puerto Rico, 123; 
revenue streams from, 63; 
support for, 200–201; in 
Texas, 117–19, 132, 165; in 
Utah, 218; in Wales, 92–93; 
in Washington, D.C., 118; 
in Washington state, 218 
 Thompson, Tommy, 114 –16 
 Time magazine, 94, 153, 159, 162, 
168 
 Tipping Point, The (Gladwell), 11, 
45 
 Transitional homeless, 6 
 Tsemberis, Sam J., 15, 103, 130, 
170–71 
 Unemployment benefits, 
31–32 
 United Kingdom (U.K.), 
homelessness, 4, 79–94 
 United Nations (UN), 108, 159 

288 Index
 United States (U.S.), 
homelessness, 2–32.  See 
also individual states 
 United Way, 70, 151, 164 
 Universal Periodic Review (UN), 
108 
 Urban Institute, 144 
 Utah state plans, 199, 218 
 Vento, Bruce, 171 
 Veterans: chronic homelessness 
among, 188; as disabled 
persons, 25, 32, 42; poverty 
of, 19; research on, 19–20; 
resources for, 66–67; 
women veterans, 19 
 Veterans Homelessness Preven-
tion Demonstration Pro-
gram (VHPD), 139 
 Violence Against Women 
Prevention (DIJ), 31 
 Violence against Women transi-
tional residential program, 
136 
 Violence issues, 21–22, 24, 31, 48, 
70 
 Volunteers/outreach workers, 
5–6 
 Wages.  See Income issues 
 Wales, ten-year plan, 92–93 
 Washington Families Fund, 
136 
 Washington state plans, 199, 
218 
 Weekend Edition (NPR), 123 
 Weekly Standard, 57 
 Williams, Anthony, 118–19 
 Woman of Hope program, 168 
 Women veterans, 19 
 Workforce Investment Act (WIA), 
20 
 

289
 About the Author 
 MARY ELLEN HOMBS served as deputy director of the U.S. In-
teragency Council on Homelessness from 2003 to 2009. Prior to 
joining the council, Ms. Hombs was executive director of the Mas-
sachusetts Housing and Shelter Alliance, a statewide alliance of 
85 agencies that operate over 250 housing and emergency services 
programs for homeless people. Beginning in 1995 she was the alli-
ance’s director of special projects and coordinated statewide tech-
nical assistance initiatives in the areas of housing development, 
homeless programs, and discharge planning. 
 Ms. Hombs has more than 25 years of public policy, direct ser-
vice, and technical assistance experience in homeless advocacy 
and programs at the local, state, and national level. She is the 
author of several books and numerous articles on homelessness, 
including “American Homelessness.” She holds a BA in political 
economy and public affairs from George Washington University 
and a master’s degree in city planning from Howard University. 

