

Modern Small Antennas
If you’re involved in designing and developing small antennas, this complete, cutting-
edge guide covers everything you need to know. From fundamentals and basic theory
to design optimization, evaluation, measurements, and simulation techniques, all the
essential information is included. You’ll also get many practical examples from a range
of wireless systems, whilst a glossary is provided to bring you up to speed on the latest
terminology. A wide variety of small antennas is covered, and design and practice steps
are described for each type: electrically small, functionally small, physically constrained
small, and physically small. Whether you are a professional in industry, a researcher, or
a graduate student, this is your essential guide to small antennas.
Kyohei Fujimoto is a Professor Emeritus at the University of Tsukuba, Japan, and is also
a Senior Scientist at the Foundation for Advancement of International Science. He has
published extensively on the subject of antennas and has written several books including
the classic Small Antennas (1987). He is a Life Fellow of the IEEE, a Fellow of the
IEICE, and a member of Sigma Xi.
Hisashi Morishita is a Professor in the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engi-
neering at the National Defense Academy, Japan, where he has worked since 1992. His
research has long been concerned with small antennas and mobile communications, on
which he has so far published many papers in major technical journals. He is a member
of the IEICE and a senior member of the IEEE.

“Modern Small Antennas is a clearly written, comprehensive, yet practical treatment for
the design and development of the physically small and compact antennas required by
many of today’s wireless systems. It is an indispensable day-to-day desk reference for
the small antenna designer.”
Gary A. Thiele, University of Dayton
“This book on small antennas is masterfully written. The wealth of design information
on the state-of-the-art on small antenna conﬁgurations is unparallel to any existing book
on this subject. Both the antenna practicing engineers and researchers should ﬁnd the
book very valuable.”
Yahya Rahmat-Samii, University of California, Los Angeles

Modern Small Antennas
KYOHEI FUJIMOTO
University of Tsukuba, Japan
HISASHI MORISHITA
National Defense Academy, Japan

University Printing House, Cambridge CB2 8BS, United Kingdom
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
education, learning and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Infor mation on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521877862
C⃝K. Fujimoto and H. Morishita 2013
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2013
Printed in the United Kingdom by TJ International Ltd. Padstow Cornwall
A catalog record for this publication is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication data
Fujimoto, K. (Kyohei), 1929–
Modern small antennas / Kyohei Fujimoto, University of Tsukuba, Japan; Hisashi Morishita, National
Defense Academy, Japan.
pages
cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-521-87786-2
1. Antennas (Electronics)
2. Miniature electronic equipment.
I. Morishita, Hisashi.
II. Title.
TK7871.6.F85
2013
621.382′4 – dc23
2012030785
ISBN 978-0-521-87786-2 Hardback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of
URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication,
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.

Contents
Preface
page viii
Acknowledgements
xiv
1
Introduction
1
References
6
2
Small antennas
8
2.1
Deﬁnition of small antennas
8
2.2
Signiﬁcance of small antennas
9
References
11
3
Properties of small antennas
12
3.1
Performance of small antennas
12
3.1.1
Input impedance
12
3.1.2
Bandwidth BW and antenna Q
14
3.1.3
Radiation efﬁciency
17
3.1.4
Gain
18
3.2
Importance of impedance matching in small antennas
18
3.3
Problems of environmental effect in small antennas
20
References
21
4
Fundamental limitations of small antennas
23
4.1
Fundamental limitations
23
4.2
Brief review of some typical work on small antennas
24
References
36
5
Subjects related with small antennas
39
5.1
Major subjects and topics
39
5.1.1
Investigation of fundamentals of small antennas
39
5.1.2
Realization of small antennas
39
5.2
Practical design problems
40
5.3
General topics
42

vi
Contents
6
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
43
6.1
Principles for making antennas small
43
6.2
Techniques and methods for producing ESA
44
6.2.1
Lowering the antenna resonance frequency
44
6.2.2
Full use of volume/space circumscribing antenna
56
6.2.3
Arrangement of current distributions uniformly
57
6.2.4
Increase of radiation modes
58
6.2.5
Applications of metamaterials to make antennas small
62
6.3
Techniques and methods to produce FSA
69
6.3.1
FSA composed by integration of components
69
6.3.2
FSA composed by integration of functions
69
6.3.3
FSA of composite structure
70
6.4
Techniques and methods for producing PCSA
70
6.4.1
PCSA of low-proﬁle structure
71
6.4.2
PCSA employing a high impedance surface
71
6.5
Techniques and methods for making PSA
72
6.5.1
PSA in microwave (MW) and millimetre-wave (MMW) regions
73
6.5.2
Simple PSA
73
6.6
Optimization techniques
74
6.6.1
Genetic algorithm
74
6.6.2
Particle swarm optimization
79
6.6.3
Topology optimization
79
6.6.4
Volumetric material optimization
81
6.6.5
Practice of optimization
81
References
86
7
Design and practice of small antennas I
92
7.1
Design and practice
92
7.2
Design and practice of ESA (Electrically Small Antennas)
92
7.2.1
Lowering the resonance frequency
92
7.2.2
Full use of volume/space
138
7.2.3
Uniform current distribution
193
7.2.4
Increase of excitation mode
203
7.2.5
Applications of metamaterials
216
7.2.6
Active circuit applications to impedance matching
249
References
257
8
Design and practice of small antennas II
266
8.1
FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
266
8.1.1
Introduction
266
8.1.2
Integration technique
266
8.1.3
Integration of functions into antenna
327

Contents
vii
8.2
Design and practice of PCSA (Physically Constrained Small Antennas)
332
8.2.1
Low-proﬁle structure
332
8.2.2
Application of HIS (High Impedance Surface)
333
8.2.3
Applications of EBG (Electromagnetic Band Gap)
335
8.2.4
Application of DGS (Defected Ground Surface)
339
8.2.5
Application of DBE (Degenerated Band Edge) structure
345
8.3
Design and practice of PSA (Physically Small Antennas)
347
8.3.1
Small antennas for radio watch/clock systems
349
8.3.2
Small antennas for RFID
350
References
363
9
Evaluation of small antenna performance
371
9.1
General
371
9.2
Practical method of measurement
373
9.2.1
Measurement by using a coaxial cable
374
9.2.2
Method of measurement by using small oscillator
375
9.2.3
Method of measurement by using optical system
377
9.3
Practice of measurement
382
9.3.1
Input impedance and bandwidth
382
9.3.2
Radiation patterns and gain
384
9.3.3
Efﬁciency measurement
385
References
388
10
Electromagnetic simulation
389
10.1 Concept of electromagnetic simulation
389
10.2 Typical electromagnetic simulators for small antennas
390
10.3 Example (balanced antennas for mobile handsets)
391
10.3.1 Balanced-fed folded loop antenna
394
10.3.2 Antenna structure
396
10.3.3 Analytical results
398
10.3.4 Simulation for characteristics of a folded loop antenna in the
vicinity of human head and hand
400
References
407
11
Glossary
409
11.1 Catalog of small antennas
409
11.2 List of small antennas
409
References
448
Index
459

Preface
Small antenna, big impact!
More than 20 years have elapsed since the ﬁrst book on small antennas was published
in 1987. Small antennas have been used for a long time, from the earliest communications
to present-day applications in various small wireless systems; typically mobile phones
and other hand-held equipment that emerged into common use several decades ago.
Publication of the ﬁrst small-antenna book dates back to 1987, starting with its planning
in 1981, when we, the late Professor J. R. James and I (Fujimoto), saw the necessity
of a book on small antennas. At that time design techniques vital for development and
successful fabrication of small antennas had not been systematically treated and were
seldom even recorded in the literature. Hoping to improve that situation, we agreed to
produce a book entitled “Small Antennas.” Six years later, in 1987, Research Studies
Press, UK, published the book as the ﬁrst text devoted to small antennas. We intended
the book to provide data and information that should assist with the analysis, design,
and development of practical small antennas. We were pleased that the book was used
worldwide and was recognized as useful by many people who had taken advantage of
data and practical examples provided in the book.
Now, more than 20 years later, I recognized that the original book no longer matches
current trends in the discipline, and it calls for extensive updating to reﬂect current
trends in advanced antenna technology and acute requirements of these times.
Coincidentally, at the ISAP 2006, Singapore, in 2006, quite a few attendees there asked
me about renewal of the book “Small Antennas.” There was a common recognition of
the expanding boundaries of the wireless world that had grown with newly evolved sys-
tems, for which advanced antennas were required. Then, the present authors (Fujimoto
and Morishita) started planning a renewed book and gathering materials necessary for
it. I was happy at that time for having received inquiries of publishing a book on small
antennas by some publishing companies, among which was Cambridge University Press
(CUP), in the United Kingdom. Then, I contacted Dr. Julie Lancashire, Engineering Edi-
tor of the CUP, and got agreement for publishing a renewed version of “Small Antennas.”
Dr. Lancashire was formerly a commissioning editor of Artech House, UK, who sup-
ported us (the late Professor J. R. James and me) in editing “Handbook of Antenna
Systems for Mobile Communications.”
Today, small antenna technology has advanced along with progress in various wireless
systems, for which small antennas are required. The most typical wireless systems
requiring small antennas were mobile phones, having progressed to date through at least

Preface
ix
four system generations. Mobile phones have evolved well beyond traditional voice-
communication instruments to widely versatile systems, often referred to as “smart
phones” and hand-held “tablets” that function as information terminals, being capable
of handling high-rate data and video transmissions (both still and moving pictures)
in addition to standard telephone capabilities. Besides mobile phones, numerous other
types of wireless systems have been deployed. Representative systems are NFC (Near
Field Communication), including RFID (Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation), broadband
wireless such as WLAN (Wireless Local Area Network) and WiMAX (Worldwide
Interoperability for Microwave Access), wireless power transmission, radio control,
body-centric communications, medical systems, and so forth. Most of these systems
need small and compact antennas, as the equipment is generally very small and normally
requires internal antennas to avoid damage in normal handling and to lend convenience
for operators as well as better appearance.
This book is designed to provide readers with the latest data and information that
would be useful for engineers and researchers to design and develop small antennas,
placing particular emphasis on practical usefulness. With that emphasis on practicality,
this book purposely does not aim to concern itself too deeply with underlying theory.
Extensive bibliographic references accompany each chapter to guide readers needing to
pursue details to a greater degree.
It is worth mentioning that this book is unique in treating four types of small antennas,
differing from conventional small-antenna books so far published, in which only ESA
(Electrically Small Antennas) are dealt with. The categories of small antennas here are
based on functions, physically constrained size, and physically small dimensions, in
addition to electrically small size in comparison with the wavelength. Hence, the book
endeavors to cover these four types of small antennas which are practically employed in
various wireless systems that require not only electrically small size, but also enhanced
performances or improved characteristics, even with reduced size. This book provides
design concepts of small antennas, and many examples based on them are given. Novel
design methods such as applications of integration techniques, inclusion of environ-
mental materials in the antenna design, applications of electromagnetic (EM) composite
structure and the latest topical EM materials like metamaterials, are described along
with many examples. Antennas today are no longer a single device, but constructed
within a composite structure to perform sophisticated functions even with physically
small dimensions. We the authors sincerely hope that our book is useful for readers who
need to design, develop, and create novel and sophisticated small antennas.
In this book, some important small antennas applicable to human body communica-
tions and those employed in medical uses such as endoscopes and cancer treatment
are omitted, although they are unquestionably interesting subjects and important
antennas.
Small antennas have vital importance in small wireless equipment, as in some cases
they will determine the limits of system performances; in turn they can promote further
deployment and advancement of novel sophisticated wireless systems and modern infor-
mation systems that are beneﬁcial and ameliorative for human life and society. Thus,
even though their size is small, quite big is the impact of small antennas on the human

x
Preface
condition as well as on their technically related ﬁelds such as antennas, communications,
and information concerns, to which they contribute greatly and signiﬁcantly.
We say again “Small Antennas, Big Impact!”
The contents of this book, consisting of eleven chapters, and the persons in charge of
each chapter are described brieﬂy as follows.
Chapter 1 Introduction (K. Fujimoto)
This chapter presents introductory remarks on small antennas, starting with a brief
history of small antennas, followed by comments on the current status of practical small
antennas and some related subjects such as fundamental limitations and so forth. Then,
explanation of the concepts underlying small antennas is given, which is unique in
categorizing in a wider sense into four types that include functionally small, physically
constrained small, and simply physically small, in addition to electrically small that
differs from conventional books. Then, variations of small antenna types are covered
brieﬂy, ranging from simple examples like dipoles to a variety of geometries constructed
with basic shapes and structures, modiﬁed structures, composite designs, and designs
integrated with materials, including metamaterials.
Chapter 2 Small antennas (K. Fujimoto)
This chapter begins with a deﬁnition of small antennas categorized into four types
from the viewpoint of function, physical dimensions, and partly constrained physical
dimensions, in addition to dimensions small in comparison with the wavelength. The
four types are: (1) FSA (Functionally Small Antenna), (2) PCSA (Physically Constrained
Small Antenna), (3) PSA (Physically Small Antenna), and (4) ESA (Electrically Small
Antenna). The signiﬁcance of small antennas can be recognized as the essential and
indispensable feature in a great many types of small wireless equipment and the fact
that they may often determine the performance level of wireless systems; in turn, newly
emerged wireless systems have been aided by small antennas in cases where they couldn’t
even operate properly without them.
Chapter 3 Properties of small antennas (K. Fujimoto and Y. Kim)
This chapter starts with a discussion on speciﬁc characteristics of small antennas; typ-
ically impedance, antenna Q, bandwidth, and radiation efﬁciency. Impedance matching
of small antennas, particularly when the size is only a small fraction of a wavelength,
exhibits difﬁculty, because of the antenna’s small radiation resistance and large reactance
compared with the connected circuit impedance. Some useful methods for matching are
introduced. Other issues speciﬁcally noted regarding small antennas are proximity effect
that cannot be avoided in almost all cases due to the installation inside small equipment.

Preface
xi
The proximity effects usually deteriorate antenna performances; however, in a way it
can be turned into enhancement of the antenna performance, when materials near an
antenna can be utilized as a part of the radiator.
Chapter 4 Fundamental limitation of small antennas (K. Fujimoto)
Typical work on the fundamental limitation of small antennas is reviewed, beginning
with that done by Wheeler, up to recent work by Thal. H. A. Wheeler was a pioneer
who treated small antennas ﬁrst in 1947, discussed performances of small antennas, and
introduced the concept of the fundamental limitation of small antennas. Chu followed
Wheeler’s work in 1948 and derived the minimum possible Q of an antenna for either
TE or TM wave mode radiation that is known as Chu’s limitation. After Chu, many
researchers such as Hansen, Harrington, Collin, Rothchild, Fante, McLean, Folts, Thiel,
Geyi, Best, and Yaghjian discussed and calculated antenna Q by using each individual
method. Best and Yaghjian uniquely gave relationships between Q, impedance, and
bandwidth. Thal had shown the most veriﬁable Q by calculating reactive energy inside
Chu’s sphere, a topic that had been ignored by Chu. Hansen later showed a new method
for calculating Q, which gave a more rigorous value.
Chapter 5 Subjects related with small antennas (K. Fujimoto)
This short chapter describes major subjects that concern small antennas; ﬁrstly inves-
tigation of fundamental characteristics of the small antenna, and secondly exploitation
of methods or ideas of how to realize a practical small antenna. Discussed next are
practical design problems that should be considered for small antennas; for instance,
design issues for mobile terminals. Lastly, general topics are covered, such as problems
in designing small antennas suitable for speciﬁc wireless systems, and the necessity of
compromising between the theoretical designs and practical performances encountered
when the antenna size is very small.
Chapter 6 Principles and techniques for making
antennas small (H. Morishita and K. Fujimoto)
This chapter ﬁrst covers principles of making antennas small, and follows with techniques
to realize those principles for four types of small antennas. Each type is introduced
with examples. One of the signiﬁcant methods is to use materials, especially recently
developed metamaterials (MM), by which novel small antennas may be created. Use of
materials composed with SNG (Single Negative) and DNG (Double Negative) materials,
including NRI (Negative Refractive Index) TL (Transmission Line) MMs, is described.
A review to solve matching problems in very small antennas with application of SNG
materials in the near ﬁeld of a radiator is given.

xii
Preface
Later in the chapter, optimization techniques in designing are introduced. Small
antenna designers often encounter difﬁculty when an antenna is either too small to treat
or is located in a complicated environment. Optimization techniques may be useful to
ease such difﬁculty in designing. Four typical optimization techniques, GA (Genetic
Algorithm), PSO (Particle Swarm Optimization), TO (Topology Optimization), and
VMO (Volumetric Material Optimization) are described along with some application
examples.
Chapter 7 Design and practice of small antennas I (K. Fujimoto)
This lengthy chapter along with the next (Chapter 8) intends to provide practical design
methods and illustrative examples. The chapter consists of four sections corresponding
to four types of small antenna: ESA, PCSA, FSA, and PSA. This chapter is the ﬁrst
part, where ESA is dealt with. Design methods based on the principles shown in Chapter
6 are discussed and then numerous design examples taken from some related journals
are provided.
Chapter 8 Design and practice of small antennas II (K. Fujimoto)
Following the previous chapter’s treatment of ESA, this again-lengthy chapter describes
design methods and practical examples for the remaining three types of small antennas,
PCSA, FSA, and PSA. In FSA, methods to enhance antenna performances, typically
wideband, multiband, and UWB (Ultra Wideband) operations, are described. Integration
of function into antenna structure is added as an important method to produce FSA, which
includes reconﬁgurable antennas. Typical methods to produce PCSA are applications of
EM materials/structures such as HIS (High Impedance Surface), EBG (Electromagnetic
Band Gap), and DGS (Defected Ground Surface) as well as PEC (Perfect Electric
Conductor) ground plane, by which antennas of low proﬁle, wide bandwidth, higher
gain, and arrays with closely spaced elements are realized. Today we see various small
widely deployed RFID devices, which employ very small antennas that are considered
as the most representative PSA.
Chapter 9 Evaluation of small antenna performance (H. Morishita)
At ﬁrst, speciﬁc problems that must be considered for evaluation of small antenna
performances are discussed. In small-antenna measurements, a prime important matter
is balanced and unbalanced geometries in the antenna structure and feed line to achieve
measurement errors as small as possible. Optical ﬁber systems can replace coaxial cable
systems in the small-antenna measurements to avoid serious errors due to unfavorable
current ﬂow on the feed cable. Recommended practices in measuring important antenna
parameters such as impedance, radiation patterns, and efﬁciency are described.

Preface
xiii
Chapter 10 Electromagnetic simulation (H. Morishita and Y. Kim)
Electromagnetic (EM) simulation plays an important role in designing an antenna and
ﬁnding its characteristics, especially when the antenna is too small to deal with and/or
it is employed in complicated environments so that conventional design or evaluation
of antenna characteristics is almost impossible. This chapter explains concepts of EM
simulation ﬁrst and then describes typical EM simulators. The typical simulation meth-
ods considered here are the IE3D, FIDELITY, HFSS, and MW studio, which are based
on the Method of Moments (MoM), FDTD (Finite-Difference Time-Domain), FEM
(Finite Element Method), and FIT (Finite Integration Technique), respectively. Exam-
ples of simulation applied to practical antenna models for either design or evaluation of
performances are described.
Chapter 11 Glossary (K. Fujimoto and N. T. Hung)
This chapter gives a catalog of typical small antennas to provide readers with data
and information for assisting design and development. Most of the antennas treated
are covered in more detail elsewhere in the book, alongside a few antennas covered in
other literature. The glossary list gives a brief view of each antenna, its antenna type,
its main features, and applications for every antenna, along with references and the
chapter/section number where the antenna is described.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to express their highest appreciation to a number of people who
assisted them to complete this book, providing useful information, data, and materials
related with small antennas, contributing to prepare manuscripts and endeavoring to
produce the book through sincere effort.
Particular acknowledgement should go to Dr. J. R. Copeland, who supported us with
his editing skill being devoted to our manuscripts, and improved our nonnative English,
especially from a technical point of view as an experienced antenna researcher. (He was
one of the members who did pioneering work on the active integrated antennas at the
Ohio State University Antenna Laboratories in the early 1960s, where the ﬁrst author
was also one of the members.)
The book wouldn’t have been completed without the continuous support and patience
of Cambridge University Press editorial and production staff. Sarah Marsh and many
other editorial staff assisted us to produce and arrange our manuscripts. We paticularly
acknowledge the support of Dr Julie Lancashire, Publisher, Engineering, who at ﬁrst
showed interest in publishing this book, then promoted the book project, and encouraged
us in the process of production. She is especially thanked for her patience at the time
when the progress of the project stalled, by understanding of our situation, especially my
health condition and unavoidable complications caused by the unexpected huge disaster
in north-eastern Japan on March 11, 2011. The authors are also deeply indebted to Jon
Billam for his kind review of the manuscripts in detail, by which the manuscript was
greatly improved and reﬁned.
Kyohei Fujimoto would personally like to thank many people for their assistance and
contribution to preparing manuscripts. Among them, immense appreciation should go
to Professor Hiroyoshi Yamada, Niigata University, Japan, who generously helped in
producing ﬁgures and tables in Chapters 6, 7, and 8 with hearty cooperation of not
fewer than 10 of his students who worked excellently under his instruction. We are also
much obliged to Dr. Yongho Kim, Nguyen Tuan Hung, and Yuki Kobayashi, current and
former graduate students of Professor H. Morishita, who assisted us by exhibiting their
skillful work, in drawing ﬁgures in Chapters 1 to 4, improving poor quality ﬁgures in
some few chapters, and producing Chapter 11. Last but not least, I must acknowledge my
wife Machiko Fujimoto, who allowed me to continue to work on the book by sacriﬁcing
much domestic life, with patience for a couple of years until completion of the book.

Acknowledgements
xv
Hisashi Morishita would like to thank all his graduate students of his laboratory
in National Defense Academy, Japan for their wholehearted cooperation in producing
ﬁgures and tables in Chapters 9 and 10. Especially, Dr. Y. Kim, who was his graduate
student, who contributed to produce Chapter 10.


1
Introduction
The antenna ﬁrst used in radio communication was a small antenna, which was a fan-
type monopole (Figure 1.1), developed by G. Marconi, used for trans-Atlantic Ocean
communication in 1901 [1]. The antenna appeared to be very large, as it was hung by
two masts 48 meters high and 60 meters apart so that it could never be considered small
[1]; however, since the dimensions were a small fraction of wavelength (about 1/6 of the
operating wavelength, 366 meters), it was “electrically” small.
An Electrically Small Antenna – ESA – (the deﬁnition is described in 2.1) is an
antenna of dimensions much smaller than the wavelength. In the classical sense, there
are two types of ESA; one is an electric element, which couples to the electric ﬁeld
and is referred to as a capacitive antenna, and another is a magnetic element (electric
loop), which couples to the magnetic ﬁeld and is referred to as an inductive antenna.
These are ESA categories; however, many practical antennas are some combination
of these two types. It should be noted that small electric and magnetic elements in
the forms of dipoles and loops have been used since 1887 when Hertz successfully
generated and detected electromagnetic waves and veriﬁed Maxwell’s prediction [2].
His invention of such small antennas certainly proved his success in demonstrating
existence of electromagnetic waves. Although more than 120 years have passed since
Hertz’s experiment, his small dipoles and loops shown in Figure 1.2 (a) and (b) were so
basic that essentially the same antennas are still being used.
Typical antennas in practical use for the early days of radio communications were
ESAs. Examples of them are shown in Figure 1.3: (a) top-loaded monopole, (b) fan-type
monopole, (c) multi-wire, (d) rectangular cage type, and (e) cage type, and so forth. Most
of them were installed on ships and operated in frequency bands of LF and HF. Since then,
small antennas have been used in various communication systems, particularly mobile
systems, where small antennas were required. Antenna types used are not only linear but
also planar and others such as composite and integrated types. Antenna technology has
made steady progress along with the progress in communication systems and electronic
devices, especially during World Wars I and II that provided the need for advanced
antenna design and the surge of technology. Operating frequencies have gradually been
raised to higher regions; from MF and HF bands to VHF, UHF, and SHF in recent years.
Use of higher frequencies and smaller-sized electronic devices gave impetus to develop
smaller antennas. One of the major trends in recent antenna technology is miniaturization
of antenna systems, yet with improved functioning and further sophistication. The latest
applications of small antennas are mainly to mobile communications and newly deployed

2
Introduction
Figure 1.1 The ﬁrst radio communication antenna used for trans-oceanic communications
developed by Marconi in 1901 [1].
60 cm
40 cm
40 cm
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.2 Hertz antenna used for his experiment of the ﬁrst radio wave transmission experiment
[2, 3, 4].
various wireless systems. The typical mobile systems are mobile phone systems, which
have evolved from the ﬁrst generation systems in the early 1950s to the present fourth
generation through the third-generation systems and further progressed wireless systems
such as smart phones and handy tablets, where small antennas are indispensable. Recently
emerged wireless systems also demand small antennas. These recent wireless systems
are applied not only to communications, but also to control, sensing, identiﬁcation,
medical use, body communications, and data and video transmission. Typical systems

Introduction
3
(a)
(b)
(d)
(e)
(c)
Figure 1.3 Typical antennas used in early radio communications; (a) top-loaded monopole,
(b) fan-type monopole, (c) multi-wire, (d) rectangular cage type, and (e) cage type [2, 3, 4].
for which small antennas are required, are NFC (Near Field Communication) systems,
including RFID (Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation), UWB (Ultra Wideband) systems, and
wireless broadband systems such as WLAN (Wireless Local Area Network) systems
and WiMAX (Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access) systems.
Requirements from various mobile systems have intensely stimulated research and
study of small antennas and as a consequence have brought promotion of novel antenna
systems development. They have also contributed to improved antenna performances

4
Introduction
Figure 1.4 A millimeter-wave horn antenna, which is physically small, but electrically large.
Ground plane
Substrate
Patch
Ground plane
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1.5 Typical planar antennas; (a) PIFA (Planar Inverted-F Antenna), (b) patch antenna, and
(c) MSA (Microstrip Antenna).
year by year and the antenna functions have gradually been enhanced to meet the require-
ments raised from the advanced systems. Meanwhile, discussions on the fundamentals of
small antennas have continued ceaselessly ever since Wheeler’s work, because of contin-
ued signiﬁcance. Problems that concern limitations are still regarded as very interesting
and controversial topics. Knowledge of the limitations informs antenna engineers how
to approach the limitations with an antenna of given size.
There is some ambiguity in the expression “small antenna,” because one can say,
“This is a small antenna,” when it looks physically small. For example, a millimeter-
wave (MMW) horn antenna (Figure 1.4) of only the size of a human palm looks simply
small and it might be called a “small” antenna. However, since a MMW antenna often
has the aperture of a few or more wavelengths, the antenna dimension shouldn’t be
said to be “small,” but in fact “electrically large” in terms of the operating wavelength.
On the contrary, for an antenna having dimensions of a small fraction of the operating
wavelength like the Marconi antenna mentioned earlier, the antenna is referred to as an
“electrically small” antenna. Here, small antennas will be treated in a wider sense, in

Introduction
5
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 1.6 Typical linear small antennas; (a) NMHA (Normal Mode Helical Antenna), (b)
Meander Line Antenna, (c) ILA (Inverted-L Antenna), and (d) IFA (Inverted-F Antenna).
Monopole
Slot
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.7 Examples of composite antenna; (a) self complementary antenna and (b) active
integrated antenna.
which antennas are deﬁned four ways; ﬁrst, in terms of simply physical size; second, in
comparison with the operating frequency; third, in relation with function; and fourth, in
the size-constrained structure. Small antennas deﬁned in terms of the function may be
unfamiliar in general; however, antennas so deﬁned should be appreciated as a signiﬁcant
concept that comprehensively embraces the term “small.”
Various types of small antennas have so far been evolved from simple dipoles or loops.
Planar and low-proﬁle antennas are typical ones. Practical examples are illustrated in
Figure 1.5, which shows (a) Planar Inverted-F Antenna (PIFA), (b) patch antenna and
(c) Microstrip Antenna (MSA). Meanwhile, examples of linear antennas are shown in
Figure 1.6, which depicts (a) Normal Mode Helical Antenna (NMHA), (b) Meander

6
Introduction
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.8 Examples of loaded antenna: (a) a ferrite loaded coil, and (b) dielectric loaded patch
antenna.
Ground plane
Coax
Stub
Negative permittivity resonator
Figure 1.9 Example of metamaterial (negative permittivity) loaded small antenna [5–7].
Line Antenna (MLA), (c) Inverted-L Antenna (ILA), (d) Inverted-F Antenna (IFA) and
composite antenna. Examples of composite antennas are shown in Figure 1.7, which
depicts (a) an example of complementary antennas and (b) an example of active inte-
grated antennas. Integration technique, by which some device or circuitry is combined
with an antenna structure so that the antenna works with enhanced performance or
function, can be utilized for small-sizing. Application of materials such as ferrite and/or
dielectrics is also a useful means to reduce antenna size. Examples are an antenna
loaded with a ferrite and an MSA loaded with dielectric material as shown in Figure
1.8(a) and (b), respectively. Presently, introduction of metamaterials such as mu-negative
or epsilon-negative materials (MNM or ENM) and double negative materials (DNG) into
the antenna structure has been discussed extensively worldwide as one of the promising
candidates for antenna miniaturization [5–13]. An example of application of negative-
epsilon material to small antenna structure is depicted in Figure 1.9 [6]. Development of
negative-mu materials will also contribute to new small antennas [14]. These antennas
will be discussed in later sections.
References
[1] J. Ramsay, Highlight of Antenna History, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society
Newsletter, December 1981, 8.
[2] S. Tokumaru, Invitation to Radiowave Technology, Kohdansha, Japan, 1978, pp. 48–50 (in
Japanese).

References
7
[3] O. Lodge, Signaling Across Space Without Wires, Van Nostrand, 1900.
[4] G. Pierce, Principles of Wireless Telegraphy, McGraw-Hill, 1910.
[5] H. R. Stuart and A. Pilwerbetsky, Electrically Small Antenna Elements Using Negative
Permittivity Resonator, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 54, 2006,
no. 6, pp. 1644–1653.
[6] F. Bilotti, A. Ali, and L. Vegni, Design of Miniaturized Metamaterial Patch Antennas with
µ-Negative Loading, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56, 2008, no. 6,
pp. 1640–1647.
[7] P. Y. Chen and A. Alu, Sub-Wavelength Elliptical Patch Antenna Loaded withµ-Negative Per-
mittivity Resonator, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 1,
pp. 13–25.
[8] N. Engheta and R. W. Ziolkowsky, eds., Metamaterials-Physics and Engineering Explo-
rations, IEEE Press, 2006, John Wiley and Sons.
[9] A. Lai, C. Caloz, and T. Itoh, Composite Right/left-Handed Transmission Line Metamateri-
als, IEEE Microwave Magazine, September 2004, pp. 34–50.
[10] C. Caloz, T. Itoh, and A. Rennings, CRLH Metamaterial Leaky-Wave and Resonant Anten-
nas, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 50, 2008, no. 5, pp. 25–39.
[11] G. V. Eleftheriades and K. G. Balmain (eds.), Negative Refraction Metamaterials: Funda-
mental Principles and Applications, Wiley-IEEE Press, 2005.
[12] J. L. Volakis, C.-C. Chen, and K. Fujimoto, Small Antennas, Miniaturization Techniques and
Applications, McGraw-Hill, 2010, chapter 6.
[13] F. Capolino (ed.), Applications of Metamaterials, CRC Press, 2009, Part IV.
[14] T. Tsutaoka, et al., Negative Permeability Spectra of Magnetic Materials, IEEE iWAT 2008,
Chiba, Japan, P202, pp. 279–281.

2
Small antennas
2.1
Deﬁnition of small antennas
Here in this book, small antennas are treated with a concept that embraces not only
electrically small antennas, but also other types of small antennas. Categories used to
classify small antennas include functions as well as dimensions, because small antennas
being used practically are not only what we call “Electrically Small Antennas,” but also
simply physically small antennas – antennas of partly electrically small dimensions and
antennas equivalently small in terms of functions. Conventionally, ESA has been the
main subject when small antennas are discussed; however, other types of small antenna
have comparable signiﬁcance with the ESA, depending on the situation of the practical
applications. The categories used here are Electrically Small Antenna (ESA), Physically
Constrained Small Antenna (PCSA), Functionally Small Antenna (FSA), and Physically
Small Antenna (PSA) [1].
An ESA is an antenna conventionally deﬁned as an electrically small-sized antenna;
i.e., one having dimensions much smaller than the wavelength. However, this deﬁnition
is unclear, since the dimensions are not described precisely. Wheeler deﬁned the ESA
as an antenna having the maximum size that can be circumscribed by a radian sphere,
with a radius of one radian in length (= λ/2π) [2]. However, an antenna having the
maximum dimension of a radian length may not necessarily be categorized as an ESA,
because taking a dipole antenna as an example – which has the length of a radian length,
2 × λ/2π (= 0.32λ) – it can no longer be called electrically small, as the size becomes
no longer a small fraction of the wavelength. Hence classifying the radian-length dipole
antenna as an ESA is not reasonable.
There was another deﬁnition of ESA – that was an antenna having dimension not
greater than one eighth of a wavelength [3]. One more deﬁnition was given by King,
who did not use the term ESA, but “very short antenna,” that referred to an antenna
having the length in terms of ka ≤0.5 (a: a half length of a thin linear dipole and
k = 2π/λ, (λ: wavelength)) [4]. Recently, Best followed King’s deﬁnition that ESA is
an antenna having ka ≤0.5, the same dimensions as King’s. This is more reasonable
to deﬁne as ESA, so hereafter we will reserve the term ESA for small antennas having
dimension ka smaller than 0.5, where a is the radius of sphere circumscribing the
antenna.
A PCSA is an antenna, not having dimensions of ESA, but a part of which has
dimensions corresponding to the ESA. A low-proﬁle antenna, for example, with the

2.2 Signiﬁcance of small antennas
9
height over the ground plane or the thickness of say λ/50 or so, like an Inverted-L
antenna, planar antennas such as a patch antenna, a microstrip antenna (MSA), and so
forth, can be classiﬁed into “Physically Constrained Small Antenna” (PCSA).
Another classiﬁcation of small antennas relates to antenna functions. When an antenna
can attain either additional functions or enhanced performances with the dimensions
being kept unchanged, it can be said to have an equivalent reduction in the antenna size,
because with normal antennas such enhanced function or improved performance could
result only from enlargement of dimensions. An example is an antenna designed to have
wideband, multiband performance, radiation pattern shaping, and array thinning without
any change in the dimensions. This class of antenna is referred to as “Functionally Small
Antenna” (FSA).
Among the FSA, there may be antennas that can be categorized also as ESA and/or
PCSA at the same time, because their antenna dimensions are small enough to be
comparable with a fraction of a wavelength, which is the criterion for ESA and/or
PCSA.
A “Physically Small Antenna” (PSA) is an antenna, which differs from any of the
above, but has physically small dimensions as measured. When the volume of an antenna
is bounded by 30 cm or less, we may call the antenna a PSA. There is not any strict
physical meaning in the deﬁnition, but only a sensual measure based on the common
understanding of “smallness” in physical size. An example is a millimeter-wave horn
antenna with an aperture size of, say 5 cm approximately. Many of the MSAs may be
classiﬁed into either PCSA or PSA.
These deﬁnitions cannot be analytically formulated in practice, because an antenna
may be differently classiﬁed depending on the practical situation. For instance, when
a short monopole categorized in the ESA is put on a rectangular conducting plate of
1/4 wavelength, the antenna can no longer be classiﬁed into ESA, because the antenna
dimensions are effectively enlarged with inclusion of the plate. The plate of ﬁnite size acts
as a part of the radiator so that the monopole plus the plate constitutes an antenna system.
In this case, the radiation performance of the monopole is enhanced by contribution of
the radiation current on the plate induced by the monopole. A very small ceramic-chip
antenna practically used in small mobile terminals is another example.
In any case the size of the antenna system must be deﬁned with the maximum size,
which includes the platform together with the antenna element.
Although an antenna may be classiﬁed into one of the four categories mentioned
above, the categories are not necessarily distinct so that one class of antenna can be
categorized also in another class. For instance, when a very thin patch antenna has the
edge (radiating aperture) of 1/5 wavelength in its periphery, the antenna is referred to as
both an ESA and a PCSA.
2.2
Signiﬁcance of small antennas
The signiﬁcance of the small antenna is recognized from its important role in var-
ious wireless systems, where small antennas are indispensable. In the early days of

10
Small antennas
communications, when electronic devices such as thermionic vacuum tubes were not yet
available, antenna technology was essential to extend the communication range. Devel-
opment of tuning and matching concepts gave impetus to promote further increase in
communication capability. In those days, most of the antennas used were ESA, because
operating frequencies were mostly MF and HF bands. In the 1930s, antennas such as slot
antennas and ferrite antennas were put to practical use. It was around this era when needs
for small antennas furthered researchers’ interest in studying the fundamentals of small
antennas, and investigation of limitations of small antennas was inspired. In parallel with
research, practical development of small antennas was advanced. Examples are normal
mode helical antennas, MSAs, and patch antennas. Their practical applications extended
to various mobile systems, particularly to land vehicles. Remarkable progress of antenna
technology can be attributed to World Wars I and II. After the wars, and toward the end
of the twentieth century, various composite antennas and integrated antennas appeared.
Meanwhile, mobile communications drove development of small antennas, as mobile
terminals needed small equipment, for which small-sized, compact, and lightweight
antennas were required.
So far, creation and invention of small antennas have accelerated rapidly in response
to worldwide demands raised urgently by the growth of mobile phone systems. Recent
trends are increasing demands arising particularly for newly deployed wireless mobile
systems – NFC (Near Field Communication) systems, including RFID (Radio Fre-
quency Identiﬁcation), UWB (Ultra-Wide Band), and wireless broadband systems such
as WLAN (Wireless Local Area Networks) and WiMAX (Worldwide Interoperability
for Microwave Access). Small antennas have already played an obscure but key role
in such wireless mobile systems, as the systems do not work without these devices.
Antennas in these systems have acted as a key component, since they almost determine
the system performance, especially in small wireless equipment, because the systems
are designed to exhibit almost the highest achievable electronic performance, and only
the antenna can further improve the system performance. Since downsizing of electronic
devices and their design technology as well has expedited progress in small wireless
equipment, small antennas have become inevitable for these systems. As such, it can also
be said that such newly deployed wireless systems owe much in their development to
small antennas, and in turn small-antenna technology has advanced by being employed
in these wireless systems. Recent urgent demand is application of small antennas to
the MIMO (Multi-Input Multi-Output) systems. WiMAX already employs the MIMO
system in order to transmit high data rate to the 4G (4th Generation) mobile systems, and
other wireless broadband systems where high data rates will be needed will adopt the
MIMO system. Small antennas are suitable for small MIMO equipment, where space
to install antennas is limited to small areas, and close proximity of antenna elements is
unavoidable.
Downsizing of an antenna without degrading the antenna performance imposes a
severe design issue for antenna engineers – how to keep the antenna performance
unchanged while the antenna size is reduced. The latest demands for small antennas are
not only physically small, but also functional, typically wideband, multiband operation,
or including signal processing capability.

References
11
Types of antennas required for modern wireless systems are not only ESA, but also
PCSA, PSA, and FSA, depending on the system speciﬁcations. The major design param-
eters are the operating frequency, system speciﬁcations, dimension of the unit to which
the antenna is installed, place and space to install the antenna inside the unit, and so forth.
Selection of antenna type and the design of the antenna differ depending upon these
parameters. It is most important to optimize the antenna design that meets the system
requirements. There have been many small antennas used practically in current systems
without well-optimized design. Such non-optimally designed antennas must be used only
with understanding that if the system may not fully function to its maximum capability,
it shouldn’t bring any serious impediment. If the antennas were optimally designed, the
antenna and thus the system performance would be improved. In a small mobile unit –
for example a small RFID unit – an antenna is often used in poor impedance-matching
condition, because the size of the antenna is too small to allow good matching. However,
if good impedance matching were achieved, the system sensitivity would be increased
so that the operating range could be extended. Another important advantage claimed by
better matching is saving the battery life; the battery might be used for a longer time or
could be replaced by a smaller one.
Increase in the bandwidth may also be expected by improving the matching condition.
Proper design of matching circuitry is essential.
Although small antennas have been used widely in communications and other wireless
systems, there are still many issues remaining that concern theory, design, and practical
applications. Realization of an ESA is still a big, challenging problem for antenna
engineers, and at the same time antenna engineers are urged to develop skills to develop
practically useful small antennas.
Study of fundamentals of ESAs assists optimization of antenna design and devel-
opment of new small antennas, augments the knowledge of essential properties and
characteristics of small antennas, and provides a substantial clue to creating novel ESA
implementations. In addition, knowledge of the radiation mechanism of small antennas,
still being pursued, should add a signiﬁcant key for giving birth to a unique small antenna
when it is successfully mastered.
Small antennas offer the vital key to further development and progress of wireless
systems, and in turn, these systems bestow an unparalleled opportunity for further
advancement of small antennas.
References
[1] K. Fujimoto et al., Small Antennas, Research Studies Press, UK, 1987, p. 4.
[2] H. A. Wheeler, Fundamental Limitations of Small Antennas, Proceedings of IRE, vol. 35,
Dec. 1947, pp. 1479–1484.
[3] S. A. Schelkunoff and H. T. Friis, Antennas and Theory, John Wiley and Sons, 1952, chapter 10.
[4] R. W. P. King, The Theory of Linear Antennas, Harvard University Press, 1956, p. 184.

3
Properties of small antennas
3.1
Performance of small antennas
Small antennas exhibit some speciﬁc characteristics that differ from antennas of a size
comparable to the wavelength. The input impedance of a small electric (magnetic)
dipole antenna is highly capacitive (inductive), while its resistive component is very
small. Difﬁculty in the perfect matching to the load of 50 ohms is mainly due to this
impedance characteristic.
The radiation pattern of a small antenna, as its size becomes smaller, tends to approach
that of the classical elemental vertical dipole which is omnidirectional in the horizon-
tal plane, with a ﬁgure-of-eight pattern in the vertical plane, and with a directivity
approaching 1.5.
Small antennas, particularly ESAs, need speciﬁc design techniques.
3.1.1
Input impedance
A small dipole antenna of radius d and the half length a (Figure 3.1), when ka is less
than 0.5 (k: 2π/λ), exhibits the input impedance Za = Ra + j Xa as follows [1];
Ra = 20(ka)2
(3.1)
Xa = 60( −3.39)/ka
(3.2)
where  = ln (2a/d).
Numerical values are illustrated in Figure 3.2. This is an excellent approximation of
the correct value for βa ≤0.2 and quite a good approximation for βa ≤0.5. The ﬁgure
shows loss-free cases, where k = β with α = 0 in k = α + jβ.
Meanwhile, the radiation resistance Ra of a small circular loop antenna of radius a
and wire radius d (loop area: A = a2π) for βa ≤1 (Figure 3.3) [2][3] is
Ra = 20 β4 A2.
(3.3)
The reactance X can be found by calculating ωL, where L, the inductance of a small
circular loop, is given by [3]
L = aμ [ln(8a/d) −2].
(3.4)
Figure 3.4(a) gives Ra with respect to βa, and Figure 3.4(b) depicts L against a/d.

2d
2a
Figure 3.1 A small dipole [1].
1.2
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
βa
0.1
1
10
100
R
Xa
a
Ra
-Xa
Ω:20
15
12.5
10
Figure 3.2 Impedance characteristics of a dipole [1].
a
2d
Figure 3.3 A small circular loop antenna [1]–[3].
(a)
(b)
1000
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
100
10
1
0.1
0.01
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
ββa
a/d
R[Ω]
L
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
10
100
1000
Figure 3.4 Impedance characteristics of a loop antenna; (a) resistance component and
(b) inductance.

14
Properties of small antennas
2d
H
W
Figure 3.5 A small square loop antenna [3].
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
–6
0
1
1.4
1.4
γ = 1.0
γ = 0.09
P/λ
P/λ = 1.4
1.4
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.6
1.6
2
3
4
5
R (××100Ω)
X (×100Ω)
(P = 2(H + W))
6
7
8
9
Figure 3.6 Impedance characteristics of a rectangular loop antenna [4].
For the square loop with sides a and wire radius d [3] (Figure 3.5),
L = 2μ(a/π)[ln(a/d) −0.774].
(3.5)
The impedance Ra and Xa of a rectangular wire loop of side P = 2(H + W), γ = W/H
and wire radius d, is shown in Figure 3.6, where P/λ is taken as the parameter [4].
3.1.2
Bandwidth BW and antenna Q
The bandwidth of an antenna cannot simply be deﬁned the same way as in circuitry,
because the functional bandwidth of an antenna may be limited by factors not existing
in circuitry performance, for example, change of pattern shape or pattern direction,
variation in impedance characteristics, change in gain, and so forth. In general, however,
the bandwidth can be deﬁned as a frequency band within which the antenna meets a

3.1 Performance of small antennas
15
ωl
I(ω)
Ir
Ir
√2
0
ωr ωh
ω
Figure 3.7 Frequency characteristics of a LCR circuit near resonance.
given set of speciﬁcations, typically based on the impedance characteristics. In small
antennas, either the antenna input impedance or the power spectra can be taken as the
parameter to specify the bandwidth. The bandwidth so deﬁned is the frequency difference
	f between the highest frequency fh and lowest frequency fl, both speciﬁed at a certain
value of parameters such as VSWR S or the return loss RL, based on the input impedance
Za, and by some level of power reduced from the maximum. These parameters, S and
RL, are given by
S = (1 + |
|)/(1 −|
|)
(3.6)
and RL = 20 log |
|
(3.7)
where 
 (the reﬂection coefﬁcient) = (Za −ZL)/(Za + ZL).
Here ZL is the load impedance.
The load impedance ZL is usually taken to be a pure resistance of 50 ohms. Usually
S = 2 is taken, which corresponds to RL ≈–10 dB. 
 for the impedance at the half-power
point is 0.707 and S for this 
 is 5.828. The half-power point BW1/2 is usually used in
circuitry and not generally used in the antenna case.
For convenience, the relative bandwidth RBW, which is a ratio of BW to the center
frequency f0 = (fh – fl)/2 or the resonance frequency fr, is generally used, instead of BW.
Sometimes, a ratio of fh/fl is used as a measure of wideband capability.
Antenna Q is deﬁned from the physical implication as
Q = ωPreact/Prad
(3.8)
where Preact denotes the reactive power stored in the antenna structure and Prad is the
radiated power from the antenna.
Originally, Q was used as a circuit parameter showing a measure of selectivity of a tun-
ing circuit, generally when the BW is relatively narrow. Taking an LCR series circuit as an
example, the impedance Z = R + j(ωL – 1/ωC). When a voltage V is applied to the circuit,
current I ﬂows in the circuit, that is, I = V/|Z| = V/

R2 + (ωL −1/ωC)2. The cur-
rent I(ω) with respect to frequency ω is depicted in Figure 3.7. At resonance ω = ωr, the
current Ir = Vr/R, because ωL = 1/ωC. Taking a ratio of I/Ir = G in dB, G is given by
G = −10 log[1 + (ωL −1/ωC)2/R2](dB).
(3.9)

16
Properties of small antennas
At the half-power point, I/Ir = 1/
√
2, and G = –3 dB. The frequency bandwidth 	ω
for the half-power point is (ωh – ωl), where ωh and ωl, respectively, are the higher and
lower half-power point frequencies (Figure 3.7), and given by
ωh =

ω2r + (R/2L)2 + (R/2L) and
ω1 =

ω2r + (R/2L)2 −(R/2L)
(3.10)
since 	ω = 2π	f ,	f = fh −fl = R/2π L.
(3.11)
This 	f is used when fh and fl respectively, are not far removed from the resonance
frequency fr.
At the resonance, voltage Vc of the capacitance and VL of the inductance, respectively,
are
Vc = (ωr L/R)V
and
VL = (1/ωrC R)V.
(3.12)
Since at the resonance ωr L = 1/ωr C, dividing this by R will give Q by the deﬁnition.
ωr L/R = 1/(ωrC R) = Q.
(3.13)
Then, from (3.11),
BW/fr = RBW = 1/Q.
(3.14)
This provides the relation of a RBW to an inverse of Q, when the BW is not very wide.
In the antenna case, this is applicable only when Q is much greater than unity.
The term Q was originated to mean “quality” of the circuit component or the selectivity
of the circuit and is abbreviated as “Q.” In order to attain a highly selective circuit, a coil
of low loss R, thus high Q is desired. From this, Q is used to represent a measure of high
quality of the coil that also stands for high selectivity of the circuit. However, the Q is
generally understood from the physical implication rather than the quality of the circuit
as described by (3.9).
The bandwidth of a small antenna can be improved by inserting a network to the
matching circuit, whereas the size of antenna limits the bandwidth. Fano demonstrated
bandwidth increase by means of matching with a network [5][6]. The Fano concept can
be applied to matching of an antenna so as to achieve wider bandwidth. Matthaei et al.
treated this problem and gave design parameters along with the improvement factors as
follows [7]:
tanh a/cosh a = tanh (nb)/cosh b
cosh (nb) = 
cosh (na)
(3.15)
and sinh b = sinh a −2 (κ) sin (π/2n).
Here a and b are parameters to be determined, 
 is the reﬂection coefﬁcient, κ is 1/Q of
the load at the band edge, and n is the number of additional matching circuits. Matthaei
solved equations (3.15) and obtained numerical values of these parameters as shown
in Table 3.1, where values of a, b, and κ are shown for VSWR ≤2. Hansen gave the

3.1 Performance of small antennas
17
Table 3.1 Parameters related with
matching circuit design [7]
n
a
b
κ
1
1.81845
0.32745
1.33333
2
1.03172
0.39768
0.57735
3
0.76474
0.36693
0.46627
4
0.62112
0.33112
0.42416
5
0.52868
0.30027
0.40264
∞
0
0
0.34970
Table 3.2 Bandwidth
improvement factor [8]
n
IF
1
2.3094
2
2.8596
3
3.1435
4
3.3115
∞
3.8128
bandwidth improvement factor, which is deﬁned as a ratio (κ for n = 1)/(κ for n > 1),
as Table 3.2 shows. In the table, values are given for VSWR ≤2 [8].
A novel matching method to increase bandwidth is application of Non-Foster circuits.
The Foster Reactance Theorem says that the frequency derivative of the reactance
dX/dω > 0 for the circuit which is composed with only lossless reactance X. The Non-
Foster circuit violates this theorem and may include not only passive components, but
also active components in the network. A typical Non-Foster circuit is an NIC (Negative
Impedance Converter), which transforms positive impedance to negative impedance [9].
Sussman-Fort demonstrated bandwidth improvement by applying a negative capacitance
circuit to matching for a short dipole and obtained a 10-dB improvement over more than
an octave of frequency [10].
In small antennas, Q or bandwidth that can be attained with a given size is limited. The
fundamental limitation of small antennas has so far been discussed by many researchers,
ﬁrst by Wheeler and then Chu and others. These will be described in the next chapter.
3.1.3
Radiation efﬁciency
The radiation efﬁciency η is given by
η = Rrad/(Rrad + Rloss)
(3.16)
where Rloss denotes the loss resistance, which includes RLa in the antenna structure and
RLc in the matching circuit. Input impedance of a small electric dipole antenna has
a large capacitive component, so for matching, a large conjugate impedance – i.e. an
inductance – is required. When a small dipole, for example, is a short stub of 0.16 λ with
radius r of 3.3 × 10–4 λ, Rrad is 0.1 and Xrad (input reactance component) is –2071
. The matching condition requires an inductive component of +2071 . When QL
of this inductance is 100, for example, RLc of the inductive component alone would be
20.7. The radiation efﬁciency η in this case would be about 0.005 – that is 0.5%. With
QL of 400, η increases to 0.019, but that’s still only 1.9%. This is because of the much
greater loss resistance RLc in the inductive component over the radiation resistance Rrad.
Practically, a transformer between the low radiation resistance and the load resistance
50 is necessary and the loss at that transformer should be taken into consideration.

18
Properties of small antennas
Meanwhile, when a small magnetic dipole of the circumference 0.1λ with the same
thickness as the above dipole is used, η is 9.28% if QC of the capacitive component is
1000. If QC of that capacitance is 4000, η becomes 21.1%. Because QC of the capacitive
component is usually higher than QL of an inductive component, a small magnetic
antenna element is advantageous to obtain higher radiation efﬁciency when about the
same size of small antenna is considered.
As such, matching design will be very serious as the size of antenna becomes smaller.
3.1.4
Gain
Gain G of an antenna is related to its directivity by accounting for efﬁciency and two
different matching factors.
G = ηDMp
(3.17)
where D is directivity, M is the impedance-matching factor, and p is the polarization-
matching factor. M is given by using reﬂection factor 
 at the input terminals and VSWR
S as
M = 1 −|
|2 ≤1
(3.18)
= 4S/(1 + S)2.
(3.19)
The polarization factor p is given by
p = |ρH · ρE|2 = | cos ψp|2
(3.20)
where ρH and ρE are unit vectors of the wave with horizontal and vertical polarization,
respectively, and ψp is the angle between the two vectors. Here the electric ﬁelds EH and
EE of incoming waves Ei, respectively, are described as
EH = ρH Ei
(3.21)
EE = ρE Ei.
(3.22)
Gain of a very small antenna is determined almost by η and M, because D is around 1.5
independently of the size and p is usually taken as unity, since polarization matching
can be good in almost all cases. In practical small antenna design, a condition M ̸= 1
will be often encountered. The M may take much lower values than unity, as the antenna
size tends to be smaller. Gain reduction due to mismatching occurs in many cases with
improper design of small antennas, and speciﬁc design techniques are needed to avoid
degradation of antenna performance due to mismatching. Impedance matching problems
will be discussed in the next section.
3.2
Importance of impedance matching in small antennas
In communication systems, signal transmission through the network under the well-
matched condition is essential for no loss or no serious degradation in the signal quality

3.2 Importance of impedance matching in small antennas
19
–0.2 –0.1
0.
0
0
.1
0.2
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Y/λ
Y/λ
X/λ
X/λ
INCIDENT PLANE WAVE
–0.2 –0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
INCIDENT PLANE WAVE
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.8 Power ﬂow of a plane wave incoming to a small dipole [11].
or quantity. The same is true for antennas. Achieving good matching condition is par-
ticularly a serious problem in small antennas, because of difﬁculty in proper matching
of small antennas to the load of 50 ohms. There are often cases where proper matching
is impossible.
The importance of matching in a small antenna can be visualized by a model shown
in Figure 3.8, where a small dipole antenna is placed in an environment with a plane
wave incoming [11]. In the ﬁgure, the plane wave energy ﬂow is illustrated by arrows,
showing amplitude with the length and the direction with the arrow. The plane wave
energy is intercepted by the antenna perfectly when the antenna is in the perfectly
matched condition as Figure 3.8(a) illustrates. On the other hand, when the antenna is in
mismatched condition the plane wave energy ﬂow passes through the antenna as Figure
3.8(b) illustrates. This demonstrates that the antenna does not function as a radiator
when it is in mismatched condition, and indicates how crucial a problem matching is for
small antennas.
In practice, the smaller the antenna will be, the harder the matching to the load of
50 ohms becomes. In addition, a transformer necessary for transferring the very low
resistive component of the antenna to the load 50 ohms adds additional loss so that the
radiation efﬁciency will be further lowered as a consequence.
When an antenna is constructed as a structure within which self-resonance is possible,
no reactance component is necessary for the matching, and the loss problem – at least in
the matching circuit – is relieved. Hence higher efﬁciency may be achieved. Examples
of such antenna structures are NMHA (Normal Mode Helical Antenna), meander line,
zigzag line, fractal shape, and composite antennas, in which resonance condition at lower
frequencies can be achieved by combining antenna elements.
The latest technology offers the novel matching method, which applies the Non-
Foster circuit and metamaterials to the matching circuits. Difﬁculty attributed to loss in
the devices or the matching circuit can be overcome by applying the Non-Foster circuit
to matching, and yet wideband matching may be expected.

20
Properties of small antennas
Figure 3.9 Image of a vertical monopole on a ground plane.
Applications of metamaterials have been shown to be useful for matching in space.
Stuart has introduced a new concept [3], which demonstrated an application of negative-
epsilon material to matching in the near ﬁeld of a very small monopole antenna as
Figure 1.9 illustrated. The principle is to compensate the reactive (capacitive) ﬁelds
outside the antenna with an inductive component due to a negative epsilon material. By
this means, an ultra small antenna is possibly created.
3.3
Problems of environmental effect in small antennas
Antenna performance is affected by proximity effects due to materials existing near an
antenna. A simple example is a monopole placed on a ground plane (GP) (Figure 3.9).
When the size of the GP is inﬁnite, a virtual monopole is produced beneath the GP by the
image effect as shown with a dotted line below the GP in Figure 3.9. As a consequence
the antenna is treated equivalently as a dipole. However, when the size of GP is ﬁnite,
radiation current is induced on the GP by the excitation of the monopole, and the GP
will act as a part of the antenna system. Thus the antenna together with the GP exhibits
different performance from that of the dipole only.
Similar proximity effects are often observed in an antenna system located near some
inﬂuential materials. The proximity effect is either advantageous or disadvantageous
for an antenna system, depending on the dimensions of the antenna element and the
materials. In general, one common situation is variation or degradation of the antenna
performance due to the proximity effect. Contrarily, an advantage derived from the
proximity effect is often observed for cases where the antenna performance is enhanced
by the existence of the proximity effect. A practical example of such advantage is a
PIFA installed inside a mobile terminal. The PIFA itself is an antenna of inherently low
gain and narrow band, say about 1%–2% when the antenna is placed on an inﬁnite or
comparable size of GP; however, a PIFA installed on a ﬁnite size GP, for example that
in a mobile phone terminal, exhibits higher gain and wider bandwidth than the antenna
in free space [12]. This improvement is a result caused by the assistance of the GP, on

References
21
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.10 Image of a horizontal monopole on a ground plane; (a) PEC and (b) N-PEC.
which the radiation current excited by the PIFA ﬂows, and the performance of the entire
antenna – that is, the PIFA plus the GP – is improved. In practice, the PIFA to be mounted
on the mobile phone is designed intentionally to include the GP as a part of the antenna
system so as to meet the system speciﬁcation such as gain and bandwidth.
Another good example is a small ceramic-chip antenna encapsulated in a few-
millimeter cube, which is a typical ESA and also PSA as well. When designing a
small ceramic-chip antenna, dimensions of the mobile terminal unit, location to install
the antenna, space to be occupied by the antenna, as well as the size of the antenna,
should all be included in the antenna speciﬁcations.
It should be noted that a small antenna that is appropriately designed to satisfy the
system requirements should not be placed near certain materials so that designed antenna
performance is substantially harmed. It can be said generally that the smaller the antenna
becomes, the larger the inﬂuence of such nearby materials is likely to be.
Recently, non-perfect electrically conducting (N-PEC) surface has drawn much inter-
est worldwide to be used as a platform on which an antenna is placed. When a linear
current source is placed near a PEC surface in parallel as shown in Figure 3.10(a), an
image of the inverse phase is produced beneath the surface. However, when an N-PEC
surface is used, the image is the same phase as the original source as shown in Figure
3.10(b). By using the N-PEC surface, a current source antenna can be placed very near
to the surface, implying that such an antenna can have low-proﬁle structure. Typical
N-PEC surface can be composed by using EBG (Electronic Band-Gap) material, which
is realized by either periodical structure or physically constructed material. Application
of EBG surface has now become one of the popular topics in the ﬁeld of small antennas.
It is considered as a useful means to make an antenna low-proﬁle [13], to reduce the
coupling between two closely spaced antennas [14], and to miniaturize an antenna [15].
References
[1] R. W. P. King, The Theory of Linear Antennas, Harvard University Press, 1956, pp. 184–192.
[2] R. W. P. King and C. W. Harrison, Antennas and Waves: A Modern Approach, The MIT
Press, 1969, pp. 549–552.
[3] C. A. Balanis, Antenna Theory, 2nd edn., John Wiley and Sons, 1997, pp. 209–216.
[4] C. A. Balanis, Antenna Theory, 2nd edn., John Wiley and Sons, 1997, pp. 236–239.
[5] R. M. Fano, Theoretical Limitations on The Broadband Matching of Arbitrary Impedance,
MIT Research Lab of Electronics, Technical Report, no. 41, 1948, pp. 56–83.

22
Properties of small antennas
[6] R. M. Fano, A Note on the Solution of Current Approximation Problems in Network Syn-
thesis, Journal of The Franklin Institute, vol. 249, March 1950, pp. 189–205.
[7] G. L. Matthaei, E. M. T. Jones, and L. Young, Microwave Filters, Impedance-Matching
Networks and Coupling Structure, McGraw-Hill, 1964, sections 4.09 and 4.10.
[8] R. C. Hansen, Phased Array Antennas, John Wiley and Sons, 1998, section 5.4.3.
[9] L. G. Linvill, Transistor negative impedance converters, Proceedings of IRE, vol. 41, 1953,
pp. 725–729.
[10] R. M. Rudish and S. Sussman-Fort, Non-Foster Impedance Matching improves S/N of
Wideband Electrically-Small VHF Antennas and Arrays, Proceedings of the Second IASTED
International Conference 19–21 July 2005, Banff, Alberta, Canada.
[11] K. Ishizone, Poynting Vector ﬂow in the vicinity of a receiving dipole antenna, IEICE
Technical Report AP-86-38, 1986, pp. 35–41.
[12] K. Satoh et al., Characteristics of a Planar Inverted-F antenna on a Rectangular Conducting
Body, IEICE Transactions B, vol. J-71-B, 1971, no. 11,71, pp. 1237–1243.
[13] F. Yang and Y. Rahmat-Sami, Reduction Phase Characteristics of the EBG Plane for Low
Proﬁle Antenna Applications, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 51,
2003, pp. 2691–2703.
[14] E. Saenz et al., Coupling Reduction Between Dipole Antenna Elements by Using a Pla-
nar Meta-Surface, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 57, 2009, no. 2,
pp. 383–392.
[15] J. L. Volakis et al., Antenna Miniaturization Using Magnetic-Photonic and Degenerate Band-
Edge Crystal, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 48, October 2006, no. 5,
pp. 12–28.

4
Fundamental limitations
of small antennas
4.1
Fundamental limitations
It is commonly understood that as antennas reduce in size, antenna gain and efﬁciency
will degrade and the bandwidth tends to be narrower. Then, a question arises how small
a dimension an antenna can take for practical use? Or, what will happen when the
antenna dimension is limitlessly reduced? One answer was given by J. D. Kraus, who
showed that a small antenna could have effective aperture of as high as 98 percent of
that of a half-wave dipole antenna, if the antenna could be perfectly matched to the
load [1]. It suggests that however small an antenna is, the antenna can intercept almost
the same power (only 8 percent less) as a half-wavelength dipole does. In other words,
there seems to be no limitation in reducing the antenna size so long as the antenna
could be perfectly matched. Unfortunately, the perfect matching is impossible when an
antenna becomes extremely small, because the smaller the antenna size tends to be, the
harder the antenna matching will become, as was mentioned before. In addition, losses
existing in the antenna structure and the matching circuit will exceed the radiation
resistance, resulting in signiﬁcant reduction of the effective aperture that corresponds
to reduction of the radiation power and the degradation of the radiation efﬁciency.
Regarding the antenna impedance, increase in reactive component and decrease in
the resistive component results in high Q, and as a consequence bandwidth will be
narrowed. Thus, the size reduction of an antenna also affects Q and the bandwidth as
well. Then it is rather natural to say that there is a fundamental limitation applying
to the size reduction of antenna dimensions. This implies in turn that antenna gain,
efﬁciency, Q, and the bandwidth are bounded by the antenna dimensions. Parameters
that concern fundamental limitations of small antennas are antenna Q, relative bandwidth
(RBW), radiation efﬁciency η, and the antenna size ka, where a is the radius of a sphere
circumscribing the antenna. In summary, relationships between these parameters and
the antenna size are roughly approximated, when ka is much smaller than unity, as
follows:
(a) Q is proportional to (ka)−3
(b) RBW is proportional to (ka)3, since RBW nearly equals 1/Q
(c) η is proportional to (ka)4

24
Fundamental limitations of small antennas
a
Figure 4.1 A sphere model enclosing an antenna of radius a.
2a
V=Ab
A=πa2
b
C
L
Figure 4.2 A capacitor and an inductor with a cylindrical shape [2].
4.2
Brief review of some typical work on small antennas
Systematic analysis of small antennas was probably ﬁrst made by H. A. Wheeler, who
extensively treated small antennas practically as well as theoretically [2–5]. One of his
notable works is on the limitation of small antennas. He showed that the size reduction
of an antenna directly limits the radiation power factor (RPF), a ratio of the radiated
power to the reactive power, implying that the radiation efﬁciency is constrained by the
antenna size. It was also shown that the RPF equals the reciprocal of Q, thus the size
reduction of antenna limiting Q corresponds to a limitation of the RBW depending on
the antenna size.
By assuming a sphere model of radius a, which encloses a small antenna as shown in
Figure 4.1, Wheeler derived Q for the most limiting case as
Q = 1/(ka)3.
(4.1)
This equation indicates that Q is inversely (cubic) proportional to the size of an antenna,
so the antenna size imposes the fundamental limitation of the bandwidth.
Wheeler didn’t work only on the theory of small antennas, but also on design and
development of practical antennas. From the early to mid twentieth century, almost
all antennas were “small antennas” because of their lower operating frequencies and
electrically small size. Wheeler’s development was large-sized antennas; however they
were electrically small. His antennas were designed based on the concept introduced by
himself.
Wheeler considered small antennas to behave as a capacitor C or an inductor L, which
was assumed to be circumscribed by a cylinder-shaped volume, as shown in Figure 4.2

4.2 Brief review of some typical work on small antennas
25
μ = ∞
a
V
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3 A spherical coil (a) without and (b) with a magnetic core ﬁlled [2, 5].
0.04λ
pm = 0.001
C
Figure 4.4 A loop coil ferrite-loaded antenna [5].
[2]. He derived the radiation power factor (RPF), which is a ratio of the radiated power
to the reactive power, for the C or the L types of small antennas [2, 5] and showed that
it is directly proportional to the volume. His idea of the cylindrical radiator is extended
to create a self-resonant helical coil that would radiate equal power in both TE and
TM modes in phase quadrature so that circular polarization is yielded [6]. This type of
antenna was later named as the Normal Mode Helical Antenna (NMHA) by J. D. Kraus
[7]. Wheeler designed the NMHA for the ﬁrst US communications satellite Telstar,
on which the antenna handled the command and telemetry systems in the VHF band.
He also invented a spherical coil, in which a magnetic core was ﬁlled (Figure 4.3)
[5, 8]. Another practical antenna he developed was a one-turn loop of wide strip
(Figure 4.4) [9], which was used for the oscillator of the proximity fuse in the nose
cone on a small rocket [10]. A long coil on a ferrite core was commonly used for the
radio-broadcasting receiver in the frequency range of 0.55–1.5 MHz and VLF. Some
types of long coil ferrite-loaded antennas were found to be useful for horizontal mount
on vehicles (Figure 4.5) [11]. Also, a VLF loop was applied to submarines [12].
Chu followed Wheeler’s work on small antennas. He also analyzed the limitations
of small antennas, but more exactly than Wheeler. In his analysis [13], he assumed a
vertically polarized dipole antenna circumscribed by a sphere of radius a, and expressed
the radiation ﬁeld produced outside the sphere with a spherical function expansion,
which can describe the ﬁelds with a sum of the spherical modes. By introducing the

26
Fundamental limitations of small antennas
b = 0.3
0.04 m
6 m
4 turns
3 turns
Figure 4.5 Over turn loop of a wide strip [5].
0
5
10
15
20
25
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
2πa/λ
Qn
6
n 29
27
25
23
21
19
17
15
13
11
9
7
5
3
1
=
Figure 4.6 Lowest obtainable Q with antenna dimension maximum [13].
equivalent circuits for each mode, the modal impedance and the antenna Q for each
mode are derived. He obtained the lowest possible Q, highest obtainable Gain G and the
highest obtainable G/Q, and gave graphs as shown in Figures 4.6–4.8.
Chu’s results have been understood as the important derivation that provides the lowest
obtainable Q that concerns the highest obtainable bandwidth, and the highest achievable
G/Q, with maximum dimensions of antenna, although his analysis is accurate only for
the lowest mode, whereas it includes rough approximations for the higher modes.
King worked extensively on linear antennas both theoretically and numerically [14–
15], including small antennas. He showed fundamentals of linear antennas, demonstrat-
ing current distributions on antenna elements, numerical values of impedance, and Q for
various types and dimensions of linear antennas with theoretical and numerical data, and
ﬁgures of these. He deﬁned “Electrically Short Antenna,” instead of “Electrically Small
Antenna,” as one that has the maximum length ka smaller than 0.5. The impedance of
a small dipole antenna was given previously in Figure 3.2. Table 4.1 shows resistance

4.2 Brief review of some typical work on small antennas
27
0
16
14
12
10
8
GAIN
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8 10 12
N = 1
N = 3
N = 5
N = 7
N = 9
N = 11
N = 13
N = 15
N = 17
N = 19
N = 21
N = 23
N = 25
N = 27
2πa/λ
14 16 18 20 22 24
Figure 4.7 Highest obtainable gain with antenna dimension maximum [13].
0
16
14
12
10
8
G/Q
6
4
2
0
2
4 6
8 10 12
N = 1
N = 3
N = 5
N = 7
N = 9
N = 11
N = 13
N = 15
N = 17
N = 21
N = 23
N = 25
N = 27
2πa/λ
14 16 18 20 22 24
N = 19
Figure 4.8 Highest obtainable G/Q with antenna dimension maximum [13].

28
Fundamental limitations of small antennas
Table 4.1 Resistance and reactance for
electrically short antennas [14, 15]
(ohm.)
a
Xa
Ra
0
–∞
0
0.1
–3945
0.183
0.2
–1950
0.732
0.3
–1274
1.66
0.4
–929
2.97
0.5
–716
4.67
0.6
–569
6.80
0.7
–460
9.35
0.8
–373.7
12.38
0.9
–303.5
15.82
1.0
–238.2
19.90
Ra and reactance Xa for electrically short antennas of length 2h and radius a calculated
by
Ra = 18.3β2
0h2 
1 + 0.086β2
0h2
(4.2)
and Xa = −60 ( −3.39)
β0h
(4.3)
where  = 2 ln (2h/a) and
β0 = 2π/λ0.
King gave the expression for antenna Qr at the resonance in terms of the impedance
[16] by analogy with a lumped-constant RLC circuit as
Qr =
 ω
2R
d X
dω

res
.
(4.4)
Here X = ωL −1/ωC and ωL = 1/ωC at resonance.
Collin and Rothschild improved previously given theory for obtaining Q based on the
ﬁeld rather than the equivalent circuit [17]. They calculated Q for cases where both TE
and TM modes are used for excitation, and derived it for the lowest mode as
Q = 1/(ka)3 + 1/(ka).
(4.5)
This Q represents the minimum possible value. Fante generalized their treatment to
include both TE and TM modes, and found that equal excitation of TE and TM modes
does not provide Q of half the value for the excitation of either mode alone. The actual
result was somewhat larger than half the original value.
Hansen simpliﬁed Chu’s expression for calculating Q [18]. He stated that when ka is
roughly less than unity and only the lowest TM mode propagates, Q is expressed by
Q = [1 + 3(ka)3]/(ka)3[1 + (ka)2].
(4.6)

4.2 Brief review of some typical work on small antennas
29
dipole
Gaubau antenna
ηη = 100%
0.1
1
2
4
6
10
Q
20
40
60
100
0.3
5
10
50
0.5
0.7
0.9
κa
1.1
1.3
1.5
dipole
Figure 4.9 Antenna Q of a short dipole antenna [18].
Hansen concluded that the value of Q would be halved when TM and TE modes are
equally excited. He illustrated Q with respect to the antenna size ka along with the
radiation efﬁciency η as the parameter (Figure 4.9). This ﬁgure is useful and convenient
for ﬁnding antenna Q, thus bandwidth, and the efﬁciency in relation with antenna size
when designing a small antenna of a given size.
McLean corrected some previous derivations obtained by Wheeler, Chu, and Hansen,
as he thought their results were too rough to establish fundamental limits of Q because
of the simple assumption or approximation [19]. He derived Q as
Q = [1 + 2(ka)3]/(ka)3[1 + (ka)2].
(4.7)
He concluded that when ka is very small, there is not much difference between the
previous derivations and his own derivation, and equation (4.7) is an exact expression
of the lower bound on Q for a given antenna size.
Folts and McLean used a prolate spheroid that would better approximate an actual
antenna like a dipole antenna (Figure 4.10) and evaluated Q vs. ka [20]. They considered
that Q previously obtained was not really close to the veriﬁable values for many antennas,
because the volume of a sphere surrounding an antenna was not fully utilized, and that
made the value of Q larger than was expected. Figure 4.11 depicts Q, using the parameter
a/b, where a and b respectively denote the major axis and the minor axis of the prolate
spheroid.
Thiele obtained Q by a different method, as he thought that previously obtained Q
was far from that of actual antennas, because the current distributions were not taken
into consideration in the calculation [21]. He used the superdirective ratio SDR for

30
Fundamental limitations of small antennas
a
a
(a)
(b)
(c)
b
η
ε
f
a
φ
Figure 4.10 A prolate spheroidal model approximating a small monopole and dipole antenna [20].
0.01
0.1
1
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
6
Electrical height κa, radians
Quality Factor Q
= 1
= 3
= 10
= 30
= 100
ab = 1
ab = 3
ab = 10
ab = 30
ab = 100
Figure 4.11 Q of a prolate spheroidal model with respect to electrical length ka [20].
calculating Q, based on the concept that the radiation energy is concerned with the
visible region in the radiation ﬁeld, while the total stored energy is concerned with the
invisible region. The calculated Q for a thin dipole antenna in terms of X/R McLean’s
result, lower bound for an ideal dipole with uniform current distribution, and far ﬁeld Q
for a dipole with sinusoidal current distribution are shown in Figure 4.12. Figure 4.13
depicts Q for a thin dipole of different radius, end-loaded dipole, and bow-tie antenna,
respectively. In the ﬁgure, McLean’s Q was drawn as a comparison.

0.0
0.2
0.4
βa or πL/λ
0.6
0.8
Typical Wire Dipole
Far-field Q
McLean
1.0
101
100
102
QA
103
104
McLean
Far-field Q
Dipole |X/R|
Figure 4.12 Q vs. βa [21].
0.0
0.2
0.4
(Bow-tie)
(End-loaded
dipole)
βa
0.6
0.8
Far-field Q
McLean Equation
1.0
101
100
102
QA
103
104
105
McLean Equation
Bowtie
L
2
End-Loaded Dipole
Far-field Q
Radius = .00005λ
Radius = .001λ
L
2
L
2
L
a = 
a = 
2
90°
L
2
Figure 4.13 Q vs. βa or πL/λ (a: radius, L: diameter of a sphere enclosing the radiator) [21].

32
Fundamental limitations of small antennas
2a
x
y
z
2ao
a
x
y
2ao
(a)
(b)
(c)
driven
source
driven
source
driven
source
ground
x
z
Figure 4.14 Antenna models used for evaluation of Q: (a) a dipole, (b) a loop, and (c) inverted-L
[23].
Gdir
max
max
Gnorm
Gomn
0
10−1
100
101
102
103
1
2
3
κa
4
5
6
Figure 4.15 Maximum obtainable gain [22].
Geyi studied Q [22–24] rigorously by introducing complex power balance relations
into an antenna structure and derived an expression of Q for several typical antennas
such as a dipole, small loop, and an inverted-L antenna as Figure 4.14 shows [23]. He
also discussed physical limitations of small antennas, and derived minimum possible
Q for both TE and TM modes excited by the antenna, and the ratio of maximized
G/Q and normal gain, respectively, and his results are shown in Figures 4.15, 4.16
and 4.17 [22–24].
Best discussed Q of electrically small linear and elliptically polarized spherical dipole
antennas, based on the concept that the Q of a resonant electrically small dipole antenna
can be minimized by utilizing the occupied spherical volume to the greatest possi-
ble extent with the antenna geometry. He demonstrated a self-resonant (at 300 MHz)

4.2 Brief review of some typical work on small antennas
33
Q dir
G
max
Q omn
G
max
0
10−1
100
101
102
103
1
2
3
κa
4
5
6
Figure 4.16 Maximum obtainable G/Q [22].
0
10−1
100
101
102
103
1
2
3
κa
Qdir
4
5
6
min
Qomn
min
minQ
Figure 4.17 Minimum possible Q [22].
four-arm folded linearly polarized spherical dipole antenna that exhibits an impedance
47.5 , an efﬁciency of 97.4%, and Q of 87.3, which is within 1.5 times the fundamental
lower bound at a value ka of 0.263 [25]. This antenna may have the lowest Q that can
be realized with a practical antenna. He also showed that a self-resonant (at 300 MHz)
elliptically polarized antenna exhibits Q within two times the lower bound. The antenna
has an efﬁciency of 95% and an impedance of 61.5 .
Best also treated Q and bandwidth in terms of antenna impedance and gave relation-
ships between Q and VSWR fractional bandwidth (FBW) [26–27]. He discussed the
upper bound of VSWR FBW for loss-free antennas and showed it to be
FBWV ub = 2√β (ka)3
1 + (ka)2 =
(ka)3
1 + (ka)2
s −1
√s
(4.8)

34
Fundamental limitations of small antennas
Figure 4.18 An antenna model used for evaluating minimum Q [29].
where s denotes VSWR. The maximum available FBW when a number of tuned circuits
are applied to the matching circuit in order to increase the BW is given by
FBWV max = 1
Q
π
ln
 s+1
s−1
 =
(ka)3
1 + (ka)2
π
ln
 s+1
s−1
 ≈π (ka)3
ln
 s+1
s−1
.
(4.9)
Best further has given evaluation of Q for various different dipole-type antennas [25,
28].
Thal commented that previous treatment of Q ignored the energy inside the sphere,
resulting in considerably higher Q limit for realizable antennas than the minimum
values predicted by the previous work. He then derived minimum Q values that include
the contributions of energy within the sphere by using an antenna model formed by
conducting thin wires on the surface of a sphere [29]. The antenna model he used is
depicted in Figure 4.18. He used the equivalent circuits representing the antenna system
valid for both outside and inside the sphere, accounting for the mode energy stored
inside the sphere. He deﬁned stricter limits that apply to a class of antennas consisting of
conductors arranged to conform to a spherical surface and showed that the new limit he
derived should be helpful for estimating the minimum Q of wire antenna conﬁgurations
not necessarily exactly spherical but reasonably approximating the conﬁguration of a
sphere.
Thal, after his discussion on the limit of Q [29], explored the relationships between
phase, gain, bandwidth, and the Q lower bound, particularly for electrically small anten-
nas [30], and provided general theory and numerical examples giving a lower bound on
the Q of any antenna with coupled TM–TE modes as a function of the electrical radius
ka and the relative phases of the radiated mode ﬁelds, by which the gain is determined.
He showed values of radiation Q with respect to ka from 0.05 to 0.65 and the minimum
Qs for TM and TE mode, respectively, are 1.5 and 3 times Qchu, which is given by Chu
[17].
Hansen and Collin also calculated internal stored energy and provided exact formulas
for total stored energy Q for TM modes and an approximate formula for the Q of
the lowest mode [31]. The calculation was based on the previous work [17], by which
formulas for the Q values of TM and TE modes are derived for a case where these modes

4.2 Brief review of some typical work on small antennas
35
0
10
100
1000
Q
QCHU
QNEW
–1
–2
–3
ka
–4
–5
Figure 4.19 Q calculated by using Equation (4.10) and Qchu [31].
are excited by current sheets on a sphere and include the stored reactive energy within
the sphere. Then by following Thal [29], new formulas to express Q for TM modes are
derived [31], by treating the reactive power inside the sphere circumscribing the antenna,
whereas Chu’s calculation did not include that. Thus the Q is given by the Qchu plus
an additional term which corresponds to the internal reactive energy. This formula is
simpliﬁed to an approximate formula similar to (4.5), which can be expressed by
Q = 3/2(ka)3 + 1/
√
2(ka).
(4.10)
The value of Q with respect to the antenna dimension ka is depicted in Figure 4.19 [31],
where the Qchu is also given as a comparison.
Discussions on the Q of radiating structures have continued. Gustafsson gave new
physical bounds for antennas of arbitrary shape and illustrated numerical examples
[32]. He presented physical bounds for antennas circumscribed by the rectangular par-
allelepiped, ﬁnite cylinders, and planar rectangles. The theory can directly be applied
to analyze the potential performance of different antenna geometries using pattern and
polarization diversity.
Vandenbosch derived general and rigorous expressions for calculating the reactive
energy stored in the electromagnetic ﬁeld around an arbitrary source device [33]. A
straightforward application is to investigate the energies and Q of radiating structures in

36
Fundamental limitations of small antennas
terms of topology of the device. The expressions can be applied to much more general
topology, particularly for small antennas.
Kim et al. studied Q of electrically small current distributions and practical antenna
designs radiating the TE10-mode magnetic dipole ﬁeld, and derived closed form expres-
sions for the internal and external electric and magnetic stored energies and radiated
power by a spherical, electric surface current density enclosing a magneto-dielectric core
[34]. This result leads to determining the Q for arbitrary values of ka. He demonstrated
that for a given size of antenna and permittivity, there is an optimum permeability
that ensures the lowest possible Q, and this optimum permeability is inversely pro-
portional to the square of the antenna electrical radius. With permittivity of unity, the
optimum permeability yields the lowest bound of Q for a magnetic dipole antenna
with a magneto-dielectric core. He obtained by simulation Q of 1.24 times Qchu for the
TE10-mode multi-arm spherical helix antenna with a magnetic core, for ka of 0.192.
Yaghjian obtained general expressions for the lower bounds on Q of electrically
small electric and magnetic-dipole antennas conﬁned to an arbitrary shaped volume
V which are excited by general sources or by global electric current sources alone
[35]. He showed that the lower bound expressions depend only on the direction of
the dipole moment with respect to V, electrical size of V, and per unit volume static
PEC (Perfect Electric Conductor) and PMC (Perfect Magnetic Conductor) electric and
magnetic polarizabilities of V. He provided new expressions of the lower bound Q for
electrically small electric and magnetic dipole antennas, and sources restricted to global
surface currents.
Stuart and Yaghjian investigated the effect of a thin shell of high permeability magnetic
material on Q for the electrically small, top-loaded electrical dipole antenna [36]. The
magnetic polarization currents induced in the thin shell of magnetic material reduce the
internal stored energy, leading to a lower Q. It was shown that for the case of spherical
antennas, Q approaches Qchu.
Kim and Breinbjerg found that the lower bound for radiation Q of spherical magnetic
dipole antennas with pure solid magnetic core could approach Qchu as the antenna
electrical size decreases [37]. With properly selected permeability, the antenna can
exhibit a lower Q than the air-core magnetic and electric dipole antennas of the same
size in the range of ka < 0.863.
So far, Chu’s limitation has been understood as the lowest achievable Q for an antenna
of given size, which, however, would be impossible in reality to achieve. Design of small
antennas is an exercise in ﬁnding new techniques to approach Chu’s limitations Qchu as
closely as possible with small antennas. The main issues would be study on the antenna
shape, current distributions on it, and relationships with radiation efﬁciency.
References
[1] J. D. Kraus, Antennas, 3rd edn., McGraw-Hill, 2002, pp. 30–33.
[2] H. A. Wheeler, Fundamental Limitations of Small Antennas, Proceedings of IRE, vol. 35,
Dec 1947, pp. 1479–1484.

References
37
[3] H. A. Wheeler, Small Antennas, in H. Jasik (ed.), Antenna Engineering Handbook, 2nd edn.,
McGraw-Hill, 1984, chapter 6.
[4] H. A. Wheeler, The Radian Sphere Around a Small Antenna, Proceedings of IRE, vol. 47,
August 1959, pp. 1325–1331.
[5] H. A. Wheeler, Antenna Topics in My Experiences, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation, vol. 33, 1985, no. 2, pp. 144–151.
[6] H. A. Wheeler, A Helical Antenna for Circular Polarization, Proceedings of IRE, vol. 35,
1947, pp. 1484–1488.
[7] J. D. Kraus and R. J. Marhefka, Antennas, 3rd edn., 2002, McGraw-Hill, pp. 292–293.
[8] H. A. Wheeler, The Spherical Coil as an Inductor, Shield, and Antenna, Proceedings of IRE,
vol. 46, 1958, pp. 1595–1602.
[9] pp. 147–148 in [5].
[10] p. 148 in [5] and H. A. Wheeler, Small Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation, vol. 23, 1975, pp. 462–469.
[11] pp. 146–147 in [5].
[12] H. A. Wheeler, Fundamental Limitations of a Small VLF Antenna for Submarines, IEEE
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 6, 1958, pp. 123–125.
[13] L. J. Chu, Physical Limitations of Omni Directional Antennas, Research Laboratory of MIT,
MIT Tech Report no. 64, 1948.
[14] R. W. P. King, Linear Antennas, Harvard University Press, 1956.
[15] R. W. P. King, and C. W. Harrison, Antennas and Waves, The MIT Press, 1969.
[16] pp. 171–182 in [14].
[17] R. E. Collin and S. Rothschild, Evaluation of Antenna Q, IEEE Transactions on Antennas
and Propagation, vol. 12, 1964, pp. 23–27.
[18] R. C. Hansen, Fundamental Limitations in Antennas, Proceedings of IEEE, vol. 69, 1981,
no. 2, pp. 170–181.
[19] J. S. McLean, A Re-Examination of the Fundamental Limits on the Radiation Q of Elec-
trically Small Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 44, 1996,
pp. 672–676.
[20] H. D. Folts and J. S. McLean, Limits on the Radiation Q of Electrically Small Anten-
nas Re-Estimated to Oblong Bounding Regions, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society
International Symposium, July 1999, vol. 4, pp. 2702–2705.
[21] G. A. Thiele, P. L. Detweiler, and R. P. Peno, On the Lower Bound of the Radiation Q
for Electrically Small Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 51,
2003, pp. 1263–1269.
[22] W. Geyi, Physical Limitations of Antenna, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 51, 2003, pp. 2116–2123.
[23] W. Geyi, A Method for the Evaluation of Small Antenna Q, IEEE Transactions on Antennas
and Propagation, vol. 51, 2003, pp. 2124–2129.
[24] W. Geyi, P. Jarmauszewski, and Y. Qi, The Foster Reactance Theorem for Anten-
nas and Radiation Q, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 48, 2000,
pp. 401–408.
[25] S. R. Best, Low Q Electrically Small Linear and Elliptical Polarized Spherical Dipole
Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 53, 2005, no. 3, pp. 1047–
1053.
[26] A. D. Yaghjian and S. Best, Impedance, Bandwidth, and Q of Antennas, IEEE Transactions
on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 53, 2005, no. 4, pp. 1298–1324.

38
Fundamental limitations of small antennas
[27] S. R. Best, Bandwidth and the Lower Bound on Q for Small Wideband Antennas, IEEE APS
International Symposium, 2006, pp. 647–650.
[28] S. R. Best, A Low Q Electrically Small Magnetic (TE Mode) Dipole, IEEE Antennas and
Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 8, 2009, pp. 572–575.
[29] H. L. Thal, Gain and Q bounds for coupled TM–TE modes, IEEE Transactions on Antennas
and Propagation, vol. 57, 2009, no. 7, pp. 1879–1885.
[30] H. L. Thal, New Radiation Q Limits for Spherical Wire Antennas, IEEE Transactions on
Antennas and Propagation, vol. 54, 2006, no. 10, pp. 2757–2763.
[31] R. C. Hansen and R. E. Collin, A New Chu Formula for Q, IEEE Antennas and Propagation
Magazine, vol. 51, 2009, no. 5. pp. 38–41.
[32] M. Gustafsson, C. Sohl, and G. Kristenssen, Illustrations of New Physical Bounds on Linearly
Polarized Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 57, 2009, no. 5,
pp. 1319–1326.
[33] G. A. E. Vandenbosch, Reactive Energies, Impedance, and Q Factor of Radiating Structures,
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 4, pp. 1112–1127.
[34] O. S. Kim, O. Breinbjerg, and A. D. Yaghjian, Electrically Small Magnetic Dipole Antennas
With Quality Factors Approaching the Chu Lower Bound, IEEE Transactions on Antennas
and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 6, pp. 1898–1905.
[35] A. D. Yaghjian and H R. Stuart, Lower Bounds on the Q of Electrically Small Dipole
Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 10,
pp. 3114–3121.
[36] H. R. Stuart and A. D. Yaghjian, Approaching the Lower Bounds on Q for Electrically Small
Electric-Dipole Antennas Using High Permeability Shells, IEEE Transactions on Antennas
and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 12, pp. 3865–3872.
[37] O. S. Kim and O. Breinbjerg, Lower Bound for the Radiation Q of Electrically Small Magnetic
Dipole Antennas With Solid Magneto-dielectric Core, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation, vol. 59, 2011, no. 2, pp. 679–681.

5
Subjects related with small antennas
5.1
Major subjects and topics
The major subjects that have long been discussed on small antennas are investigation
into the fundamental characteristics and performances of small antennas, and exploita-
tion of methods or ideas to realize small antennas, particularly ESA (Electrically Small
Antennas). Also, there have been practical matters discussed frequently as critical prob-
lems involved with designing small antennas. They are rather urgent problems that are
concerned with design of antennas in unusual or uncommon environmental conditions
often encountered in practical applications.
5.1.1
Investigation of fundamentals of small antennas
The essentials of small antennas have long been studied by many investigators; however,
there are still many problems that must be discussed or solved. Among them, the
limitations of small antennas is the most signiﬁcant and interesting subject. It is important
because knowledge of the limitations may give a clue to realizing novel small antennas.
The physical-size limitation was ﬁrst discussed by Wheeler in 1947 and then by Chu
in 1948, as was mentioned in Chapter 4. Since then small antenna problems have been
continually discussed down to the present day. Chief problems are those concerned
with major antenna parameters regarding antenna quality factor Q, gain, bandwidth,
and efﬁciency, in conjunction with the limitations of small antennas. How to obtain
antenna Q precisely still remains a controversial problem, since Q directly relates with
the radiation power, and exact calculation of the reactive part of the radiation power
still remains a controversial subject. The antenna Q is signiﬁcant in relation to the
bandwidth, since when the antenna Q is appreciably high it is very nearly the reciprocal
of the bandwidth. Thus achieving required bandwidth with an antenna of given size is
related to realizing the Q of a corresponding value. When the Q is small, the bandwidth
is wide; however, with small-sized antennas, it is usually a hard problem to obtain a
small Q.
5.1.2
Realization of small antennas
How to achieve a small antenna with reasonably high gain, efﬁciency, bandwidth, etc.
is one of the most serious propositions in the ﬁeld of antennas and communications.

40
Subjects related with small antennas
Various efforts for realizing antennas having performance as close as possible to the
fundamental limitation of small antennas have been ongoing for many years. Along
with study and research on realization of small antennas, various attempts to develop
practically useful small antennas have been made repeatedly and much progress has
been observed these days. Demand for small antennas to be used in various wireless
systems recently deployed is rather urgent. Recent progress of downsizing in electronic
components, devices, and thus wireless equipment is remarkable, whereas small-sizing
of antennas has not necessarily followed the trend in downsizing of electronic devices.
The basic concept of downsizing antennas is essentially different from that of electronic
devices or components, because problems in antennas are inherently deﬁned by the
physical nature of electromagnetic waves in open space, while those in circuitry and
devices are concerned with electronics parameters within closed space.
5.2
Practical design problems
Design of small antennas, particularly ESA, is to attain an antenna of physically small
dimensions, yet having appreciably high performance, even though the dimensions
become small. It is rather a challenging issue to realize an ESA, but the practical problem
is to achieve a compromise between small-sizing and attaining higher performance in
an antenna system. In addition to the physical dimensions, when reducing the size of an
antenna there is need to consider various other important parameters such as antenna
structure, including type, shape, materials of element, feed system, and environmental
conditions, including the platform to install the antenna element, and nearby materials,
to list a few.
When designing or developing small antennas, one often encounters complicated
problems due to environmental conditions that must be met in order to have a practically
useful small antenna. When an antenna is to be placed or installed in a complicated or
unusual location, one should consider either how to avoid inﬂuence of such undesired
conditions that may cause degradation of antenna performance, or how to include such
conditions in the antenna design to utilize them for enhancing the antenna performance.
It may be of almost no use to apply ordinary theory for designing an antenna located in
such complicated situations.
One of the practical examples is a mobile antenna where mobile terminals are so
small that the built-in antenna cannot be isolated electrically from nearby materials,
because the antenna is forced to reside in a restrictive area inside the small terminal. A
similar example is a case where the antenna must be placed in very limited space, such
as in a small, thin plastic card or on a tiny dielectric chip. Design of small antennas in
these conditions is not very easy and certainly not simple, because matching problems
and environmental effects must be taken into account in the antenna design. It is rather
usual, in these situations, to aim for either antennas having the maximum obtainable
performance, or antennas having the performance attained as a compromise in the
complicated situations.

5.2 Practical design problems
41
Meanwhile, electromagnetic simulation techniques can be applied to the antenna
design, even though antennas may be located in difﬁcult environmental conditions.
Simulation is a powerful means that allows calculation of antenna performance
fairly precisely, and can obtain good approximation that is useful for the antenna
design.
An example is an antenna installed inside a small mobile terminal, where two antenna
elements are located in conﬁned space with very close separation so that coupling
between the elements cannot be avoided. Space to locate antenna elements inside the
small unit is so narrow that the size of the antennas must be as small as possible and
the separation between them is forced to be small. Then reduction of coupling between
antenna elements is signiﬁcant for avoiding degradation of antenna performance.
This type of problem is often observed in antennas used for MIMO systems; a
typical example is antennas in small mobile WiMAX (Worldwide Interoperability for
Microwave Access) terminals.
Materials existing near an antenna element give rise to effects on antenna performance
that can be either advantageous or disadvantageous, depending on whether they can
enhance or improve the antenna performance as a result of acting as a part of the antenna
system. In small mobile terminals, the antenna element is usually located in so narrow
a space that isolation of the antenna from nearby electronic components, devices, and
hardware, including parts like speaker, ﬁlter, case, switch, etc. is almost impossible. The
design problem is how to integrate these materials into the antenna system. A ground
plane, on which an antenna element is installed, also acts as a part of the antenna system.
In this case, the size of the ground plane and the location of the antenna on it should be
speciﬁed so that integrated design of the antenna and the ground plane can be carried out
effectively. The unit’s metal case affects radiation too, and it may sometimes be utilized
positively as a radiator, as the antenna dimension is essentially extended to the size of
the unit. There is a circumstance where the ground plane or the unit case is utilized as
one part of a diversity element. When the ground plane or the unit case is used as a part
of the radiator, care must be taken for the effect of an operator’s hand which can degrade
the antenna performance.
Since materials existing near an antenna usually yield complicated environmental
conditions for the antenna, the antenna design procedure must properly include these
materials as part of the antenna system. Of course ordinary design procedure is useless
in this regard. On the contrary, use of computer software is helpful, since modeling of the
antenna system, in which even considerably complicated environmental conditions can
be included, is made feasible by the appropriately selected software, namely electromag-
netic simulators such as MoM (Method of Moments), FDTD, HFSS (High Frequency
Simulation Software), IE3D, SEMCAD, FEM (Finite Element Method) and so forth.
The latest simulation techniques have made remarkable progress and so one can rely
on them to obtain reasonably precise results, providing very good approximations that
assist in making design of antennas easier and yet more reliable than before. Nonethe-
less, however when one may try to approximate the antenna behavior, some errors are
likely to remain, as the modeling cannot be completely perfect.

42
Subjects related with small antennas
5.3
General topics
There have been increasing demands for small antennas, paralleling the rapid progress in
modern wireless mobile systems, where the numbers of small terminals have explosively
increased. The antennas for such mobile terminals are required to be small, compact, and
built-in, and yet they must be capable of multiband, wideband, and variable-frequency
operation, and in some cases they must exhibit signal processing performance. In prac-
tice, gain and bandwidth should be maintained at least the same as the prototypical
antennas even before their size is reduced. Other growing demands have also arisen
in various wireless systems, which are applied to not only communication, but also
to transmission of data, video signals including moving images, and control signals.
Typical of these applications are the WLAN (Wireless Local Area Network) systems,
and WiMAX systems. Other important wireless systems are NFC (Near Field Com-
munications) systems, including RFID (Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation) systems, and
UWB (Ultra Wideband) systems. Small-sized antennas are demanded for all of these
systems. Apart from conventional mobile systems, small antennas are also required for
the reception of the Digital Television Broadcasting (DTVB) in vehicles and mobile
phones in Japan. Since the DTVB is received with small receivers not only outdoors but
also in indoor environments, the antennas should be as small and light as possible. In the
vehicle use, equipping with functions such as diversity and adaptive control is preferred.
Recent development of modern wireless systems is notable, being expanded widely
into systems other than communications such as near-ﬁeld systems, identiﬁcation, data
and image transmission, and other systems where use of the wireless systems is consid-
ered beneﬁcial. Among these, RFID systems have been applied widely in the ﬁelds of
business, industry, science, agriculture, medicine, and so forth. In practical use, RFID
equipment takes the form of cards, pencils, key-holders, small boxes, notes, and so
forth. Antennas to be used for such RFID systems must be simple, lightweight, and
compact, and often they must be placed in a very limited space inside the small or tiny
container. This makes design of these antennas difﬁcult, and as a consequence many of
these antennas may not exhibit the fully satisfactory performance that would be expected
from their larger prototypes. Thus it is rather common to employ antennas which are
understood to be only practically usable enough. In a way, design of these antennas will
include how to compromise the performance with the speciﬁed size of antenna, the size
of the platform, nearby materials, and other system requirements.
With knowledge of the limitations, antenna design turns out to be an effort on how
to approach the limitation as closely as possible; in other words, how to obtain wider
bandwidth with a given small size.

6
Principles and techniques for making
antennas small
6.1
Principles for making antennas small
The general concept of making an antenna small is creation of an antenna having
dimensions much smaller than the wavelength, keeping the performance the same as
before the downsizing. From a slightly different aspect, attaining improved or enhanced
antenna performance while keeping the physical dimensions of an antenna unchanged,
should also be recognized as a concept similar to making an antenna small. The former is
generally realization of an ESA (Electrically Small Antenna), while the latter is mostly
concerned with creation of FSA (Functionally Small Antenna). When only some of
the antenna dimensions are made much smaller than the wavelength, it is classiﬁed as a
PCSA (Physically Constrained Small Antenna). If an antenna is simply physically small,
it is a PSA (Physically Small Antenna). Typical examples of PSA are antennas used in
higher frequency regions like microwave (MW) and millimeter wave (MMW) regions.
These antennas have inherently small dimensions because of their operating frequencies.
Antennas simply made small so that they can be placed on, for instance, a human palm,
can be classiﬁed into the category of PSA. Principles and techniques to produce these
small antennas differ depending on the types such as ESA, FSA, PCSA, and PSA.
Major principles for realizing an ESA are;
(1) lowering the resonance frequency for an antenna of given dimensions
(2) full use of space or volume circumscribing the maximum dimension of an antenna
(3) arranging for uniform current distributions on the antenna element, and
(4) increasing the number of radiation modes in an antenna structure.
Items (2) and (3) relate to conditions that improve the bandwidth of a given size of
antenna. There are various techniques and methods to realize the above conditions.
The principles of producing an FSA are based on integration of either electronic
components or functions into an antenna structure. Principles of producing PCSA and
PSA are rather simpler than those used to produce other types of antennas. A PCSA
can be constructed by making an antenna either low proﬁle or with planar structures,
whereas a PSA is simply an antenna made small enough to have dimensions perhaps
comparable to the size of a human palm. Each of these will be discussed in the sections
to follow.

44
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
Figure 6.1 A zigzag line.
6.2
Techniques and methods for producing ESA
There are various techniques and methods for producing ESA based on the principles
described in the previous section. What follows are the typical methods.
6.2.1
Lowering the antenna resonance frequency
Lowering the resonance frequency of an antenna of given dimensions is the most basic
principle for making an antenna electrically small. When an antenna with physically
very small dimensions, which ordinarily makes the resonance frequency higher, is made
to have a lower resonance frequency, the antenna can be recognized as electrically
small and classiﬁed into ESA. It is usually a very hard problem to attain lower resonance
frequencies with physically small antennas; however, whatever dimensions of an antenna
are physically small, achieving resonance at lower frequencies with smaller dimensions
is one of the effective ways to produce an ESA, since matching, thus resonance at the
operating frequency is inevitably necessary.
The most efﬁcient way of lowering the resonance frequency of an antenna while
keeping the dimensions unchanged is to compose the antenna with a slow wave (SW)
structure. The SW is deﬁned as the electromagnetic wave that travels a transmission
path with smaller phase velocity vp than that of light in free space, c [1, 2]. Then an
antenna composed of the SW structure carries its electromagnetic wave travelling with
phase velocity vp smaller than c.
vp/c = (ω′
p/βp)/(ω0/β0) < 1,
Here β is phase constant, subscript p denotes slow wave structure and 0 is the normal
structure and prime (′) is taken for the slow wave structure. When an antenna (length
L0) and an antenna with slow wave structure (length L p < L0) are resonant at ω′
p = ω0,
(ω′
p/β′
p)/(ω0/β0) = β0/β′
p < 1. From this, β0 < β′
p, meaning λ0 < λ′
p and f ′
p < f0.
This implies that with slow wave structure, even a shorter antenna can be made resonant
at a lower frequency f ′
p than f0, of the longer one.
6.2.1.1
SW structure
The SW structures are composed using periodic structures, transmission lines,
waveguides, modiﬁcation of antenna geometry, and material loading using dielectric
or magnetic materials.
6.2.1.1.1 Periodic structures
The simplest periodic structures are wire lines formed into helix (Figure 1.6 (a)), mean-
dered shapes (Figure 1.6(b)), zigzag (Figure 6.1), and fractal shape (Figure 6.2) [3], all
of which are modiﬁed from a linear line. Since a wave travels along the wire line of

6.2 Techniques and methods for producing ESA
45
Figure 6.2 A fractal line.
L
L0
Figure 6.3 Linear length and the length of the meander line.
jωL
jωC
jωC
jωL
Figure 6.4 A SW structures composed with C and L, with β–ω diagram [after 4].
the line length L, it takes a longer path than that of the antenna (the linear length L0
(Figure 6.3)). Consequently, the wave travel time on the antenna structure of the length
L0 becomes equivalently tp which is excess time beyond the travelling time t0 on the
length L0. Thus, the phase velocity vp = L0/tp of the wave on the antenna structure is
smaller than c = L0/t0, implying that the wave propagates more slowly on the antenna
structure corresponding equivalently to the SW.
These wired SW structures are advantageous in designing a small antenna, since a
self-resonance condition is easily attained, even though the antenna dimensions are small.
In small antennas, self-resonance is signiﬁcant, because it helps mitigate the matching
difﬁculty in a small antenna arising from its impedance, which is a very low resistive
component and a very large reactive component that may combine to produce a large
loss and degrade the antenna performance. The wired SW structures have additional
advantages; they are fabricated rather simply, with low cost, and can be constructed in
planar form, which is very useful for small equipment such as small handsets, handy
mobile terminals, and so forth.
The SW structures can be composed with transmission lines, on which impedance
components or equivalent boundaries are loaded periodically. The loaded impedances
are treated as ordinary lumped components. Examples are shown in Figure 6.4, in which

46
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
(a)
(b)
(c)
jωC2
jωC1
jωC1
jωL2
jωL1
jωL2
Figure 6.5 Examples of SW structures: (a), (b), and (c) circuits with β–ω diagrams [4].
one segment of the unit length with β–ω diagrams for each circuit is illustrated [4].
Here the propagation constant γ = α + jβ =
√
ZY, where α is the attenuation constant,
β is the phase constant, Z is the series impedance per unit length, and Y is the shunt
admittance per unit length. In the ﬁgure, the dotted line indicates ±kc, below which β is
greater than k (the wave number in free space), meaning that vp is smaller than c and so
the media supports the SW. The SW structure can be composed by setting appropriate
impedances on the transmission line to make β greater than k. Other examples of LC
circuits that possibly realize SW structure are illustrated in Figure 6.5 (a), (b) and (c) with

6.2 Techniques and methods for producing ESA
47
2
/
R
L
R
C
L
C
2
L
L
2
/
R
L
L
C
2
(a)
(b)
ω
ωG2
ωG1
−ππ
βℓ
π
Figure 6.6 (a) An example of equivalent circuit to represent metamaterial and (b) β–ω diagram
[6].
1
1, ε
μ
Figure 6.7 A SW structure with dielectric sheet.
Figure 6.8 A SW structure with corrugated surface.
Figure 6.9 A SW structure with trough on the surface.
the β–ω diagrams [5]. The circuits shown in Figure 6.5 can be utilized as metamaterials
exhibiting negative phase constant –β by referring to the β −w diagram.
Transmission lines can also be applied to implement metamaterials performance
exhibiting either negative ε or negative μ, or both by setting up impedance components
appropriately [6]. Examples are shown in Figure 6.6. Applications of this technique to
small antennas will be described in later sections.
Two-dimensional SW structures can be made with a dielectric sheet (Figure 6.7),
corrugation (Figure 6.8), holey plate, and troughs on the surface (Figure 6.9) [7]. The
SW structures can be formed in two-dimensional (2D) structures with transmission lines

48
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
0
L
0
C
2 ⋅
0
C
2 ⋅
0
C
2 ⋅
0
C
2 ⋅
d
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.10 A 2D metamaterial structure composed with transmission line; (a) equivalent circuit
[17], (b) practical model [8].
L
2
w
a
(a)
(b)
b
=
2
N
3
1
Figure 6.11 Meander line antenna: (a) antenna structure and (b) an equivalent expression [10].
(Figure 6.10) [8]. Three-dimensional (3D) structure is also composed with transmission
lines or bulk materials [9].
6.2.1.1.1.1 Meander line antennas
A meander line may be used as a typical antenna element for reducing the size, as it
has the SW structure [10–12]. Applicable antenna types are not only dipoles, but also
monopoles over a ground plane, and arrays. The antenna element can be made of thin
wire and thin tape printed on the surface of dielectric structure. The performance of a
meander line antenna (Figure 6.11(a)) can be found by treating the antenna structure
as a series connection of a shorted two-wire transmission line plus a linear element as
shown in Figure 6.11(b) [10]. However, the antenna is practically designed by using an
electromagnetic simulator, for instance, MoM (Method of Moment) and FDTD (Finite-
Difference Time-Domain) [11]. The simulation is simple and yet provides better results
as compared with the calculation that uses the equivalent transmission line.
The phase velocity vp of an EM wave on the meander line is approximately given by
(L p/L0)c
(6.1)

6.2 Techniques and methods for producing ESA
49
w/λλ
N
Figure 6.12 Relationship between the number of segment N and the width w/λ [after 10].
1.4
1.2
Measured
Calculated
0.8
0.6
1
0
1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
f
b
a
f0
Figure 6.13 Resonance frequency (f/f0) dependence on the ratio of the pitch b/a [10].
where Lp denotes the length of the meandered line and L0 is the length of the linear part
of the line.
The resonance frequency f0 is determined mainly by the total length L0 of the line, but
in a strict sense it depends on the structural parameters of antennas (the straight length L,
width w, pitch a, element width b, and number of equivalent transmission lines N). With
the equivalent transmission line model, the resonance wavelength λ0 = c/f0 is given in
conjunction with N, which is given by
N = [λ/4 log(2λ/b) −L log(8L/b)]/{w log(2L/Nb)[1 + 1/3(βw/2)2]}.
(6.2)
This is a transcendental equation which can’t be solved analytically but only numerically
and given graphically as shown by Figure 6.12 and Figure 6.13, respectively, where
relationships between N and w/λ, and b/a against f/f0 are illustrated. The resonance
frequency f0 can be calculated from λ0 and also read from Figure 6.13.

50
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
η
λ
2L
[%]
N
100.0
80.0
60.0
40.0
20.0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
50
100
0.0
b/a = 0.25
Exp’t
b/a = 0.50
Exp’t
b/a = 0.75
Exp’t
Figure 6.14 Relationship between radiation efﬁciency η and the length 2L/λ (w/λ = 0.03) [10].
2.0
1.0
0
5
(a)
L
2a
P
)
2
=
(tan
a
P
π
ψ
ψ
β cot
k
ψ
kacot
(b)
(
)
03
.0
2
=
λ
λ w
L
Figure 6.15 NMHA; (a) antenna structure and (b) relationship between the phase velocity vp and
the pitch angle ψ in NMHA [14].
Efﬁciency η of a meander line antenna is given by using antenna parameters as
follows:
η = 1/[1 + 1/4π(Rs/Rd)(λ/b)(Nw/L)].
(6.3)
The radiation efﬁciency η is drawn with respect to b/a as Figure 6.14 shows.
The efﬁciency of a meander line antenna is lower than that of a linear antenna of
length L0 because it has greater loss owing to longer length Lp than the linear antenna
of the length L.
Design of this type of antenna will be introduced in Chapter 7.
6.2.1.1.1.2 Helical antennas
Here the helical antenna is taken only for the case where radiation is in the direction
normal to the antenna axis; that is, Normal Mode Helical Antenna (NMHA) [13]. In the
case of NMHA, the phase velocity vp is given approximately by [14]
vp = c sin ψ
(6.4)
where ψ is the pitch angle (Figure 6.15).

6.2 Techniques and methods for producing ESA
51
0
L
notch
slot
0
L
Figure 6.16 An example of extension of the current path on an antenna structure with a slot and
notch.
The resonance frequency depends on the antenna parameters such as the diameter
d, pitch angle ψ, and the total length L; however, since it is hardly given analytically,
practical design depends on either simulation or approximation.
Practical design methods will be discussed in Chapter 7.
6.2.1.1.1.3 Waveguide structures
Planar surface waveguides propagate either fast or slow waves, depending on the struc-
tural parameters of the guides. Usually, these guides are used as relatively large, two-
dimensional, ﬂush mounted antennas; however, here only SW structures and those
applicable to construct small antennas will be taken into consideration. Typical surface
guides are planar dielectric sheet (Figure 6.7), holey plate structure, inductive guide
structure, corrugated surface (Figure 6.8), capacitive guided structure, and so forth
[1, 4].
These guides are not necessarily used as a radiating element, but applied to lowering
resonance frequency by placement on a planar antenna surface.
This concept is adopted when equivalent metamaterial performance is required.
6.2.1.1.2 Modiﬁcation of antenna geometry to extend the current path
The SW structures can be produced by modifying an antenna geometry such that the
current ﬂow path is lengthened, resulting in the phase velocity vp equivalently smaller
than c in free space, and hence lowering the resonance frequency. A planar antenna, on
which a slot or a notch is placed to lengthen the current path so that the electrical size
is shortened as shown in Figure 6.16, is an example. In the ﬁgure, the direction of the
current ﬂow is illustrated with arrows.
The phase velocity vp of the wave travelling on this surface is modiﬁed by lengthening
the current path L0 to Lp and is approximately given by
vp = (L0/L p)c
(6.5)
where Lp is the length of the current path with the slot and L0 is the length without the
slot. The resonant frequency is determined approximately by the length Lp.
Multiband operation can be realized by using several slots on a planar structure, by
which the current ﬂows on several paths, as shown in Figure 6.17. In this case, each
resonance frequency corresponds to one length of the current path.

52
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
Ground
Feed
Figure 6.17 Extended current paths with a notch and a slot producing multiband operation.
Figure 6.18 Array of thin wires to compose negative permittivity surface [15, 16].
6.2.1.1.3 Material loading on an antenna structure
Loading of materials such as dielectric, magnetic, or metamaterials on an antenna
structure is a simple way to produce the SW structure. Since the phase velocity vp in
such materials is expressed by using the permittivity ε of the dielectric material and the
permeability μ of the magnetic material, as
vp = ω0/β = 1/(εμ)1/2.
(6.6)
From this, vp is shown to be smaller than c, because
vp/c = (ε0μ0)1/2/(εμ)1/2 = 1/(εrμr)1/2 < 1
(6.7)
since ε = εrε0 and μ = μrμ0, and εr and μr are usually greater than unity.
Making use of metamaterials is another useful way to produce SW structure. The
metamaterials are known as materials that exhibit uncommon electromagnetic properties
not available in nature [15–17]. In reality, metamaterials do not exist; however, equivalent
materials have been realized ﬁrst by using a dense array of thin wires (Figure 6.18), and
an array of split ring resonators (SRR) (Figure 6.19) [18–20]. The former exhibits a
property of negative permittivity ε and the latter shows negative permeability μ and

6.2 Techniques and methods for producing ESA
53
Figure 6.19 Array of sprit ring resonators (SRR) to compose negative permeability surface
[15, 16].
)
(ω
S
Z
)
(ω
S
Z
)
(ω
P
Y
Figure 6.20 A T-circuit model representing transmission line (one segment of the periodic
connection) [26].
applications of them to antennas have been described in many papers [16–17, 21–23].
Among them, Itoh demonstrated an artiﬁcial metamaterial using transmission lines,
which achieved equivalent metamaterial performances that exhibit a left-handed (LH)
property that resulted from negative permeability and negative permittivity at the same
time [24, 25].
Plane-wave propagation in isotropic and homogeneous dielectric can be treated by
the concept of TEM propagation in a transmission line, which is comprised of periodic
connections of a T-shaped circuit consisting of a series per-unit-length impedance Zs,
and a shunt per-unit-length admittance Yp as shown in Figure 6.20 [26]. Here, charac-
teristic impedance Z = Zs/Yp and propagation constant γ = ZsYp, and Zs and Yp,
respectively, are described as
Zs(ω) = jωμ
(6.8)
Yp(ω) = jωε

54
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
(a)
(b)
2
/
L
C
2
/
L
C
2
L
C
2
Figure 6.21 The equivalent transmission line model consisting of circuit parameters L-C; (a) L in
series and C in shunt and (b) L-C interchanged circuit [26].
where ε and μ, respectively are the dielectric permittivity and the magnetic permeabil-
ity of the propagation medium [27]. The transmission line model consisting of circuit
parameters C and L, is illustrated in Figure 6.21(a). From Eq. (6.8), the effective consti-
tutive parameters εeff and μeff, respectively, are described as
εeff = C/l
(6.9)
μeff = L/l
where l is the unit length.
Interchange of C and L, results in the dual transmission line as shown in Figure
6.21(b). By using (6.8), εeff and μeff can be related with the circuit parameters as
εeff = −1/(ω2Ll)
(6.10)
μeff = −1/(ω2Cl)
The dispersion characteristics of the equivalent circuit are the same as that shown
previously in Figure 6.5(a) and (b). In the SW (Slow Wave) structure, a wave propagates
with the phase constant β greater than that in free space k. The transmission line with the
constitutive parameters –ε and –μ that are given by (6.10) is considered as the LH (Left
Handed) media where the phase velocity vp and the group velocity vg are anti-parallel,
and the wave propagates backward [28]. The LH media is characterized by the property
of negative propagation constant –k, the attribute of –ε and –μ. The name is originated
from the term Right-Hand (RH) Rule that is derived from use of a right hand to indicate
the direction of the wave vector k; for example, E × H = S, by the thumb of the right
hand as Figure 6.22 shows. In the LH media, the direction of the wave vector k is the
opposite to that of the cross product vector S, while in the RH case, directions of both k
and S are the same as Figure 6.22(b) illustrates.
In reality, however, this transmission line cannot be implemented perfectly, because
there exists unavoidable parasitic series inductance Lp and shunt capacitance Cp. Then
a CRLH (Composite Right/Left-Handed) model shown in Figure 6.23 is considered
as the most general form of a structure with the LH attributes [26]. The dispersion
characteristics of the CRLH transmission line model is depicted in Figure 6.24, which
shows a case for ω2 > ω1 [26]. The region between two frequencies ω1 and ω2 denotes
a bandgap, where waves do not propagate. This bandgap is generally called the EBG
(Electromagnetic Band Gap).

6.2 Techniques and methods for producing ESA
55
(b)
(a)
S
E
H
k
S
E
H
k
LH case
RH case
S
E
H
Figure 6.22 The Right-handed Rule; (a) demonstration for vector cross product and (b) the
Right-handed (RH) and Left-handed (LH) cases.
2
/
R
L
R
C
L
C
2
L
L
2
/
R
L
L
C
2
Figure 6.23 CRLH model (one segment of equivalent transmission line) [26].
Figure 6.24 Dispersion characteristics of the CRLH transmission line model [26].
The effective constitutive parameters εeff and μeff of this CRLH model are given by
εeff = (CR −1/ω2L L)/l .
(6.11)
μeff = (L R −1/ω2CL)/l
This indicates the nature of CRLH of the artiﬁcial transmission line. An SNG transmis-
sion line can be realized by loading a host line with series capacitors (corresponding to
–μ lines) or shunt inductors (corresponding to –ε lines).

56
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
Figure 6.25 Examples of fractal shape [31].
Figure 6.26 Examples of meander line (dipole structure) [32].
Metamaterials composed by this transmission line model will be discussed in
Section 6.2.5.
6.2.2
Full use of volume/space circumscribing antenna
There have been some discussions on improvement of bandwidth or maximization of
gain in an antenna with a given antenna size. Balanis described in [29] that bandwidth
of an antenna circumscribed by a sphere of radius r can be improved only if the antenna
utilizes efﬁciently the available volume of the sphere, with its geometrical conﬁguration.
Also Hansen commented in [30] that improvement of bandwidth for an ESA is possible
only by fully utilizing the volume in establishing a TE or TM mode or by reducing
efﬁciency. These comments can be interpreted as that full use of a volume which
circumscribes an antenna structure is the only means to improve the antenna bandwidth.
In other words, even with small size, if an antenna is constructed so as to occupy a whole
volume of a sphere in which the antenna is contained, the bandwidth can be improved.
Increase in bandwidth with a given size of an antenna corresponds to creation of a
small antenna. However, in practice, this is an idealized concept, because an antenna
structure can never occupy fully the space or volume that circumscribes the antenna. The
concept may be followed by ﬁlling such space or volume efﬁciently; that is, to use the
space with the antenna geometry as much as possible. The space is not necessarily three
dimensional, but perhaps two dimensional depending on an antenna structure. Fractal
shape is a typical example, which ﬁlls a space efﬁciently with the antenna geometry as
Figure 6.25 shows [31]. There are some other examples of two-dimensional antennas;
meander lines (Figure 6.26) [32], Peano geometry (Figure 6.27) [33], and Hilbert curve

6.2 Techniques and methods for producing ESA
57
Figure 6.27 Examples of Peano curve geometry (the original to the higher mode) [33].
Figure 6.28 Examples of Hilbert curve geometry (the original to the higher mode) [34].
z
y
x
Figure 6.29 A four-arm helical antenna [35].
geometry (Figure 6.28) [34]. With a helical structure, a four-arm helical antenna, which
is designed to occupy a volume of a sphere as much as possible as shown in Figure 6.29,
is one of the three-dimensional applications [35].
6.2.3
Arrangement of current distributions uniformly
A similar concept to the full use of space, but slightly different method, by which the
maximum gain with a given size of an antenna is obtained, is to arrange the current
distribution on an antenna element to be uniform. Chu discussed that the ideal current
distribution to attain the maximum gain with a given size of an antenna is uniform [37]
and the gain at this condition is πr/4λ, where r is the radius of a sphere enclosing the
antenna. However, uniform distribution can never be realized by a small antenna. On a
small dipole, for instance, the current distribution tends to zero toward the end of the
element, taking the maximum value at the center, that is, the feed point. Usually it is
assumed to be a triangular shape with the maximum at the feed point and zero at the end
as Figure 6.30(a) depicts, where a uniform case is also shown (Figure 6.30(b)). One way

58
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.30 Current distribution on a short dipole; (a) triangular shape and (b) uniform (ideal
case).
Figure 6.31 Capacitance plate loaded on the top of a short dipole.
Figure 6.32 A capacitance loaded transmission line.
to obtain uniform current distribution on a short dipole is to place a capacitance plate
loading on its top as shown in Figure 6.31 [38]. By this means, the antenna gain can be
the highest that is possible with that length of the dipole antenna. The longer the linear
part of the antenna becomes, the nearer the current distribution approaches to uniform,
as the distribution is gradually smoothed from the triangle. By loading a capacitor at
the end terminal, the current distribution on the transmission line may be made nearly
uniform (Figure 6.32).
6.2.4
Increase of radiation modes
Increasing radiation modes is another important method to create an ESA. Hansen
discussed in [30] that antenna Q will be reduced by 1/2 with simultaneous excitation of
TE and TM modes. Reduction of antenna Q implies increase in the bandwidth. If this can
be achieved in an antenna with a given size, it corresponds to creating an ESA. Practical
methods to increase radiation modes are composing an antenna with complementary
structure, or conjugate structure, combining different types of antenna, and so forth.
These will be described in the following section.

6.2 Techniques and methods for producing ESA
59
1
Z
2
Z
Figure 6.33 A demonstration of the principle of self-complementary concept combining two (E
and H) mode structure [39].
Monopole
Slot
Figure 6.34 An example of self-complementary antenna; composed with a monopole and a
complementary slot on the ground plane [40].
6.2.4.1
Use of self-complementary structure
Self-complementary structure is constructed by combining two-mode (E and H) struc-
tures [39], as Figure 6.33 illustrates. An example is a monopole combined with a
self-complementary shape of a slot on the ground plane as shown in Figure 6.34 [40,
41]. A self-complementary antenna has inherently frequency independent properties, as
the impedance Z0 of a complementary antenna is constant over inﬁnite frequency range
as shown by Mushiake in [40] with
Z2 = Z1Z2 = (Z0/2)2 = const
(6.12)
where Z1 is the impedance of an E-mode antenna, Z2 is that of a complementary H-mode
antenna, and Z0 is the intrinsic impedance of the medium.
The perfect frequency independent performance can be achieved only when the size
of the ground plane is inﬁnite. With a ﬁnite ground plane, the property of frequency
independence is limited to some extent, and the frequency bandwidth is no longer
inﬁnite, although the bandwidth obtained will be still appreciably wide.
Some examples of planar self-complementary antennas are shown in Figure 6.35 [39].

60
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
Figure 6.35 Examples of planar self-complementary structures [39].
6.2.4.2
Use of conjugate structure
An antenna composed of conjugate components consisting of a capacitive element and
its conjugate inductive element so that the reactive component in the antenna structure
can be compensated, resulting in self-resonance, can be designed to have appreciably
wide bandwidth, although the size is fairly small. This is also a useful method to produce
an ESA. Combination of an electric source with a magnetic source may become a pair
to compensate the reactive component in the antenna structure; thus self-resonance is
attained.
6.2.4.3
Compose with different types of antennas
It has been shown in the previous sections that radiation modes of an antenna can
be increased by increasing radiation sources, realized by combining different types
of antennas, which contribute to producing different radiation modes. In addition to
previously described methods such as complementary and conjugate structures, other
examples are introduced below.
An example is an ESA composed with a small loop and a ground plane, on which
the receiver circuit is mounted [42]. The antenna is designed based on the concept for
producing ESA; increasing radiation modes, and accomplishing self-resonance. Figure
6.36 illustrates an antenna system as an example, where a loop antenna is located inside a
small unit and fed with a coaxial cable. The antenna system is expressed as a combination
of a loop element and the ground plane (printed circuit board) as Figure 6.37(a) shows.
At the feed terminals of this antenna system, the current I0 ﬂows, that can be divided

6.2 Techniques and methods for producing ESA
61
a
b
c
d
ground plane
a loop
antenna
to
receiver
Figure 6.36 An example of a composite antenna system composed of a loop and a dipole [41b].
a
c
d
b
Loop
element
(a)
0I
0
V
(c)
a
c
d
b
uI
u
z
uI
uI
2
1
uI
2
1
(b)
a
b
c
d
b
z
b
V
bI
bI
bI
Figure 6.37 Equivalent expression of the antenna system shown in Figure 6.36; (a) the antenna
system, (b) the loop and (c) an equivalent dipole composed with the loop and the ground [41b].
into two modes; one part is the unbalanced current Iu and another is the current Ib. These
two modes are originated from feeding the connection of the loop with an unbalanced
cable. The balanced current Ib ﬂows into the balanced terminals of the loop as shown
in Figure 6.37(b), while the unbalanced current Iu, ﬂows into both the ground plane and
the loop element as Figure 6.37(c) shows. Because of the unbalanced current ﬂow on
the loop element, the loop element can be assumed to be an equivalent ﬂat plate that
yields a virtual planar dipole along with the ground plane as Figure 6.38 depicts.
This antenna was previously used in a VHF pager and brought several signiﬁcant
outcomes that were: (1) about a 3 dB increase in the receiver sensitivity when the pager
was put in the operator’s pocket due to the image effect of the loop, and (2) a change in
the receiving pattern (sensitivity) to almost non-directional as a result of combination
of a ﬁgure-eight pattern of the loop and another out-of-phase ﬁgure-eight pattern of
the equivalent dipole. This antenna system simply appears to be only a small loop, but
actually works with enhanced performance as a consequence of two-mode combination
of a loop and a virtual dipole.

62
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
y
z
x
lu
luH
luV
u
Eθ
u
Eφ
(b)
y
z
x
Eθb
lb
lb
(a)
Figure 6.38 Radiation patterns of (a) the loop and (b) the dipole having elements at right-angle
[41b].
ENG Material
Plasmas
DPS Material
Dielectrics
DNG Material
MNG Material
Not exist in nature,
but physically realizable
Gyrotropic
magnetic materials
)
(
0
0,
>
<
μ
ε
)
(
0
0,
>
>
μ
ε
)
(
0
0,
<
<
μ
ε
)
(
0
0,
<
<
μ
ε
ε
μ
Figure 6.39 Mapping of terminology expressing metamaterial properties.
6.2.5
Applications of metamaterials to make antennas small
There have been increasing trends to employ speciﬁc properties of metamaterials to
create novel small antennas in the recent decade. Of course, metamaterials do not exist
in reality. Artiﬁcial metamaterials, for example, transmission lines and waveguides of
periodical structure, have been used for creating small antennas. Many papers treating
metamaterial applications to small antennas have been published and some practically
useful antennas have been reported already.
Terminologies to express metamaterial properties generally used are DNG (Double
Negative), SNG (Single Negative), ENG (Epsilon Negative), and MNG (Mu Negative)
and they are mapped on a permittivity–permeability chart as Figure 6.39 shows. DNG

6.2 Techniques and methods for producing ESA
63
Antenna
System
E
H
V
I
Space
Circuit
Figure 6.40 A transducer representing an antenna system [42].
H
Space Domain
Immittance Domain
E
V
I
[Y]
[Z]
or
J
L[E] =
E
[J]
L 1
=
−
1J
2J
nJ
1J
2J
nJ
Figure 6.41 Antenna system model divided into two parts: Space Domain and Immittance Domain
[42].
materials are those exhibiting both ε and μ negative, SNG materials are those having the
property of either ε or μ negative, and ENG and MNG materials respectively represent
negative ε and negative μ materials. There are some other terms, ENZ and MNZ,
expressing materials of ε near zero or μ near zero, respectively. The DNG property,
as was described in the previous section, corresponds to properties such as LH (Left-
Handed), and the NRI (Negative Refraction Index), both the attributes of negative
constitutive parameters, −ε and −μ. The term LH is derived from the RH rule (Figure
6.22) as was described in the previous section. It is also well known that in the DNG
media, the phase velocity vp and group velocity vg are anti-parallel.
Applications of metamaterials to antennas can be found in various ways: making use of
SW structure realized by DNG materials for small sizing, use of composite transmission
lines which exhibit both LH (Left-Handed) and RH (Right-Handed) property for small
sizing and for radiation pattern control, employing SNG or DNG materials for matching
either in space or at the load terminal, and so forth. For matching at the load terminals,
a Non-Foster circuit realized by metamaterials is used, and an antenna of small size yet
with high efﬁciency is obtained.
An antenna is a transducer which transforms the ﬁeld parameters E and H (electric
and magnetic ﬁeld respectively) to the circuit parameters, voltage V and current I as
shown in Figure 6.40 [42]. The antenna model represented by a transducer is divided
into two parts: Space Domain and Immittance Domain as Figure 6.41 illustrates. The
Space Domain deﬁnes relationships between the EM ﬁelds (E and H) and the current
distributions J on the antenna system, which is given by
E = Ł[J]
(6.13)
and J = Ł−1[E]
(6.14)
where Ł denotes the operator and Ł−1 is the inverse operator. The Immittance Domain
deﬁnes the relationship between the current distributions J and the circuit parameters V

64
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
and I. These are expressed by using either the impedance matrix [Z], or the admittance
matrix [Y] as
[V ] = [Z][I]
(6.15)
[J] = [Y][V ].
(6.16)
Ordinary matching at the load terminals is made in the Immittance Domain, where
the input impedance Zi of an antenna is matched to the load impedance, usually
50 ohms. The space matching is done in the near ﬁeld of an antenna as follows. Consider
the complex Poynting vector S, where S = E × H* = Re S + Im S. If Im S can be
compensated by some vector P produced by a source F so that Im S + P = 0, only
real part Re S remains, and Re S is varied to make Re Zi = Ri to be 50 ohms, then the
matching process is completed, without regarding the size of antenna. The additional
vector F should produce such a ﬁeld that ∇× F, will be zero by taking divergence so
that
∇· (S + ∇× F) = ∇· S
(6.17)
This implies that ∇× F is a near-ﬁeld component, corresponding to a reactive power.
This ∇× F component can be replaced by a metamaterial that provides the corresponding
quantity to the ∇× F component which is equal to –Im S so that the resonance in space
can be attained. In a short dipole case, Im S is a reactive (capacitive) power, so the
∇× F component should be a reactive (inductive) power, which can equivalently be
represented by an ENG material. The ENG material also affects Re S, so Zi, (now Ri
since Xi = 0), will be adjusted to 50 ohms, by varying the material parameters such as
size, location, geometry, and so forth. Even when the resistive component Ri could not
be made equal to 50 ohms, at least the resonance condition Xi = 0 in the near ﬁeld can
be achieved and the matching at the load terminal with low loss can be achieved very
easily. In the mean time, MNG materials can be employed for the space matching when a
small magnetic source like a small loop, which produces inductive ﬁeld in the near ﬁeld,
is used. DNG materials can also be adapted for small antennas to enhance the radiation
[46, 47].
6.2.5.1
Application of SNG to small antennas
6.2.5.1.1 Matching in space
The concept of matching in space is to realize compensation of the reactive components
in the near ﬁeld of an antenna. The conjugate component is produced by an extra ﬁeld
in the near ﬁeld of the antenna so that resonance condition is obtained, and at the same
time the real component in the near ﬁeld is varied so that the total antenna impedance
is made equal to the complex conjugate of the load impedance. By this means, a very
high efﬁciency small antenna would be realized. The bandwidth depends on the range
of frequency over which the material can compensate the reactive component in the
near ﬁeld. The extra ﬁeld is produced by an additional radiation source to the antenna;
however, it can also be represented by a metamaterial located in the proximity to the
antenna, which produces the conjugate ﬁeld equivalent to that of the near ﬁeld so that

6.2 Techniques and methods for producing ESA
65
ENG
monopole
ground plane
Figure 6.42 An example of an ENG application to a short monopole antenna.
MNG
loop
ground plane
Figure 6.43 An example of an MNG application to a loop antenna.
0
−Z
1
−
1
Z
0
Figure 6.44 An NIC network.
resonance and matching can be achieved in the near ﬁeld of the radiation source. In
practice, an epsilon-negative (ENG) material is placed near an electrical radiator like
a small monopole (Figure 6.42), while a mu-negative (MNG) material is used near a
magnetic radiator, for example a small loop (Figure 6.43). Stuart reported application
of a negative permittivity material to a short monopole, by which the size reduction
of an antenna was achieved (Figure 6.42) [44]. Bilotti et al. published a paper [45], in
which they discussed application of a negative permeability material to a patch antenna
to realize downsizing of an antenna (Figure 6.43).
The space matching can be achieved by using not only materials but also hardware
that represents metamaterials. Some examples are shown in [46–48], where both ENG
and MNG are realized by using a meander line, and an inter-digital capacitor circuit,
respectively.
6.2.5.1.2 Matching at the load terminals
It is taken for granted that matching occurs at the load terminal of an antenna; however,
it is also well known that the smaller the size an antenna becomes, the harder the match-
ing at the load terminal becomes, because the impedance tends rapidly to high reactive
impedance and low resistive impedance. In order to overcome this problem, making use
of an NIC (Negative Impedance Converter) at the matching circuit is considered very
useful. The NIC is represented by a two-terminal network as Figure 6.44 shows [49].

66
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
Antenna
system
NIC
a
Z
a
Z
−
L
Z
Figure 6.45 An NIC application to antenna matching.
Receiver
dipole
C
-
negative
C
-
negative
balun
Ω
50
Transmitter
Figure 6.46 A practical NIC implemented by a transistor circuit [49a].
The NIC network transforms an impedance Z to its negative –Z, as shown in Figure
6.44, where the network parameters are given. By inserting an NIC network between
the antenna output terminals and the matching circuit as shown in Figure 6.45 [50],
the antenna impedance Za of, for instance, a very short dipole, which has very high
capacitive impedance, is converted into the negative impedance –Za, resulting in high
inductive impedance at the output terminals of the NIC. The high inductive impedance
can be compensated by high capacitive impedance, which has low loss. This is advan-
tageous for matching a short dipole antenna, because it does not require high inductive
impedance that has big loss, thereby reducing efﬁciency in an ordinary matching pro-
cess. Practical NIC circuits can be implemented by a transistor circuit and some excellent
results have been reported by Sussman (Figure 6.46) [49a]. This is an application of
Non-Foster circuitry to the antenna matching circuit [51]. However, use of a transistor
circuit has disadvantages, because of its uni-directionality against bi-directionality of
the antenna. Recently real (not artiﬁcial) metamaterial, which exhibits negative perme-
ability, has been developed by using composite ferrite material [52]. This material is
doubly advantageous to be used in the antenna matching circuit, because the circuit is
made bi-directional, and the material is made in a very small piece, so it does not take
space as compared with other metamaterials like transmission lines.

6.2 Techniques and methods for producing ESA
67
+3
ω
+2
ω
+1
ω
0
ω
ω
ωω
)
(β
ω
ω
l
π
π
π
π
π
π
3
l
2
l
0
l
+
l
3
+
l
2
+
β
–1
–2
–3
Figure 6.47 CRLH transmission line media dispersion relation and resonance frequencies [16].
6.2.5.2
DNG applications
The DNG property, as was described previously, is characterized by other terms such as
LH (Left-Handed), −k (the negative propagation constant), NRI (Negative Refractive
Index), anti-parallel nature of vp (phase velocity) and vg (group velocity), as the attribute
of the properties based on the negative constitutive constants (−ε and –μ). These
properties can be implemented by combination of an array of thin wires and an array of
SRRs, and periodically reactance-loaded transmission lines, in which the typical one is
the CRLH transmission line. The combination of thin wires and SRR was ﬁrst introduced
as the metamaterial that exhibits the property of DNG, and discussions ensued about its
application in various ways such as to planar lenses, ﬁlters, waveguides, and so forth, but
not to radiators. Practical implementation of such metamaterials has been so far found
in use of transmission lines, which are composed with lumped components periodically
loaded into the structure. The typical one is the CRLH transmission line.
The CRLH transmission line constituted with a periodical connection of a series LR
and CR circuit, and a shunt CL and LL circuit, as was shown in Figure 6.23, exhibits
the dispersion characteristics having resonant modes as illustrated in Figure 6.24. As a
conventional transmission line, a CRLH transmission line may also be open-ended or
short-ended to produce a standing wave or resonance state. The resonance modes of the
transmission line structure constituted with N units of the length l (= Nd; d is the unit
length) are given in relation with the length l by
lm = |m|λ/2
(m = 0, ±1, ±2, ±3, . . .)
(6.18)
and the phase constant for a mode m is
βm = ±mπ/l.
(6.19)
The resonance modes m exist both positive and negative as shown in Figure 6.47.
Each positive resonant mode (m > 0) at ω+m corresponding to β+m (RH region) has
twin-negative resonant modes (m < 0) at ω−m corresponding to β−m (LH region) [53].

68
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
voltage
m = ±2
m = ±1
m = 0
m = ±3
z
βℓ= mπ 
Figure 6.48 Typical ﬁeld distribution of resonance modes on the CRLH transmission line [16].
π
π
π
π
π
π
π
π
Figure 6.49 Resonance of CRLH transmission line resonator constituted of N = 4 units (balanced
case) [16] (l: length of resonator, d: period).
The typical ﬁeld distributions of the resonant modes on the CRLH transmission line
are depicted as in Figure 6.48. It should be noted that there is a zeroth-order (ZOR)
mode (m = 0), which exhibits at the transition frequency ω0 where λg = ∞or β =
0, implying inﬁnite wavelength or no phase variation [54, 55]. In the practical N-unit
CRLH transmission line, there exist passbands as shown in Figure 6.49, where a case
for N = 4 is illustrated. With N = 4, resonance modes m are 0, ±1, ±2, ±3, and when
m = ±4, where lm = ± π/d, it is not resonance, but the edge of the Brillouin zone.
In general, the dispersion diagram of the N-unit CRLH transmission line is limited in
frequencies at the limits β = ±π/d of the Brillouin zone, and resonance occurs at m =
±(N −1) plus m = 0. For a balanced transmission case, there exist (2N −1) resonances,
while an unbalanced case has 2N resonances. The resonance frequency ωm is calculated
from
2{1 −cos(mπ/N)} = (ωL/ωm)2 + (ωm/ωR)2 −(ωsh/ωse)2/(ωR)2
where ωcR = 1/

L RCR, ωcL = 1/

L LCL, ωse = 1/

L RCL,
and ωsh = 1/

L LCR.
(6.20)

6.3 Techniques and methods to produce FSA
69
When m = 0 (ZOR mode), the resonance frequency is independent of physical length.
The resonance frequency ω0 is either one of ωse or ωsh. When the transmission line is
a balanced structure, ω0 = ωse = ωsh = 1/√L RCL. The property of ZOR structure,
i.e., size-independence of the resonance frequency, can be applied to reduce the antenna
size; i.e., design of ESAs, as the physical size does not depend on the frequency, but on
the circuit parameters C and L [56, 57]. Examples are introduced in Chapters 7 and 8.
6.3
Techniques and methods to produce FSA
Since an FSA does not necessarily have its size much smaller than the wavelength as in
an ESA, techniques and methods to produce FSA differ from that of ESA. Generally,
an FSA is constructed by integration techniques, by which either antenna performance
can be improved or enhanced, or some function is integrated into an antenna structure
so that the antenna can perform additional functions as a consequence of integration.
6.3.1
FSA composed by integration of components
Integration of components such as device, circuitry, or materials, including metama-
terials, with antenna structure has been commented upon in the previous sections; for
the purpose of generating uniform current distributions, composing SW structure, or
self-resonance structure, and modifying antenna geometry so that various types of small
antennas, not only FSA, but also ESA, can be created. The major objective of integration
is generally to change current distributions on an antenna structure so that modiﬁca-
tion of antenna performance, change in antenna characteristics, and improvement or
enhancement of antenna performances, are achieved. These techniques enable us to
produce various interesting FSAs such as those having enhanced gain or bandwidth or
capability of varying or controlling radiation patterns.
6.3.2
FSA composed by integration of functions
By integrating some function into an antenna, either enhancement of the antenna per-
formance or improvement of the antenna characteristics can be expected. The functions
to be integrated include ampliﬁcation, oscillation, frequency conversion, power combin-
ing, and pattern control. By integration of ampliﬁcation, gain increase can be expected,
although extreme care about internal noise in the ampliﬁer should be taken into account.
The concept of smallness in the FSA should be understood in such a way that when, for
instance, an enhanced gain or wider bandwidth that can be attained only by increasing
the antenna size is realized, then the antenna of unchanged size can be said to be a
small antenna. Integration of oscillator circuit, frequency converter, etc. will contribute
to produce varieties of interesting FSAs such as a power oscillating antenna, an antenna
having frequency mixing function, power combining in space, and so forth.
The integration technique may bring evolutional antenna systems that cannot be
realized by conventional methods. Either passive or active integration, or a combination

70
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.50 Equivalent expression of (a) ILA and (b) IFA on the ground plane.
of these are possible. Enhancement of antenna performance or improvement of antenna
characteristics may create novel antennas with small size that cannot practically be
realized by conventional antennas, although it might not be as easy as expected.
Although integration techniques are very attractive and useful means to create novel
FSAs, there are some serious problems to be taken into consideration. They involve
noise and non-linear characteristics in devices and components. Noise produced from
an active device deteriorates the FSA performance, while the non-linear characteristics
inherently existing in devices, even in passive ones, may generate interference due to its
intermodulation performance.
6.3.3
FSA of composite structure
Some composite structures have been described in previous sections, some of which
are concerned with ESA. They are self-complement structure, conjugate structure, and
combination of different types of antennas. This type of FSA can be composed by
similar techniques as in ESA: (1) by loading impedance components, which includes
conjugate components, (2) with complementary elements, and (3) by using travelling
wave structure. These techniques are essentially based on application of IAS (Integrated
Antenna Systems [58]) techniques.
6.4
Techniques and methods for producing PCSA
PCSA is a Physically Constrained Small Antenna, which has a part of its structure
very small as compared with the wavelength as in ESA. PCSA is generally constructed
with either low-proﬁle or planar structures. In usual low-proﬁle structures, a low-height
antenna is placed on a ground plane and the antenna is treated equivalently as a symmet-
rical antenna constituted with its image, as shown in Figure 6.50, where (a) depicts an
Inverted-L antenna, and (b) an Inverted-F antenna as the examples. Planar structures are
treated in the same way as linear antennas. Images of these antennas must be included
in the antenna design. The PCSA is an antenna which has very low height that is much
smaller than the wavelength; however, other parts of the antenna are not necessarily
small, but may have dimensions comparable to the wavelength; for instance, the periph-
ery of a PIFA is about a half wavelength. No particular methods are used for the design
of these antennas, excepting cases where proximity effects must be included.

6.4 Techniques and methods for producing PCSA
71
h
h
PEC
h
h
HIS
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.51 A dipole placed on (a) PEC surface and (b) on HIS.
6.4.1
PCSA of low-proﬁle structure
Generally low-proﬁle antennas are mounted on the ground plane and in the evaluation
of the antenna performance the image antenna is taken into consideration. When the
ground plane is not inﬁnite, but has appreciable size, some currents driven by the antenna
ﬂow on it, and the ground plane will act as a part of the antenna system. When the size
of the ground plane is larger than several wavelengths, it can be assumed as an almost
inﬁnite ground plane. Design of low-proﬁle antennas is not always simple, depending on
the size of the ground plane and the environmental conditions. Well-known low-proﬁle
linear antennas are ILA, IFA, and a half-loop of either circle or square, while planar
ones are parallel plate, MSA, PIFA, printed antenna, and tiny ceramic-chip antennas.
Design methods of these antennas differ depending on the type of antenna, but are not
necessarily speciﬁc, excepting cases where complexity surrounding the antenna system
needs serious considerations. Use of a simulation technique may become useful for
such cases where ordinary methods are not applicable, as very complicated problems
such as inclusion of proximity effects, are involved. However, simulation methods are
not a cure-all means, but are only an approximation, although they can provide fairly
accurate and precise results as compared with experiments performed in extraordinary
environmental conditions. However, it would be recommended that the results obtained
by the simulation should better be assured by comparison with experimental results,
although for smaller antenna sizes, the implementation of the experiment can become
difﬁcult.
6.4.2
PCSA employing a high impedance surface
When an ordinary dipole antenna is placed in parallel and very close to the PEC (Perfect
Electric Conductor) surface, the performance of the antenna degrades signiﬁcantly
because of the negative inﬂuence caused by the image of the dipole, which has opposite
phase to that of the primary dipole (Figure 6.51(a)). When, however, the PEC surface is
replaced with a High Impedance Surface (HIS) [59–61], the performance of the dipole
does not degrade, but may be modiﬁed to allow the dipole to be placed very close
to the surface (Figure 6.51(b)), and have improved impedance characteristics, efﬁcient
radiation, and so forth.
The input impedance Zd of the dipole antenna placed on the HIS is given by [68]
Zd = Z11 + Z12ejθ
(6.20)

72
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
C
L
surface
<<λ
plate
ground plane
vias
C
L
Figure 6.52 Mushroom structure to represent EBG surface; (a) Mushroom type EBG
implementation, (b) a cross section of several segments, (c) a cross section of one segment, and
(d) equivalent circuit of one segment.
where Z11 is the impedance of the primary dipole, Z12 is the mutual impedance
between the primary and the image dipole, and θ is the reﬂection phase angle, which
is 180 degrees for the PEC surface. The θ can be determined by the surface media
parameters. One of the typical HISs is EBG (Electromagnetic Band Gap) media [57],
in which the Mushroom type [58] is the most popular one. Figure 6.52 illustrates (a)
implementation of the Mushroom type EBG, (b) a cross section of the Mushroom
structure, (c) a cross section of the one segment, and (d) an equivalent representation of
the one segment with an L-C circuit. The capacitance C is due to the gap between the
two surface planes and the inductance L is produced by the current ﬂowing through the
surface plane, vias, and the ground plane. Applications of the Mushroom type media
are found in various situations; one is for lowering antenna height on the ground plane
[64], another is to reduce mutual coupling between two antennas [65–66]. The ﬁrst one
contributes to creating a very low proﬁle antenna, and the second one allows antennas
to be located closely in a limited area. Thus, in a small wireless unit, in which more than
one antenna is required to be installed in a small limited space, mounting several antenna
systems simultaneously, for instance, placing such antennas as multiband antennas,
MIMO antennas, and multi-purpose antennas in a limited area, becomes feasible. The
HIS media can be applied to other signiﬁcant purposes; reduction of surface wave,
enhancement of radiation [67, 68], beam scanning [69, 70], and bandwidth enhancement
[71], are some examples. The design and practices will be described in Chapters 7 and 8.
6.5
Techniques and methods for making PSA
A PSA is a Physically Small Antenna which has such small general physical dimensions
that the antenna can be put on a human palm. High-frequency antennas in microwave
(MW) and millimeter wave (MMW) regions are typical examples, as they have inherently
small dimensions according to their frequency. Lower-frequency antennas, which have
simply small dimensions, are also included in the PSA. Lately, various types of PSAs
have been developed and employed in small terminals or units used in recently deployed
wireless systems such as NFC (Near Field Communication) systems, including RFID
(Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation) systems, UWB (Ultra Wide Band) systems, and so
forth.
Matching problems are often encountered in these systems, as antennas used for these
systems are too small to satisfy appropriate matching conditions. Serious issues are

6.5 Techniques and methods for making PSA
73
found particularly in application to the RFID systems, where equipment is so small that
the space to install an antenna is strictly limited to a very narrow area, and thus the size
of the antenna is forced to be very small, and satisfying matching conditions becomes
extremely difﬁcult. Antennas used unﬁttingly in such situations without proper matching
conditions often suffer insufﬁcient system performance; for example, low sensitivity so
that the service is limited to small areas.
6.5.1
PSA in microwave (MW) and millimeter-wave (MMW) regions
Antennas for MW and MMW regions are inherently small size because they are designed
for high operating frequencies. Since they are physically very small, many types of them
can be classiﬁed into ESA in addition to PSA, but they are not necessarily restrained by
the limitations imposed on small antennas as the usual ESA. The basic structure of these
antennas is the same as those used in lower-frequency regions; however, since aperture
antennas such as horn, reﬂector types, and waveguide require generally some physical
volume, they are not usually used in lower-frequency applications. But, thanks to their
small size in MW and MMW regions, they are useful for application in various systems,
especially in integrated RF devices with small antennas. Particularly, planar antennas
are employed in such systems. Antennas integrated with RF circuits play very important
roles in small mobile wireless systems, where small, compact, and yet functional antenna
systems are required. Some of these antennas are thus classiﬁed into FSA.
Recently demands on antennas in MW or MMW regions have gradually increased,
especially for signal transmission of high data rate, video, and multimedia applications.
One example is an application to mobile phones, to which a small 60-GHz wireless
module is attached, that is used for the purpose of transmission of high-rate data infor-
mation or TV images at home. Small chip antennas or planar antennas integrated into
RF parts constitute the front end of the wireless systems.
Design of these antennas differs depending on where to apply, how to use, the type
of antenna, and so forth. Use of simulation is particularly helpful for design of antenna
systems having complicated or extraordinary structure.
6.5.2
Simple PSA
There are wide varieties of PSAs. Some of them are ordinary types, while others are
extraordinary types constituted with complicated or composite structure. Typical ordi-
nary antennas are small wire antennas such as dipole, monopole, loop, IFA, meander
line, helices, fractal structure, and so forth, whereas planar antennas are PIFA, MSA,
printed antennas, and related types. The wire elements can be printed on the surface of a
planar substrate to comprise a planar antenna. They can be implanted into a small bulk
substructure to form a tiny chip structure. Meanwhile, many of the extraordinary types
of antennas are composed by integrating impedance components, materials, or other
types of antenna elements into an antenna structure.
Realization of antennas with physically small size is in other aspects to achieve either
wider bandwidth or higher efﬁciency with the antenna size being kept unchanged.

74
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
Practical wireless systems sometimes require a very small antenna to ﬁt to the very
small electronic unit. Antenna designers thus should attempt to realize an antenna having
the practically obtainable performances for the required size, although there could be
still some difﬁculty in achieving it.
It should not be neglected to have impedance matching conditions in any antenna
systems in addition to the above conditions. Matching is the inevitable condition, as
being understood commonly in ordinary antenna systems; however, in small antennas,
especially with physically small size, proper matching will become difﬁcult and ﬁnal
results may be left without perfect matching status. Nevertheless, the lower frequency
resonance should be satisﬁed either within the antenna structure or by network at the
antenna load terminal. The matching is signiﬁcant particularly in PSA, and the matching
technique needs skill and experience. The latest advances are an application of NF (Non-
Foster) circuits to the matching circuit, and matching in space by using metamaterial,
which can compensate the reactive component in near ﬁeld so that resonance in space
is attained.
6.6
Optimization techniques
Generally, antenna miniaturization is at the expense of efﬁciency, bandwidth, and gain.
As previously noted, small antenna design is a compromise between performance and
the dimension as well as manufacturability, materials, and the operating environment.
Experience and intuition are essential in the antenna design process as well. However
as a certain level of design complexity is reached, design optimization tools become
extremely valuable if not a necessity. In this section, some optimization methods adopted
for antenna design are discussed. Speciﬁcally, Genetic Algorithm (GA), Particle Swarm
Optimization (PSO), Topology Optimization, and Volumetric Material Optimization
schemes are considered for antenna design improvement.
6.6.1
Genetic algorithm
Genetic Algorithms (GAs) are search methods based on the principles and concepts
of natural selection and evolution. These optimization methods consider a set of trial
solutions (in parallel), based on a parametric variation of a set of coded geometric and
material features. GA employs already known concepts, such as chromosomes, genes,
alleles, mating, and mutation, to the coding and best design selection. Figure 6.53 outlines
the GA optimization process. More details can be found in papers and books covering
the application of GA in electromagnetics [69–73]. The most studied application of GAs
in electromagnetics is antenna design. Speciﬁcally, GAs have been applied in reducing
side lobes [74, 75], aperture amplitude or phase tapering [76, 77], and for adaptive
array optimization [78, 79]. Several uses of GA in single element designs have also
been reported [80–82] in uses of circuit elements for antenna loading. GAs have also
been used to optimize the performances of standard antennas such as reﬂectors [83],
and Yagis [84]. As is the case with all optimization algorithms, a search for an optimal

6.6 Optimization techniques
75
Begin
Generate
initial
population
Evaluate
fitness of
population
Selection
Crossover
(mating)
Evaluate
fitness of
population
Converge?
End
Figure 6.53 Flow chart of GA.
solution is carried out subject to pre-speciﬁed performance criteria (such as bandwidth,
gain, return loss, etc.). Figure 6.53 displays a typical ﬂow chart of the GA optimization
process.
Antenna optimizations via GA have been demonstrated. The examples are a minia-
turization of a microstrip patch antenna [85], and design of a biocompatible antenna for
the 402–405 MHz band [86], where the metal patch is divided into numbers of rectan-
gular cells, and some of them are removed to provide reduction in the patch resonance
frequency. Prior to these applications, similar approaches have already been introduced
in [87], in which improvement of the quality factor (Q) of a resonator is achieved, and
another [88] had shown use of GA to obtain wideband patch antennas.

76
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
Figure 6.54 Generic microstrip patch antenna.
In the GA based optimization design procedure, the variables are the number of metal
cells and their location, while all the other antenna parameters remain constant. The
initial common rectangular microstrip patch as an example is divided into N × M equal
rectangular cells. The coding is straightforward as a “1” represents a cell with metal
and a “0” represents a cell with no metal. All the cells are allowed to be metallic or
nonmetallic except the cell where the coaxial probe is connected, which necessarily must
be metallic. Each chromosome is, therefore, coded as a string of N × M bits (genes). The
initial population is generated randomly. For each cycle of the optimization procedure
a start frequency, stop frequency, and number of frequency points are chosen. At each
frequency point and for each individual the input reﬂection coefﬁcient is obtained. If
the return loss is less than or equal to 10 dB the cost function is set to zero. If it is
greater than 10 dB, the resonance frequency of the individual is set as the frequency
where the input reﬂection coefﬁcient is minimum. The cost function is then calculated
as the difference between the resonance frequencies, the higher the cost function the
higher the ﬁtness of the individual. A new generation is obtained from the previous one
using tournament selection with elitism, single-point crossover, and mutation. The cycle
continues until the predeﬁned number of generations limit is reached. Since there is no
information about an “absolute” or “unique” solution, a new cycle can be started. In this
case, a new start frequency and stop frequency are deﬁned to guarantee the optimization
procedure efﬁciency.
In an example introduction in [85], a patch having dimensions of 32.94 mm in both
the width w and the length L, is printed on the substrate with a thickness of 62 mils,
a relative dielectric constant of 2.20, and a loss tangent of 0.0007. The conventional
parameters have been chosen to provide a resonance frequency around 3 GHz in GA
optimization, in which N × M = 9 and populations of ten individuals are used. For the
optimized patch shown in Figure 6.54, a resonance frequency of 1.738 GHz has been
obtained compared with 3 GHz of the conventional patch.
The space-ﬁlling curves are chosen to design small antennas because they utilize the
space more efﬁciently to improve the antenna performance with a given small size. Some
representative antenna geometries and structures using space-ﬁlling curves like meander,

6.6 Optimization techniques
77
turn n
turn 2
turn 1
h11
h21
w21
h22
w22
w11
w00
h00/2
h12
w12
HN/2
Figure 6.55 Scheme for non-uniform MLA with indication of parameters to be optimized only
half antenna is visible.
spiral/helix, and fractals are described later in Section 7.1 in conjunction with design of
small antennas. However, the resonant frequency and the antenna performances do not
depend only on the total wire length of space-ﬁlling curves, but also on their geometrical
conﬁguration. Thus the GAs are introduced to design these kinds of small antenna to
obtain better performance while maintaining miniaturization.
Meandering structure is widely used in small antennas for wireless applications.
However, for a ﬁxed height, an ordinary meander line antenna (MLA) does not exhibit
the optimum gain [89], especially when the conductor losses due to lengthening the
meandered line cannot be neglected. It has already been shown that the inherent geometry
of the meander line will affect the resonant frequency and the performance, such as Q,
input impedance, and gain. Thus a GA-based MLA is designed to obtain better gain
while taking into account the wire conductivity [90]. An MLA can be described by only
three parameters: height, width, and number of turns. Whereas in the GA design, more
parameters will be considered as shown in Figure 6.55: the number of turns N, the length
of the horizontal (wn1 and wn2) and vertical (hn1 and hn2) segments of the nth turn,
and the length of the central segments (w00 and h00). The above optimization process,
involving a trade-off between miniaturization with self-resonance (long wire length) and
minimization of loss (short wire length), requires all the vertical and horizontal segments
to be independently designed and can be efﬁciently handled by the GA approach. For
each pth antenna of the GA population at the kth generation, the following ﬁtness
function is then evaluated:
f (k)
p (G p, Hp, X p) = r1
G p
G0
+ r2
Hp
Hmax
+ r3
X0
|X p| + X0
(6.21)
where Hp, Gp, Xp are the pth antenna height, maximum gain, and input reactance, respec-
tively. Parameters have been chosen as: r1 + r2 + r3 = 10, G0 = 1.63 (maximum gain of
half-wavelength perfect conductor dipole), X0 = 1. The ﬁtness function converges to
fp = 10 as antenna gain equals G0, the height equals Hmax and the antenna is at resonance.
To investigate the GA optimization to enhance MLA gain, several trials of designs
have been performed for different maximum sizes (Hmax × Wmax) ranging from 3 × 3 cm2

78
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
3
2.5
U-MLA
NU-MLA
2
1.5
1
0.5
Gain (dB)
0
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
Hmax (cm)
5
5.5
6
6.5
−0.5
−1
−1.5
Fig 6.56 Copper-wire GA-optimized MLA antennas for different maximum available areas
(dashed shapes).
to 6 × 6 cm2. The antenna elements are made of copper. As depicted in Figure 6.56, the
GA-optimization remains effective over the uniform MLA as the maximum available
area decreases. For sizes as small as 4 × 4 cm2, an N = 2 antenna has been considered
to obtain self-resonance. As the available space increases, the antenna tuning requires
shorter horizontal segments, mainly localized at the wire’s ends to minimize losses.
GA techniques have also been applied to the design of pre-fractal antenna elements.
For example a GA-engineered second-order Koch-like dual antenna, having a compact
size and low voltage standing wave ratio (VSWR) is presented in [91]. Later Pantoja
et al. extended the work to seek an optimum set of solutions in terms of resonance
frequency, bandwidth, efﬁciency, and the design, using a multi-objective GA of wire
pre-fractal Koch-like antennas [92]. Moreover, the GA code is employed to search for
nonfractal structures, namely zigzag and meander type antennas. It is shown that for a
given overall wire length and antenna size, GAs ﬁnd Euclidean geometry designs that
perform better than do their pre-fractal counterparts.
Altshuler used GA to optimize wire antennas ﬁlling the volumetric space. In [93]
various wire antennas were designed. One of them consists of seven wires, with the
locations and lengths determined by the GA alone, that radiates waves for GPS/IRIDIUM
applications [94]. Also two Yagis were designed for different goals, one is for a broad
frequency band and low sidelobes, and the other is for high gain at a single frequency.
All of these antennas have unusual shapes compared to conventional ones. In [95] a Self-
Resonant Wire Antenna (S-RWA) was designed. First, Altshuler chose a target frequency
and then constrained the algorithm to create a conﬁguration of linear wire segments,
connected in series within the volume of a cube, such that the resulting antenna was
self-resonant. As a consequence of cancellation of the inductance and capacitance of
the wire conﬁguration at the target frequency, Altshuler found that as the size of the

6.6 Optimization techniques
79
cube was reduced, more wire segments were required. Altshuler used GA to optimize
the S-RWA with a minimum Q and maximum bandwidth. In [96], an antenna consisting
of a set of wires connected in series and with impedance loads is investigated. The shape
of the antenna, the location of the loads, and their impedance are optimized using a GA.
The resultant antenna mounted over a ground plane radiates elliptically polarized waves
in almost near hemispherical coverage. It has a VSWR less than about 4.5 over the 50
to 1 frequency band ranging from 300 to 15 000 MHz.
It is well known that antenna miniaturization impacts antenna efﬁciency as well as
bandwidth. Therefore multi-objective optimization should be performed to design small
antennas with improved efﬁciency. An optimal set of designs using Pareto GA approach
is implemented for designing electrically small wire antennas taking into consideration
both bandwidth and efﬁciency [97]. For the antenna conﬁguration, multi-segment wire
structure is employed. The resulting GA designs followed the trend of the fundamental
limit, but were about a factor of two below the limit. To further improve the performance
of the GA-designed antennas, other design freedoms such as variable characteristic
impedance, multi-arm wires, and multiple wire radii could be considered.
6.6.2
Particle swarm optimization
As a novel evolutionary algorithm proposed in the mid 1990s [98, 99], particle swarm
optimization (PSO) has been introduced into the EM community [100, 101], and its
applications have received enormous attention in recent years. Unlike GAs, the swarm
intelligence in nature is modeled by fundamental Newtonian mechanics in PSO for opti-
mization purposes. This corporative scheme manifests in PSO the concise formulation,
the ease in implementation, and many distinct features in different types of optimiza-
tions. PSO is based on the principle that each solution can be represented as a particle
(agent) in a swarm. PSO has been widely used in antenna optimal design in recent years,
such as antenna arrays [102–104], and wideband printed antennas [105–107].
Figure 6.57 shows the working procedure of the PSO algorithm using a simple ﬂow
chart. The detailed description of PSO can be found in [101, 102], where, as an example,
a microstrip array and a corrugated horn have been optimized.
PSO has also been applied to small antenna design in recent years, but the design
procedure is not much different from GA. For example, the hybrid real-binary PSO
algorithm is used to design a dual-band handset patch antenna operating at 1.8 GHz and
2.4 GHz [108]. The unique hybrid representation of candidate antenna designs using
real and binary variables enables the optimized beneﬁt from the advantages of both
continuous and discrete optimization techniques. With the ﬁtness function evaluated by
an MoM-based full-wave simulator, the design is accomplished in quite a limited space
with a dimension of 0.23λg × 0.13λg at 1.8 GHz (λg is a wavelength).
6.6.3
Topology optimization
A full three-dimensional (3D) antenna design methodology is presented using concurrent
shape, size, metallization as well as dielectric and magnetic material volume optimization

80
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
Randomly initialize
particles’ positions
and velocities
For each particle
Out of
bounds?
Assign
bad fitness
Calculate
fitness
Term. crit.
satisfied?
End
Update Pbest
gbest,x,y
Figure 6.57 Flow chart depicting the PSO algorithm.
by Volakis et al. [109, 110]. It is reasonable to expect that designs resulting from
the optimal selection of materials, metallization, and matching circuits would lead to
novel conﬁgurations with much higher performance as compared to simpler approaches
employing a subset of these parameters. Nevertheless, volumetric optimization would
provide for greater design ﬂexibility.
In the early works [109, 110], optimum topology/material design of dielectric sub-
strates was applied to a patch antenna and obtained remarkable improvement in the
bandwidth. The topology algorithm has generally been used to optimize size/shape of
objective and it provides a possibility of volumetric design [111]. In applying it to RF
design, the optimization scheme will bring the best geometrical and topological conﬁg-
uration from its volumetric variation, along with consideration of geometry and physical
dimensions as well as material composite. It performs iteration of evaluation to reach the
optimum (maximum) value initially set to obtain the objective shape/conﬁguration. It
was demonstrated that the volumetric material design led to signiﬁcant improvement of

6.6 Optimization techniques
81
bandwidth in a simple patch antenna as a consequence of the application of the topology
optimization method.
6.6.4
Volumetric material optimization
To take advantage of volumetric variations in antenna design, various optimization
schemes can be pursued for material and topological selections subject to various elec-
trical and size/volume constraints while considering geometry, physical dimensions as
well as material composition. Several approaches have already been employed to facil-
itate antenna design by integrating analysis tools with formal optimization. In general,
much emphasis has been placed on the shape optimization either by changing geometric
parameters or by concentrating on metallization shape. Material optimization has not
been considered except for a few recent cases.
Volumetric Material Optimization [112] is novel optimization algorithm, which per-
mits full volumetric antenna design by combining GA with ﬁnite element-boundary
integral method. This is the ﬁrst time that a full 3D antenna design is pursued using
concurrent shape, size, metallization as well as dielectric and magnetic material volume
optimization.
Later, a full 3D antenna design is pursued using concurrent shape, size metalliza-
tion as well as dielectric and magnetic material volume optimization. Multi-objective
optimization is used for consideration of higher gain, increased bandwidth, and size
reduction simultaneously. An aggressive optimization scheme was employed using GAs
in conjunction with a fast ﬁnite element-boundary integral code. The approach employs a
wide-frequency sweep using a single geometry model, thus, enhancing speed, along with
several discrete material choices for realizable optimized designs. The presented color-
coded graphs allow for quick and efﬁcient evaluation of the best/optimized cases. Design
examples for circularly and linearly polarized antennas were presented. The ﬁnal designs
are associated with very thin (0.01λ) material substrates and yield as much as 15% band-
width using a 0.1∼0.4λ aperture subject to various gain and bandwidth requirements.
In particular, optimization cycles using multilayer magneto-dielectric stacked patches
produced a small (0.11λ aperture) antenna design exhibiting 4.7 dBi gain with 3.4%
bandwidth, as shown in Figure 6.58.
6.6.5
Practice of optimization
In this section, Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) to optimize the method of cutting the
ground plane (GP) under a U-shaped Folded Dipole Antenna is described. The UFDA
[114–116] element is designed for WiMAX (using frequency of band 2.3 GHz∼2.7 GHz
and 3.4 GHz∼3.8 GHz).
6.6.5.1
Outline of particle swarm optimization
PSO was ﬁrst introduced by James Kennedy and Russell Elberhart in 1995 [117]. It has
the algorithm based on the simpliﬁed social model of swarming theory. The algorithm

82
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
1.25
0
40
30
25
20
10
5
2.2
1
20
μr
εr
Magneto-Dielectric
Map
Metallization
Map
16
13
10
8
5
2
1
0
−1
−1
−2
−3
0
0
0.2
0.5
0
1
2
3
1
−5
−10
−15
−20
10
5
0
Gain (dBi)
S11 (dB)
−5
−10
1.3
1.35
1.4
Frequency (GHz)
1.45
1.5
Figure 6.58 Examples of optimized metallomagnetodielectric LP designs; left: resulting material
and metallic geometries and right: corresponding return loss and gain.
of PSO imitates the social behavior of birds and insects, etc., that keep living by main-
taining swarm actions. The algorithm of PSO is regarded as simpler than other methods
and moreover, it can lead to a convergence quickly. The algorithm is described by renew-
ing two standard quantities of each particle in the swarm: coordinate and velocity. At
ﬁrst, the coordinate and velocity of each particle in the swarm are set with initial values
randomly inside the searching space. It is supposed that, xi(k) and vi(k) are the coordinate
and velocity of particle number i at step k, respectively, and they are updated into their
new values at step k + 1 as xi(k + 1) and vi(k + 1) by applying the two equations below:
vi(k + 1) = ωvi(k) + c1r1[pi(k) −x1(k)] + c2r2[pg(k) −xi(k)]
(6.22)
xi(k + 1) = xi(k) + vi(k + 1)	t
(6.23)
where pi(k) and pg(k) are the best coordinates of particle number i and the whole swarm
until step k, respectively. Both r1 and r2 get independent random values between 0
and 1. Cognitive parameter c1 indicates how much a particle trusts in itself and social
parameter c2 indicates how much it trusts in the swarm while searching the optimum
solution of the optimization problem. According to reference [117], in order to obtain a
good convergence for the PSO algorithm, c1 is set to1.5 and c2 is set to 2.5. The unit time
step 	t is used throughout the optimization process with a constant value as 0.7. The
inertia weight ω plays a role as controlling the exploration properties of the algorithm,
and it is adjusted dynamically from 1.4 to 0.35 during the optimization. Movements of the
whole particles of the swarm are controlled and repeated by the two equations above, and
ﬁnally one optimal solution will be derived when the algorithm results a convergence.
6.6.5.2
PSO application method and result
Figure 6.59 shows the model of U-shaped Folded Dipole Antenna (UFDA) on the ground
plane (GP). The previous study [116] shows that in the low-proﬁle case, when the space
between UFDA and GP becomes smaller, then UFDA gets more effect from GP that
makes its VSWR characteristic worsen (GP w/o cutting in Figure 6.63). But when a part

6.6 Optimization techniques
83
16
5
1
UFDA
30
1
5
4.2
31
75
[Unit : mm]
O
z
x
y
GP
Figure 6.59 Model of UFDA on GP.
of GP is cut practically such as shown in Figure 6.60(b) with the cutting area Scut =
88 mm2, it has been shown that VSWR can be improved with a wider-band characteristic
(GP cut w/o using PSO in Figure 6.63). However, it is desired to ﬁnd the best way to
cut GP most effectively to get the wider broadband feature, and simultaneously ﬁnd the
minimum value for the cutting area Scut. Therefore, PSO is applied, to this problem.
How to cut the GP using PSO is decided by deﬁning three design variables x1, x2 and
x3 as shown in the Figure 6.60(a) where x1 indicates the cutting position, x2 represents
the deletion distance along the O-x axis and x3 represents the deletion distance along
the O-y axis. These three variables can change freely within GP’s limit considering the
position of the feed strip and short strip. Thus, the constraint conditions for them are as
follows:
0 < x1, x2, x3
(6.24)
x1 + x2 ≤75
(6.25)
x3 ≤14
(6.26)
The objective function F, the function expressing the purpose we target in the optimiza-
tion problem is set by the following equations:
F = wV + (1 −w)S
(6.27)
V = w1V1 + w2V2 + w3V3
(6.28)
S = Scut/S0 = 2x2x3/S0
(6.29)
where w = 0.5, w1 = w2 = w3 = 1/3 are inertia weight coefﬁcients. V1, V2, V3 are VSWR
values at three frequencies f1 = 2.4 GHz, f2 = 3.2 GHz, f3 = 3.95 GHz where VSWR
is apt to increase easily. The smaller V (composed of V1, V2, V3) is, the wider covered

84
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
x
x2
x3
x3
Scut = 2x2x3
Scut = 88 mm2
x1 = 8
x1 = 13
x2 = 1
x3 = 14
x2 = 8
x3 = 5.5
Scut =28 mm2
x1
x2
x1
y
O
(a) three variables for cutting GP
(c) GP cut using PSO
(b) GP cut w/o using PSO (previous study)
Figure 6.60 Shape of GP (a) three variables for cutting GP, (b) GP cut w/o using PSO (previous
study), and (c) GP cut using PSO.
frequency band is achieved. The cutting area Scut is transformed to a normalization value
as S with S0 = 100 mm2 to ﬁt to V in Eq. (6.27) because V is dimensionless. The value of
function F is minimized by the algorithm of PSO. This process will give us the minimum
of V, which means that it is possible to obtain a wider broadband characteristic and the
minimum of S simultaneously.
A swarm with 50 particles to search for the optimum solution of this problem through
40 steps is used. The convergence result of objective function F is shown in Figure 6.61
which demonstrates that F converges to the minimum value Fmin = 0.8686 from the 18th
step. Naturally, design variables (x1, x2, x3) also converge to the optimum solution (13,
1, 14) at the same step as in Figure 6.62. This means that the most appropriate shape
of GP is the shape shown in Figure 6.60(c). In this case, cutting area Scut is minimized
to 28 mm2 which is much smaller than the result Scut = 88 mm2 of a previous study
when PSO was not used. Comparisons of VSWR characteristics between this case and
the previous result are shown in Figure 6.63. Covered frequency band (VSWR ≤3) of
the optimized result (GP cut using PSO) is obviously wider than the case GP cut w/o
using PSO, and the difference between them is about 600 MHz.

6.6 Optimization techniques
85
3
2
1
0
0
10
20
Step
18th Step
min G (Xelite) = 0.8686
30
40
F
Figure 6.61 Convergence of objective function F.
0
16
12
8
4
0
10
20
Step
18th Step
xi (mm)
x2optim = 1
x1optim = 13
x3optim = 14
30
40
Figure 6.62 Convergence of design variables xi (i = 1, 2, 3).
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
12.0
3.0
Frequency (GHz)
VSWR
4.0
4.5
3.5
2.5
GP w/o cutting
GP cut w/o using PSO
GP cut using PSO (Cal.)
GP cut using PSO (Mea.)
Figure 6.63 VSWR characteristics.

86
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
References
[1] C. H. Walter, Travelling Wave Antennas, Dover 1965, p. 14 and chapters 5 and 6.
[2] K. Wu, Slow Wave Structures, in K. Chang (ed.) Encyclopedia of RF Microwave Engineer-
ing, John Wiley and Sons, 2005, vol. 3, pp. 4744–4760.
[3] D. H. Werner and S. Gargiel, An Overview of Fractal Antenna Engineering Research, IEEE
Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 45, February 2003, pp. 38–57.
[4] J. Ramo, J. R. Whinnery, and T. V. Duzer, Fields and Waves in Communications, John
Wiley and Sons, 1965, Appendix IV, p. 737.
[5] J. Ramo, J. R. Whinnery, and T. V. Duzer, Fields and Waves in Communications, John Wiley
and Sons, 1965, pp. 738–739.
[6] E. Martin and B. Marquis, 9.1, in F. Capolino (ed.), Applications of Metamaterials, CRC
Press, 2009, pp. 9.2–9.3.
[7] J. Ramo, J. R. Whinnery, and T. V. Duzer, Fields and Waves in Communications, John
Wiley and Sons, 1965, p. 475 and C. H. Walter, Travelling Wave Antennas, Dover 1965,
pp. 237–269.
[8] C. Carlos and T. Itoh, CRLH Transmission Line Metamaterials, in F. Capolino (ed.),
Applications of Metamaterials, CRC Press, 2009.
[9] G. E. Eleftheriades, in N. Engheta and R. W. Ziolkowsky (eds.) Metamaterials, Physics and
Engineering Exploration, John Wiley and Sons, 2006, chapter 5, p. 5.2.
[10] T. Endo, Y. Sunahara, S. Sato, and K. Katagi, Resonant Frequency Radiation Efﬁciency of
Meander Line Antennas, Transactions of IEICE, vol. J80-BE, 2000 no. 12, pp. 1044–1049.
[11] A. Z. Elsherbeni, C-W. Paul Huang, and C. E. Smith, 12.2 Meander Line Antenna for Per-
sonal Wireless Communications, in L. C. Godara (ed.), Handbook of Antennas in Wireless
Communications, CRC Press, 2002.
[12] S. R. Best, Small and Fractal Antennas, in C. A. Balanis (ed.), Modern Antenna Handbook,
John Wiley and Sons, 2008, chapter 10, pp. 488–498.
[13] J. D. Kraus and R. J. Marhefka, Antennas, 3rd edn. McGraw Hill, 2002, pp. 292–297.
[14] J. Ramo, J. R. Whinnery, and T. V. Duzer, Fields and Waves in Communications, John Wiley
and Sons, 1965, pp. 467–468.
[15] F. Capolino (ed.), Theory and Phenomena of Metamaterials, CRC Press, Part I 1.1.
[16] N. Engheta and R. W. Ziolkowsky (eds.), Metamaterials, Physics and Engineering Explo-
ration, John Wiley and Sons, 2006.
[17a] J. B. Pendry, A. J. Holden, D. J. Rollins, and W. J. Stewart, Low Frequency Plasmons in Thin
Wire Structures, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter, vol. 10, June 1998, pp. 4785–4809.
[17b] P. R. Smith and S. Shultz, Determination of Effective Permittivity and Permeability
of Metamaterials from Reﬂection and Transmission Coefﬁcients, Physical Review B,
vol. B65, 2002, pp. 65–195104–65–195105.
[17c] J. B. Pendry, Magnetism from Conduction and Enhanced Non-Linear Phenomena, IEEE
Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, vol. 47, 1999, no. 11, pp. 2075–2084.
[18] F. Capolino (ed.), Applications of Metamaterials, CRC Press, 2009, Part III 9.
[19] F. Capolino (ed.), Theory and Phenomena of Metamaterials, CRC Press 2009, 1.2.2 and
1.2.3.
[20] N. Engheta and R. W. Ziolkowsky (eds.), Metamaterials, Physics and Engineering Explor-
ation, John Wiley and Sons, 2006, sections 3.2.1 and 3.2.2.
[21] A. Lai and T. Itoh, Composite Right/Left Handed Transmission Metamaterials, IEEE
Microwave Magazine, September 2004, pp. 34–50.

References
87
[22] C. Caloz, I. Itoh, and A. Rennings, CRLH Metamaterial Leaky–Wave and Resonant
Antennas, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 50, 2008, no. 5, pp. 25–39.
[23] D. Guha and Y. M. M. Antar, Microstrip and Printed Antennas, John Wiley and Sons, 2011,
Chapter 11.
[24] A. Lai and T. Itoh, Composite Right/Left Handed Transmission Metamaterials, IEEE
Microwave Magazine, September 2004, pp. 36–40.
[25] C. Caloz, T. Itoh, and A. Rennings, CRLH Metamaterial Leaky–Wave and Resonant Anten-
nas, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 50, 2008, no. 5, pp. 25–28 and F.
Capolino (ed.), Applications of Metamaterials, CRC Press, 2009, Part IV 22.
[26] F. Capolini (ed.), Applications of Metamaterials, CRC Press, 2009 Part III 9.1, pp. 9.2–
9.5.
[27] N. Engheta and R. W. Ziolkowsky (eds.), Metamaterials, Physics and Engineering Explor-
ation, John Wiley and Sons, 2006, and A. Lai and T. Itoh, Composite Right/Left Handed
Transmission Metamaterials, IEEE Microwave Magazine, September 2004, p. 37.
[28] N. Engheta and R. W. Ziolkowsky (eds.), Metamaterials, Physics and Engineering Explo-
ration, John Wiley and Sons, 2006, section 7.2.
[29] C. A. Balanis, Antenna Theory and Design, 2nd edn, John Wiley and Sons, 1997, p. 570.
[30] R. C. Hansen, Fundamental Limitations in Antennas, Proceedings of IEEE, vol. 69, 1981,
no. 2, February pp. 172–173.
[31] C. P. Baliarda, J. Romeu, and A. Curdama, The Koch Monopole: A Small Fractal Antenna,
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 48, November 2000, pp. 1773–1781.
[32] J. Rashed-Mohassed, A. Mehdipour, and H. Alinkbarian, New Scheme of Size Reduction
in Space Filling Resonant Dipole Antennas, 3rd EuCAP Conference, 23–27 March 2009,
pp. 2430–2432.
[33] J. Zhu, A. Hoorfer, and N. Engheta, Peano Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation Letters, vol. 3, 2004, pp. 71–74.
[34] X. Chen, S. Safavi, and Y. Liu, A Down-sized Printed Hilbert Antenna for VHF band, IEEE
APS International Symposium, 2003, vol. 2, 22–27 June 2003, pp. 581–584.
[35] S. R. Best, The Radiation Properties of Electrically Small Folded Dipole Antennas, IEEE
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 52, April 2004, no. 4.
[36] L. J. Chu, Physical Limitations of Omni-Directional Antennas, Journal of Applied Physics,
vol. 19, 1948, no. 28, pp. 1113–1175.
[37] W. L. Weeks, Antenna Engineering, McGraw Hill, 1968, 21, p. 28.
[38] W. L. Stutzman and G. A. Thiele, Antenna Theory and Design, 2nd edn, John Wiley &
Sons, 1998, p. 58.
[39] Y. Mushiake, Self-Complementary Antennas, Springer Verlag, 1996.
[40] P. Xu and K. Fujimoto, L-Shaped Self-Complementary Antenna, IEEE APS International
Symposium 2003, no. 3, pp. 95–98.
[41a] K. Fujimoto et al., Small Antennas, Research Studies Press, UK, 1987.
[41b] K. Fujimoto, Small Antennas in K. Chang (ed.), Encyclopedia of RF and Microwave
Engineering, vol. 5, John Wiley and Sons, 2005, p. 4777.
[42] H. Morishita, Y. Kim, and K. Fujimoto, Design Concept of Antennas for Small Mobile
Terminals and the Future Perspective, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 44,
October 2002, no. 5, pp. 30–43.
[43] H. R. Stuart and A. Pievertsky, Electrically Small Antenna Elements Using Negative
Permittivity resonator, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 54, 2006,
no. 6, pp. 1644–1653.

88
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
[44] F. Bilotti, A. Alu, and L. Vegri, Design of Miniaturized Metamaterial Patch Antennas, IEEE
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56, 2008, no. 6, pp. 1640–1647.
[45] R. W. Ziolkowsky and A. Erentock, Metamaterial-Based Efﬁcient Electrically Small Anten-
nas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 54, 2006, no. 7, pp. 2113–2130.
[46] A. Erentock and R. W. Ziolkowsky, Metamaterial-Inspired Efﬁcient Electrically Small
Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56, 2008, no. 3,
pp. 691–707.
[47] R. W. Ziolkowsky and A. D. Kipple, Application of Double Negative Materials to Increase
the Power Radiated by Electrically Small Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation, vol. 51, October 2003, no. 10, pp. 2626–2640.
[48] J. L. Linvill, Transistor Negative-Impedance Converters, Proceedings of the IRE, June 1953,
pp. 725–729.
[49a] R. M. Rudish and S. E. Sussman-Fort, Non-Foster Impedance Matching Improves S/N
of Wideband Electrically-Small VHF Antennas and Arrays, Proceedings of the Second
IASTED International Conference on Antennas, Radar, and Wave Propagation, July 19–21
2005, Alberta, Canada.
[49b] S. E. Sussman-Fort, Matching Network Design Using Non-Foster Impedance, International
Journal of RF and Microwave-Computer Engineering, March 2006, pp. 135–142.
[50] J. T. Aberle, Two-Port Representation of an Antenna with Applications to Non-Foster
Networks, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56, May 2008, no. 5,
pp. 1218–1222.
[51] T. Tsutaoka et al., Negative Permeability Spectra of Magnetic Materials, IEEE iWAT 2008,
Chiba, Japan, p. 202, pp. 279–281.
[52] N. Engheta and R. W. Ziolkowsky (eds.), Metamaterials, Physics and Engineering Explo-
ration, John Wiley and Sons, 2006, Part IV, pp. 15.2–15.6 and pp. 16.12–16.13.
[53] N. Engheta and R. W. Ziolkowsky (eds.), Metamaterials, Physics and Engineering Explo-
ration, John Wiley and Sons, 2006, pp. 205–209.
[54] N. Engheta and R. W. Ziolkowsky (eds.), Metamaterials, Physics and Engineering Explo-
ration, John Wiley and Sons, 2006, Part IV, pp. 16.12–16.19.
[55] N. Engheta and R. W. Ziolkowsky (eds.), Metamaterials, Physics and Engineering Explo-
ration, John Wiley and Sons, 2006, Part IV, p. 16.13 and p. 16.20.
[56] N. Engheta and R. W. Ziolkowsky (eds.), Metamaterials, Physics and Engineering Explo-
ration, John Wiley and Sons, 2006, pp. 207–209.
[57] K. Fujimoto, Integrated Antenna Systems, in K. Chang (ed.) Encyclopedia of RF and
Microwave Engineering, John Wiley and Sons, 2005.
[58] C. A Balanis, Modern Antenna Handbook, John Wiley and Sons, 2008, Part III, ch. 15.
[59a] A. Lai and T. Itoh, Composite Right/Left Handed Transmission Metamaterials, IEEE
Microwave Magazine, September 2004, Part VI 31.
[59b] [17a] or [17b] or [17c] chs. 8–9, and chs. 11–12.
[60] D. Sievenpiper et al., High-Impedance Electromagnetic Surfaces with a Forbidden Fre-
quency Band, IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, vol. 47, November
1989, no. 11, pp. 2059–2074.
[61] F. Young and Y. Rahmat-Samii, Reﬂection Phase Characteristics of the EBG Ground Plane
for Low Proﬁle Antenna Applications, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 51, October 2003, no. 10, pp. 2691–2703.
[62] F. Young and Y. Rahmat-Samii, Microstrip Antenna Integrated with Electromagnetic
Bandgap (EBG) Structure; A Low Mutual Coupling Design for Array Applications, IEEE
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 51, no. 10, October 2003, pp. 2936–2946.

References
89
[63] N. Engheta and R. W. Ziolkowsky (eds.), Metamaterials, Physics and Engineering Explo-
ration, John Wiley and Sons, 2006, pp. 276–281.
[64] R. Gonzalo, P. de Yang, K. P. Ma, and T. Itoh, Enhanced Patch Antenna Performance
by Suppressing Surface Wave using Photonic-Bandgap Substances, IEEE Transactions on
Microwave Theory and Techniques, vol. 47, 1999, pp. 2131–2138.
[65] S. Enoch, B. Glalak, and G. Tayeh, Enhanced Emission with Angular Conﬁnement from
Photonic Crystals, Applied Physics Letters, vol. 81, 2002, no. 9, pp. 1588–1590.
[66] F. Young and Y. Rahmat-Samii, Bent Monopole Antenna on EBG Ground Plane with
Reconﬁgurable Radiation Patterns, IEEE APS International Symposium 2004, vol. 2, July
2004, pp. 1819–1820.
[67] N. Engheta and R. W. Ziolkowsky (eds.), Metamaterials, Physics and Engineering Explo-
ration, John Wiley and Sons, 2006, 11.11 p. 305.
[68] K. L. Virga and Y. Rahmat-Samii, Low Proﬁle Enhanced-Bandwidth PIFA Antenna for
Wireless Communications Packaging, IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Tech-
niques, vol. 45, 1997, no. 10, pp. 1879–1888.
[69] R. L. Haupt, An Introduction to Genetic Algorithms for Electromagnetics, IEEE Antennas
and Propagation Magazine, vol. 37, April 1995, no. 2.
[70] D. S. Whiele, E. Michielssen, Genetic Algorithm Optimization Applied to Electromagnet-
ics: A Review, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 45, March 1997,
no. 3.
[71] J. M. Johnson, Y. Rahmat-Samii, Genetic Algorithms in Engineering Electromagnetics,
IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 39, August 1997, no. 4.
[72] R. L. Haupt, D. H. Werner, Genetic Algorithms in Electromagnetics, Wiley-IEEE Press,
2007.
[73] Y. Rahmat-Samii, E. Michielssen (eds.), Electromagnetic Optimization by Genetic Algo-
rithms, Wiley Series in Microwave and Optical Engineering, 1999.
[74] R. L. Haupt, Thinned Arrays Using Genetic Algorithms, IEEE Transactions on Antennas
and Propagation, vol. 42, 1994, no. 7, pp. 993–999.
[75] M. J. Buckley, Linear Array Synthesis Using a Hybrid Genetic Algorithm, IEEE Antennas
and Propagation Society International Symposium Proceedings, Baltimore, MD, July 1996,
pp. 584–587.
[76] R. L. Haupt, Optimum quantised low sidelobe phase tapers for arrays, Electronics Letters,
vol. 31, 1995, no. 14, pp. 1117–1118.
[77] M. Shimizu, Determining the excitation coefﬁcients of an array using genetic algorithms,
IEEE Antennas and Propagation International Symposium Proceedings, Seattle, WA, June
1995, pp. 530–533.
[78] A. Tennant, M. M. Dawoud, and A. P. Anderson, Array pattern nulling by element position
perturbations using a genetic algorithm, Electronics Letters, vol. 30, 1994, no. 3, pp. 174–
176.
[79] D. S. Weile and E. Michielssen, The control of adaptive antenna arrays with genetic algo-
rithms using dominance and diploidy, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 49, October 2011, pp. 1424–1433.
[80] Z. Altman, R. Mittra, J. Philo, and S. Dey, New designs of ultrabroadband antennas using
genetic algorithms, IEEE Antennas and Propagation International Symposium Proceed-
ings, Baltimore, MD, July 1996, pp. 2054–2057.
[81] M. Bahr, A. Boag, E. Michielssen, and R. Mittra, Design of Ultrabroadband Loaded
Monopoles, Proceedings of IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society International Sympo-
sium, Seattle, WA, June 1994, pp. 1290–1293.

90
Principles and techniques for making antennas small
[82] A. Boag, A. Boag, E. Michielssen, and R. Mittra, Design of Electrically Loaded Wire
Antennas using Genetic Algorithms, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 44, May 1996, pp. 687–695.
[83] S. L. Avila, W. P. Carpes, Jr., and J. A. Vasconcelos, Optimization of an Offset Reﬂector
Antenna Using Genetic Algorithms, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, vol. 40, March 2004,
no. 2, pp. 1256–1259.
[84] D. S. Linden and E. E. Altschuler, The Design of Yagi Antennas Using a Genetic Algorithm,
Proceedings USNC/URSI Radio Science Meeting, Baltimore, MD, July 1996, p. 283.
[85] N. Herscovici, M. F. Osorio, and C. Peixeiro, Miniaturization of Rectangular Microstrip
Patches Using Genetic Algorithms, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol.1,
2002, pp. 94–97.
[86] P. Soontornpipit, C. M. Furse, and Y. C. Chung, Miniaturized Biocompatible Microstrip
Antenna Using Genetic Algorithm, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 53, June 2005, no. 6, pp. 1939–1945.
[87] C. Delabie, M. Villegas, and O. Picon, Creation of New Shapes for Resonant Microstrip
Structures By Means of Genetic Algorithms, Electronics Letters, vol. 33, August 1997,
pp. 1509–1510.
[88] H. Choo, A. Hutani, L. C. Trintinalia, and H. Ling, Shape Optimization of Broadband
Microstrip Antennas Using Genetic Algorithm, Electronics Letters, vol. 36, December
2000, pp. 2057–2058.
[89] G. Marrocco, A. Fonte, and F. Bardati, Evolutionary Design of Miniaturized Meander-line
Antennas for RFID Applications, Proceedings of the IEEE AP-S International Symposium,
vol. 2, San Antonio, TX, 2002, pp. 362–365.
[90] G. Marrocco, Gain-Optimized Self-Resonant Meander Line Antennas for RFID Applica-
tions, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 2, 2003, pp. 302–305.
[91] D. H. Werner, P. L. Werner, and K. H. Church, Genetically engineered multiband fractal
antennas, Electronics Letters, vol. 37, 2001, no. 19, pp. 1150–1151.
[92] M. Fern´andez Pantoja, F. Garc´ıa Ruiz, A. Rubio Bretones, et al., GA Design of Wire Pre-
Fractical Antennas and Comparison With Other Euclidean Geometries, IEEE Antennas and
Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 2, 2003.
[93] E. E. Altshuler and D. S. Linden, Wire-antenna Designs Using Genetic Algorithms, IEEE
Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 39, April 1997, pp. 33–43.
[94] E. E. Altshuler, Design of a Vehicular Antenna for GPS/Iridium Using a Genetic Algorithm,
IEEE Antennas and Propagation, vol. 48, June 2000, pp. 968–972.
[95] E. E. Altshuler, Electrically Small Self-resonant Wire Antennas Optimized Using a Genetic
Algorithm, Antennas and Propagation, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 50, March 2002, no. 3, pp. 297–300.
[96] E. E. Altshuler and D. S. Linden, An ultra-wideband impedance-loaded genetic antenna,
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 52, November 2004, pp. 3147–3151,
[97] Hosung Choo, Robert L. Rogers, and Hao Ling, Design of Electrically Small Wire Antennas
Using a Pareto Genetic Algorithm, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol.
53, March 2005, pp. 1038–1046.
[98] J. Kennedy and R. Eberhart, Particle swarm optimization, Proceedings of IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Neural Networks, vol. 4 Perth, Australia, 1995 November,
pp. 1942–1948.
[99] R. Poli, J. Kennedy, and T. Blackwell, Particle Swarm Optimization: An Overview, Swarm
Intelligence, vol. 1, 2007, no. 1, pp. 33–57.
[100] J. Robinson and Y. Rahmat-Samii, Particle Swarm Optimization in Electromagnetics, IEEE
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 52, 2004, no. 2, pp. 397–407.

References
91
[101] Nanbo Jin and Y. Rahmat-Samii, Advances in Particle Swarm Optimization for Antenna
Designs: Real-Number, Binary, Single-Objective and Multiobjective Implementations,
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 55, March 2007, no. 3, pp. 556–567.
[102] N. Jin and Y. Rahmat-Samii, Analysis and Particle Swarm Optimization of Correlator
Antenna Arrays for Radio Astronomy Applications, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation, vol. 56, May 2008, pp. 1260–1279.
[103] D. W. Boeringer and D. H. Werner, Particle Swarm Optimization Versus Genetic Algorithms
for Phased Array Synthesis, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 52,
March 2004, pp. 771–779.
[104] P. J. Bevelacqua and C. A. Balanis, Minimum Sidelobe Levels for Linear Arrays, IEEE
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 55, December 2007 pp. 3442–3449.
[105] F. Afshinmanesh, A. Marandi, and M. Shahabadi, Design of a Single-Feed Dual-Band
Dual-Polarized Microstrip Antenna Using a Boolean Particle Swarm Optimization, IEEE
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56, July 2008, pp. 1845–1852.
[106] N. Jin and Y. Rahmat-Samii, Parallel particle swarm optimization and ﬁnite-difference
time-domain (PSO/FDTD) algorithm for multiband and wide-band patch antenna designs,
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 53, November 2005, pp. 3459–3468.
[107] L. Lizzi, F. Viani, R. Azaro, and A. Massa, A PSO-Driven Spline-Based Shaping Approach
for Ultrawideband (UWB) Antenna Synthesis, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Prop-
agation, vol. 56, August 2008, pp. 2613–2621.
[108] N. Jin and Y. Rahmat-Samii, Particle swarm optimization for multi-band handset antenna
designs: A hybrid real-binary implementation, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society
International Symposium, 2008, AP-S 2008, 5–11 July 2008, pp. 1–4.
[109] G. Kiziltas and D. Psychoudakis, J. L. Volakis, and N. Kikuchi, Topology design opti-
mization of dielectric substrates for bandwidth improvement of a patch antenna, IEEE
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 51, October 2003, pp. 2732–2743.
[110] G. Kiziltas, and J. L. Volakis, Shape and Material Optimization for Bandwidth Improve-
ment of Printed Antennas on High Contrast Substrates, IEEE International Symposium on
Electromagnetic Compatibility, 2003. EMC’03, vol. 2, 11–16 May 2003, pp. 1081–1084.
[111] T. Nomura, K. Sato, S. Nishiwaki, and M. Yoshimura, Topology Optimization of Multi-
band Dielectric Resonator Antennas Using Finite-Difference Time-Domain Method, IEEE
International Workshop on Antenna Technology, March 2007, pp. 147–150.
[112] S. Koulouridis, E. Psychoudakis, and J. L. Volakis, Multiobjective Optimal Antenna Design
Based on Volumetric Material Optimization, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propa-
gation, vol. 55, March 2007, no. 3, pp. 594–603.
[113] S. Ohtsu, S. Endo, N. Michishita, and H. Morishita, A Study on Conﬁgurations of Magnetic
Material Loaded Planar Inverted-F Antenna Using Topology Optimization, IEEE Antennas
and Propagation Society International Symposium, July 2008.
[114] A. Kajitani, Y. Kim, H. Morishita, Y. Koyanagi, Wideband Characteristics of Built-in
Folded Dipole Antenna for Handsets, IEEE AP-S Conference Proceedings, June 2007,
pp. 3548–3551.
[115] A. Kajitani, Y. Kim, H. Morishita, and Y. Koyanagi, Self-balanced and Wideband Charac-
teristics of Improved Built-in Folded Dipole Antenna for Handsets, ISAP AP-S Conference
Proceedings, August 2007, pp. 1178–1181.
[116] N. T. Hung, S. Watanabe, and H. Morishita, Fundamental Investigation of U-shaped Folded
Dipole Antenna for WiMAX, IEICE Society Conference, Sep. 2010, B-1–128.
[117] G. Venter, Particle Swarm Optimization, AIAA Journal vol. 41, August 2003, no. 8.

7
Design and practice of small
antennas I
7.1
Design and practice
This chapter describes practical design and examples of small antennas. The chap-
ter is composed of four sections, which deal with four types of small antenna: ESA
(Electrically Small Antennas), FSA (Functionally Small Antennas), PCSA (Physically
Constrained Small Antennas), and PSA (Physically Small Antennas). Since this group-
ing is rather ﬂexible according to the antenna structure, types of applications, and so
forth, some antennas may be classiﬁed into more than a single group.
7.2
Design and practice of ESA
7.2.1
Lowering the resonance frequency
7.2.1.1
Use of slow wave structure
7.2.1.1.1 Periodic structure
7.2.1.1.1.1 Meander line antennas (MLA)
Meander line antennas have been applied to various small wireless systems such as
mobile phones, digital TV receivers, RFID, and so forth, as the antennas can be easily
and more ﬂexibly constituted in planar structure than simple wire types. The meander line
structure has practically been employed with modiﬁed versions such as an asymmetric
dipole for two-frequency bands, a composite with a line or a slot for multiband operation,
a horizontal element of an IFA (Inverted-F antenna), and so forth. These antennas used
as a part of another type of antenna like the horizontal element of a PIFA are designed
partly as an MLA and integrated into the other type of antenna.
7.2.1.1.1.1.1 Dipole-type meander line antenna
The principle of application of a meander line structure to antennas is as mentioned in
Section 6.2.1.1, application of SW (Slow Wave) performances, the main feature of which
is the smaller phase velocity as compared with that of free space so that the resonance
frequency is lowered, resulting in the antenna size reduction. As one way to evaluate the
size reduction effect, the length-shortening ratio SR is proposed [1], and demonstrated

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
93
(e = 0.0133 λ.)
Axial length 2Lax (λ)
500
400
300
Xin
Rin
200
100
2 Lax
e
−100
−200
0
0.3
0.4
0.5
Input impedance  Zin (Ω)
e
∼
∼
Calculated
Experiment
Figure 7.1 Input impedance (Zin = Rin + j Xin) of MLA (from [1], copyright C⃝1984 IEEE).
by considering two models; a meander line antenna and a zigzag antenna. The SR is
deﬁned as
SR = (λ/2 −2Lax)/(λ/2)
(7.1)
where Lax is the axial length of the antenna (the length taken directly from one end
to another end of the antenna structure) and λ is the resonance wavelength. The phase
velocity Vp in this case is expressed by using SR as
Vp = (1 −SR)c.
(7.2)
Here c is the velocity of light in free space.
The input impedance Zin (= Rin + jXin) of the antenna is calculated and depicted in
Figure 7.1, where the inset illustrates the antenna model (a dipole type), and Zin is drawn
with respect to the axial length 2Lax. This ﬁgure indicates that the resonance occurs with
the length of 2Lax = 0.35 λ (the length L0 of the meandered wire extended into a straight
line = 0.70 λ with e = 0.0133 λ), and Rres (Rin at the resonance) = 43 . In this case,
SR is 0.3. The radiation pattern is similar to that of a half-wave dipole with gain of 1.95
dB and half-power beam width of ±47 degrees.
The dipole-type MLA is also described in [2], providing data on monopole type,
dipole type, tapered type, folded type, and other types, including examples of practical
application to mobile phones.

94
Design and practice of small antennas I
h
a
p
d
2
Ground plane
Feed point
∼
Figure 7.2 Monopole-type MLA placed on a ground plane (from [3]).
Measured
Calculated
a/h = 0.0069
N = 1
0.05
0
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
1.5
2
3
4
5
6
h/λ
d/λ
Figure 7.3 Relationship between antenna height h/λ and the width d (from [3] copyright C⃝1998
IEICE).
7.2.1.1.1.1.2 Monopole-type meander line antenna
An MLA can be constituted in a monopole type and placed on a ground plane as shown in
Figure 7.2, where a hatched part shows one segment of the antenna and the dimensional
parameters are given [3]. In practice, this type of antenna has been often seen in small
mobile terminals. The relationship between the antenna height h/λ and the width d/λ
for the antenna in the resonance state is drawn in Figure 7.3, where the number N of
segments is taken as the parameter and λ is the wavelength at the resonance. The h/λ
varies linearly with d/λ and all lines in the ﬁgure concentrate at a point (0, 0.25), where
d/λ = 0, corresponding to the resonance point of an ordinary quarter-wave monopole.
An empirical equation for d/λ with respect to h/λ is given by
d/λ = (0.25 −h/λ)/1.70N 0.54.
(7.3)
Radiation resistance Rin in terms of h/λ is shown in Figure 7.4, where both calculated
and experimental results are shown with respect to N. Rin does not vary substantially
with N. When N = 3, Rin is given approximately by
Rin = 545(h/λ)1.82.
(7.4)

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
95
a/h = 0.0069
Calculated
Measured
N = 1
0.04
0.1
1
10
50
0.3
h/λλ
Radiation resistance [Ω]
6
Figure 7.4 Radiation resistance with respect to antenna height h/λ (from [3], copyright C⃝1998
IEICE).
a/h = 0.0069
0.04
0.1
0.3
N = 6
1
5
10
100
Quality factor
Calculated
Measured
h/λ
Figure 7.5 Antenna Q with respect to antenna height h/λ (from [3], copyright C⃝1998 IEICE).
Q is related with h/λ and shown in Figure 7.5, where both calculated and experimental
results are provided, and given empirically for N = 3 as
Q = 0.777/(h/λ).
(7.5)
Radius a of the wire has almost no inﬂuence on the impedance characteristics.
Design parameters of monopole-type MLAs are also given in [4]. As a practical
example, there has been a report on an MLA etched on both sides of a thin dielectric
substrate [5]. The antenna model is depicted in Figure 7.6 with one side in (a) and the
other side in (b). This antenna has wide enough bandwidth to receive the terrestrial TV
broadcasting at UHF bands between 550 and 800 MHz, and gain of –3dB. The size is
80 × 100 × 1.6 mm3.
Another example is a monopole-MLA driven by a small loop mounted on a ground
plane [6]. The meander line winding is optimized by using NEC (Numerical Electromag-
netic Code) in conjunction with a Pareto GA (Genetic Algorithm). A further example

96
Design and practice of small antennas I
(a)
Via
Via
(b)
61 mm
61 mm
y
z
x
Figure 7.6 MLA etched on both side of thin dielectric substrate (from [5], copyright C⃝2006
IEICE).
Z Y
X
Lax
l
e2
e1
Sleeve
Feed point
Meander line
Figure 7.7 A small MLA with two sleeves located besides the antenna element (from [7]).
is a printed MLA [7], which is mounted on a ground plane and has two sleeves besides
the meander line element as shown in Figure 7.7. The antenna impedance is calculated
by using FDTD simulation and is shown to have operating bandwidth in the 0.9 to
3.0 GHz band, although the ground plane is comparatively small. As one more example,
Figure 7.8 illustrates an MLA constituted in a loop structure in order to attain multi-
band operation [8]. In the ﬁgure (a) is the antenna mounted on the ground plane, (b)
shows antenna structure (with bent part extended), and (c) illustrates the side view of
the antenna mounted on the dielectric substrate. This antenna is designed as an internal
antenna installed inside a mobile terminal used for GSM/DCS/PCS operations.
Tapered MLAs are described in [9a] and their applications to cellular units are intro-
duced in [9b].

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
97
7
6
15
13.5
27
21 mm
Centerline
1
1
50
microstripline
on back side
System ground
(45
100 mm2)
Proposed
meandered loop
antenna
2.5
2.5
2
mm
1
=
w
4.5
Matching
section 1
1
1
1
Matching
section 2
t = 14
0.8
7
Bending line
B
A
A: Feeding point
B: Shorting point
4
(a)
(b)
(c)
h=7 mm
Ground plane length L= 100
mm
3
0.8 mm thick FR4 substrate
mm
1
thick plastic housing
)
(
S/m
0.02
3.5,
=
=
σ
εr
Proposed antenna
17
Figure 7.8 A MLA having a loop structure (from [8], copyright C⃝2006 IEICE).
7.2.1.1.1.1.3 Folded-type meander line antenna
As can be seen in Figure 7.5, Q of a meander line antenna becomes higher as the size
becomes smaller, meaning that the smaller the antenna size becomes, the narrower the
bandwidth will be. In order to increase the bandwidth, a folded type can be useful [10],
since a folded structure has substantially two modes, balanced and unbalanced modes,
and by arranging the susceptances of these two modes appropriately, bandwidth can
be increased. Figure 7.9 is an antenna model, constituting a folded structure with two
meander lines, which are connected at the top. The folded structure is decomposed
into two parts; balanced and unbalanced modes as shown in Figure 7.10 [11], in which
(a) shows the folded structure, on which currents I1 and I2 ﬂow on each element, and
(b) illustrates decomposed modes; the unbalanced mode (the current Iu) plus balanced
mode (the current Ib). The unbalanced mode current Iu equals (I1 + I)2/(1 + γ ), and the
balanced mode current Ib equals (γ I1 – I2)/(1 + γ ), where γ stands for the ratio of the
unbalanced current on the element 1 and that on the element 2 [10]. This folded model is
equivalently expressed by a circuit shown in Figure 7.11, in which the circuit parameters
such as the source voltage V, currents I1, the decomposed mode currents Iu and Ib, and
the impedances for both modes, Zu (unbalanced) and Zb (balanced), are provided.

98
Design and practice of small antennas I
Element 1
Element 2
Ground
plane
Ground
Feed
point
d
z
w
t
p
h
x
y
Figure 7.9 A folded antenna model with two meander lines (from [10], copyright C⃝1999 IEICE).
uI
uI
γ
bI
bI
2
1
2
1
1I
2I
Element
(a)
(b)
2
1
Figure 7.10 Currents on a folded structure and on the decomposed balanced and unbalanced
modes ([10], copyright C⃝1999 IEICE).
Impedance
step up ratio
2 : 1
V
I1
Ib
Iu
Zu
2Zb
Figure 7.11 Equivalent circuit corresponding to a folded structure ([10], copyright C⃝1999 IEICE).

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
99
By using these circuit parameters, Zu and Zb respectively, are given by
n2Zu = V/Iu
(7.6)
and
Zb = V/(2Ib)
(7.7)
where Iu = (I1 + I2)/(1 + γ ), Ib = (γ I1 – I2)/(1 + γ ), and γ denotes a ratio of unbalanced
currents on the element 1 and 2, and n = 1 + γ .
From (7.6), the unbalanced impedance n2 Zu = V/In2, and is given by using radiation
resistance R, antenna Q, and resonance frequency f0 as
n2Zu = R + j Ru
(7.8)
where u = Q( f/f0 −f0/f ) = Q(2	f )/f0
(	f = f −f0).
(7.9)
Admittance (unbalanced) Yu is expressed from (7.8) as
Yu = 1/(n2Zu) = Gu + j Bu
(7.10)
and Gu = 1/{R(1 + u2)}
Bu = −u/{R(1 + u2)}
(7.11)
In the same way, the balanced mode admittance Yb is
Yb = 1/Zb = jBb
(7.12)
and Bb = −B0u/Q.
(7.13)
Here B0 is deﬁned by using a parameter K as
B0 = K Q.
(7.14)
Then Bb = Ku.
(7.15)
Now the total susceptance Bt = Bu + Bb will be
Bt = −1
R
u
(1 + u2) + Ku.
(7.16)
From (7.11) and (7.14), when u is very small, Bu approaches 1/R, and by selecting an
appropriate value for K, Bt can be made to be zero. The reﬂection coefﬁcient 
 of the
line is given by

(u) = {Y0 + Yi(u)}/{Y0 −Yi(u)}.
(7.17)

 (u) is a function of u, and Y0 is the characteristic admittance of the line. The voltage
standing wave ratio (VSWR) S as function of (u) is
S(u) = {1 + 
(u)}/{1 −
(u)}.
(7.18)

100
Design and practice of small antennas I
K = 0.01
3
VSWR
2
2.5
1.5
1−3
−2
−1
0
u
um
1
2
3
R = 25
R = 40
R = 50
R = 75
R = 100
Figure 7.12 VSWR characteristics in relation to parameter u with variation of input resistance R
([10], copyright C⃝1999 IEICE).
−3
−2
−1
0
1
1
2
K = 0.05
R = 25 Ω
0.005
0.01
3
4
5
u
VSWR
2
3
0.001
Figure 7.13 VSWR characteristics in relation to parameter u with variation of K (from [10],
copyright C⃝1999 IEICE).
Now desired relative bandwidth RBW is expressed by using bandwidth 	fm speciﬁed at
a required value of Sm and um that correspond to Sm as
RBW = 2	fm/f0
(7.19a)
= um/Q.
(7.19b)
Then, (7.19b) shows that increase of RBW is possible by setting um at its maximum
value.
S with respect to u is illustrated in Figure 7.12, where R is taken as a parameter, and
in Figure 7.13, where K is used as a parameter, respectively. Design parameters can be
known from Figure 7.14 and Figure 7.15, in which relationships between Sm and K, and

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
101
1.5
0.005
0.01
0.015
2
VSWR
2.5
3
3.5
K
Figure 7.14 Relationship between K and Sm (from [10], copyright C⃝1999 IEICE).
3.5
3.5
VSWR
3
3
2.5
2.5
1.5
1.5
2
2
1
umax
Figure 7.15 Relationship between umax and Sm (from [10], copyright C⃝1999 IEICE).
Sm and um, respectively, are provided. RBW in relation to Sm is given in Figure 7.16,
where Q is used as the parameter.
In practical designs, one of these antennas may be decomposed into two modal parts:
balanced and unbalanced modes. The balanced mode can be treated equivalently as a
two-wire transmission line of length L with characteristic impedance Z0. Here the length
L is that of the meander line from the feed point to its end. The input susceptance Bb of
this line is written as
Bb = −(1/Z0) cot(2π L/λ).
(7.20)
By using the wavelength λ0 at the resonance,
Bb = −(1/Z0) cot{(2π L/λ0)(1 + 	f/f0)}.
(7.21)

102
Design and practice of small antennas I
Q = 10
20
30
50
1.5
2
0
5
10
25
20
30
15
3
VSWR Sm
RBWmax [%]
2.5
3.5
100
Figure 7.16 Relationship between Qmax and Sm (from [10], copyright C⃝1999 IEICE).
Q = 10
20
50
0.015
0.01
Characteristic impedance Zc [Ω]
K
0.005
0
10
20
30
40
L/λ0 = 0.75
Figure 7.17 Relationship between Zc and K with variation of Q (from [10], copyright C⃝1999
IEICE).
L can be written by using number n of the resonance mode as
L = (2n −1)λ0/4(n = 1, 2, 3, . . .).
(7.22)
Then, Bb = (1/Zt) tan{(2π L/λ0)(	f/f0)}
(7.23)
= Ku.
(7.24)
Here K = (1/Z0)(L/λ0)/Q
(7.25)
where the approximate expression taking only the ﬁrst-order variable for tangent is used.
From this, K can be determined by selecting Z0 and L/λ. Z0 in relation to K is expressed
by Figure 7.17, where Q is taken as the parameter. By using the meander line parameters
w (width) and a (wire radius) in terms of t (separation of two lines), which are given in

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
103
Two-strip
2.6
0.01
1
0.1
10
10
2a/t for two-wire
w/t for two-strip
1
100
100
1000
Characteristic impedance Zc (Ω)
Two-wire
t
2a
t
w
εr
εr = 1
Figure 7.18 Relationship between Zc and wire radius a in terms of t (from [10]).
Figure 7.9, Z0 is expressed as shown in Figure 7.18. These are useful for designing an
antenna consisting of two parallel strip-type meander lines.
A practical model having h = 0.11λ (144.4 mm), d = 0.057λ (74.8 mm), and N
(number of segments) = 6, is considered. In this case, f0 is set to 228 MHz, Sm =
1.5, and the thickness of the substrate (Teﬂon, ε = 2.6) is 0.0006λ (0.8 mm). From
Figure 7.14 and Figure 7.15, um is 1.1 and RBW is 0.013. When the elements 1 and 2
are connected at the end to form the folded structure, L/λ becomes 0.75, and Z0 is found
to be 9.58 . From these, w/t is 18, and thus w becomes 0.011λ (14.4 mm), as t = 0.8
mm. RBW is obtained to be about 7.2%. Measured impedance (200 MHz step between
200 and 260 MHz) is shown in Figure 7.19, where a square ground plane of 0.76 λ (1 m)
is used. Radiation efﬁciency obtained was about 90% to 95%. Sm in terms of frequency
f is shown in Figure 7.20.
A tapered folded-type MLA is described in [9a], including folded type with a plate
top-loaded MLA.
7.2.1.1.1.1.4 Meander line antenna mounted on a rectangular conducting box
When an MLA is mounted on a rectangular conducting box [12], as can be often seen in
practical applications (Figure 7.21), the resonance frequency fr varies with the distance S
of the antenna element from the surface of the substrate on which the antenna is printed.
R and fr with respect to S are given in Figure 7.22. Figure 7.23 illustrates impedance loci
on the Smith chart. The locus A is for the MLA mounted on the rectangular box, while
the locus B is for the MLA placed on a circular ground plane with a diameter of 1 m.
In both cases the impedance loci encircle near the center of the Smith chart, providing
evidence of wideband characteristics. The frequency range used in the measurement is
between 800 MHz and 900 MHz.

−j
+j
0
V
S
W
R
 
≤
 
1
.
5
∞
Figure 7.19 Measured impedance ([10], copyright C⃝1999 IEICE).
u
0
1
1
210
220
230
240
250
Frequency (MHz)
2
2
3
−3
3
2.5
VSWR
1.5
−2
−1
Calculated)
Measured
Figure 7.20 VSWR Sm versus frequency f ([10], copyright C⃝1999 IEICE).
z
y
x
t
d = 24.9
28
40
120
Feed
Ground
d
p = 8
h = 32
h
S
t = 0.2
[mm]
p
Figure 7.21 An MLA mounted on a conducting box ([12], copyright C⃝1999 IEICE).

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
105
fr
R
S
750
15
10
5
0
700
650
600
550
2
6
10
14
18
S (mm)
Frequency (MHz)
Resistance (Ω)
Figure 7.22 Resonance frequency fr and radiation resistance R with respect to distance S ([12],
copyright C⃝1999 IEICE).
S = 7mm
A
B
800 MHz
VSWR≤− 2
S = 10mm
Figure 7.23 Impedance loci of MLAs: a two-wire type mounted on a rectangular conducting plate
and a one-wire type mounted on a circular conducting plane ([12], copyright C⃝2004 IEICE).
7.2.1.1.1.1.5 Small meander line antennas of less than 0.1 wavelength [13]
Small meander line dipole-type antennas having their lengths smaller than 0.1λ have
been extensively studied theoretically and experimentally, and the design parameters
have been provided [13]. The basic antenna structure is shown in Figure 7.24, where
antenna dimensional parameters are given. The antenna performance was calculated
by using an EM simulator IE3D and the operating frequency is taken to be 700 MHz.
Since the wire width d of the element is considered one of the signiﬁcant parameters
in designing the antenna, when the antenna length L is ﬁrst set to a desired value, the
number N of meandering turns is determined in conjunction with the width d. In this
case, d is the maximum value dmax that is determined by the desired length L. Figure 7.25
shows dmax in relation to the number N for different L (from 0.025 λ to 0.1 λ) of the
antenna length where the separation s of wire elements is 0.1 mm. This type of antenna
can easily be set in self-resonance condition, as the wire length La of the antenna can be
made long enough to be nearly a quarter wavelength by selecting the number N and the
antenna width W appropriately. Relationships between W/λ and L/λ in the resonance
condition are given in Figure 7.26, where N is used as the parameter. In the ﬁgure, two
cases when d is 0.3mm (2.3 × 10 −4 λ) and 0.1mm (7.0 × 10−4 λ), respectively, are

106
Design and practice of small antennas I
d
s
W
Lf
L
Δ
Figure 7.24 MLA model with the length less than 0.1λ ([13], copyright C⃝2004 IEICE).
1.5
1
0.5
0
10
22
38
46
62
Conductor width dmax (mm)
N
L = 0.1λ
s = 0.1 mm
L = 0.075λ
L = 0.05λ
L = 0.025λ
d
Figure 7.25 Antenna width dmax with respect to the segment number N ([13], copyright C⃝2004
IEICE).
0.025
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
d = 0.3 mm
d = 0.1 mm
N = 10
,
,
,
N = 22
N = 38
0.05
0.075
0.1
Antenna length (L/λ)
Antenna width (W/λ)
Figure 7.26 Antenna width w/λ with respect to the wire length L/λ ([13], copyright C⃝2004
IEICE).

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
107
d = 0.3 mm
d = 0.1 mm
N = 38
,
,
,
N = 22
N = 10
Antenna length (L/λ)
Wire length (La/λ)
Figure 7.27 Wire length La versus antenna length L at resonance state ([13], copyright C⃝2004
IEICE).
0.025
0
5
10
15
20
25
: N = 10
: N = 22
: N = 38
d = 0.3 mm
0.05
0.075
0.1
0.125
0.15
0.175
0.2
Rin
Rin, RL
Antenna length (L/λ)
RL
Figure 7.28 Input resistance Rin and loss resistance Rl with respect to the antenna length L/λ
([13], copyright C⃝2004 IEICE).
shown. The antenna wire length La/λ in relation with L/λ at the self-resonance state is
illustrated in Figure 7.27 for cases d = 0.1 and 0.3, and N = 10, 22, and 38.
Input resistance Rin and loss resistance RL of an antenna in relation to the antenna
length L/λ for cases N = 10, 22, and 38, and d = 0.3 are shown in Figure 7.28. The loss
resistance Rl of a conductor with the skin depth δ and the conductivity σ is given by
Rl = 1/(δσ),
(7.26)
where δ =

1/( f πμσ).
(7.27)
When the conductor has planar structure with length L, width w, and thickness t, loss
resistance RL of an antenna is expressed by
RL = Rl L/2(w + t) = L√σ

f πμ/2(w + t).
(7.28)
When the conductor is copper, σ is 5.8 × 107 [S/m], then δ = 2.5 mm at 700 MHz.
Since RL increases with the antenna wire length La and √f , when L becomes less
than 0.1λ, it increases notably with increase in N that makes La large.

108
Design and practice of small antennas I
Antenna length (L/λ)
Antenna width (W/λ)
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0
0.04
0.08
0.12
Theory
Simulation
d = 0.3 mm
N = 10
N = 22
N = 38
Figure 7.29 Relationship between antenna length L/λ and antenna width w/λ ([13], copyright
C⃝2004 IEICE).
(a)
(b)
(c)
d
s
W
W
W
W′
Lf
L
L
L
Figure 7.30 Typical structure of folded-type MLA: (a) dipole type, (b) a folded-back type, and
(c) folded-up type ([13], copyright C⃝2004 IEICE).
Relationships between the antenna length L/λ and the antenna width W for cases
N = 10, 22, and 38 and d = 0.3 are shown in Figure 7.29.
When an antenna is a folded type, increase in the antenna impedance is expected.
Figure 7.30 illustrates two types of folded MLAs along with an original dipole-type
MLA (hereafter called “dipole-type” MLA); (a) is a dipole-type MLA, (b) is a folded-
back type MLA, and (c) is a folded-up type MLA. The current distributions on an
MLA are shown in Figure 7.31, in which arrows indicate directions of the current ﬂows.
Figure 7.31(a) depicts current ﬂows on a dipole type and (b) that on a folded type. These
ﬁgures suggest that substantial radiation is produced by the currents on the horizontal

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
109
(b)
(a)
W
W
W′
L
L
Lf
Lf
Figure 7.31 Current distributions on the MLA element: (a) dipole type and (b) folded-back type
([13], copyright C⃝2004 IEICE).
elements (in the ﬁgure), because the directions of their current ﬂows are the same.
Contrastingly, the currents on the vertical elements (in the ﬁgure) do not contribute to
the radiation, because the current ﬂows on parallel elements are opposite in direction,
so that their radiations cancel each other. Hence, radiation from a dipole-type MLA (the
line diameter d with the separation w of the two current ﬂows as shown in Figure 7.32(a))
is equivalently the same as that of a thicker dipole of the effective radius deff =
√
dw′
with the length L as Figure 7.32(b) shows. This dipole is driven by a voltage V, and a
current I ﬂows on the element. Meanwhile, a folded-type MLA shown in Figure 7.32(c),
in which antenna parameters such as a driven voltage V and currents I1 and I2 on each
element separated with a distance W′ are provided. Current ﬂows on these modes can be
decomposed into two modes; unbalanced (radiation) and balanced (transmission line)
modes as shown in Figure 7.32(d). On the unbalanced mode, current Iu (= (I1 + I2)/2)
ﬂows in the same direction on the two lines, while on the balanced mode, current Ib (=
(I1 – I2)/2) ﬂows in opposite directions on the two lines. The equivalent representation
for these modes is further remodeled as a radiation mode and a transmission line mode
as shown in Figure 7.32(e), which depicts a dipole driven by the voltage V, and the
current 2Iu ﬂowing on a single element with the thicker diameter dE (= deffw′).
From these, the impedance Zu of the unbalanced mode is found by (V/2)/2Iu, and that
of the unbalanced mode Zb is (V/2)/Ib. The impedance Z of the MLA is thus found
by
Z = 4Zu Zb/(2Zu + Zb).
(7.29)
Meanwhile, the balanced mode is represented by two shorted two-wire transmission
lines driven by a voltage V/2 with opposite-direction currents Ib on each line as shown
in Figure 7.32(e). The impedance Zb of the balanced mode is given by 2Zb0, which is
the parallel combined impedance of the shorted two-wire transmission line of the length
L/2. Here Zb0 is given by (V/2)/Ib and by jZ0 tan( βL
2 ), where Z0 is the characteristic
impedance of the two-wire transmission line. From these relationships, the impedance
Zf of the folded meander line antenna is derived as
Z f = 4Zu Zb0/(2Zu + Zb0).
(7.30)

110
Design and practice of small antennas I
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
W′
d
V
I
I
W′
L
| |
V
Z
I1
I1
Iu + Ib = I1
Iu – Ib = I2
Iu
⇒
⇒
Iu
I1 =
Zu
Z0
Iu
Iu
I2
I2
2Iu
Ib
Ib
2Iu
Z = V/I1
V/2
+V/2
+V/2
+V/2
–V/2
V/2
V/2
deff ≈ √dw′
Ib
Ib
Zb
Zu = (V/2)/2Iu
Zb0 = (V/2)/Ib
Ib
Ib
2
V
Z0
Ib
Ib
2Zu
1
4
+ Zb
1
de
w′
Zf = I1
V
ZuZb
2Zu + Zb
Zb0 = jZ0 tan
Z0 = 276 log
=
2
βL
Figure 7.32 Equivalent representation of current ﬂows on MLA element; (a) currents, which
contribute to radiation, on a meander line element, (b) an equivalent dipole for radiation mode,
(c) an equivalent two-wire transmission line for the balanced mode, (d) current ﬂows on a
decomposed unbalanced (Iu) and balanced modes (Ib), and (e) an equivalent expressions for
radiation and transmission line modes ([13], copyright C⃝2004 IEICE).
Since when an antenna is at the resonance condition, Zb becomes inﬁnite, then
Z f = 4Zu.
(7.31)
This implies that the impedance of a folded antenna increases by a factor of four
compared with that of its simple dipole equivalent. The factor is called the step-up
ratio, by which the radiation resistance can be increased, regardless of small sizing. The
radiation efﬁciency is particularly signiﬁcant because of small size. The loss resistance RL
of a meander line antenna with length L, planar line width d, and thickness t is found by
RL = Rl L/2(d + t),
(7.32)

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
111
0.025
0
20
40
60
80
100
: N = 10
: N = 22   d = 0.3 mm
: N = 38
0.05
0.75
0.1
Antenna length (L/λ)
Rin, Rr, Rl (Ω)
Rin
Rr
Rl
0.125
0.15
0.175
0.2
Figure 7.33 Resistance components of a folded MLA ([13], copyright C⃝2004 IEICE).
where Rl is the loss resistance of a conductor with skin depth δ and conductivity σ, and
is given by
Rl =
√
δσ.
(7.33)
Here δ equals √f πμ/σ.
Then, RL is expressed by
RL = La

f πμ/2(d + t)√σ.
(7.34)
Here, La is the line length (when extended). The resistance components of a folded
meander line antenna with respect to the antenna length L/λ are shown in Figure 7.33,
in which the radiation resistance Rr, the loss resistance RL, and input resistance Rin, are
depicted for cases N = 10, 22, and 38, and d = 0.3 mm. RL is calculated simply from
RL = Rin −Rin(σ = ∞).
(7.35)
It is shown in the ﬁgure that, as the antenna length L becomes shorter, the loss resistance
RL increases, suggesting decrease in the radiation efﬁciency. It is also observed from
the ﬁgure by comparing with the resistance components of a dipole type shown before
in Figure 7.28 that a folded type exhibits greater resistance components than the dipole
type. Rres is about four times greater than that of the dipole type, showing the stepping-up
effect due to the folded structure. The loss resistance RL is, however, not four times, but
only about two times, and yet increases when the antenna length becomes shorter. This
is because of RL dependence on the line length La, which increases with increase in N.
Rin, on the contrary, decreases rapidly as the antenna length L becomes shorter.
The radiation efﬁciency η is calculated for both dipole-type and folded-type antennas
with respect to the antenna length L/λ, and is depicted in Figure 7.34 for N = 10, 22, and
38. With greater N, the radiation efﬁciency η rapidly decreases as L becomes smaller,
particularly in the dipole type, whereas less variation appears in the folded type.
Trial antennas of length 0.1 λ of both dipole-type and folded-type MLAs are man-
ufactured. The parameters of the folded-type MLA are: N = 10, L = 43 mm (0.1λ),

112
Design and practice of small antennas I
38
0.05
–16
–12
–8
–4
0
0.1
Antenna length (L/λ)
η η (dB)
0.15
Folded type
Dipole type
0.2
22
22
38
N = 10
10
Figure 7.34 Radiation efﬁciency of a folded MLA ([14], (copyright C⃝2005 IEEE).
W = 35 mm
Lf  = 10 mm
L = 43 mm
s = 1.4 mm
d = 1.7 mm
W = 35 mm
Figure 7.35 A trial model of 0.1λ folded MLA ([13], copyright C⃝2004 IEICE).
W = 35 mm (0.08λ), Lf = 10 mm (0.02λ), d = 1.7 mm (4.0 × 10−3 λ), s = 1.4 mm (3.3 ×
10−3 λ), and the thickness of the element made with thin copper plate t = 0.1 mm
(2.3 × 10−4 λ) (Figure 7.35). Measured impedance characteristics of both dipole and
folded types are shown in Figure 7.36. The folded type is shown to have higher impedance
than that of the dipole type as was mentioned before. Radiation patterns of both dipole
and folded types are given in Figure 7.37. Gain is evaluated as –5.99 dBd for the
dipole type and –2.28 dBd for the folded type, respectively. The gain obtained by using
the IE3D simulator was –5.2 dBd for the dipole type and –1.5 dBd for the folded type,
showing higher gain of about 3.7 dB in the folded type [13].
7.2.1.1.1.1.6 MLAs of length L = 0.05 λ [13, 14]
Smaller antennas with length 0.05λ were studied and shown to be practically useful,
with appreciably high gain of –12 dBd for the dipole type and –10 dBd for the folded
type, respectively, even in this small size [14]. A type of MLA, which is sandwiched
by two planar dielectric substrates of high dielectric constant εr (Figure 7.38), was
developed, and the antenna performances were studied. Figure 7.39 provides dimensional

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
113
Folded type
0.5j
1.0j
2.0j
5.0j
−5.0j
−2.0j
−0.5j
−0.2j
02
710 MHz
710 MHz720 MHz
720 MHz
750 MHz
750 MHz
740 MHz
740 MHz
710 MHz720 MHz
750 MHz
740 MHz
Dipole type
Figure 7.36 Measured impedances of 0.1λ dipole-type and folded-type MLAs ([13], copyright
C⃝2004 IEICE).
[dBd]
Folded type
Dipole type
0
−10
−20
Figure 7.37 Radiation patterns of 0.1λ dipole-type and folded-type MLAs ([13], copyright C⃝2004
IEICE).
Meander line antenna
Substrate
h
εr
εr
h
Figure 7.38 A trial 0.05λ MLA model sandwiched by two high-εr dielectric plates ([14],
(copyright C⃝2005 IEEE).

114
Design and practice of small antennas I
εr = 1
d = 0.1 mm
Freq. = 708.7 MHz
(a)
(b)
26.93
1.498
25.432 −12.5472
−12.01
N = 14 
N = 38
N = 14 
N = 38
εr = 10
d = 0.6 mm
h = 1.0 mm
Freq. = 704.8 MHz
5.809
2.035 3.774 −4.55537 −8.72166
W = 0.04λ
L = 0.05λ
Freq. = 709.05 MHz
Rin [Ω] Rr [Ω] Rl [Ω]
η [dB]
Gain [dBi]
Rin [Ω] Rr [Ω] Rl [Ω]
η [dB]
Gain [dBi]
Rin [Ω] Rr [Ω]
Rl [Ω]
η [dB]
Gain [dBi]
Rin [Ω] Rr [Ω] Rl [Ω]
η [dB]
Gain [dBi]
63.83 7.166 56.664 −9.49748 −8.81569
h = 1.0 mn
W = 0.04λ
W = 0.04λ
W = 0.04λ
L = 0.05λ
L = 0.05λ
L = 0.05λ
Freq. = 759.7 MHz
20.28
11.4
8.88
−2.50163 −3.61452
Figure 7.39 Dimensional parameters and radiation performances of 0.05λ MLAs for cases εr = 1
and 10 ([14], copyright C⃝2005 IEEE).
W = 44.3 mm
W = 18.9 mm
W = 24.4 mm
d = 0.2 (s = 0.3) mm
d = 0.4 (s = 0.1) mm
L = 22 mm
Lf  = 2.6 mm
Figure 7.40 A trial 0.05λ folded MLA model ([13], copyright C⃝2004 IEICE).
parameters and antenna performances of 0.05λ MLAs of both dipole type and folded
type. In the ﬁgure, (a) gives results when the substrate εr = 1, while (b) represents the
substrate εr = 10. A trial model is depicted in Figure 7.40, which has an asymmetric
structure, with the element width d of the driven element (0.2 mm) different from
that of the folded element (0.4 mm) in order to keep the loss resistance as small as
possible. Antennas are designed for the resonance frequency of 700 MHz for both the

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
115
1.0j
2.0j
2.0j
−5.0j
5.0j
−5.0j
0.2j
−0.5j
−0.5j
−1.0j
−1.0j
(a)
(b)
−2.0j
−2.0j
−0.2j
02
02
05
05
10
10
20
20
50
50
02
02
05
05
10
10
20
20
50
50
02
05
10
20
50
02
05
10
20
50
715 MHz
715 MHz
770 MHz
770 MHz
740 MHz
740 MHz
685 MHz
685 MHz
715 MHz
770 MHz
740 MHz
685 MHz
Figure 7.41 Impedance characteristics of 0.05λ dipole-type and folded-type MLA ([13], copyright
C⃝2004 IEICE).
Dipole type
Folded type
[dBd]
0
Figure 7.42 Radiation patterns of 0.05λ dipole-type and folded-type MLA ([13], copyright C⃝2004
IEICE).
driven element and the folded element. Figure 7.41 illustrates impedance characteris-
tics; (a) for the dipole type and (b) for the folded type. Figure 7.42 shows radiation
patterns of both dipole type and folded type. These ﬁgures give evidence of advan-
tageous performances of the folded type against the dipole type. Figure 7.43 depicts
VSWR performance, showing the bandwidth of about 12 MHz for VSWR = 2, which

116
Design and practice of small antennas I
4
3
2
1
0
745
751
757
763
769
Frequency (MHz)
12 MHz
VSWR
Figure 7.43 VSWR performance of 0.05λ folded-type MLA ([13], copyright C⃝2004 IEICE).
j50
j25
j12.5
j100
770
720
715
710
0
765
760
755
750
700
50
20.28Ω
36.9
0
j200
−j200
−j100
−j50
−j25
−j12.5
−1
−0.5
N = 14
N = 38
Inf
0.5
0.5
150
150
0.5
150
705
705
63.83
63.83Ω
705
63.83Ω
Figure 7.44 Impedance characteristics of 0.05λ MLA for different N ([14], copyright C⃝2005
IEEE).
corresponds to 1.6% in terms of the relative bandwidth. Figure 7.44 illustrates impedance
characteristics for cases of N = 14 and 38, corresponding to εr = 10 and 1, respectively.
Figure 7.45 shows radiation patterns, also for cases N = 14 and 38. Increase in gain for
the case N = 14 was observed.
An example of a practically developed small MLA introduced previously (Figure 7.6)
[5] is a monopole type etched on both sides of a dielectric substrate (glass epoxy) fed
with coplanar waveguide. The antenna element occupies the substrate surface with an
area of 61 mm × 61 mm and the meander line of 0.5 mm width is spaced periodically
with 0.5 mm. The antenna pattern is designed to receive vertical polarization by the
front side and horizontal polarization by the back side by arranging the meander line

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
117
N = 14
N = 38
90
270
180 [deg.]
−3.6 dBi
[dBi]
−10
0
−20
−30
30
−30
−8.8 dBi
Figure 7.45 Radiation patterns of 0.05λ MLA for different N ([14], copyright C⃝2005 IEEE).
200
–25
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
400
600
800
1000
Frequency (MHz)
Return loss (dB)
Figure 7.46 Return-loss characteristics of a MLA shown in Figure 7.6 ([5], copyright C⃝2006
IEICE).
pattern parallel to the ground plane on the front side, while vertical on the back side.
The return-loss characteristics, gain, and calculated radiation patterns, respectively, at
600 MHz are given in Figures 7.46–48. In Figure 7.48, (a) and (b) illustrate radiation
patterns on the azimuth plane (y–z plane) and the elevation plane (x–z plane), respectively,
for the antenna on the front side, and (c) and (d) show those on the azimuth plane and
the elevation plane, respectively, for the antenna on the back side. The gain is evaluated
to be greater than –3 dBd in the frequency range between 550 MHz and 800 MHz, and
the return-loss characteristic is less than –5 dBd for the frequency range of 500 MHz to
700 MHz. This antenna is designed to receive UHF band terrestrial TV broadcasting.

118
Design and practice of small antennas I
0
–10
–20
–30
–40
–50400
500
Frequency (MHz)
Gain (dBi)
600
700
800
Figure 7.47 Gain characteristics of a MLA shown in Figure 7.6 ([5], copyright C⃝2006 IEICE).
Figure 7.49 illustrates another example; a monopole-type MLA driven by a small loop.
Figure 7.50 shows the relative bandwidth with respect to the antenna size kr. Here, r is
the radius of a sphere circumscribing the antenna structure and the bandwidth is shown
for cases 1/Q and 2/Q. This antenna has appreciably wide bandwidth; for instance, the
relative bandwidth is evaluated to be about 10%, although the size kr = 0.5.
There are many other MLAs applied practically to small equipment such as mobile
phones. Discussions on these antennas will be provided in later chapters.
7.2.1.1.1.2 Zigzag antennas
A zigzag antenna composed of a line with alternating salient and re-entrant angles is
depicted in Figure 7.51. The zigzag line is formed either uniformly or log-periodically.
Since the zigzag line carries a slow wave (SW) with smaller phase velocity than that of
free space, the antenna size can be made small. Study of zigzag antennas should go back
to a paper published in 1960 [15], in which operation of typical logarithmically periodic
zigzag antennas based on near-ﬁeld measurement had been discussed. Later, other papers
treating balanced backﬁre zigzag antennas [16], theory [17], input impedance [1], and
analysis [18], which facilitated antenna design, were published. In [18] two types of
zigzag antenna are described; one is a uniform balanced zigzag antenna over a ground
plane, and another is a balanced log-periodic zigzag antenna as Figure 7.52 shows.
Input impedance of a zigzag dipole antenna is depicted in Figure 7.53, where input
impedance of a linear dipole antenna is shown as a comparison. Current distributions
on the antenna element are calculated by solving integral equations for antennas, and
the numerical results are illustrated in Figure 7.54, where (a) depicts that of the uniform
zigzag antenna and (b) the log-periodic zigzag antenna. A k–β diagram is shown in
Figure 7.55, where the wire diameter d of the antenna is 0.008λ and two cases in tooth
angle, 20 degrees and 30 degrees, are shown.

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
119
5
–5
–5
–15
–15
–25
–25
–35
–35
–45
–45
Angle [degree]
5
–5
–5
–15
–15
–25
–25
–35
–35
–45
–45
Angle [degree]
5
–5
–5
–15
–15
–25
–25
–35
–35
–45
–45
Angle [degree]
5
–5
–5
–15
–15
–25
–25
–35
–35
–45
–45
5
–5
–15
–25
–35
–45
5
–5
–15
–25
–35
–45
5
–5
–15
–25
–35
–45
5
–5
–15
–25
–35
–45
Angle [degree]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 7.48 Radiation patterns of an MLA shown in Figure 7.6: (a) and (b) depict radiation
patterns on the azimuth plane and the elevation plane, respectively, for antenna on the front side,
and (c) and (d) show those on the azimuth plane and the elevation plane, respectively, for antenna
on the back side ([5], copyright C⃝2006 IEICE).

120
Design and practice of small antennas I
r
Figure 7.49 A meander line monopole antenna driven by a small loop ([6], copyright C⃝2003
IEEE).
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–10.1
0.2
0.3
Antenna size (kr)
Bandwidth log (%)
0.4
0.5
0.6
2/Q
1/Q
Figure 7.50 Relative bandwidth of the antenna shown in Figure 7.49 ([6], copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).
7.2.1.1.1.3 Normal mode helical antennas (NMHA)
The NMHA (Figure 7.56) has been used practically in various small wireless terminals
like mobile phones, as it can be produced in small size, and yet with higher radiation efﬁ-
ciency than other types of antennas having the same size. Radiation pattern is essentially
the same as that of a linear dipole, and the most signiﬁcant feature of the NMHA may be
in the antenna structure, with which self-resonance can easily be attained, even though
the size is small. Self-resonance is favorable for obtaining higher radiation efﬁciency,
because a reactance component, which typically gives rise to a matching-network loss,

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
121
~
Z
X
Y
Eθ
θ
Eφ
e1
2Lax
e2
e3
e4
e5
e6 e7
ϕ
τ 
Figure 7.51 Zigzag antenna model with the coordinate systems ([1], copyright C⃝1984 IEEE).
Ground plane
d
2
Top view
Rn+1
Rn
Rn+2
(b)
(a)
Y
a
X
Plane view of one-half
of the antenna
ψ
Figure 7.52 Two types of zigzag antenna model ([18], copyright C⃝1970 IEEE).
is not necessary. It is a common understanding that the smaller the antenna becomes,
the lower the antenna efﬁciency tends to be, but self-resonance in small antennas may
resolve this problem.
Analysis of the NMHA by using a simulator is not simple, because its helical structure
is constituted with very small helix radius and pitch values compared with the wave-
length, and even though meshes as small as hundredths of a wavelength may be used to
describe the antenna model, still accurate results are difﬁcult to obtain. A dipole-type
NMHA has been analyzed by using Method of Moments, in which unique techniques to
solve the integral equations were contrived [19], and numerical data obtained by calcu-
lation are provided. Later, the design data based on the analysis described in [19] were

122
Design and practice of small antennas I
100
–100
Rin
Xin
–200
–300
–400
0
0.3
0.4
0.5
Measured
Dipole
Zigzag
Axial length 2Lax (λ)
Input impedance Zin (Ω)
Figure 7.53 Impedance characteristics of a zigzag dipole antenna ([1], copyright C⃝1984 IEEE).
mA
5
0
1
2
3
4
5λ
5λ
−5
−2
−4
−6
Uniform zigzag antenna
(tooth angle = 60°, wire diameter = 0.008λ,
distance from ground plane dv2 = 0.0625λ).
(a) 
Real part
Imaginary part
Location of bend
Absolute value
mA
6
4
2
0
1
0
2
3
4
7λ
6
5
Real part of current
Imaginary part
Location of bend
Absolute value
Log-periodic zigzag antenna
(α = 28°, Ψ = 32°, τ = 0.85°, wire diameter = 0.008λ).
(b) 
Figure 7.54 Current distributions on (a) the uniform zigzag antenna and (b) the log-periodic
zigzag antenna ([18], copyright C⃝1970 IEEE).
provided in a book [20], where some practical examples, including NMHAs modiﬁed
to improve bandwidth and gain and so forth, were described. A further study about the
analysis of NMHA has been given in [21], in which the method of analysis shown in
[19] has been extended to obtain more accurate numerical results efﬁciently by using
improved expansion function and weighting function.

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
123
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.0
Tooth angle 20°
Calculated
Extrapolated
Tooth
angle 30°
0
a
0
ka
2π
βo
2π
β wire * k
Figure 7.55 k–β diagram of a zigzag antenna ([18], copyright C⃝1970 IEEE).
z
x
L
y
l = 0
l = 2NL
l = NL
(Voltage source)
2a
p
d
Figure 7.56 An NMHA model ([21], copyright C⃝2008 IEICE).
Study on NMHA has progressed as requirements for small antennas such as the
NMHA have increased. Various types of NMHAs such as dielectric-loaded NMHA
[21], in which efﬁcient numerical calculation is demonstrated, log-periodic NMHA
[22], folded NMHA [23], and two-wire NMHA [24], have so far been used.
Here analysis and design of the NMHA will be brieﬂy introduced by quoting the
analysis described in [19–21], and providing design data based on the analysis. The
antenna model used for the analysis is shown in Figure 7.57 with the coordinate systems
and antenna parameters such as helix radius a, wire diameter d, pitch of helical winding

124
Design and practice of small antennas I
p
y
z
x
2a
#2
#(2N – 1)
V
#1
#m
#N
ℓ = 0
ℓ
 J(ℓ)
ℓ = ℓ0
ℓ = 2Nℓ0
–
Figure 7.57 NMHA model used for the analysis with the coordinate systems [19].
2a
d
p
ℓ
ℓ0
(ℓ0 = (2πa)2 + p2)
√
Figure 7.58 A segment consisting of two whole turns of helical structure [19].
p, helix one-turn length ℓ0 =

(2aπ)2 + p2, and number of helix windings N. The
integral equation with respect to the current distribution J (ℓ) on the wire is
j
ωε0
2N L

0
	
k2
0 J(ℓ′)G(ℓ, ℓ′) + d J(ℓ′)
dℓ′
· ∂G(ℓ, ℓ′)
∂ℓ′

dℓ′ = Ei(ℓ)
(7.36)
where G (ℓ, ℓ′) = e−jk0r(ℓ,ℓ′)
4πr(ℓ, ℓ′)
(7.37)
Ei(ℓ) = −V
δ rect
ℓ−N L
δ

.
(7.38)
Here V is the feed voltage, δ is a gap at the feed terminal, k = ω√μ0ε0 = 2π/λ stands
for phase constant in free space, and r is distance between two points on ℓ, and ℓ′. In
order to transform the derivative of Green’s function to that of current functions and to
ease solving the integral equation, the Galerkin method will be adopted along with a
weighting function, which is zero at the end of the segment. The antenna model is divided
into (2N – 1) segments. A segment consists of two whole turns of helical structure taken
at an arbitrary place on the antenna, which has length of 2ℓas shown in Figure 7.58.
Then, ℓat the mth segment is described as (m – 1) L ≤ℓ≤(m + 1) L, where m takes the
values 1, 2, . . . , (2N −1), and the current Jm(ℓ) on the mth segment is expressed by Im
times f (ℓ), which is a function having the maximum value unity at ℓ= mL, and zero

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
125
x
1.5
0.5
Squared_cosinusoidal
–0.5
0.2
0.4
0.6
–1
–1.5
1
0.8
1
Figure 7.59 A squared cosine function ([21], copyright C⃝2008 IEICE).
at ℓ= (m ± 1)L. Here, Im is an unknown coefﬁcient to be determined. Then the current
on the antenna J (ℓ) is given by
J (ℓ) =
2N−1

m=1
Im f (ℓ−mL).
(7.39)
Im can be determined by using the circuit equation
2N−1

m=1
Zn,m Im = Vn
(7.40)
Zn,m = j η0
4π
k0L

−k0L
k0L

−k0L
e−jk0rn,m
k0rn,m
×
	
f (ℓ) f

ℓ′
⃗a (ℓ) · ⃗a

ℓ′
−1
k2
0
f ′ (ℓ) f ′ 
ℓ′
d (k0ℓ) d

k0ℓ′
(7.41)
Vn =
δ/2
∫
−δ/2
f (ℓ)V
δ rect
l −N L
δ

dℓ.
(7.42)
Now a function f (ℓ), a squared cosine function (Figure 7.59) is selected to give a good
approximation as follows
f (ℓ) = cos2(πℓ/2L).
(7.43)
Through some tedious manipulations, constitutional parameters of the NMHA at
resonance are analyzed [21]. In the analysis, antenna parameters of relative helix radius
a/λ and relative pitch p/λ with respect to the wavelength are taken into consideration
and divided into two groups A and B depending on the size. In group A, both a/λ and
relative pitch p/λ are relatively larger, lying between 10−3 ∼10−4, and in group B, they
are relatively smaller with a/λ between 5 × 10−4 ∼10−3, and p/λ between 10−4 ∼5 ×
10−4. Number of turns N at the resonance condition is expressed by illustrating the
relationship between a/λ and p/λ in Figure 7.60 for the group A and in Figure 7.61 for
the group B, respectively.

126
Design and practice of small antennas I
0
0
2
4
p/λ * 100
a/λ  * 100
6
8
10
2
4
6
8
40.
30.
25.
20.
18.
16.
14.
12.
10.
8.
6.
Figure 7.60 Number of turns N at resonance in relation to the helix radius a/λ and the pitch p/λ
for the group A ([21], copyright C⃝2008 IEICE).
p/λ * 10000
a/λ * 10000
5
2
1
4
3
5
6
7
8
9
10
220 .
210 .
200 .
190 .
180 .
170 .
160 .
150 .
140 .
130 .
120 .
110 .
100 .
90 .
Figure 7.61 Number of turns N at resonance in relation to the helix radius a/λ and the pitch p/λ
for the group B ([21], copyright C⃝2008 IEICE).

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
127
2.
0
0
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
2
4
6
8
10
2
4
6
8
10
p/λ * 100
a/λ * 100
Figure 7.62 Shortening factor S1 of the antenna length L at resonance in relation to the helix
radius a/λ and the pitch p/λ for the group A ([21], copyright C⃝2008 IEICE).
In order to evaluate small-sizing, the shortening factor S1 of the antenna length is
introduced by taking the ratio of the NMHA length and a quarter wavelength of a linear
antenna, which is
S1 = (λ/4)/(Nr p).
(7.44)
Also the shortening factor S2 of the wire length L (extended length of helix), which is a
ratio of L and a quarter wavelength of a linear antenna, is introduced as
S2 = (λ/4)/(Nr L).
(7.45)
These S1 and S2, respectively, are illustrated by showing relationships between a/λ and
p/λ in Figure 7.62 and Figure 7.64 for the group A, and Figure 7.63 and Figure 7.65 for
the group B.
It is a general understanding that radiation resistance Rrad becomes smaller when
antenna resonance length is made shorter. The contour of this Rrad is expressed by
showing relationships between a/λ and p/λ in Figure 7.66 for the group A, and in
Figure 7.67 for the group B.
These illustrations can be used for designing an NMHA.
7.2.1.1.1.4 Discussions on small NMHA and meander line antennas
pertaining to the antenna performances
Antenna performances of small NMHA and meander line antennas are numerically
obtained by using simulators NEC 4.1 of EZNEC Pro over a frequency range of 50 MHz

128
Design and practice of small antennas I
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
2
4
6
8
10
p/λ * 100
a/λ * 100
12.
12.
13.
13.
14.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
2.
Figure 7.63 Shortening factor S1 of the antenna length L at resonance in relation to the helix
radius a/λ and the pitch p/λ for the group B ([21], copyright C⃝2008 IEICE).
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
2
3
4
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
15.
5
p/λ * 10000
a/λ * 10000
Figure 7.64 Shortening factor S2 of the antenna wire length La (extended length) at resonance in
relation to the helix radius a/λ and the pitch p/λ for the group A ([21], copyright C⃝2008 IEICE).

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
129
2.1
2.1
2.0
2.0
2.2
2.2
2.3
2.3
2.4
2.4
2.5
2.5
2.6
2.6
2.7
2.7
2.8
2.8
p/λ * 10000
a/λ * 10000
5
2
1
4
3
5
6
7
2.1
2.0
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
9
8
10
Figure 7.65 Shortening factor S2 of the antenna wire length La (extended length) at resonance in
relation to the helix radius a/λ and the pitch p/λ for the group B ([21], copyright C⃝2008 IEICE).
p/λ * 10000
a/λ * 10000
5
2
0
6
4
15.
8
10
6
7
9
8
10
60.
30. 20.
15.
9.
9.
8.
7.
5.
6.
5.
5.4.
2.
3.
3.
2.
1.
10.
10.
5040.
Figure 7.66 Radiation resistance in relation to the helix radius a/λ and the pitch p/λ for the group
A ([21], copyright C⃝2008 IEICE).

130
Design and practice of small antennas I
p /λ * 100
a/λ * 100
0
2
0
6
4
8
10
2
4
8
6
10
60.
30.
50.
40.
20.
10.
7.
4.
5.
3.
2.
1.
0.5
Figure 7.67 Radiation resistance in relation to the helix radius a/λ and the pitch p/λ for the group
B ([21], copyright C⃝2008 IEICE).
to 500 MHz, and they are discussed extensively in [26]. In [26], antenna length kh = 0.5
is taken according to the deﬁnition of electrically small size, and parameters to achieve
self-resonance, which is desired in designing small antennas, are discussed. The antenna
dimensional parameters used are antenna length h, which is 6 cm corresponding to 0.08λ
at 400 MHz, diameter of NMHA, width of meander line sections, number N of helical
windings for a NMHA, number N of segments for a Meander Line Antenna (MLA),
the total length of wire (extended length of wire), wire radius, and antenna geometry.
The parameters also include antenna effective volume Ve, effective height, and spherical
radius r. The effective volume can be written in terms of an effective spherical radius r,
which is given by [27]
r = (λ/2π)(9/2Q)1/3.
(7.46)
Here Q is determined by [28]
Q = (ω/2π)

(d RA/dω)2 + (d X A/dω + | X A |/ω)3
(7.47)
where RA and XA are antenna radiation resistance and reactance, respectively. Antenna
performances considered are resonance frequency, Q as a parameter to indicate band-
width, and resonant radiation resistance. In discussion, the effective volume of spherical
radius r is used as a parameter that relates with Q and discussed by using normalized r
with the effective height h; that is, r/h.
To lower the resonance frequency in NMHA, one way is to increase the number of
windings N of the helix as shown in Figure 7.68, which depicts three models: NMHA

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
131
Table 7.1 The resonant properties of the three NMHA models ([26],
Copyright C⃝2004 IEEE)
Antenna
Resonant frequency
(MHz)
Radiation resistance
(Ohms)
Q
NMH1
408.2
5.1
66
NMH2
331.4
3.5
115
NMH3
278.4
2.6
184
Table 7.2 The physical properties of the three NMHA
models ([26], Copyright C⃝2004 IEEE)
Antenna
Height (cm)
Total wire
length (cm)
No. of turns
NMH1
6
29.25
9
NMH2
6
38.42
12
NMH3
6
47.65
15
NMHA1
z
y
y
y
x
x
x
z
z
NMHA2
NHMA3
Figure 7.68 Three models of NMHA with different number of winding N ([26], copyright C⃝2004
IEEE).
1 to NMHA 3. Here the wire diameter is 0.5 mm. The total wire length also increases
and the resonance frequency is lowered from 408.2 MHz to 278 MHz as Table 7.1 and
Table 7.2 describe. Radiation resistance and Q also decrease.
In the case of MLA, one way of lowering the resonance frequency is the same as in
NMHA; that is, increase the number of meander line segments, thus increasing the total
wire length as shown in Figure 7.69, and Table 7.3, which describes increase in the total
wire length in models M1 to M2.
Another way is to increase the width of meander line segments as shown also in
Figure 7.69, which depicts models M3 and M4 with wider width. In this case, the total
length of M3 is decreased from that of M2, but the effective volume is increased so that

132
Design and practice of small antennas I
Table 7.3 The physical properties of the six MLA models
([26], copyright C⃝2004 IEEE)
Antenna
Height (cm)
Total wire
length (cm)
Meander
width (cm)
M1
6
29.25
0.97
M2
6
38.42
0.95
M3
6
29.25
1.66
M4
6
29.25
3.87
M1
M2
M3
M4
z
y
y
y
y
x
x
x
x
z
z
z
Figure 7.69 MALs with different number of segment and width ([26], copyright C⃝2004 IEEE).
NMH1
NMH4
M6
M5
Figure 7.70 Comparison of NMHAs and MLAs in terms of the width ([26], copyright C⃝2004
IEEE).
the effective capacitance against the ground is increased. In addition, increase in the
effective diameter decreases capacitances between the meander line segments, which
results in increase in the effective self-inductance of the wire. These effects contribute to
lowering the resonance frequency. This is also the case with models M3 and M4, where
the total wire length is kept the same, while the width is increased as is described in
Table 7.3. As a consequence, the resonance is lowered.
An MLA is compared with an NMHA at the same resonance frequency of 408
MHz, taking models of NMHA 1, NMHA 4, M6, and M5 (Figure 7.70) as examples.
Table 7.4 provides comparisons of the physical and radiation properties of these models.
With increase in the width, the total wire length increases in M6 from that of NMHA 1,
whereas keeping the same width, that of NMHA 4 increases as compared with that of

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
133
Table 7.4 The radiation properties of the two NMHA models and two MLA models ([26], copyright C⃝2004 IEEE)
Antenna
Height
(cm)
Total wire
length (cm)
Width (cm)
Resonant
frequency (MHz)
Radiation
resistance
(Ohms)
Q
r/h
NMH1
6
29.25
1.0
408.2
5.1
66
0.80
M6
6
49.0
1.66
408.12
4.71
65
0.80
NMH4
6
21.99
3.7
408.2
4.2
61
0.82
M5
6
28.16
3.7
408.2
4.4
61
0.82
H5
H6
H3
H4
H1
H2
Figure 7.71 NMHAs with different number of turns ([26], copyright C⃝2004 IEEE).
M5. Radiation resistance decreases in M6 as compared with that of NMHA 1, while a
small increase is observed in M5 from NMHA 4. Q and r/h are equal or almost equal
regardless of models, NMHA 1, NMHA 4, M6, and M5. The numerical values of these
are also given in Table 7.4.
When diameter of the NMHA is increased as shown in Figure 7.71, the total wire
length and also the number of turns becomes smaller for the same resonance frequency
(ﬁxed at 408 MHz). The physical properties and resonance properties for models H1 to
H6 are given in Table 7.5 and Table 7.6, respectively.
When antennas have the same effective height and volume, their resonance properties
are essentially identical, independently of any differences in their total wire length and
their geometry. The above discussions are useful for designing MLAs and NMHAs.

134
Design and practice of small antennas I
Table 7.5 The physical properties of the six NMHA models ([26], copyright
C⃝2004 IEEE)
Antenna
Height (cm)
Total wire
length (cm)
Diameter (cm)
No. of turns
H1
6
29.25
1.0
9
H2
6
27.45
1.24
6 3/4
H3
6
26.05
1.50
5 3/4
H4
6
25.09
1.77
4 3/4
H5
6
23.63
2.31
3
H6
6
22.36
3.18
2
Table 7.6 The resonant properties of the six NMHA models ([26],
copyright C⃝2004 IEEE)
Antenna
Resonant
frequency (MHz)
Radiation
resistance (ohms)
Q
r/h
H1
408.2
5.13
66
.80
H2
408
5.18
63
.81
H3
408.3
5.11
61
.82
H4
408.2
5.03
59
.82
H5
408.3
4.85
57
.83
H6
408.2
4.55
57
.84
7.2.1.2
Extension of current path
This section describes antennas other than wire types introduced in the previous sections.
Typical examples are antennas which have one or more slots or notches inserted in the
current path on the surface of the antenna element. A term “slit” is often used instead of
“notch.” Slots embedded on the surface of a planar antenna element force the current into
a roundabout geometry as shown in Figure 7.72, lengthening the current path so that the
resonance frequency is lowered. Notches or slits embedded on the edge of a rectangular
surface also lengthen the current path (Figure 7.73). Slits embedded alternately on both
sides of a rectangular surface make the current path meandering and the resonance
frequency lower (Figure 7.74). Another example is a pair of triangular (bow-tie) patches
(Figure 7.75(a)), which is constituted by expanding the mouth of a notch to the end of
the planar surface (Figure 7.75(b)). The current ﬂows in this case spread toward the
end of the triangular surface taking paths with different lengths so that the resonance
occurs at not only one frequency, but also at two or more. Current ﬂows on the surface of
these antennas are shown in each of their corresponding ﬁgures with arrows. Operating at
lower resonant frequency in a given antenna size implies an equivalent downsizing of the
antenna, as normally an antenna of lower resonance frequency should have larger size.
Slots or notches are not only employed for the purpose of making antennas small, but
also for attaining such operations as dual band, multiband, wideband, and circular polar-
ization by arranging the size, shape, and the number of slots, and the places for embedding
them. A slot may have an L-shape (Figure 7.76(a)), a folded shape (Figure 7.76(b)), or

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
135
Figure 7.72 Current ﬂow on the surface of planar element with a slot.
Figure 7.73 Current ﬂow on the surface of planar element with a notch.
be combined with a notch (Figure 7.77(a)) or with a bow tie (Figure 7.77(b)). Various
other examples are illustrated in Figure 7.78, showing (a) cross slots, (b) two bent slots,
(c) four bent slots, (d) four notches, (e) a square slot, (f) four square slots, (g) a circular
slot, and (h) an offset circular slot [29].

136
Design and practice of small antennas I
Figure 7.74 Current ﬂow on the surface of a planar element with meandered notches [29].
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.75 Current ﬂow on a pair of triangular patch (bow-tie) surfaces: (a) current ﬂow and (b)
end of notch expanded to form triangle [29].

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
137
Probe feed
Probe feed
Air
substrate
Shorting plate
Ground plane
(a)
(b)
Shorting plate
Folded slit
L-shaped slit
Figure 7.76 Variation of slit on the surface of patch; (a) L-shape and (b) folded shape.
Embedded slot
Meandering slits
Embedded slot
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.77 Variation of slits and slots on a patch: (a) meandered slits and two slots on a
rectangular patch and (b) two slots on triangle patch [29].
Mostly, these antennas have been developed not merely to create small antennas, but
also to enhance antenna performance such as wide bandwidth, multiband operation,
circular polarization, and so forth. Then, most such antennas are treated as FSA (Func-
tionally Small Antenna) rather than ESA, and designed to satisfy demands for achieving
small or compact antennas and yet having improved performance without increasing

138
Design and practice of small antennas I
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(g)
(h)
(f)
Figure 7.78 Variations of slots/slits on the rectangular patch: (a) cross slot, (b) a pair of bent slots,
(c) a group of four bent slots, (d) four slits on the center of each side, (e) a square slot, (f) four
rectangular slots, (g) a circular slot, and (h) an offset circular slot [29].
the size. For that purpose, slots and slits are combined to enhance the performance and
achieve downsizing as well. The FSAs will be described in the next chapter.
7.2.2
Full use of volume/space
The concept of ﬁlling volume/space by an antenna element is based on Wheeler’s work
showing that antennas fully utilizing the volume that circumscribes the maximum size
of an antenna, will provide the lowest Q as compared with other geometries within the
same volume. He examined the antenna Q in relation to the antenna size by taking a
cylindrical shape of capacitor and inductor representing a C-type and an L-type dipole

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
139
(a)
2a
A = ϖa2
(b)
b
Figure 7.79 (a) Small C-type antenna and (b) L-type antenna occupying the same volume ([30],
copyright C⃝1947 IEEE).
antenna, respectively, as is depicted in Figure 7.79, and he showed that the Q is inversely
proportional to the volume of the antenna [30]. In his analysis, Wheeler used circuit
parameters, capacitor C, inductance L, and radiation resistance Rrad or conductance Grad
of these antennas, and derived Q. The C and L became:
C = ε0kC A/b
(7.48)
L = μ0π2A/kLb
(7.49)
where kC and kL, respectively, are the shape factor of the C-type and the L-type antenna,
A denotes the cross section area, and b is the height, as Figure 7.79 shows.
Radiation resistance Rrad and conductance Grad, respectively, are derived as
RCrad = 20(kb)2, and GCrad = (k2kC A)/(6π Z0)
(7.50)
for the C-type antenna, and
RLrad = 20(nk2A)2, and GLrad = (kkL A)2/(6πn2Z0)
(7.51)
for the L-type antenna.
Here k is the wave number (2π/λ), n is number of turns of the coil, and Z0 is the free
space impedance. Then by using Eqs. (7.48–7.50), QC of the C-type antenna and QL of
the L-type antenna, respectively, are derived as
QC = ωC/GC = 6πk3/(kC Ab) = 9VRS/2Veff
(7.52)
and
QL = ωL/RL = 6πk3/(kL Ab) = 9VRS/2Veff
(7.53)
where VRS denotes the volume of a sphere having radius λ/2π (the radian sphere), and
Veff is the effective volume, which is deﬁned by
Veff = σ Vphy.
(7.54)
Here σ = kC, kL and Vphy is the physical volume of the antenna.
Equations (7.52) and (7.53) indicate that Q is inversely proportional to Veff, thus Vphy,
as Vphy is proportional to Veff, and that by constituting an antenna in a sphere, which

140
Design and practice of small antennas I
μr
μ0
n turns
2a
Figure 7.80 Wheeler’s spherical coil ([31], copyright C⃝1958 IEEE).
encloses its minimum, so as to occupy the entire volume of the sphere, the lowest Q will
be obtained.
Wheeler examined what type of small antenna can most effectively utilize the volume
or has the highest volume and lowest Q. He took up a constant pitch spherical coil of n
turns with magnetic core as shown in Figure 7.80 [31], where the excitation voltage is
across the poles of the coil, and he calculated the circuit parameters, from which Q can
be found as
Q = (1 + 2/μr)/(ka)3 = VRS/(σ Vphy).
(7.55)
Where μr is the relative permeability of material ﬁlled in the sphere, and a is the radius
of the sphere. The lowest Qmin is obtained when μr is inﬁnite; that is,
Qmin = 1/(ka)3.
(7.56)
It should be noted that this is a case for an antenna radiating only either TE10 or TM10
mode. When both TE10 and TM10 are radiated, Qmin becomes
Qmin = 1/2(ka)3.
(7.57)
Chu worked on a similar problem. There is a well-known bound for Q that is often
referred to as the Chu limit; the theoretical minimum Q relates to the spherical volume,
which embraces the maximum dimensions of the antenna. Here assuming a hypothetical
sphere having radius a, the Chu limit [32] prescribes that the lower bound of Q is a
function of ka (k = 2π/λ), the dimensional parameter of the sphere, and is given by
Q = (ka3)−1 + (ka)−1.
(7.58)
To obtain a Q of the closest lower bound of Eq. (7.58), the antenna must effectively
utilize the total sphere volume deﬁned by the dimensional parameter ka. In case of a thin
linear dipole having length l and diameter d, a hypothetical sphere which circumscribes
the dipole should have the radius l/2, and hence the dipole occupies only a small part
of the volume of the sphere, implying very inefﬁcient use of the volume of the sphere.
Meanwhile, in case of a spherical dipole, which occupies the outermost regions of the
sphere of radius l/2, the volume of the sphere is utilized very efﬁciently. The lowest Q
may be closely approached by this sort of spherical dipole.
The concept of ﬁlling volume can be applied to the two-dimensional case; that is,
when a space is occupied fully with thin metallic conductors a lower obtainable Q

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
141
(a)
n = 1
n = 2
n = 3
n = 1
n = 2
n = 3
n = 4
(b)
Figure 7.81 (a) Peano curve; order one through three and (b) Hilbert curve; order one through four
[33].
can be achieved within a limited space. For this purpose, the concept of space-ﬁlling
curves, which are generally a continuous mapping of the normalized interval onto the
normalized square, is used. The space-ﬁlling curve was ﬁrst proposed by G. Peano
in 1890 [33], and now it is called the Peano curve. D. Hilbert introduced his version
of space-ﬁlling curve in 1891 [33], now called the Hilbert curve. These curves are
composed through iterative generating procedures, by which contours (patterns) with
inﬁnitely complicated structure to ﬁll a space are produced. The pattern is formed by
inﬁnitely repeating combinations of scaling and rotating an initial pattern. It is expressed
in terms of the iteration numbers and the space is gradually ﬁlled as the iteration number
approaches inﬁnity. Figure 7.81(a) illustrates Peano curves of orders n = 1 through 3
and (b) shows Hilbert curves of orders n = 1 through 4.
In addition to these two curves, fractal patterns are also known as a class of space-
ﬁlling curve, and have been used for lowering resonance frequency and thus small sizing
of antennas. Fractal stands for “Fractional Dimension,” and incorporates the meaning
of “fragmented” or “broken.” The term fractal has been applied to a species of cumulus
clouds or stratus clouds with ragged, shred appearance. The fractal patterns are produced
by similar iteration procedures, starting from a “generator,” which replaces an “initiator,”
the initial geometry, and repeats this iteration process inﬁnitely. Representative Fractals
include Koch [34a], Minkowsky [34b], and Sierpinsky [34c], respectively, as shown in
Figures 7.82, 7.83, and 7.84. In the case of a Koch Fractal, the initiator is a line, and
onethird of the line is replaced by the generator, which is an equilateral triangle, at its
center, and this procedure is repeated an inﬁnite number of times to create a geometry
that has intricate patterns on an ever-shrinking scale.
These fractal structures are expressed in terms of iteration number. In addition, as
the iteration order of the pattern increases, the length of the element increases, while
the footprint area is maintained the same. By this means, the resonance frequency
is lowered without increasing the space, and hence it can be used for creating small
antennas. Furthermore, when it is used for an antenna, it offers another advantage that
input impedance can be increased as the length of the fractal pattern element increases,

142
Design and practice of small antennas I
Figure 7.82 Koch fractal models ([34a], copyright C⃝2000 IEEE).
Figure 7.83 Minkowsky fractal models ([34b], copyright C⃝2002 IEEE).
Figure 7.84 Sierpinsky fractal models ([34c], copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).
whereas an ordinary small antenna suffers having very small input impedance that
hinders good matching.
Features of space-ﬁlling curves, including fractal structures, when applied to antennas,
result in not only lowering the resonance frequency, and increasing antenna impedance,
but also in increasing the surface impedance as a result of lengthened space-ﬁlling
elements within the limited space, that will produce a high impedance surface (HIS).
The HIS can offer various salient antenna performances and novel antenna structure, and
can decrease mutual coupling between antenna elements. Furthermore, enhancement of
the antenna performance is attained by utilizing positive image effects, and a decrease
of coupling between antenna elements allows close location of several antenna elements
on a limited space, that will bring an increase in the transmission data-rate when it is
applied to the MIMO system. Suppression of surface current contributes to decreasing
undesired radiation; for instance, resulting in increase of the front-to-back ratio due to
the reduction of backward radiation.
Spiral patterns are considered as a class of space-ﬁlling pattern as they occupy an
area of given size without much vacancy and contribute to making bandwidth wide.
This does not necessarily imply small-sizing of an antenna in terms of an entire fre-
quency range, but at the lower resonance frequencies the antenna should be recognized
as small-sized in terms of the operating wavelength. Then, spiral antennas should be
partially classiﬁed into Functionally Small Antenna and partially into Electrically Small
Antenna.

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
143
Table 7.7 Parameters of basic meander lines of three
types; N1, N2, and N3, shown in Figure 7.85 [35]
Antennas
f0(MHz)
Rrad()
Q
kr
N1
543.44
26.52
59.8
0.499
N2
548
120
59
0.498
N3
325.1
5.362
74.6
0.296
N1
N2
N3
Figure 7.85 Variation of meander line patterns: N1: original (rectangular), N2: triangular and N3:
sinusoidal ([35], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE).
7.2.2.1
Two-dimensional (2D) structure
7.2.2.1.1 Meander line
A Meander line pattern is the simplest one to ﬁll a space of given area, and has been
applied in various small wireless systems. A representative pattern is that of a dipole
shown in Figure 7.24, which is described in Section 7.2.1.1. Variations of the basic
meander line proﬁle from the original rectangular one are triangular proﬁle and sinusoidal
proﬁle (Figure 7.85 N1, N2, and N3) [35]. The meander line with triangle proﬁle raises
radiation resistance from 26.5  to 120 , and the sinusoidal proﬁle meander line
signiﬁcantly reduces resonance frequency from 543 MHz to 325 MHz, indicating a
comparable reduction of antenna size. These parameters are listed in Table 7.7, where
resonance frequency, radiation resistance, Q, and the size are provided.
In order to use space more efﬁciently and improve antenna performances, further
modiﬁcation of meander line proﬁle are taken into consideration by taking various
geometries shown in Figure 7.86, where four types, M1 through M4, are illustrated.
Performances were studied and found lower resonance frequency with smaller size,
moderate value of Q, and lower cross polarization level, although radiation resistance
decreases (Table 7.8). Meandered wire itself can be a meandered structure to further
lower the resonance frequency so that the antenna size can be reduced.
Some types of planar meandered antennas used in mobile phones will be introduced
as examples of practical applications in later sections. Examples of other types of
planar meandered antennas developed for RFID tags were a meandered rectangular loop

144
Design and practice of small antennas I
Table 7.8 Parameters of meander line patterns of four different types; M1, M2, M3, and M4 [35]
Antennas
Radiation
resistance ()
Resonant
frequency (MHz)
ka
Q
QChu
Cross-Pol. (dB)
M1
11.68
512.92
0.645
114.2
5.277
−115.9
M2
18.32
474.5
0.67
66.25
4.871
−118.6
M3
15.7
423.9
0.6
102.5
6.296
−117.1
M4
5.89
414.95
0.588
54.39
6.62
−122.7
M4
M2
M1
M3
Figure 7.86 Variation of meander line patterns: M1, M2, M3, and M4 ([35], copyright C⃝2009
IEEE).
[36] and a C-shaped folded monopole structure [37], operating at 900-MHz band and
400-MHz bands, respectively.
7.2.2.1.2 Koch Fractal curve, Peano curve and Hilbert curve
7.2.2.1.2.1 Monopole using Koch, Peano, and Hilbert curves
It is well known that use of space-ﬁlling geometry, such as Koch, Peano, and Hilbert
curves [38–42] for antenna structure to lengthen the antenna in a given space so that the
resonance frequency is lowered, results in small-sizing of an antenna. It is also useful
for obtaining wideband or multiband operation with small antennas, as the wire length
(stretched straight) increases with number of iterations of initial geometry.
A Koch monopole is generated by an iterative procedure that repeats replacing one
third of the line at its center with an equilateral triangle, then scaling and rotating
it inﬁnitely as shown in Figure 7.87, which depicts the generator of the pattern and
iteration process [38]. A Koch monopole having height h = 6 cm, being placed over
the 80-cm ground plane is illustrated in Figure 7.88. The computed and measured input
impedances with respect to number n of the iteration are shown in Figure 7.89, where
(a) is the resistance and (b) is the reactance. The stretched length l of the antenna is
expressed by l = h (4/3)n and an antenna constructed by iteration of n times is denoted
as Kn, where n = 0 means the Euclidean version of the antenna, that is an ordinary
straight monopole. A line expressing the small-antenna limit kh < 1 is drawn as the

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
145
K0
K1
K2
K3
K4
Figure 7.87 Koch monopole structures; generator K0 through fourth stage K4, ([38], copyright
C⃝2000 IEEE).
6 cm
80 cm
Figure 7.88 Koch monopole antenna of the fourth stage ([38], copyright C⃝2000 IEEE).
reference. The ﬁgure indicates that the resonance frequency is lowered with increase in
n, resulting in reduced sizing of the antenna corresponding to the lowered frequency.
The Koch Fractal monopole is considered to be useful for lowering resonance fre-
quency and thus small-sizing an antenna. However, comparison with two other types

146
Design and practice of small antennas I
0.2
0.4
0.6
Small antenna limit, kh<1
K0
K1
K2
K3
K4
K5
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
(a)
(b)
3500
Experimental
Computed (MoM)
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
f (GHz)
K0
K1
K2
K3
K4
K5
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Input reactance (Ω)
Input resistance (Ω)
2000
1000
−1000
−1500
500
−500
0
−2000
Figure 7.89 Input impedance of different stage of Koch monopole: (a) resistance and (b) reactance
([38], copyright C⃝2000 IEEE).
of wire antennas, meander line antenna (MLA) and helical antenna (NMHA), reveals
that the Koch Fractal antenna has relatively higher resonance frequency compared with
that of MLA and NMHA (Figure 7.90) [39], for the same (stretched) wire length l. This
means that when the resonance frequency is adjusted to be equal for the three types of
antenna, keeping the antenna height h the same, the wire length l of the Koch Fractal
monopole becomes the longest among these three types of antenna, while the antenna
performances, radiation resistance, and the bandwidth, are about the same, as Table 7.9
shows [39].
This fact suggests that the antenna speciﬁc geometry is not necessarily signiﬁcant for
small-sizing of an antenna, but the electrical length, not physical length, is essential.
Instead of a single wire structure, a given space is ﬁlled more efﬁciently by single
Peano or Hilbert curve elements. Consider these two curve structures, Peano and Hilbert,
previously illustrated in Figure 7.81 (a) and (b), respectively, embedded in a square
of 3 × 3 cm [41]. Induced currents due to normally incident plane waves for these

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
147
Table 7.9 Comparison of antenna performances for three types at the same resonance frequency ([39],
copyright C⃝2003 IEEE)
Antennas
Resonant
frequency (MHz)
Overall
height (cm)
Total wire
length (cm)
Resonant
resistance (ohms)
2:1 SWR
bandwidth
(%)
K0
1201
6
6
36.8
8.5
K3
745.3
6
14.22
15.4
3.5
M3
745.3
6
12.32
15.6
3.5
H3
745.3
6
11.46
15.8
3.5
1250
1050
850
650
450
Koch Fractal
Meander
Helix
Euclidean
2500
1
2
3
4
5
Antenna iteration
Resonant frequency (MHz)
Figure 7.90 Comparison of resonance frequency for three types of antenna in terms of iteration
number ([39], copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).
structures differ depending on the curve structure and direction of the incident wave.
Subsequently, resonance frequency differs depending on the polarization of the incident
wave and relates with the electrical length of wire (stretched) residing in the square. For
instance, for the horizontally polarized incidence wave the resonance frequency of the
Peano curve structure is about one third of that for the vertical polarization incidence,
because the electrical wire length is longer in the horizontally polarized wave than that
of the vertically polarized wave. The antenna performance of the Hilbert curve structure
is similar to that of the Peano curve structure. A Peano curve can ﬁll a space much more
than a Hilbert curve for the same number of iterations. This can be understood from
Table 7.10.
The Peano curve structure is applied to an antenna of a dipole type as shown in
Figure 7.91, in which the feed point is shown as an example [41].
In the same way, the Hilbert curve structure is applied to a dipole type as shown in
Figure 7.92 [42]. Input impedance of the 2nd-order Hilbert structure is illustrated in

148
Design and practice of small antennas I
Table 7.10 Total length (stretched) S for Peano and
Hilbert curves with respect to the iteration number
([40], copyright C⃝2006 John Wiley and Sons Inc.)
Peano
S = (32N −1)d
d = L/(3N −1)
Hilbert
S = (22N −1)d
d = L/(2N −1)
Note: L is the linear side dimension of the curve.
Feed point
n = 1
n = 2
n = 3
Feed point
Feed point
Figure 7.91 Peano dipoles, orders n = 1 through 3 ([41], copyright C⃝2004 IEEE).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 7.92 Hilbert dipoles; (a) 1st order, (b) 2nd order, (c) 3rd order, and (d) fourth order ([42],
copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
149
Table 7.11 Resonance frequency and input impedance of Hilbert antenna of 2nd and 3rd stages ([42],
copyright C⃝2003 IEEE)
Outer
dimension (mm)
Fractal
iteration order
Width of
strip (mm)
Resonant frequency by
RWG MoM code with
substrate (MHz)
Impedance when
resonating
50
2
4
582.087
3.79829
50
3
4
415.516
0.95505
80
2
4
371.716
3.93187
80
3
4
263
0.98539
80
2
8
385.686
4.26708
80
3
8
277.2
1.04867
550
500
−100
0
100
200
Re (Z) with substrate
Re (Z) w/o substrate
Im (Z) with substrate
Im (Z) w/o substrate
600
Frequency
Impedance
(MHz)
(Ω)
650
700
750
800
Figure 7.93 Input impedance of 2nd-order Hilbert antenna fed at the center, with and without
substrate; width = 4 mm and other dimensions = 50 mm ([42], copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).
Figure 7.93. The input impedance can be adjusted to about 50  by selecting the feed
position. Table 7.11 provides variation of resonance frequency and input impedance with
respect to the iteration number, outer dimensions and width of strip. Current distributions
along a 3rd-order Hilbert dipole printed on the substrate of εr = 4.3 and fed at the center
at resonance frequency 582.087 MHz having the outer dimensions of 4.5 cm is shown
in Figure 7.94. The current distribution is almost the same as that for the center-fed
and very similar to that of a half-wave dipole resembling a sinusoidal wave, and does
not vary signiﬁcantly with change in the iteration number. Radiation patterns of the 3rd
order Hilbert Dipole antenna is shown in Figure 7.95, which is nearly the same as that
of a dipole antenna.
Figure 7.96 compares the size between a printed dipole antenna and the 2nd- and
the 3rd-order Hilbert dipoles. The ﬁgure shows that the 2nd- and the 3rd-order Hilbert
dipoles have dimensions of about 1/4 and about 2/11, respectively, of that of the
dipole.

150
Design and practice of small antennas I
120
100
80
60
40
20
−20
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Distance along antenna
Current density
0.25
0.35
0.45
0.3
0.4
0
Real
Imaginary
Figure 7.94 Current distribution along a 3rd-order Hilbert antenna with substrate and fed at node
32 (a dot on the element) at resonance frequency (outer dimension is 4.5 cm and width is 2 mm)
([42], copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).
45
90
0.0035
0.003
0.002
0.001
0.001
0.0025
0.0025
0.0025
135
180
225
270
315
0
0.003
0.003
0.0035
0.0035
0.002
0.002
0.001
0.0025
0.003
0.0035
0.002
0
18
36
54
72
Figure 7.95 Radiation pattern of the 3rd-order Hilbert antenna with substrate fed at node 24 at the
resonance frequency ([42], copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).
7.2.2.1.2.2 PIFA using Peano curve elements
A Peano curve structure is used for miniaturizing a PIFA element, replacing the horizontal
element with planar Peano curve elements. The antenna has two planar Peano elements
to cover dual bands, which are designed for applications to GSM in 900 MHz band
and PCS in 1900 MHz band [43]. The geometry is shown in Figure 7.97, in which

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
151
Table 7.12 Dimensions of optimized antenna shown in
Fig. 7.97 ([43], copyright C⃝2006 IEICE)
P1
L1
s
x1
x2
x3
A
34.4
14.3
6
4.6
–
5.4
B
32.9
13
6
5.1
1.2
–
C
40
12.5
7.7
5.6
4.5
5.1
500
450
350
400
300
250
200
150
100
0
300
500
Resonance frequency
(MHz)
(mm)
Dimension of antenna
700
900
50
Dipole
Hilbert order 2
Hilbert order 3
Figure 7.96 Comparison of the dimension of printed dipole and Hilbert antenna at the same
resonance frequency ([42], copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).
Feed
Shorting
pin
Ground
Lg
x2
x3
x1
L1
x
y
z
P1
s
Figure 7.97 Dual-band 2nd-order Peano PIFA ([43], copyright C⃝2006 IEEE).
dimensional parameters are given. Optimized antenna dimensions are listed in Table
7.12, in which A and B give parameters for an antenna with height = 8.25 mm and
C gives for that h = 8 mm and the one side element is replaced with a rectangular
patch. Computed VSWR of the antenna in the 900 MHz band and that of the antenna
in the 1900 MHz band are illustrated in Figures 7.98 and 7.99, respectively. By using
a Peano element, the PIFA can be miniaturized about 50% in volume compared with a
conventional PIFA.

152
Design and practice of small antennas I
5
4.5
3.5
2.5
1.5
1
880
900
920
940
960
980 1000 1020
4
Frequency (MHz)
VSWR
3
2
Antenna B
Antenna C
Antenna A
Figure 7.98 Computed VSWR for antennas A, B, and C near 900 MHz band ([43], copyright
C⃝2006 IEEE).
5
4.5
3.5
2.5
1.5
1
1860
1840
1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000
4
Antenna B
Frequency (MHz)
VSWR
Antenna C
3
2
Antenna A
Figure 7.99 Computed VSWR for antenna A, B, and C near 1920 MHz band ([43], copyright
C⃝2006 IEEE).
7.2.2.1.3 Minkowsky and Sierpinsky Fractal monopoles
7.2.2.1.3.1 Planar Minkowsky Fractal monopole
A Minkowsky Fractal monopole is generated starting from a Euclidean square by replac-
ing each of the four segments of the initial square with the generator shown, and repeating
it for an inﬁnite number of times as illustrated in Figure 7.100 [44], which shows only
from the initiator to the third iteration structure. To utilize space-ﬁlling ability, a ﬁrst-
order planar Minkowsky loop is fabricated (Figure 7.101) and its performances are
reported [44]. The perimeter length lp is given by
lpn = (1 + 2w/3)nlp(n−1)
(7.59)

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
153
Initiator
Generator
> Indentation width
Figure 7.100 Iterative generation procedure for Minkowsky island fractal; transition from a
generator is shown below ([44], copyright C⃝2002 IEEE).
Figure 7.101 The ﬁrst-order Minkowsky fractal loop antenna ([44], copyright C⃝2002 IEEE).
where n is the iteration number and w is the indentation width. Scaling factor for reso-
nance for a λ/4 square loop for various numbers of iteration and for varying indentation
widths is shown in Figure 7.102, which provides design curves for resonance frequency
with respect to number of iteration and indentation width. The resonance frequency is
reduced as the iteration number increases and the indentation number as well.
7.2.2.1.3.2 Comparison of planar Minkowsky fractal monopoles with other
space-ﬁlling-curve monopoles [45]
Planar monopoles using various space-ﬁlling curves such as (a) Minkowsky fractal,
(b) Hilbert curve, (c) Koch fractal, (d) tee-fractal, (e) box-meander line, and (f) meander
line, having planar area of 15.7 cm × 15.7 cm (246.5 cm2), respectively are shown in
Figure 7.103(a), (b), (c), (d), (e), and (f). The physical and resonance properties are

1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
Fractal iteration
Scaling factor for resonance for λ/4
square loop
0
2
1
Indentation width = 0.200
Indentation width = 0.333
Indentation width = 0.500
Indentation width = 0.666
Indentation width = 0.800
Indentation width = 0.900
Figure 7.102 Scaling factor for design of Minkowsky loop antenna for various indentation width
in terms of iteration number ([44], copyright C⃝2002 IEEE).
M0
(a)
(b)
(d)
(c)
M1
M2
M3
K1
K2
K3
K4
(e)
(f)
B-1
B-2
H0
H1
H2
H3
T1
ML2
ML3
ML4
ML5
ML6
ML7
T3
T2
Figure 7.103 Various types of planar fractal monopole: (a) mod-Minkowsky fractal, (b) Hilbert
curve fractal, (c) Koch fractal, (d) tee-fractal, (e) box-meander line, and (f) meander line ([45],
copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
155
12
8
4
0
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Hilbert curve
Mod-Minkowski
Koch curve
Tee fractal
Box meander
Meander line
Resonant frequency (MHz)
Radiation resistance (ohms)
(a)
+
++
+
Hilbert curve
Mod-Minkowski
Koch curve
Tee fractal
Box meander
Meander line
+
600
400
Q
200
0
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Resonant frequency (MHz)
(b)
Figure 7.104 Radiation resistance and Q of six types of planar monopoles shown in Figure 7.103:
(a) radiation resistance and (b) Q ([46], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE).
compared in terms of resonance frequency, radiation resistance, efﬁciency, and Q for
various iteration numbers. Radiation resistance and Q of these antennas are illustrated in
Figure 7.104(a) and (b), respectively. The analysis disclosed that there are no signiﬁcant
differences in the resonance properties of these antennas, although antenna geometry and
total wire length differ, indicating that their resonance behavior is primarily established
by their occupied area [45]. This analysis provides useful suggestions for designing
planar monopoles using space-ﬁlling curves.
7.2.2.1.3.3 Sierpinsky Fractal monopole
Sierpinsky Fractal structures (Figure 7.105 [46, 47]) were discovered by W. Sierpin-
sky in 1916. The Sierpinsky Fractal is generated starting from an equilateral triangle
by removing the central triangle with vertices located at the midpoints of the sides of
the original triangle, and repeating it for the three remaining triangles and then nine

156
Design and practice of small antennas I
Figure 7.105 Sierpinsky fractal structure ([47], copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).
n = 0
n = 1
n = 2
n = 3
n = 4
Figure 7.106 The ﬁrst four stages in construction of a conventional Sierpinsky gasket fractal ([47],
copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).
0
2
4
f (GHz)
6
8
10
12
14
16
S11 (dB)
0
−20
−10
Simulations
Measurements
Figure 7.107 Return-loss characteristics relative to 50  ([47], copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).
remaining triangles, and so on to form a sieve of triangles as shown in Figure 7.105 [46].
The Sierpinsky sieve (or gasket) of triangles is, when applied to an antenna structure,
characterizedbyacertainmultibandbehaviorowingtoitsself-similarshape.Amonopole
antenna based on the Sierpinsky gasket has been shown to be an excellent candidate for
multiband applications. The simulated and measured input reﬂection coefﬁcient (S11)
of a four-stage Sierpinsky structure (Figure 7.106) is depicted in Figure 7.107 [46]. The
antenna dimensions are: height h = 88.9, hn/hn+1 = 2, ﬂare angle α = 60◦, thickness
of the substrate hs = 1.588, permittivity εr = 2.5, and the iteration number n = 4 (in
mm for all dimensional parameters). The antenna parameters are provided in Table 7.13,
in which frequency band, resonance frequency, bandwidth, reﬂection coefﬁcient, ratio
of iteration segment, and height of triangle for each segment in terms of wavelength,
are provided. A ﬁve-order Sierpinsky monopole shown in Figure 7.108 [47] was fab-
ricated and measured and the simulated reﬂection coefﬁcient is shown in Figure 7.109

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
157
Table 7.13 Sierpinsky gasket fractal monopole parameters ([46], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE,
and [47], copyright C⃝2003 IEICE)
Iteration
Band
number
S11 fm [GHz]
Bandwidth [%]
[dB]
frn+1/frn
hn/λn
0
1
0.52
7.15
10
3.50
0.153
1
2
1.74
9.04
14
2.02
0.258
2
3
3.51
20.5
24
1.98
0.261
3
4
6.95
22
19
2.00
0.257
4
5
13.89
25
20
–
0.255
80 cm
8.89 cm
4.45 cm
2.23 cm
1.11 cm
0.55 cm
z
y
x
Figure 7.108 A ﬁve-order Sierpinsky monopole ([47], copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).
f (GHz)
1
−10
−20
−30
2
4
8
Experiment
Simulation
0
Γin(dB)
Figure 7.109 Input reﬂection coefﬁcient relative to 50  ([47], copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).

158
Design and practice of small antennas I
f (GHz)
1
200
100
30
2
4
8
300
(a)
(b)
f (GHz)
1
0
−100
2
4
8
Imag (Zin) Ω
Real (Zin) Ω
100
Experiment
Simulation
Experiment
Simulation
Figure 7.110 Input impedance of a ﬁve-order Sierpinsky monopole: (a) real part and (b)
imaginary part (solid line: measured, dashed line; simulated by using FDTD, and dashed-dotted
line; simulated by using DOTIG4 ([47], copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).
Input impedances are given in Figure 7.110, where (a) shows resistance and (b) shows
reactance.
7.2.2.1.4 Spiral antennas
Antenna performances of dipoles and loops generally depend on the frequency; how-
ever, there are some antennas like self-complementary antennas which have frequency-
independent characteristics. Other types, such as spiral antennas also have frequency-
independent characteristics. The antenna structure is essentially determined by angle,
not length, with which the antenna exhibits constant impedance characteristics. Ideally
the spiral antenna of inﬁnite structure is frequency independent; however, a practical
antenna cannot have inﬁnite structure, the frequency dependence on its impedance being
limited by the ﬁnite structure; that is, the outer length of spiral curve and the impedance
becomes constant over the frequency higher than that determined by the outer spiral
length. Two types of spiral antenna are representative: equiangular spiral antenna and
Archimedean spiral antenna.
7.2.2.1.4.1 Equiangular spiral antenna
The basic equiangular spiral curve shown in Figure 7.111 is expressed by
r = r0eaϕ
(7.60)

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
159
x
r
φ
y
Figure 7.111 Equiangular spiral curve ([48]).
(a)
(b)
r3
r1
δ
Edge 2
Edge 1
r4
r1
R
Figure 7.112 (a) Planar equiangular spiral antenna (self-complementary case with δ = 90◦([48])
and (b) a conical equiangular spiral structure.
where r0 denotes radius for ϕ = 0, and a is a constant controlling the ﬂare rate of the spiral
[48]. The spiral in the ﬁgure is right-handed, but left-handed spirals can be generated
using negative values of a, or simply turning the spiral in the opposite direction. A
planar equiangular spiral antenna is created by using the equiangular spiral curve shown
in Figure 7.112 (a). Each edge of the spiral element has a curve basically expressed
by (7.60). For instance, r1 = r0eaϕ, r2 is the curve rotated through angle δ, so r2 =
r0 ea(ϕ–δ), r3 has the curve of δ = π, then r3 = r0ea(ϕ–π ), and r4 is the curve further
turned from r3, so r4 = r0ea(ϕ–π–δ).
Figure 7.112(b) depicts a conical equiangular spiral structure.
The ﬂare rate a is more conveniently expressed by using expansion factor ε, which is
ε = r(ϕ + 2π)/r(ϕ) = r0ea(ϕ+2π)/r0eaϕ = ea2π.
(7.61)
A typical value for ε is 4, and then a = 0.221. The upper frequency fu is determined
by the feed structure. The minimum radius r0 is about λ/4 at fu for ε = 4. A nearly

160
Design and practice of small antennas I
Figure 7.113 (a) A circular type Archimedean spiral antenna and (b) a square type Archimedean
spiral structure.
equivalent criterion is a circumference in the feed region of 2πr0 = λu = c/fu. The
lowest frequency fL is set by overall radius R, which is roughly λL/4 (λL = c/fL), and
the circumference C of a circle, which encloses the entire spiral, is used to set fL by
taking C = 2πR = λL. When a = 0.221, R is r(ϕ = 3π) = r0 e0.221(3π) = 8.03 r0 and
equals λL/4. Meanwhile, r0 equals λu/4, then, the bandwidth deﬁned by λL/λu = 8.03,
meaning about 8:1 bandwidth.
7.2.2.1.4.2 Archimedean spiral antenna
Figure 7.113 illustrates the planar Archimedean spiral antenna [48], having two spiral
curves, which are linearly proportional to the polar angle rather than exponential for the
equiangular spiral, represented by
r = r0(1 + ϕ/π) and r0(1 + ϕ/π −p).
(7.62)
The outside circumference in this case is one wavelength (a half wavelength for the
outer half-circle) and an antenna with three turns is shown in Figure 7.113(a). Since the
radiated ﬁelds produced by the two spirals are orthogonal, equal in magnitude, and 90
degrees phase difference, the wave is left-hand circular polarization (LHCP). The left-
hand winding of the spiral determines the left-hand sense in the wave, which is viewed
as radiation out of the page, and the opposite sense of wave is viewed as radiation toward
the other side of page, that is RHCP.
Figure 7.113(b) illustrates a square Archimedean spiral modiﬁed from circular type.
The spiral produces a broad main beam perpendicular to the plane of the spiral;
however, in many practical applications, a unidirectional beam is preferred. This suggests
the use of a ground plane or cavity, over which the spiral is placed. The latter is called a
cavity-backed spiral antenna. Since by using metallic material for the cavity, it is natural
that the frequency performance is altered, leading to use of absorbing material loaded
into the cavity to reduce the frequency variation.
The typical performance parameters for a cavity-backed Archimedean spiral antenna
are HP (Half power beamwidth) = 75◦, |AR| = 1 dB, G = 5 dB over 10:1 bandwidth or
more [48]. The input impedance is approximately 120- resistive.

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
161
Rout
out
Rout
Rin
ψ
z
y
x
Figure 7.114 Geometry of truncated two-arm equiangular spiral antenna ([49], copyright C⃝2007
IEEE).
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Frequency
Resistance (Ω)
0.5
1
2
3
4
Measured
FDTD
εr = 6.15
εr ≈ 1
Figure 7.115 Measured and FDTD simulated resistance for antenna type A and B ([49], copyright
C⃝2007 IEEE).
7.2.2.1.4.3 Antenna performance and design of spiral antenna
7.2.2.1.4.3.1 Input impedance
A model considered here is depicted in Figure 7.114 [49], which shows major design
parameters Rin, Rout, and . Here two cases, A and B, where a spiral element is embedded
on two different substrates, are treated. The dimensional parameters (see Fig. 7.114) are
Rin = 3 mm, Rout = 0.114 m,  = 79◦. The antenna type A uses substrate modeled as
a 0.1 mm polyester ﬁlm layer εr = 3.2 on top of a foam layer εr = 1, while the antenna
type B uses substrate modeled as a uniform dielectric with a thickness of 1.27 mm and
εr = 6.15. Input impedances measured and calculated by using FDTD simulator are
depicted in Figure 7.115, showing resistance, and Figure 7.116(a) and (b), showing
reactance for the type A and the type B, respectively. Impedance characteristics tend
to show peculiar behavior having three distinct regions. The outer truncation of the
spiral curve dominates the performance in low-frequency regions, the inner trunca-
tion determines that in higher-frequency behavior, and the shape of the spiral curve
itself relates to that of the intermediate-frequency regions. There is a region where
a band of nearly constant impedance is seen between the erratic behavior at the
upper and lower frequencies. This is the speciﬁc behavior of the spiral antenna as a
frequency-independent antenna and this region is referred to as the “operating band.”
The input impedance Z in this region is 188 , when the spiral has self-complementary

162
Design and practice of small antennas I
.5
1
f (GHz)
2
3
4
Foamclad reactance (Ω)
100
0
(a)
−50
−100
50
FDTD
Measured
.5
1
Frequency (GHz)
2
3
4
Rogers reactance ( jΩ)
100
0
(b)
−50
−100
50
FDTD
Measured
Figure 7.116 Measured and FDTD simulated reactance: (a) for type A and (b) for type B ([49],
copyright C⃝2007 IEEE).
109
Frequency (Hz)
1010
 Real impedance (W)
250
100
150
50
0
200
εr = 1.3
εr = 2.9
εr = 6.2
Figure 7.117 Real impedance of spirals designed to be 188 , 148 , and 108  (triangular
markers denote the edges of the operating band) ([49], copyright C⃝2007 IEEE).
structure [50], which is given by
Z = (1/2)Z0 = (1/2)

μ0/ε0
(7.63)
where Z0 is the free space impedance. When the antenna is embedded on the substrate
of εr, the impedance Z is given by using effective permittivity εeff as
Z = (1/2)

μ0/εeff = (1/2)

μ0/εrε0 = (1/2)Z0/√εr.
(7.64)
The impedance as a function of frequency is illustrated in Figure 7.117, which is cal-
culated for the spiral of type A on the substrate of thickness of 1.27 mm with different
εeff = 1.3, 2.9, and 6.2. The lower-frequency region is dominated by a series of resonant
peaks, the middle-frequency region is approximately constant, and higher-frequency
regions contain either a resonant peak or a region where the real impedance decreases
with frequency. In the ﬁgure, marker arrows denote the edge of the operating band and
the dashed lines show the calculated characteristic impedance, which is the average in
the operating band. The spiral impedance can be evaluated numerically over the range

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
163
180
Real impedance (Ω)
160
140
120
100
0
0.2
εr = 2
εr = 2.75
εr = 4
εr = 7
0.4
0.6
h/Rin
0.8
1
∞
{   }
{   }
Figure 7.118 Real impedance with respect to h/Rin for εr = 2, 2.75, 4, and 7 ([49], copyright
C⃝2007 IEEE).
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
Frequency (Hz)
Gain (linear)
¥ 109
0
2
4
6
8
10
ª2.2 GHz
εr = 1
εr = 2.2
εr = 4.2
Figure 7.119 Simulated gain for a spiral with εr = 1, 2.2, and 4.2 ([49], copyright C⃝2007 IEEE).
0.1 < h/Rin < 1 for εr < 7 in Figure 7.118. The impedance for smaller h/Rin tends
to (1/2) Z0, corresponding to no substrate case (meaning in free space), and for larger
h/Rin, to (1/2) Z0/ √εr.
7.2.2.1.4.3.2 Gain
Measured and FDTD simulated gains of the spiral antenna of  = 79◦, Rin = 2.5 mm,
Rout = 0.12 m are illustrated in Figure 7.119, where a sequence of gain variation for
various substrates with εr from lowest to highest 1, 2.2, and 4.2 is given. Gain G can be
evaluated as
G = π√εact
(7.65)
where εact is effective permittivity of the active region ring in the spiral. The active
region is a part that contributes to radiation, which occurs in a curved structure having
circumference one wavelength or in a straight wire or edge with length of one-half

164
Design and practice of small antennas I
wavelength. Equation (7.65) indicates that the spiral radiates with a constant gain of π
in free space. However, all three gains have a periodic ripple with period of approximately
2.2 GHz, which is the inverse of time delay td = 0.45 ns that is caused in the radiated
ﬁeld by the wave travelling on the spiral surface. This arises because of the truncation
of the spiral, which is 12 cm from the feed. The time delay which causes ripple tends
to be approximately R/c, where R is the radius of the spiral and c is velocity of light in
free space.
7.2.2.1.4.4 Radiation patterns
Radiation patterns of the spiral antenna shown in Figure 7.114 (εr = 4.2) are illustrated
in Figure 7.120 [49], where only upper hemisphere patterns are given, as the lower
hemisphere patterns are the same. The patterns are seen to have alternative contraction
and expansion along the z-axis that corresponds to the maxima of the gain ripple. In
the dielectric case, it becomes further complicated as the frequency becomes higher,
because of deﬂection of radiated power into side lobes.
7.2.2.1.4.5 Unidirectional pattern
In many practical spiral antenna applications, a unidirectional pattern is required. For
this purpose, a conducting shallow cavity is placed behind a spiral antenna. How-
ever, since simple use of such a cavity deteriorates the inherent wideband property of
the spiral antenna, an absorber may be applied to the outer spiral arms to restore the
wideband property [50]. The absorber will suppress reﬂection of waves caused by the
truncation of outer spiral arms. Figure 7.121 illustrates an example of an equiangular
spiral antenna, to which a ring-shaped absorber (R-ABS) is applied. In the ﬁgure, (a)
shows an exploded view, (b) the side view, (c) spiral arms, and (d) a magniﬁed view
of near the input terminals. Figure 7.122 illustrates the input impedance; (a) Rin (resis-
tance), (b) Xin (reactance) with and without cavity, (c) with R-ABS. The antenna used
here is a two-arm equiangular spiral antenna having parameters provided in Table 7.14,
which is backed by a conducting cavity of height Hcav (= antenna height), and diameter
Dcav. Axial ratios with and without R-ABS are shown in Figure 7.123. As these ﬁgures
show, fairly wideband characteristics can be seen with use of R-ABS.
The absorber size can be reduced only to cover near the edge of the outer spiral arms so
that no or almost no reﬂection appears at the ends of the outer spiral arms. Figure 7.124
illustrates an example of the use of arc-shaped ABS (A-ABS) [50]. Input impedance Zin
(= Rin + jXin) and axial ratio for a case with A-ABS are shown in Figure 7.125(a) and
(b), respectively, and radiation patterns are depicted in Figure 7.126, in which (a) and
(b) show with A-ABS, but for the case where ϕarc = 90◦and 180◦, respectively, and (c)
shows without A-ABS (ϕarc = 0◦).
7.2.2.1.4.6 Miniaturization of spiral antenna
Spiral antennas can be miniaturized by lowering phase velocity of the waves travelling on
the spiral arms from the feed point. However, since a spiral antenna has an inherently wide
bandwidth property, the phase velocity at a single resonance frequency cannot be taken

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
165
εr = 1
εr = 4.2
1.78 GHz
2.88 GHz
3.98 GHz
5.18 GHz
6.28 GHz
7.50 GHz
Figure 7.120 Radiation patterns of antenna shown in Figure 7.114 on the upper hemisphere for
cases εr = 1 and 4.2 ([49], copyright C⃝2007 IEEE).

166
Design and practice of small antennas I
Z
Z
Dcav
Hcav
Hcav
X
Cavity
R-ABS
R-ABS
Spiral
O
~
O′
t
A
B
O
O
(a)
(a)
(d)
(b)
y
x
y
x
Ring-shaped
ABS
(R-ABS)
qB
ϕend
ϕst
qB
pA
pA
pB
pB
qA
qA
A
A
B
rmax
A
x
y
B
B
a′
a
τ
Figure 7.121 Equiangular spiral antenna with a ring-shaped absorber: (a) exploded view, (b) side
view, (c) spiral element, and (d) magniﬁed view around the input terminals ([50], copyright
C⃝2008 IEEE).
600
with a cavity
without a cavity
Frequency (GHz)
400
200
0
−200
2
3
4
5
6
(b)
7
8
9
10
−400
600
with a cavity
without a cavity
400
200
0
−200
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
−400
Frequency (GHz)
(a)
Rin (Ω
(Ω) 
Xin (Ω
(Ω) 
Zin (Ω
(Ω) 
(c) 600
400
200
0
−200
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
−400
Rin
Xin
with R-ABS
without R-ABS (See)
“with a cavity” in (a) and (b)
Figure 7.122 Input impedance of equiangular spiral antenna; (a) Rin resistance (b) reactance
(dotted line, with cavity and solid line, without cavity), and (c) Rin and Xin with A-ABS ([50],
copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
167
Table 7.14 Geometrical parameters ([50],
copyright C⃝2008 IEEE)
symbol
value
unit
r0
1.5
mm
as
0.35
rad−1
ϕst
−0.25π
mm
ϕend
2.806π
rad
τ
0.5π
rad
Dcav
120
mm
Hcav
7
mm
Frequency (GHz)
20
with R-ABS
18
16
14
12
0
10
8
6
4
2
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
AR (dB) 
without R-ABS
Figure 7.123 Axial ratio with and without R-ABS ([50], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
Z
A
B
O
O′
y
x
arc-shaped
ABS
(ϕ-ABS)
Hcav
qB
qB
ϕARC
ϕARC
qA
qA
qB
qA
t
pB
(a)
(b)
(c)
pA
Figure 7.124 Equiangular spiral antenna with arc-shaped absorber: (a) spiral element, (b)
arc-shaped ABS, and (c) cavity ([50], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).

168
Design and practice of small antennas I
Frequency (GHz)
(a)
Zin (Ω)
Rin
Xin
2
–400
–200
0
200
400
600
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
A-ABSs
(ϕARC = 90°)
theo.
exp
{
Frequency (GHz)
(b)
AR (dB)
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
A-ABSs
(ϕARC = 90°)
theo.
exp
{
Figure 7.125 (a) Input impedance Zin = (Rin + jXin) and (b) axial ratio with A-ABS ([50],
copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
−10
0
z
x
θ
−20
−30
[dB]
(a)
−10
0
z
x
θ
−20
−30
[dB]
(c)
ϕARC = 90°
with A-ABSs
−10
0
z
x
θ
−20
−30
[dB]
(b)
ϕARC = 180°
ϕARC = 0°
(R-ABS)
ER theory
ER expt
without A-ABSs
with A-ABSs
ER
EL
Figure 7.126 Radiation patterns; (a) arc = 90◦, (b) arc = 180◦, and arc = 0◦([50], copyright
C⃝2008 IEEE).

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
169
as a measure of miniaturization as in the case of narrow-band antennas. Miniaturization
in cases of spiral antennas may be interpreted by reduction of the spiral arm length or
by lowering operating frequency for the speciﬁed gain [51]. In practice, lowering the
phase velocity of the wave travelling on the spiral arms can be realized by modifying
the spiral arm structure, or by loading either resistance or reactance components on the
spiral arms. There is still a need to optimize the antenna structure or way of loading to
obtain minimum Q or maximum gain for a wide frequency range with a given antenna
size. In this case, techniques for proper matching to keep wideband characteristics are
required as well.
7.2.2.1.4.6.1 Slot spiral antenna
The slot spiral antenna has been studied extensively by J. H. Volakis and his colleagues
[52–64]. Their work includes development of design algorithms to optimize the antenna
geometry, feed, loading, and so forth, and demonstrates techniques of miniaturization
and practical models. As spiral antennas have inherently wide bandwidth, miniatur-
ization should be realized without losing the initial wideband characteristics. Loading
of resistance, reactive components or materials is a common method for miniaturizing
antennas. When applying the loading method to spiral antennas, speciﬁc care must be
taken to keep wideband characteristics. Practical methods are, for example, modifying
antenna structure by meandering or coiling, using dielectric materials in superstrate as
well as substrate, and so forth. Wideband matching can be done, for instance, by tapering
resistive loading on the spiral arms, by inﬁnite coaxial balun along with spiral arms, by
the broadband hybrid, and so forth. Since the slot radiates to both front and back sides
normally to the spiral surface, the antenna is often placed on a thin cavity to produce
unidirectional radiation, which is desired in many cases of practical operation. The spiral
slot structure has a feature that is different from usual spiral of conducting arms; since
the source of radiation is magnetic current, the spiral element can be placed close to the
metallic ground plane that attributes the positive image effect, resulting in increase of the
antenna gain and thinning the antenna structure as well. Some examples are introduced
below.
An example of a slot spiral antenna is illustrated in Figure 7.127 [50], which shows
the radiating slot spiral antenna; (a) cross section, (b) underside view, and (c) top view
with microstrip balun. The antenna type is an Archimedean spiral, which is mathemat-
ically described as r = aθ + b, where r is the radian length from the origin, a is the
spiral growth rate, θ is the angular position, and b is the initial radial offset from the
origin. Geometries of the antenna are: a = 0.28 cm/radian, θ is in a range from 0.0 to
24.5 radians, b = 0, the maximum diameter dmax of the radiating slot is 14.5 cm, and the
slot width w = 0.762 mm. The substrate εr = 3.38 and the thickness of the substrate is
7.62 mm. The balun is constituted with microstrip line, which is placed on the metal part
of the spiral toward the origin (center) of the spiral, using the radiating slot as its ground
plane as Figure 7.127(a) and (c), respectively, show. At the periphery of the spiral, a
coaxial connector is soldered to the microstrip line, and at the center of the spiral, the end
of the microstrip line is shorted across the slot line to feed the slot. Termination of the slot

170
Design and practice of small antennas I
Balun
Slot spiral
Microstrip-slot
transition
region
Coaxial-microstrip
transition
region
Coaxial-microstrip
transition region
Slotline
Thick-film
slot termination
Microstrip
infinite
balun
Microstrip-slot
transition
region
Feed
Cavity bottom
Cavity
Substrate
(a)
(c)
(b)
Figure 7.127 Geometry of Archimedean spiral antenna backed with cavity: (a) cross section view,
(b) underside view, and (c) top view ([51], copyright C⃝2001 IEEE).
Chip resistor
Beginning of
termination
End of termination
Figure 7.128 Slot spiral termination with thick-ﬁlm resistors ([51], copyright C⃝2001 IEEE).
is done by loading resistances on the slot line, forming an impedance transformer between
the antenna impedance and the feed so as to ensure wideband characteristics and achieve
desired axial ratio. The termination is implemented by using 60- resistors, distributed
equally along the overall transformer length. Figure 7.128 illustrates the implemented
termination by using the thick-ﬁlm resistor [54]. The diameter of the cavity is 14.9 cm,
which can just accommodate the slots and the termination resistors. The depth D of
the cavity is set by the maximum desired frequency of the antenna, and at that point it

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
171
ε1
ε = 1
εr
D
D = 1.266 cm, d = 14.5 cm, t = 0.508 mm,
T = 0 cm, 60 resistors/arm, ε1 = 1,
w = 0.762 mm, εr = (3.38,–0.009).
d
t
T
W
⎛
⎜
⎝
⎛
⎜
⎝
Figure 7.129 Antenna geometry cross section, which shows loading with substrate of dielectric
constant εr and superstrate of dielectric constant ε1 ([51], copyright C⃝2001 IEEE).
should be less than λhighest/4 to prevent destructive interference. The minimum depth
of the cavity is determined by the slot width w and substrate dielectric constant εr. The
actual depth of the cavity used is 6.35 mm (λlowest/60).
7.2.2.1.4.6.2 Spiral antenna loaded with capacitance
This spiral antenna is miniaturized by either capacitive loading or inductive loading on
the spiral arms. The capacitive loading is implemented by applying dielectric substrate
and/or superstrate to the spiral surface. Figure 7.129 shows cross section of the antenna
geometry in the cavity when a dielectric substrate with εr, having the thickness T, or
a dielectric superstrate with ε1, having thickness t, is used. MFsm (near-ﬁeld miniatur-
ization factor) is evaluated by taking the electrical lengths of spiral arms for various
loadings θloaded and θunloaded, given in [51] as
MFsm =

θloaded/θunloaded.
(7.66)
Figure 7.130 shows MFsm as a function of substrate thickness with four values of εr.
The phase progression on the slot line when dielectric superstrate (with ε1 = εr) is
added on the slot line is depicted in Figure 7.131, which shows variation of phase angle
with respect to the slot line length for two different thickness t (0 cm with white points,
and 0.0508 cm with black points) and four different εr (2.2, 3.38, 6.15, and 10.2) of the
superstrate. This ﬁgure clearly gives an evidence of increase in the electrical length of the
slot with increase in εr of the superstrate. Figure 7.132 gives near-ﬁeld miniaturization
factor MFsm with respect to the superstrate thickness t for four values of εr (from 2.2 to
10.2). Gain of this antenna is about 0 dB around 1 GHz.
Miniaturization can also be done by loading either capacitive or inductive components
on the slot line that increases electrical length of the slot line and thus lowers the operating
frequency [58–63].

172
Design and practice of small antennas I
T / λλ0
D = 0.1 λ0, w = 0.005 λ0, d = 0.5 λ0
εr = 10.2
εr = 6.15
εr = 3.38
εr = 2.2
0
1
1.1
1.2
Miniaturization
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
Figure 7.130 Miniaturization factor with respect to substrate thickness for four values of εr ([51],
copyright C⃝2001 IEEE).
Degrees
Slot length
(cm)
1200
10.2
6.15
3.38
2.2
1000
800
600
400
200
00
5
10
15
20
εr = 1
Figure 7.131 Phase progression with respect to the slot line length for different superstrate
thickness for four values of εr from [51].
T / λ0
D = 0.044λ0, t = 0.0186λ0,
w = 0.0073λ0,  d = 0.733λ0, εr = ε2
τ
Miniaturization
1.7
w
d
D
1
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
0.005 0.01 0.015 0.02 0.025 0.03 0.035 0.04 0.045 0.05
ε1
ε4 = 10.2
ε3 = 6.15
ε2 = 3.38
ε1 = 2.2
εr
ε = 1
Figure 7.132 Miniaturization factor with respect to superstrate thickness for four values of εr
([51], copyright C⃝2001 IEEE).

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
173
−5
−10
−15
−20
−25
−30
−35
0.5
1
1.5
Boresight gain (dBic)
Frequency (GHz)
2
0
5
Measured
Simulated
L1
L2
S
w
Figure 7.133 Square spiral antenna geometry and gain with respect to frequency ([53], copyright
C⃝2005 IEEE).
7.2.2.1.4.6.3 Archimedean spiral antennas
Another example of spiral antenna is the Archimedean spiral described in [53], in
which feeding technique, single resistance loading, tapered dielectric superstrate, and
so forth, are discussed and the performances are introduced. The antenna is shown in
the inset of Figure 7.133. The geometrical parameters of the antenna are; slot width w =
0.0762 cm, conductor width S = 0.2286 cm, and aperture dimensions are 5.715 ×
5.715 cm, while the actual spiral has dimensions of 4.6482 × 4.9530 cm. To achieve
unidirectional radiation, a square cavity having an inner dimension of 5.08 cm and a depth
of 2.54 cm is used. The square spiral slot is printed on a 0.06096 cm thick substrate
(εr = 4.25 – j0.0595). A 0–180◦broadband hybrid is employed for feeding and 15
resistors using Klopfenstein taper [64] are used for the termination, instead of an inﬁnite
coaxial balun embedded on the surface of the spiral elements and feeding the spiral at
its center. Figure 7.133 illustrates measured and simulated gain. In order to terminate
with only a single resistor, the slot line is extended to the aperture edge, resulting in use
of a 47- resistor that can provide an effective termination in terms of both axial ratio
and impedance matching. By this means gain is improved and is shown in Figure 7.134,
which also shows the gain when resistive taper is used as a comparison.
Further improvement of gain is achieved by using high-contrast dielectric loading
[53]. Photos of a tapered dielectric layer placed as the superstrate on the slot spiral are
shown with cross sectional view in Figure 7.135(a), and the measured gains for various
values of the superstrate εr = 9, 16, 30, and 90 are illustrated in Figure 7.135(b). Lesser
thickness of the dielectric is used as εr becomes larger. It was found that with higher εr,
the gain tends to be higher. When –15 dB gain is taken as a reference, lowering frequency
is observed from 884 MHz to 564 MHz as εr increases from unity (no dielectric) to 90.

174
Design and practice of small antennas I
Resistive taper
Frequency (GHz)
Measured boresight gain (dBic)
0.5
1
−40
−35
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
5
2
1.5
Measured without cavity
Single chip resistor
Figure 7.134 Measured gain of the 2-inch square spiral antenna with a resistive taper and a single
resistor termination ([53], copyright C⃝2005 IEEE).
This implies 36% size reduction or lowering of the operation frequency for the same
size aperture without additional effort to improve impedance matching.
7.2.2.1.4.6.4 Spiral antenna loaded with inductance
Spiral arms are modiﬁed to increase their effective length by loading inductance on
the arms. Inductive loading on the spiral wire arms can be formed with either planar
meandering with rectangular or zigzag, or 3D coiling of the spiral line. Figure 7.136
illustrates a spiral element replaced with (a) planar meander line, and (b) loop-like
winding (rectangular or conical) [58]. Gain of the 6-inch spiral antennas is evaluated to
compare dependence of the spiral structures such as planar meandering spiral, volumetric
spiral, and simple (straight wired) spiral as Figure 7.137 illustrates.
7.2.2.2 Three-dimensional (3D) structure
To improve antenna performance in a small antenna, efﬁcient use of a volume, within
which an antenna is contained, is considered. When an antenna takes a three-dimensional
(3D) structure, the utmost 3D structure for this purpose is a sphere, and use of the
periphery of the sphere is ideal. So far some attempts at placing helical elements on the
periphery of a sphere have been made for efﬁcient use of the periphery of a sphere so as
to obtain the lower Q compared with other types of antenna having an electrically small
size [31].
Other types of structures than spheres are possible to realize small antennas having
lower Q in comparison with 2D structures of the same size, if the volume is within the
reasonable dimensions for practical use. Typical antennas having such 3D structures are
Koch tree, cylindrical helix, cube, and so forth.

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
175
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
2
1
0.5
1.5
0
5
ε1 = 1
ε1 = 9, thickness = 7.3 mm
ε1 = 16, thickness = 6.1 mm
ε1 = 30, thickness = 4.3 mm
ε1 = 90, thickness = 2 mm
Frequency (GHz)
Loaded 2” spiral
Cross section of tapered superstrate
Loaded 6” spiral
Measured realized gain (dBic)
(a)
(b)
0.5000”
0.6300”
0.0625”
2.6100”
Figure 7.135 (a) Cross section of tapered dielectric superstrate placed on the slot spiral and
photos, and (b) variation of measured total circularly polarized gain for the 2-inch square spiral
antenna depending on various dielectrics ([53], copyright C⃝2005 IEEE).
(b)
Width
Pitch
(a)
Thickness
Figure 7.136 Inductive loading of the 6-inch diameter spiral antennas: (a) with planar meandering
and (b) with volumetric coiling ([58], copyright C⃝2006 IEEE).

176
Design and practice of small antennas I
Straight wire
Frequency (MHz)
Realized total gain (dBic)
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
5
Planar meander
Conical coil, tmax = 90 mil
Conical coil, tmax = 500 mil
Conical coil, tmax = 250 mil
Figure 7.137 Gain comparison between three types of spiral antennas; ordinary wire spiral, planar
meandering, and volumetric coiling ([58], copyright C⃝2006 IEEE).
0
1
2
3
4
5
Koch
Iteration
dipole
Quasi-fractal
tree dipole
3D Quasi-
fractal tree
dipole
Figure 7.138 Three types of fractals: Koch dipole, quasi-fractal tree dipole and 3D quasi-fractal
tree dipole ([44], copyright C⃝2002 IEEE).
7.2.2.2.1 Koch trees
Modeling dipoles with Koch Fractal structures are shown in Figure 7.138, where ordinary
Koch dipole, quasi-fractal tree dipole, and 3D fractal tree dipole are depicted [44]. In
the fractal tree, the top third of every branch is split into two sections and the 3D version
has the top third of each branch split into four segments that are each one-third in length.
The 3D fractal here implies only that the structure is not contained in a plane.
As one way for evaluating the performance, Q of the antenna for each type is compared.
Figure 7.139 provides Q of (a) Koch dipole, (b) quasi-fractal tree dipole, and (c) 3D

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
177
50
45
40
35
30
25
(a)
(b)
(c)
20
15
10
5
0
0.64
0.72
0.80
0.88
0.96
1.04
1.12
kh
K0 Q
K1 Q
K2 Q
K3 Q
K4 Q
K5 Q
K0 Q
K1 Q
K2 Q
K3 Q
K4 Q
K5 Q
Fundamental limit
1.19
1.27
1.35
1.43
1.51
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0.64
0.71
0.77
0.83
0.96
0.90
1.02
1.08
kh
1.15
1.21
1.27
1.34
1.40
1.46
1.52
Fundamental limit
3DT0 Q
3DT1 Q
3DT2 Q
3DT3 Q
3DT4 Q
3DT5 Q
Fundamental limit
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0.64
0.71
0.77
0.83
0.96
0.90
1.02
1.08
kh
1.15
1.21
1.27
1.34
1.40
1.46
1.52
Q
Q
Q
Figure 7.139 Comparison of Q between (a) Koch dipole, (b) fractal tree, and (c) 3D fractal tree
([44], copyright C⃝2002 IEEE).
quasi-fractal tree dipole, respectively. The 3D fractal tree shows the lowest Q, and the
lowest resonance frequency as shown in Figure 7.140 [45], meaning that this type uses
the given space most efﬁciently.
7.2.2.2.2 3D spiral antenna
A very small spiral antenna to be used for bio-medical telemetry has been developed,
and the design and realization of the antenna is introduced [65]. Antenna design started
from a planar meander line structure, then its folded structure, and ﬁnally progressed
to 3D spiral structure as shown in Figure 7.141. Geometry and dimensions of the
optimized design of the antenna are shown in Figure 7.142. Reﬂection factor |S11|

0
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
1600
1700
1800
1900
2000
1
2
3
4
5
Koch dipole
Fractal iteration
Resonant frequency (MHz) 
Fractal tree dipole
3D fractal tree dipole
Figure 7.140 Computed resonance frequency for three types of fractal dipole as function of the
number of iterations ([45], copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).
Coaxial
feeder
Grounding
pin
Ground
plane
Two
substrates
Figure 7.141 Design step to develop 3D spiral structure ([65]).
hd = 12.75
hb = 2.25
xg = 14
xs = 1
z
z
x
x
y
xp = 4.5
yg = 14
h = 15
Figure 7.142 Geometry and dimensions of the optimized design [65].

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
179
Frequency (MHz)
|S11| (dB)
300
–35
–30
–25
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
–40
350
400
450
500
Figure 7.143 S11 performance [65].
x
x
Final free space design
Equivalent homogeneous
body model
Body
thickness
Biocompatible insulation
Figure 7.144 Introduction of insulation layer to the antenna structure and equivalent model of the
body [65].
is illustrated in Figure 7.143. Since the antenna is used in a human body, the antenna
element should be insulated to avoid direct contact with the body tissues, and a bio-
compatible insulator with dielectric constant εr = 3.2 and tan δ = 0.01, is introduced.
Figure 7.144 depicts the ﬁnal free-space design and the biocompatible insulation model.
Figure 7.145 illustrates variation of simulated |S11| depending on the thickness of the

180
Design and practice of small antennas I
−10
−20
−30
−40
−50
−60
−70
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
0
Radiation pattern for
h peek = 1.5 mm at
resonant frequency
h peek = 1 mm
h peek = 2 mm
h peek = 3 mm
h peek = 4 mm
h peek = 1.5 mm
Frequency (MHz)
|S11| (dB)
Figure 7.145 Variation of S11 depending on insulator thickness and 3D radiation pattern in free
space [65].
Figure 7.146 Prototype antenna [65].
insulator and 3D radiation pattern for h = 1.5 mm (PEEK is the product name of the glue
insulator [66]). The ﬁnal structure is shown in Figure 7.146 and simulated and measured
|S11| are depicted in Figure 7.147.
7.2.2.2.3 Spherical helix
Wheeler stated [67] that the fundamental limitation on the bandwidth and the practical
efﬁciency of a small antenna are related to the radiation power factor, which is deﬁned
as the ratio of the radiated power to the reactive power. It can be increased by utilizing
as much as possible of the volume of a sphere whose diameter is equal to the maximum
dimension of the antenna, when the antenna is restricted in its maximum dimension, but
not in its volume. The spherical helix is considered as the most appropriate candidate

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
181
Frequency (MHz)
|S11| (dΒ)
−70
−60
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
0
300
250
200
350
400
550
500
450
600
No glue
h glue = 0.015 mm
h glue = 0.05 mm
Figure 7.147 Variation of S11 depending on the thickness of glue layer [65].
for realizing such an antenna, as it can be constituted to occupy substantially nearly the
whole volume of a sphere by wiring along the perimeter of the imaginary sphere having
the radius a corresponding to the maximum size of the antenna.
The radiation properties of several spherical helices have so far been studied [68–78].
The major antenna parameters are number of helical turns, number of helical arms,
and the shape. Among the research work, Best did extensive study and demonstrated
radiation properties of electrically small spherical helices [71, 72] and compared with
that of a normal mode and cylindrical helix [73, 74]. In other papers, different types of
antennas such as spherical wire [75] and spherical magnetic dipole antennas have been
introduced [76–78].
7.2.2.2.3.1 Folded semi-spherical monopole antennas
Radiation properties such as resonance frequency, radiation resistance, Q and efﬁciency,
of spherical helix monopole and dipole antennas are investigated with respect to the
number of turns and number of arms [71]. The antenna model has a wire diameter
of 2.6 mm and the maximum spherical radius (and height) is about 6 cm. Geometry
of the antennas such as one-turn non-folded, one-turn two-arm, and one-turn four-
arm folded spherical helices, respectively are illustrated in Figure 7.148(a), (b), and
(c). With increase in number of arms, resonance frequency becomes higher, radiation
resistance tends to be higher, Q becomes lower, and radiation efﬁciency increases. They
are observed in Table 7.15; (a) with two arms and (b) four arms. There is a difference
in the height; in the four-arm antenna it is reduced to 5.77 cm from 5.89 cm in the
other antennas. Figure 7.149 shows variation of Q with respect to frequency and ka.
Note the signiﬁcance of the four-arm folded spherical helix, which shows the radiation
resistance Ra of about 43 , suitable for matching to 50- feed line, and the radiation
efﬁciency of over 95%, and Q, which is the most notable result, being within 1.5 times

Table 7.15 Antenna performances of folded spherical helix at resonance: (a) two-arm
and (b) four-arm antenna. ([71], copyright C⃝2004 IEEE)
No. of Turns
Arm Length (cm)
fR (MHz)
RA (ohms)
Efﬁciency (%)
(a)
1/2
17
469.3
16.6
99.3
1
30.9
284.95
8.4
97.6
11/2
45.07
203.8
4.7
94.5
(b)
1/2
17
515.8
87.6
99.6
1
30.9
300.3
43.1
98.6
11/2
45.07
210
23.62
97.6
(a)
(b)
(c)
Feed point
y
x
x
x
x
x
x
z
z
z
y
y
y
y
y
Figure 7.148 One-turn spherical helix (a) non-folded, (b) two-arm folded, and (c) four-arm folded
([71], copyright C⃝2004 IEEE).
100
0.125
0
50
100
150
1 1/2-turn
1-turn
Non-folded
2-arm folded
4-arm folded
1/2-turn
200
QLIM
200
0.251
+
+
+
300
0.376
Frequency (MHz)
ka
Q
400
0.501
500
0.627
600
0.752
+
Figure 7.149 Comparison of Q of folded and non-folded spherical helix antennas ([71], copyright
C⃝2004 IEEE).

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
183
Figure 7.150 Fabricated one-turn, four-arm folded spherical helix antenna ([71], copyright C⃝2004
IEEE).
(a)
y
x
x
x
z
z
y
y
z
Spherical helix
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.151 (a) Spherical helix dipole, (b) two-arm folded spherical dipole, and (c) four-arm
folded spherical dipole ([72], copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).
the fundamental limitation at a ka of approximately 0.38. A one-turn, four-arm spherical
helix is shown in Figure 7.150.
Increasing the number of arms is not found to be good for obtaining self-resonance.
7.2.2.2.3.2 Spherical dipole antenna
Figure 7.151 depicts antenna models: (a) one-arm spherical helix, (b) two-arm folded
helix dipole and (c) four-arm folded spherical dipole [72]. Geometries of antennas are
provided in Table 7.16 and comparison of resonance properties for different type of
antennas are given in Table 7.17, where L is the overall length of antenna, a is the radius
of an imaginary sphere circumscribing the maximum dimensions of the antenna, Lw is
the total wire length in one dipole arm, fr is the resonance frequency, Rr is the input
resistance at the resonance, and r is the radius of a sphere deﬁning the effective volume

184
Design and practice of small antennas I
Table 7.16 Geometry of antennas ([72],
copyright C⃝2003 IEEE) (inserted in the text)
One-arm
Two-arm
Four-arm
L (cm)
8.22
8.25
8.36
a (cm)
4.15
4.15
4.18
Lw (cm)
58.23
62.8
65.53
Table 7.17 Comparison of resonance properties of antennas ([72], copyright C⃝2003 IEEE)
Antenna
fr (MHz)
Rr (ohms)
Q
r/λ
Straight-Wire Dipole
300
1.1 – j1015
950
0.0268
Normal Mode Helix
299.6
4.6
216.6
0.0438
Spherical Helix
300.2
2.2
143.9
0.0501
2-Arm Folded Spherical Helix
299.6
10.3
101.1
.564
4-Arm Folded Spherical Helix
299.9
47.5
87.3
0.0592
* The small straight-wire dipole is not resonant near 300 MHz. Its performance at 300 MHz is
presented for a relative comparison.
of the antenna. Here r is given by [30]
r = (λ/2π)(9/2Q)1/3.
The lower bound Qlb of an electric or magnetic dipole antenna is determined by using
[32]
Qlb = η[(ka)−3 + (ka)−1]
(7.67)
where η is the radiation efﬁciency. Then Qlb is calculated to be 57.3 at ka = 0.263. Since
Q of the four-arm spherical helix dipole is 87.3, it is about 1.52 times the lower bound
on Q for an electric dipole of ka = 0.263.
Radiation efﬁciency of the four-arm spherical folded dipole is 97.4%.
7.2.2.2.3.3 Spherical wire antenna
An antenna similar to a folded loop mounted on a sphere is introduced as a space-ﬁlling
small antenna having the performance approaching the fundamental limitation. The
antenna is composed of four arms which are arranged in a perpendicular geometry as
shown in Figure 7.152, which illustrates (a) the antenna element along with the current
ﬂow and (b) a fabricated antenna [75]. With the perpendicular arrangement, radiators do
not affect each other so that the cancellation between radiating arms is reduced, and also
the scheme is effective to reduce the antenna size and at the same time lower the Q. Due
to the orthogonal direction in the current ﬂow as shown in Figure 7.152(a), coupling
between antenna arms is minimized. The ﬁrst vertical arm is on the diameter of a sphere,
and has the feeding gap at the center. The second vertical arm, which is a 90◦arc consists
of a quarter of a circle on the sphere vertically. The third element is an arc which is

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
185
Table 7.18 Measured and simulated results of
SWA ([75], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE)
Results
f0(MHz)
Rrad()
Q
Measurement
374.6
56.62
9.48
Simulation
372.45
45.15
12.14
y
z
x
r0
(a)
Wire
Coaxial cable
(b)
Figure 7.152 Folded spherical wire antenna (SWA): (a) simulated antenna and (b) fabricated
antenna ([75], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE).
Frequency (MHz)
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
200
0
(b)
650
600
550
500
450
400
350
300
Resistance (ΩΩ)
Frequency (MHz)
–400
–200
0
200
400
600
–600
–800
(a)
650
600
550
500
450
400
350
300
250
Reactance (Ω)
f0  = 372.45 MHz
Figure 7.153 Impedance of SWA: (a) resistance and (b) reactance([75], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE).
three quarters of a circle on the sphere horizontally. The fourth element is similar to the
second arm and terminated at the end of the ﬁrst arm. The sphere has diameter 2r0 =
16 cm, the total wire length is 78.79 cm, and the wire radius is 1 mm. The simulated
impedance is shown in Figure 7.153, where (a) gives reactance and (b) is resistance.
From the ﬁgure, the resonance frequency is observed to be 372.45 MHz. Table 7.18 gives
comparison between simulated and measured results. The Q is low enough to compare
to the fundamental limitation as the antenna size is as small as kr0 = 0.5. Radiation

186
Design and practice of small antennas I
θ = 0°
−30°
−10
10
−20
20
−30
30
30°
60°
90°
120°
150°
180°
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
−60°
−90°
−120°
−150°
0
θ = 0°
−30°
−10
10
−20
20
−30
30
30°
60°
90°
120°
150°
180°
−60°
−90°
−120°
−150°
0
θ = 0°
−30°
−10
10
−20
20
−30
30
30°
60°
90°
120°
150°
180°
−60°
−90°
−120°
−150°
0
θ = 0°
−30°
−10
10
−20
20
−30
30
−10
−20
−30
−10
−20
−30
−10
−20
−30
−10
−20
−30
30°
60°
90°
120°
150°
180°
−60°
−90°
−120°
−150°
0
Measured Eθ
Simulated Eθ
Measured Eφ
Simulated Eφ
Simulated |E|
Measured |E|
Figure 7.154 Radiation patterns of SWA (a) x–z plane (Eθ and Eϕ), (b) y–z plane (Eθ and Eϕ), x–z
plane (|E|) and (d) y–z plane (|E|) ([75], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE).
patterns are illustrated in Figure 7.154, in which (a) and (b) show Eθ and Eϕ patterns
on the x–z plane and y–z plane, respectively, and (c) and (d) show |E| patterns on x–z
plane and y–z plane, respectively. They show almost isotropic patterns due to combined
radiation from four arms in three directions which distribute energy in all directions and
radiation of both horizontal and vertical polarizations for most directions.

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
187
Figure 7.155 Multi-turn folded spherical helix dipole antenna ([76], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
7.2.2.2.3.4 Spherical magnetic (TE mode) dipoles
Magnetic (TE mode) dipoles can be designed to have complementary structure of
electric (TM mode) dipoles. A similar folded-slot spherical helix that exhibits a magnetic
dipole mode is developed by following the basic design concepts used with the folded
spherical helix electric dipole [76]. The developed antenna has low VSWR, high radiation
efﬁciency, and a low Q at a small value of ka. Impedance, radiation patterns, and Q
properties are discussed.
Before describing the magnetic spherical helix, the electric spherical helix is intro-
duced. As an example, a multi-turn folded spherical helix dipole is considered and the
conﬁguration is shown in Figure 7.155, which depicts a single, center-fed conductor,
wound around the spherical structure. The outer radius of the sphere is about 4.22 cm
and the conductor diameter is 2.6 mm. Self-resonance is achieved by adjusting the total
length of the conductor, and impedance matching is done by increasing the number of
conductors uniformly around the surface of the imaginary sphere and connecting them
at the top and bottom of the sphere. With four folded arms shown in Figure 7.155,
self-resonance is achieved at 300.7 MHz, where ka = 0.266, at which the resistance is
equal to 49.7  that can match to the load of 50 , radiation efﬁciency is 97%, and a
Q is 84.2. This Q value is about 1.53 times the lower bound of 55.2, consistent with the
limit derived by Thal [77]. Radiation pattern is given in Figure 7.156, which indicates
a dominant electric dipole or TM mode (Eθ) pattern, having omnidirectional pattern in
the horizontal plane.
Here a thin wall, hollow copper sphere having an outer radius of 4.3 cm is considered
and a slot is inscribed within the sphere in a shape similar to the conductors of the folded
spherical helix so as to form the complementary structure. Figure 7.157 illustrates a
two-arm (double slot) version of the folded slotted spherical helix. The antenna is fed
horizontally at the slot located on the x–y (vertical) plane as shown in the ﬁgure. Similar
to the electrical dipole version, the resonance frequency can be adjusted by increasing or
decreasing the slot length. Radiation resistance can be increased by increasing the number
of slots uniformly around the sphere. The two-arm version is self-resonant at a frequency
of 294.86 MHz, but the radiation resistance is less than 1 . Q is 503. With increase

188
Design and practice of small antennas I
30
30
10
10
dB
60
60
90
120
150
180
150
120
90
0
0
–10
10
–20
10
0
–10
–20
Figure 7.156 θ-sweep radiation pattern of the four-arm folded spherical helix (dominant
polarization is Eθ) ([76], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
Figure 7.157 Two-arm folded spherical helix dipole ([76], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
in the number of arms, radiation resistance can be increased as shown in Table 7.19;
however, with 16 slots self-resonance can be achieved. The slots are connected at the top
and bottom of the sphere. The 4, 8, and 16-arm versions of the antenna are illustrated in
Figure 7.158(a), (b), and (c), respectively. The performances are provided in Table 7.19,
where the 16-arm version shows Q of 148.5, that is about three times the lower bound.
Radiation pattern of the 16-arm version is shown in Figure 7.159, which indicates a
dominant magnetic dipole or TE mode (Eϕ) pattern, having omnidirectional pattern in
the vertical plane.
Three other modiﬁed spherical magnetic dipoles are developed [78]. Antenna con-
ﬁgurations are illustrated in Figure 7.160, where (a) multi-arm spherical helix (MSH),

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
189
Table 7.19 Comparison of performances for the 2, 4, 8, and 16-arm folded
slot spherical antennas ([76], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE)
No. Arms
Frequency
(MHz)
ka
R()
Q
VSWR
2
294.9
0.266
0.62
502.7
81.2
4
274
0.245
2.17
327.1
23
8
309.1
0.279
Not Resonant
169.6
2.33
8
310.4
0.28
15.1
173.8
3.31
16
306.4
0.276
Not Resonant
148.5
1.22
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.158 (a) Four-arm folded spherical helix dipole, (b) eight-arm folded spherical helix
dipole, and (c) 16-arm folded spherical helix dipole, ([76], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
30
30
dB
60
60
90
120
150
180
150
120
90
010
10
0
–10
–10
–20
–20
10
0
–10
–20
Figure 7.159 θ-sweep radiation pattern of 16-arm folded spherical helix dipole (dominant
polarization is Eϕ) ([76], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).

190
Design and practice of small antennas I
Excitation
dipole
(c)
(b)
(a)
Feed point
Z
Excitation
dipole
Feed point
Z
Excitation
dipole
Feed point
Z
Figure 7.160 Geometry of spherical magnetic dipole (TE10 mode) antenna: (a) multi-arm
spherical helix (MSH) antenna, (b) spherical split-ring resonator (S-SRR) antenna and (c)
spherical split ring (SRR) antenna, ([78], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
V
(b)
(a)
V
X
Iϕ
Iϕ
Iθ
Iθ
α
I
I
I
I
Y
Z
Iϕ
Iθ
Iϕ
Iθ
X
Y
Z
Figure 7.161 Multi-arm spherical helix (MSH) antenna: (a) TM10 (electric mode) and (b) TE10
(magnetic mode) ([78], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
(b) spherical split ring resonator (S-SRR) antenna, and (c) spherical split ring (SSR)
antenna are shown.
The TE10 MSH is a modiﬁcation of a spherical helix developed by Best [72]. In the
TM10 MSH antenna, the top and bottom of the arms are disconnected and a curved dipole
is placed at the quarter of the antenna sphere as shown in Figure 7.161(a), where in (b)
a TE10 spherical mode is also shown as a reference. The antenna is fed at the midpoint
of the driven dipole by applying driving voltage horizontally so as to cancel the far-ﬁeld
contribution from the θ-component produced by the electric current (Iθ), resulting in
only ﬁelds of the desired TE10 spherical mode remaining. The antenna is tuned to the
resonance by changing the number of turns (Nturns) in the arm for given frequency f0
and number of arms (Narms) as is shown in Figure 7.162, where input impedance at
f0 = 300 MHz is plotted for antennas of Narms = 2, 4, 6, and 8. All antennas have radius
of 40 mm, and the wire radius is set to 0.5mm. The antenna occupies a spherical volume

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
191
Table 7.20 Characteristics of the TE10 MSH antenna ([78], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE)
Narms
Nturns
α,◦
Q
QLB
Q /QLB
TE10,dB
TM11,dB
TM20,dB
QHO
LB
Q/QHO
LB
2
2.39
163
249.6
64.6
3.87
−0.047
−22.4
−23.0
91.1
2.74
4
2.24
143
218.5
64.6
3.39
−0.030
−27.2
−23.0
90.6
24.1
6
2.19
140
210.7
64.6
3.27
−0.027
−29.5
−23.0
90.0
2.34
8
2.17
140
207.0
64.6
3.21
−0.026
−30.4
−23.0
90.0
2.30
5
4
3
2
1
0
Input impedance (kΩ)
−1
−2
−3
2.1
2.15
2.2
2.25
2.3
Number of turns
2.35
2.4
2.45
2 arms
4 arms
6 arms
8 arms
Resistance
2.5
Reactance
Figure 7.162 Input impedance of the TE10 MSH antenna as a function of number of turns in each
arm ([78], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
of radius a = 40.5 mm, which corresponds to ka = 0.254 at 300 MHz. Table 7.20
summarizes the resonance state characteristics of the TE10 MSH antenna for different
numbers of arms. Here QLB is the lower bound Q and QHO
LB is QLB in the presence of
higher modes.
The spherical split-ring resonator (S-SRR) antenna is composed of a spherical split-
ring resonator and a curved driven dipole arranged so as to produce mostly ϕ-directed
electric surface currents, thus the desired TE10 mode. Since the antenna has symmetrical
structure, it can be placed on the ground plane as Figure 7.163 illustrates. The S-SRR can
be made electrically small, as the large area of the two spherical surfaces overlapped.
The geometrical parameters are; r0 = a = 21 mm, t = 0.8 mm, g = 1 mm, rmnp =
18 mm, and the radius of the monopole = 0.5 mm. To achieve lower Q, the S-SRR
should cover the whole sphere (β = π); however, this results in blocking the mag-
netic ﬂux over the antenna cross section and thus diminishes the electric current on
the antenna surface. Therefore there is an optimum coverage to yield a minimum Q.
It was found the angle β = 73◦is the optimum to obtain smallest Q/QLB. The res-
onance frequency depends also on the coverage and it becomes lowest when β =
64◦, which differs from the optimal β for the smallest Q/QLB, although the difference

192
Design and practice of small antennas I
0.5 g
Z
X
Y
Feed point
r0
rmnp
t
β
α
Figure 7.163 Spherical split-ring resonator (S-SRR) antenna on a ground plane ([78], copyright
C⃝2010 IEEE).
z
y
0.5 g
Feed point
r0
2γ
x
α
Figure 7.164 Spherical split ring (SSR) antenna on a ground plane ([78], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
in the resonance frequency is minor, being only 1.5 MHz. For β = 73◦, the resonance
frequency f0 is 297.0 MHz and ka = 0.133. The input impedance can be adjusted by the
length of the driven dipole, and with α = 55◦, the input resistance at the resonance R0 is
50  for the optimal β = 73◦. The lowest Q/Qlb obtained is around 3.4, which is nearly
the same as that of MSH.
The spherical split ring (SSR) antenna consists of individual wire split rings distributed
evenly in θ as shown in Figure 7.160(c). Every two neighbor rings are ﬂipped with
respect to each other and thus, operate as a conventional SRR. Multi-element SRR is
constituted by combining rings with other rings so that uniform current distribution over
the spherical surface is realized and the resonance frequency is lowered. The number of
the rings is chosen to be odd, so that the antenna is driven at the central split ring, the
length of which is adjusted to attain the input impedance to match the feed line. Since
the SSR has symmetrical structure, it can be made in half and mounted on the ground
plane as shown in Figure 7.164. The resonance frequency is changed by the number of
split rings Nsr and is determined by using the following expression
Nsr = 2int(90◦/γ ) −1
(7.68)

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
193
Table 7.21 Characteristics of the manufactured SSR antenna ([78], Copyright C⃝2010
IEEE)
f0, MHz
R0, 
efﬁciency
Q
QLB
Q/QLB
simulated (SIE)1
403.0
43
100 %
564.0
165.6
3.41
simulated (CST)2
404.0
52
76 %
462.3
124.9
3.70
measured3
403.0
51
73±2 %
442.9
120.9
3.66
1 PEC wires; inﬁnite PEC ground plane.
2 copper wires; inﬁnite PEC ground plane.
3 1.5 m circular ground plane.
where γ is an angular separation between two neighbor rings. A prototype SSR antenna
is fabricated with Nsr = 17, wire diameter = 1.63 mm, driven dipole length α = 33◦.
Simulated input impedance is 43  and the resonance frequency is 403 MHz, which
corresponds to the antenna electrical size ka = 0.184. Measured input impedance when
the antenna is placed on the ground plane of the radius 1.5 m is 51 . Simulated Q/Qlb
is comparable with that of the MSH antenna. Performance parameters of the SSR are
given in Table 7.21, where both simulated and measured results are provided.
7.2.2.2.3.5 Hemispherical helical antenna
In situations where antennas having compact structure, small size, and yet light weight,
are urgently required in aerospace and mobile terminals, use of the hemispherical helix
is desirable. New design of the hemispherical helix (HSH) antenna is explored and its
wideband performance is introduced in [79]. The antenna is a 4.5 turn HSH with tapered
strip radiating element. The width of the tapered element starts with 1 mm and ends
with 4 mm, and the hemisphere radius is 20 mm. The antenna is fed at the side with
non-linearly tapered matching section, and radiates a circularly polarized wave with
wide beam width in the frequency range of 2.2–3.7 GHz. A prototype HSH antenna
is constructed and measured for axial ratio, VSWR, and directivity. They are shown in
Figure 7.165 through Figure 7. 167 along with simulated results, which have generally
good agreement with measured results.
7.2.3
Uniform current distribution
7.2.3.1
Loading techniques
7.2.3.1.1 Monopole with top loading
The history of top-loaded antennas goes back to 1885, when Edison patented a commu-
nication system using a top-loaded antenna [80]. Hertz demonstrated electromagnetic
waves in 1888 by using a dipole with large conducting plates attached to each end, which
acted as a resonator with an inductance of the high-voltage-generator inductive coil. In
the early days of communications, transmission of very low frequency (VLF) bands
was accomplished by applying top-loading techniques to short monopoles that were
subsequently adapted to LF, MF, and HF communications. In those days, most antennas

10
9
7
8
6
5
4
3
Axial ratio (dB)
2
1
02.7 2.8 2.9
3
3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9
Frequency (GHz)
4
× 109
Simulated
Measured
Simulated BW = 20%
Measured BW = 24%
Figure 7.165 Measured and simulated axial ratio ([79], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7
Frequency (GHz)
5.9
× 109
Simulated
Measured
Simulated BW = 46%
Measured BW = 50%
10
9
7
8
6
5
4
3
VSWR
2
1
Figure 7.166 Measured and simulated VSWR ([79], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
11
9
7
8
6
5
4
3
Directivity (dB)
2
10
1
02.7
2.8
2.9
3
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9
Frequency (GHz)
4
× 109
Simulated
Measured
Figure 7.167 Measured and simulated directivity ([79], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
195
2a
z
b
r
ϕ
h
Figure 7.168 Cross section of a disk-plate top-loaded monopole mounted on an inﬁnite ground
plane ([82], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
could be categorized as electrically small antennas and hence nowadays application of
the top-loading technique to produce electrically small antenna is not necessarily new,
but rather prevalent.
As an electrically small monopole has small radiation resistance and large capacitive
reactance, addition of either a capacitive or inductive component to the monopole is
implemented to make self-resonance and matching conditions feasible. Top loading was
used as one of the most common means to realize capacitive loading on the monopole
[81]. Practical inductive loading has been implemented by coil loading in the middle of
a monopole element [82] and by modifying a linear monopole to either a meandered or
helical wire structure.
Since top loading is effective to lower the resonance frequency, it is useful for reducing
the antenna height and in turn for equivalently increasing the electrical length of a short
monopole, assisting improvement of antenna performances. This increases radiation
resistance and bandwidth even with the antenna of reduced size. The top loading can be
ascribed to producing the uniform current distribution on the short monopole that yields
signiﬁcant improvements described above.
Top loading on a short monopole is implemented by a wire of L-shape (Inverted-L),
T-shape, and crossed multi-elements, among others. A thin circular plate (disk) and its
variations are also used as another common type of top loading. A circularly symmetric
thin planar conductor top loaded on an electrically small monopole placed on the inﬁnite
ground plane shown in Figure 7.168 is representative [82]. In practice, the disk can take
other forms, as Figure 7.169 illustrates: (a) wire-grid disk, (b) wired spiral, and (c) wire-
grid spherical cap [83a, b]. There are of course dipole types as shown in Figure 7.169(d),
where the top load is a wire grid, and also the monopole can be a meandered wire, and
a helical wire as well. Figure 7.169(e) and (f) show examples of a wire-grid top-loaded
helical dipole and a spherical-cap top-loaded helical dipole, respectively [83a, b].
In the planar disk model shown in Figure 7.168, currents on the monopole and the
ﬁeld they produce are treated as independent of the azimuthal angle ϕ. With dimensions
h = 0.3 m, b = 0.6 m, and a = 6.35 mm, and the operating frequency f0 = 10 MHz,

196
Design and practice of small antennas I
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 7.169 (a) Wire-grid disk top-loaded monopole, (b) wired-spiral hat top-loaded monopole,
(c) wire-grid spherical-cap top-loaded monopole, (d) wire-grid disk top-loaded dipole,
(e) wire-grid top-loaded helical dipole, and (f) spherical-cap top-loaded helical dipole, ([83a, b],
copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
current and charge distributions on the monopole and the disk are shown in Figure 7.170
and Figure 7.171, respectively, in which the current on the monopole until h = 0.01λ is
observed nearly uniform. The input impedance (= R + jX) is depicted in Figure 7.172,
where both calculated and measured results are shown. Radiation power factor pe,
radiation conductance Ge, and bandwidth 	f along with applied voltage V are illustrated
as functions of the top-loaded ratio b/h in Figure 7.173 and Figure 7.174, respectively.
In these ﬁgures, pe0 and Ge0, respectively, denote reference values for an antenna with
b = h. The beneﬁcial effect of top-loading is obvious from increases in bandwidth 	f
(proportional to pe), and radiated power (proportional to Ge). Particularly the bandwidth
with b/h = 5 is over 250 times as much when compared with that of b/h = 0.02, the
unloaded monopole. These ﬁgures suggest that top loading is vitally important to reduce
the input voltage to a tolerable level and to achieve the required bandwidth.
Another type of top-loaded monopole is an electrically small monopole simply loaded
with an open-circuited transmission line shown in Figure 7.175 [84].
The input impedance Z is
Z = −jZ0 cot βb
(7.69)

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
197
s/λ, distance from input in wavelength
Magnitude of current in mA/V
0.005
0
0
0.01 0.015 0.02 0.025
1
2
3
4
5
6
λ
λ
b
L
Figure 7.170 Currents on a DLM with h = 0.3 m, b = 0.6 m, and a = 6.35 mm at 10 MHz ([82],
copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
s/λλ, distance from input in wavelength
0
10
100
0.025
0.02
0.015
0.01
0.005
Magnitude of charge in pC/V-m
1*103
0
b
λ
L
λ
Figure 7.171 Charge distributions on the same DLM as that in Figure 7.170 ([82], copyright
C⃝2008 IEEE).
where Z0 denotes the characteristic impedance of the metal shell and b is its total length;
that is, b = h + r. The metal shell acts as a series capacitance, by which h can be extended
to the effective height h′ as
h′ = (1/β)arc cot{(Z0/Z0e) cot βb} + H
(7.70)

198
Design and practice of small antennas I
100
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
Impedance in ohms
2πh/λ, antenna height in radians
1*103
0.1
10
1
Theory
Measured
Theory
Measured
X
R
Figure 7.172 Theoretical and measured impedance of a DLM with h = b = 0.3 m, and a =
6.36 mm ([82], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
100
1
10
0.1
0.01
b/h, top loading ratio
Ge/Ge0
pe/pe0
1*103
1*10−3
10
1
0.1
0.01
Ge/Ge0
pe/pe0
Reference values
b0 = 0.3
pe0 = 2.651 × 10−4
Ge0 = 5.293 × 10−7
Figure 7.173 Radiation power factor (normalized) pe and radiation conductance Ge as function of
b/h for a reference antenna with h = b = 0.3 m, and a = 6.35 mm ([82], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
199
1
10
0.1
0.01
b/h, top loading ratio
Voltage in kV and bandwidth in kHz
100
0.1
10
1
V (kV) 
Δf (kHz) 
Operating frequency ......f = 10 MHz
Antenna height ................ h = 0.3 m
Radiated power .................P = 1 W
Figure 7.174 Radiation bandwidth and applied voltage as function of b/h for an antenna radiating
1 W at 10 MHz with h = 0.3 m, a = 6.35 mm ([82], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
r
εr
h
H
Figure 7.175 Open-circuit transmission line loaded monopole antenna structure ([84], copyright
C⃝2006 IEEE).
where Z0e is the effective characteristic impedance of the common monopole and H is
the height of the monopole. The metal shell also plays a role of matching circuit. The
effective height h′ can be increased by lengthening h and at the same time the resonance
frequency f is lowered.
Effectiveness of top-loading was shown by using a wire-grid disk top-loaded dipole
that had as much as about 60% reduction in the antenna size [83]. Also about the same
amount of size reduction was shown with a spherical-cap top-loaded dipole [83]. The
dipole antenna sizes used in these examples were 18 cm and 19 cm in the wire-grid disk

200
Design and practice of small antennas I
Open-sleeve
element
Ground
Driven
monopole
Top-load
Figure 7.176 Geometry of the cross-T line loaded antenna with sleeves ([85], copyright C⃝2006
IEEE).
0
−5
−15
−10
−20
−25
Return loss (dB)
−3080
120
160
200
240
280
320
360
400
440
Frequency (GHz)
480
Without sleeve elements
With sleeve elements
Figure 7.177 Return-loss characteristics ([85], copyright C⃝2006 IEEE).
and spherical-cap dipole, respectively, for the resonance frequency of near 300 MHz.
Antennas were matched to the load of 50  by using a shunt stub at the feed point.
7.2.3.1.2 Cross-T-wire top-loaded monopole with four open sleeves
The antenna conﬁguration is illustrated in Figure 7.176 [85]. The ground plane is
assumed to be inﬁnite. The geometrical dimensions of the antenna are: length of driven
element L0 = 0.13λ0, length of the top-load element L1 = 0.035λ0, length of sleeve
L2 = 0.1λ0, wire diameter a = 0.015λ0, and distance between the driven element and
the sleeve R = 0.049λ0, where λ0 is the wavelength at the resonance that is 100 MHz.
Return loss is depicted in Figure 7.177 and its variation for different length L2 of the
sleeves is shown in Figure 7.178, where L2/λ0 is varied from 0.110 (case 1-1), 0.0105
(case 1-2), 0.095 (case 1-3), and 0.09 (case 1-4). The ﬁgure shows that decreasing the
length L2 of the sleeves increases the bandwidth.

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
201
0
−5
−15
−10
−20
−25
Return loss (dB)
−3080
120
160
200
240
Frequency (MHz)
280
Case1-1
Case1-2
Case1-3
Case1-4
Figure 7.178 Variation of return loss depending on the length of the sleeve ([85], copyright C⃝2006
IEEE).
2
0
1
−1
−2
y (cm)
−3
−1
−2
−3
0
1
Slot antenna
Feed point
75 Ω
50 Ω
2
x (cm)
(a)
3
−1
−2
−3
−4
−5
−6
0
x (cm)
(b)
1
75 Ω
Slot antennas
Feed point
−3
2
0
1
−1
−2
y (cm)
3
50 Ω
Figure 7.179 (a) Geometry of single-element miniaturized slot antenna (SEA) and (b) geometry of
double-element miniaturized slot antenna (DEA) ([87]).
7.2.3.1.3 Slot loaded with spiral
As a different type of small-sized loaded antenna, a slot antenna terminated with spiral
elements is introduced in [86] (Figure 7.179(a)). The radiating slot is designed to have
length λg/4 and is terminated with two identical quarter-wavelength non-radiating spiral
slots. λg is the wavelength of the quasi-TEM mode supported by the slot line. In principle,
as a resonant quarter-wavelength transmission line exhibits a short at one end reﬂected
to an open at the other end, the non-radiating quarter-wavelength spiral slot shorted at
one end behaves as an open at the other end. Therefore, a quarter-wavelength slot line
shorted at one end and terminated by the non-radiating quarter-wavelength spiral should
resonate and radiate the electromagnetic wave very efﬁciently. With this conﬁguration,

202
Design and practice of small antennas I
the antenna is reduced in size by half, and further reduction is accomplished by bending
the radiating slot line. The antenna geometry along with dimensions is illustrated in
Figure 7.179(a). The antenna occupies an area of about 0.15λ0 × 0.13λ0.
Since this antenna exhibits very narrow bandwidth, less than 1%, another parasitic
antenna with the same conﬁguration is placed in the remaining area in order to increase
the bandwidth without signiﬁcantly increasing the overall PCB (printed circuit board)
size, as Figure 7.179(b) illustrates [87]. One of these two antennas is fed by a microstrip
line, leaving the other one as a parasitic antenna. The parasitic antenna is coupled with
the radiating slot at the elbow section, where the electric ﬁeld is large. The magnetic
currents on each antenna are in phase, so the radiation is enhanced. The two antennas
are designed to resonate at the same frequency fr1 = fr2 = f0, where fr1 and fr2 are the
resonance frequencies of each antenna, and f0 is the center frequency. In this antenna
system, S11, spectral response of the two coupled antennas, exhibits two nulls, as the
coupling is adjusted strong enough to increase the bandwidth compared with that of a
single slot antenna. The separation of these two frequencies is a function of the separation
s and distance d of the overlapped elbow section of these two antennas. The coupling kt
between these two antennas is deﬁned as,
kt = ( f 2
u −f 2
l )/( f 2
u + f 2
l )
(7.71)
where fu and fl, respectively, are the frequencies of the upper and lower nulls in S11.
The kt can be adjusted by varying s and d, increasing with decrease in s and increase in
d. The designed resonance frequency fr1 = fr2 = 850 MHz; however, slightly different
frequencies can be used to achieve a higher degree of control for tuning response.
The input impedance of this antenna, for a given slot width, depends on the location
of the microstrip line feed relative to one end of the slot and varies from zero at the
short circuited end to a high resistance at the center. The optimum feed position can be
observed in Figure 7.179(b), which shows the feed line, consisting of a 50- transmission
line connected to an open-circuited 75- transmission line, which crosses the slot. The
75- line is extended by 0.33λm beyond the strip-slot crossing to couple the maximum
energy to the slot and also to compensate for the imaginary part of the input impedance
(λm: wavelength of the wave in the strip line).
Antennas, two single-element antennas (SEA1 and SEA2) and a double-element
antenna (DEA) (Figure 7.179(a) and (b)), are fabricated on a substrate of thickness
500 µm, having a dielectric constant of εr = 3.5 and a loss tangent of tan δ = 0.003, with
a copper ground plane of 33.5 mm × 23 mm. The SEA1 is the constitutive element of the
DEA and the SEA2 is an SEA having the same topology as the SEA1. Both calculated
and measured S11 of the DEA and the SEA2 are shown in Figure 7.180, which indicates
bandwidth of 21.6 MHz (2.54%) in the DEA, being wider than 8 MHz (0.9%) of the
SEA1 and 11.7 MHz (1.31%) of the SEA2. The measured gain of the DEA is 1.7 dB at
852 MHz, which is greater than that of the SEA1 of approximately 0.8 dB at 850 MHz.
The antenna size of the SEA1 is 0.133λ0 × 0.154λ0, while that of the SEA2 and the
DEA is 0.165λ0 × 0.157λ0.
By adding series inductive elements to a slot antenna, the size of the antenna can be
further reduced. A dual-band small antenna is also developed by adjusting the coupling
factor kt so as to create two separate frequencies in the S11 response [87].

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
203
0
−10
−30
−20
−40
S11 (dB)
−50
8 9
6 7
4 5
800
820
840
860
880
Frequency (MHz)
900
Measurement DEA
Simulation DEA
Measurement SEA 2
Figure 7.180 Return loss of DEA and SEA2 [87].
7.2.4
Increase of excitation mode
By increasing the number of excitation modes (for instance, addition of a TM mode
to a TE mode) enhancement or improvement of antenna performances such as gain,
efﬁciency, bandwidth, and radiation pattern, can be expected. Composing an antenna
with both TE and TM modes is one of the simplest ways. Examples are combination
of a dipole with a loop, and a monopole with that of a dual slot that constitutes a self-
complementary structure. Other types are a combination of an inductive element with
a capacitive element in an antenna system that makes a conjugate structure. With the
conjugate structure, the self-resonance condition can easily be achieved, even though the
antenna has very small dimensions. A combination of an electric source with a magnetic
source will bring out a conjugate structure as well as a complementary structure. A
composite antenna system constituted with different types of antennas having different
excitation modes is also used to create a conjugate antenna structure.
These means facilitate enhancement of the bandwidth, addition of functions such as
multiband and multiple polarization, and so forth, in small-antenna design.
7.2.4.1
Self-complementary structure
The self-complementary structure can be implemented by combining two antennas,
having complementary properties of each other. There are two types; one type has
rotationally symmetric structure while another type has axially symmetric structure. In
a planar structure, for example, a rotationally symmetric type is constituted from one
arbitrary generating structure by rotating it 180 degrees with respect to the feed point.
An example was shown previously in Figure 6.35. In contrast, an axially symmetric
type is fabricated by combining an arbitrary structure on a half-inﬁnite space with a
structure complementary to it on the other half-inﬁnite space, with axial symmetry to
each other (Figure 6.35). In a practical fabrication, a half structure divided by the axis
of symmetry is formed on a half-inﬁnite PEC (perfect electric conductor) plate, while
another half is formed with the same structure, but as spaces on another half-inﬁnite
PEC plate. Figure 6.34 illustrated this example, showing a monopole combined with a
complementary slot on the ground plane.

204
Design and practice of small antennas I
w
L
l
l
w
w
h
h
H
Figure 7.181 L-shaped self-complementary antenna [from 87].
The self-complementary structure has an inherent frequency independent property,
which is inﬁnite bandwidth, when it is constituted with an inﬁnite structure. Unfortu-
nately, practical antennas can never be realized in an inﬁnite structure, as a truncation
can never be evaded, thus bandwidth must always be ﬁnite. Although the bandwidth
would be limited, antennas with complementary structure may still have wide enough
bandwidth for practical applications; that is, an antenna is practically useful when the
bandwidth is reasonably wide to satisfy the requirement. Hence, the complementary
concept, even with truncation in the antenna structure – always encountered in small
antennas – is adapted as a useful means to attain an appreciable bandwidth for an antenna
of very small size.
7.2.4.1.1 L-shaped quasi-self-complementary antenna
One of the most simple self-complementary antennas is a monopole combined with
a dual slot (Figure 6.34) introduced in [88, 89], in which wideband performance was
demonstrated, even with an antenna of small size. Since a practical antenna can never be
composed with inﬁnite structure, it should be referred to as quasi self-complementary.
Instead of a monopole, an Inverted-L antenna is combined with a dual L-slot to compose
a quasi self-complementary structure (Figure 7.181) [89, 90]. The input impedance of
the antenna with dimensions of l = 15 mm, h = 15 mm, and w = 4 mm, shows broad
frequency characteristics covering about 2 GHz to 10 GHz for VSWR less than two
(Figure 7.182(a)). However, the ground plane size (X × Y) was 46 mm × 60 mm,
much smaller than one wavelength at the lowest frequency. Efﬁciency is sacriﬁced to
a certain measure by using a load resistance 188  at the side opposite of the feed

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
205
40
80
100
60
20
Efficiency (%)
8
10
6
4
2
Frequency (GHz)
(a)
0
8
10
6
4
2
Frequency (GHz)
(b)
0
0
1.5
2
VSWR
1
Figure 7.182 (a) VSWR characteristics of L-shaped self-complementary antenna and (b)
efﬁciency of L-shaped self-complementary antenna ([88], copyright C⃝2002 IEEE).
–40
–40
–20
20
40
0
–20
0
20
x (mm)
y (mm)
40
Figure 7.183 Self-complementary H-shaped antenna ([91], copyright C⃝2007 IEEE).
as needed to maintain the complementary condition [89]. However, with this size of
antenna, efﬁciency was observed as high as 70% almost over the frequency range of
2 GHz to 10 GHz (Figure 7.182(b)). The load resistance may be omitted to improve
efﬁciency, if some amount of sacriﬁce in the bandwidth is allowed. If a smaller ground
plane is used, as in practical applications to small mobile terminals, the bandwidth will
become narrower, but still wide enough for practical applications.
7.2.4.1.2 H-shaped quasi-self-complementary antenna
The antenna geometry is illustrated in Figure 7.183, in which a short-circuited microstrip
line used for feeding the antenna and dimensions of antenna with the scale are shown [91].
A dielectric substrate used has εr = 2.2 and the thickness is 0.787 mm. Measured and
simulated return loss and gain, respectively, are shown in Figure 7.184 and Figure 7.185.
The ﬁgure demonstrates a wide bandwidth covering about 1.35 GHz to 3.2 GHz for the

206
Design and practice of small antennas I
0
−10
−25
−20
−30
S11 (dB)
−5
−15
−35
Measurement εr = 2.2
Simulation εr = 2.2
Simulation εr = 1.0
1
1.5
2
2.5
4
3.5
3
Frequency (GHz)
4.5
Figure 7.184 Measured and simulated return loss of H-shaped antenna ([91], copyright C⃝2007
IEEE).
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6
–8 1
1.5
Frequency (GHz)
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Antenna gain (dBi)
Measurement
Simulation
Figure 7.185 Comparison of measured and simulated gain ([90], copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).
return loss below –10 dB with the substrate εr = 2.2, whereas when εr = 1, meaning
no dielectric substrate, a considerably wider bandwidth (1.3–3.9 GHz) is obtained. The
gain obtained is about 1 dBi over the frequency range of 1.3 GHz to 3.5 GHz.
7.2.4.1.3 A half-circular disk quasi-self-complementary antenna
Antenna geometry with dimensional parameters is illustrated in Figure 7.186 [92],
showing that a printed semi-circular disk on a dielectric substrate is combined with its

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
207
r
L2
ws
wf
L1
L
x
Microstrip line
Ground plane
in back
y
substrate
H
z
y
W
εr
Figure 7.186 Geometry of half-disk shaped quasi self-complementary antenna ([92], copyright
C⃝2009 IEEE).
Simulated
Measured
Frequency (GHz)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Return loss (dB)
0
−40
−35
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
Figure 7.187 Simulated and measured return loss ([92], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE).
dual slot to construct a quasi-self-complementary structure. A triangular notch is adopted
at the feed point on the ground plane to improve the impedance matching. The substrate
has thickness H = 1.6 mm and the relative permittivity εr = 3.0. Measured and simulated
return loss are shown in Figure 7.187, which indicates fairly wide bandwidth, covering
3 GHz to 10.7 GHz for the return loss less than –10 dB. Simulated gain is depicted in
Figure 7.188, in which a gain of 3 dB over the wide frequency range is observed.

208
Design and practice of small antennas I
Frequency (GHz)
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Gain (dBi)
7
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Figure 7.188 Simulated peak gain ([92], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE).
2(α+δ)
= Rp+1/Rp
τp
p = 1, 2, 3,...
2(α-δ)
R5
R4
R2
R3
R1
Figure 7.189 A two-arm self-complementary sinuous antenna with τ = 0.725, α = 30◦and
δ = 45◦([93], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
7.2.4.1.4 Sinuous spiral antenna
A planar two-arm sinuous spiral antenna composed with self-complementary structure
(Figure 7.189) was demonstrated to produce multiband and multi-polarized radiation
over three or more octaves [93]. However, it was found that to achieve improved axial
ratio, application of the self-complementary principle to a planar structure was not
necessarily effective. Therefore, away from the planar structure, a 3D structure, a cone,
on which a sinuous (or spiral) pattern is geometrically projected, was considered as
a better choice. By adapting the concept of the self-complementary property on the

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
209
9 cm
β
5 cm
5 cm
Figure 7.190 An implemented self-complementary antenna on the cone ([93], copyright C⃝2008
IEEE).
cone, not only better axial ratio performance, but also impedance matching over a wide
frequency range, was made possible. An implemented antenna is shown in Figure 7.190.
The input impedance and axial ratio, respectively, are shown in Figure 7.191(a) and
(b). Radiation of the antenna is uni directional as shown in Figure 7.192, where the
performances at ﬁve bands are depicted along with the simulation software such as
MoM, FEM, and (MoM + SEP) used for calculations.
7.2.4.2
Conjugate structure
7.2.4.2.1 Electrically small complementary paired antenna
An antenna system composed with two thick, short monopoles, which were fed
through a complementary network, was studied theoretically and experimentally [94].
As Figure 7.193 shows, the complementary network, a 180-degree hybrid tee, was
used, by which impedance of the antenna is modiﬁed to be complementary to that of
another antenna. With the phase reversal, the capacitive impedance of a short monopole
was changed to the inductive impedance, which is conjugate to that of the other short
monopole so that the resonance condition could easily be obtained and matching was
made feasible without extra matching network, even though the antenna size was very
small. A developed model consisted of two identical monopoles, each of which had
the height of one eighteenth of the wavelength at the lowest frequency, and 90-degrees
conical section having one-half the total height for a length-to-diameter ratio of unity as
Figure 7.194 shows. The antenna referred to as ESCP (Electrical Small Complementary
Antenna) was designed for acceptable VSWR at the lowest frequency. Figure 7.195
illustrates VSWR of an ESCP in comparison with an individual monopole. In the
paper [94] theoretical analyses were shown, in which the geometrical parameters to
optimize the antenna performances were discussed. It was shown that an optimized
conﬁguration could yield substantial improvement in gain–bandwidth product at the
expense of having a directional pattern over much of this bandwidth. The radiation

210
Design and practice of small antennas I
FEM
MoM
MoM + SEP
350
300
200
250
150
100
50
Impedance (Ω)
0
−50
−1002
4
6
8
10
12
16
14
Frequency (GHz)
18
50
45
35
40
30
20
15
Broadside axial ratio (dB)
10
25
5
02
4
6
8
10
12
16
14
Frequency (GHz)
18
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.191 (a) input impedance and (b) axial ratio ([93], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
patterns were also studied regarding the antenna system being in a phased array
environment.
7.2.4.2.2 A combined electric-magnetic type antenna
An antenna system composed with a dipole as an electric radiation (ER) source and a
cavity-backed slot as a magnetic radiation (MR) source was designed for UWB systems.
As a consequence of combining ER and MR sources, an extraordinarily wide bandwidth
in terms of both the radiation pattern and the impedance was obtained [95]. The antenna
geometry along with the coordinates and a prototype printed antenna along with the
dimensions are illustrated in Figure 7.196(a) and (b) respectively. The ER source com-
prises the dipole arms 1 and 2, printed on the dielectric substrate, and is considered as
a tapered slot antenna (TSA) at high frequencies, fed by the slot line 1. The MR source
is a loop formed by cutting in the arm 1 of the ER source and fed by the slot line 2.

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
211
60°
120°
90°
30°
150°
−60°
−120°
−90°
−30°
−150°
−5°
−10°
−15
15°
−20
20°
−25
25°
−20°
−15°
−10°
−5°
−25°
0°0 dB
180°
7.25 GHz
←MoM  FEM→
0 dB
60°
120°
90°
30°
150°
−60°
−120°
−90°
−30°
−150°
−5°
−10°
−15°
−20°
−20°
−15°
−10°
−5°
−25°
0°0 dB
180°
4.6 GHz
←MoM  FEM→
0 dB
−25°
60°
120°
90°
30°
150°
−60°
−120°
−90°
−30°
−150°
−5°
−10
10°
−15°
−20
20°
−20°
−15°
−10°
−5°
−25°
0°0 dB
180°
3.05 GHz
←MoM  FEM→
0 dB
−25
25°
60°
120°
90°
30°
150°
−60°
−120°
−90°
−30°
−150°
−5°
−10°
−15°
−20°
−25°
−20°
−15°
−10°
−5°
−25°
0°0 dB
180°
11.4 GHz
←MoM  MoM + SEP→
0 dB
60°
120°
90°
30°
150°
−60°
−120°
−90°
−30°
−150°
−5°
−10°
−15
15°
−20
20°
−20°
−25
25°
−15°
−20°
−25°
−10°
−20°
−25°
−15°
−25°
−20°
−15°
−10°
−5°
−25°
0°0 dB
180°
17.6 GHz
←MoM  MoM + SEP→
0 dB
Figure 7.192 Far-ﬁeld patterns for ﬁve bands computed by MoM and FEM for lower bands and by
MoM and MoM+SEP for higher bands ([93], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
180-deg
HYBRID
zΔ = z0
z∑ = z0
Δ
Σ
z2 = z1 = z0
z1
=
z0
|z1|
2
z1 = |z1|
–ϕ1
–ϕ1
Figure 7.193 Basic circuit for complementary feed ([94], copyright C⃝1976 IEEE).

212
Design and practice of small antennas I
λ0/9
λ0/4
λ0/9
H
Δ
Δl(Δϕ)
S
Σ
Figure 7.194 ESCP conﬁguration ([94], copyright C⃝1976 IEEE).
15:1
13:1
11:1
9:1
ESCP
Individual isolated
monopole
To 28:1 @ 0.5 f0
H = λ0/9
7:1
5:1
3:1
2:1
1:1
0.5 f0
1.5 f0
f0
VSWR
Figure 7.195 ESCP impedance match characteristics ([94], copyright C⃝1976 IEEE).
Hole
Asymmetric
CPW
Arm 2
Conductor
Dielectric
substrate
Arm 1
Tapered
slot
Slot line 2
Slot line 1
Slot
x
z
L
y
W
Loop
2.2
8.2
11.7
11.2
9.2
ωa = 13.6
la = 24.7
16.9
22.8
23.4
12.6
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.196 (a) Basic antenna geometry of the printed combined electric and magnetic type
antenna and (b) dimensions of a prototype antenna [95].

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
213
TSA1
Frequency (GHz)
VSWR
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Measurement
Simulation
Figure 7.197 Simulated and measured VSWR responses [95].
The slot lines 1 and 2 form an asymmetric coplanar waveguide (CPW). The loop acts as
a matching stub for transmission from the CPW to the slot line 1 as was shown in the
CPW-fed TSA design [96]. Figure 7.197 shows both simulated and measured VSWR
characteristics, illustrating a wide frequency operation covering 2.82 to 10.6 GHz for
VSWR of less than 2. In the ﬁgure, the simulated VSWR response of a TSA only is also
shown along with geometry of the corresponding TSA as an inset.
It is noted that the VSWR response of the TSA takes on values higher than 2 over
all frequencies except around 5 GHz, suggesting existence of uncompensated excess
electric energy before combining the ER source with the MR source. As a consequence
of combination of two sources, the excess energy of the ER source is compensated by
the excess energy of the MR source, resulting in lowering the VSWR signiﬁcantly. This
implies, in other words, self-resonance in an antenna system, in which the time averaged
electric and magnetic energies in the vicinity of the antenna system are balanced.
7.2.4.3
Composite structure
7.2.4.3.1 Slot-monopole hybrid antenna
A coplanar waveguide (CPW)-fed inductive slot antenna combined with a monopole
antenna, featuring a dual-band operation is introduced in [97]. It is a common under-
standing that CPW antennas can provide relatively wide bandwidth, be easily inte-
grated with surface-mount devices, and be designed to show dual-band operation [98,
99]. Figure 7.198 illustrates the antenna system, a CPW-fed inductive slot combined
with a bifurcated L-shaped monopole, showing a dual-band operation as is depicted
in Figure 7.199, which gives return losses of antennas, including those of a bifurcated
L-shaped monopole (Figure 7.200) and a CPW-fed inductive slot (Figure 7.201) for a
comparison. The antenna dimensions are given in each ﬁgure. The antenna is fabri-
cated on the dielectric substrate having εr = 4.4 and thickness of 1.6 mm. The CPW
line has a strip width of 4 mm and a gap width of 0.4 mm, corresponding to a 50 

214
Design and practice of small antennas I
L4
L4 = 15 mm
W4 = 2 mm
W4
Wslot
Lslot
HL
H
G
y
x
x
z
S
εr
Figure 7.198 Dual-band CPW-fed slot and L-shaped monopole antenna ([97], copyright C⃝2008
IEEE).
0
−10
−40
−30
−20
Stand-alone reference CPW-fed inductive slot antenna
Stand-alone L-shaped bifurcated monopole antenna
Dual-band CPW-fed inductive slot-L-shaped monopole antenna
Simulated result of the dual-band CPW-fed inductive slot-L-shaped
monopole antenna
1800
2800
3800
Frequency (MHz)
Return loss (dB)
4800
5800
Figure 7.199 Measured and simulated return-loss characteristics ([97], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
characteristic impedance. The stand-alone CPW-fed slot is designed for the higher band
5.4 GHz operation, while the bifurcated L-shaped monopole is for the lower band
2.4 GHz operation. Other types of monopole having bifurcated I-shape or F-shape are
designed and studied. Gain of the antenna is measured as 1.51 dB at 2.45 GHz and 4.91 at
5.2 GHz, and the relative bandwidth of the antenna is 11.4% at 5.3 GHz and 7.8% at
2.5 GHz, while the stand-alone CPW-fed slot antenna is 10.5%.

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
215
G
W3
L3
HL
L3 = 17 mm
W3  =  2 mm
HL  =  4 mm
εr
H
S
x
z
x
y
Figure 7.200 L-shaped bifurcated monopole antenna ([97], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
Wslot
Lslot
H = 1.6 mm
S = 4 mm
G = 0.4 mm
Lslot = 17 mm
Wslot = 4 mm
y
x
x
z
G
H
S
εr = 4.4
εr
Figure 7.201 CPW-fed inductive slot antenna ([97]).
7.2.4.3.2 Spiral-slots loaded with inductive element
A miniaturized cavity-backed slot loop low-proﬁle antenna was introduced in [100]
(Figure 7.202). It is referred to as CBCSLA (Cavity-Backed Composite Slot Loop
Antenna). The antenna is essentially a small magnetic loop, radiating similarly to that
of a small electric dipole; that is, omnidirectional pattern in the horizontal plane with
vertical polarization. The geometry is designed to be small and low height, having the
diameter as small as λ/10 and the height less than λ/100. The design concept is to modify
a simple slot loop; ﬁrstly by embedding it in a shallow cavity, secondly meandering it
to reduce the size, and thirdly sectionalizing the structure into six λ/2 slots around the
circle to accomplish resonance and achieve sufﬁcient input impedance matching. The
process of topology change is shown in Figure 7.203(a), (b), and (c). In the ﬁgure (c),

216
Design and practice of small antennas I
Figure 7.202 Photograph of fabricated CBCSLA ([100], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.203 Topology of cavity-backed slot loop antenna; (a) original slot loop, (b) modiﬁed slot
loop for size reduction, and (c) sectionalized slot loop for input impedance matching ([100],
copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
the geometry shows conceptually the proposed composite slot loop antenna, which is
fed capacitively with a stub. To reduce the antenna dimensions, the edges of each slot
are folded into a spiral-like shape that acts at the same time as inductive load on the
edges. Figure 7.204 shows the antenna structure along with the antenna geometrical
parameters. As can be seen in the ﬁgure, the coax feed is connected to the six Co-
planar Waveguides (CPW), by which each of the slots is fed separately. At the edges of
each CPW line, a corrugated stub is attached to control capacitance and thus improve
impedance matching to the slot. Measured and simulated S11 of the CBCSLA with the
cavity height hc = 12.7 mm is shown in Figure 7.205, and simulated radiation pattern is
depicted in Figure 7.206.
7.2.5
Applications of metamaterials
Real metamaterials (MM) are not available in nature; however, equivalent media may be
constructed of either resonant particles (RP) MM [101a, b, 102] or transmission lines
(TL) MM [103a, b]. The RP MM may consist of periodical arrays of sub-wavelength thin
wires (Figure 6.18) [101] or split rings (Figure 6.19) [102]. They provide either negative

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
217
a
Cb
hc
ha
d
Ca
Top view
Side view
Coaxial feed
Cavity
Dielectric substrate
Antenna aperture
Figure 7.204 Topology of the reduced-size CBCSLA and corrugated capacitive stub ([100],
copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
–35
400
420
Frequency (MHz)
440
460
480
500
–15
–30
–25
–20
–15
S11 (dB)
–5
0
12.7 mm measured
12.7 mm simulated
Figure 7.205 Measured and simulated S11 of the reduced-size CBCSLA with hc = 12.7 mm.
([100], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
permittivity or permeability within their restricted frequency range, and a combination
of them leads to a double negative medium (DNG). The TL MM may contain com-
posite RH/LH transmission lines (CRLH TL) [103], which are obtained by cascading
a sub-wavelength unit cell constituted of a series capacitance and a shunt inductance
as the LH MM structure, and unavoidable parasitic shunt capacitance and series induc-
tance existing in the practical circuit implementation as the RH MM structure. The RP

218
Design and practice of small antennas I
z
y
x
phi
Theta
Figure 7.206 Simulated radiation pattern of reduced-size CBCSLA ([100], copyright C⃝2008
IEEE).
MM has unfavorable properties; the typical ones are unsuitability for most microwave
applications, narrow bandwidth, large loss, and necessity of volumetric formation. The
TL MM, on the contrary, has advantages: applicability in microwave frequency regions,
wide bandwidth, low loss, and suitability for implementing in not only planar, but also
volumetric structures. They have been extensively studied, and various applications to
electromagnetic devices and antennas have been introduced [104–106].
The MM has unique dispersive characteristics and phase delay of wave propagation in
the media that are attributes of double negative constitutive parameters (ε < 0, μ < 0).
These MM properties can be effectively used to develop novel antennas. In the CRLH
MM, as the frequency ω becomes higher, the wave number β decreases, corresponding
to increase in the wavelength λ, thus lowering the resonance frequency in the media.
Hence, an appropriate design of the wave number β in an antenna system constituted of
an LH medium to obtain desired frequency ω renders the antenna size reduction.
In a CRLH TL MM of length l, constituted of a ﬁnite number N multiple unit cells
of length p, there would exist multiple resonance modes when length l is a multiple of
half a wavelength λg (guided wavelength), that is, l = nλg/2, with n = 0, ± 1, ±2, . . . ±
∞. A CRLH TL can be treated as effectively homogeneous media when the electrical
length of the unit cell is smaller than π/2, that is, p < λg/4. The dispersion diagram
of the CRLH TL MM is shown in Figure 7.207. The CRLH structure can support
negative resonance (n < 0) in the LH region, because of transfer of the phase origin
from frequency zero to the transition frequency ω0, and also zeroth-order resonance
(n = 0) at ω0 in addition to the ordinary positive resonance (n > 0) in the RH region [107]
(Figure 7.207 and Figure 6.49). Multiple resonances may occur at frequencies of n π/N.
Therefore, resonance at two or more frequencies in a medium can be attained, indicating
possibility of a multiband antenna design. When n = 0, that is the zero-order mode,
β = 0, and λ is inﬁnite, but the group velocity vg is not zero, as the wavelength becomes
inﬁnite, and the amplitude and phase of the wave are the same anywhere in the media.
This means that the resonance is not dependent on the dimensions of the resonator, but

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
219
ω+1
ω
ω−1
ω−2
ω−3
βρ
βρ/π
ω+2
ω+3
ω+N−2
ω+N−1
ω−(N−1)
ω−(N−2)
0
1/N
2/N 3/N
N–2/N
N–1/N
1
LH region
RH region
Figure 7.207 Resonance spectrum of a CRLH structure ([116], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
solely on the values of lumped reactive components on the unit cells, and hence this
property can be exploited to design an electrically small antenna.
In the DNG media, negative β (the wave number) suggests that direction of the power
propagation in the media is opposite to that of the phase propagation. By introducing
such condition as negative β in an antenna structure, a backward radiation can easily be
produced, whereas an ordinary LW (Leaky Wave) antenna radiates only in the forward
direction. A balanced-type CRLH TL [103a] can be used for a frequency scanned LW
antenna, which is designed to produce backward radiation as well as forward by using
the LH/RH property. By constituting a CRLH TL MM in 2D structure, a larger aperture
is obtained and consequently a small antenna with enhanced gain can be designed. By
dual feeding with phase delay circuits to the 2D CRLH TL MM, a circularly polarized
small antenna can be realized.
Other than artiﬁcial materials, there are some materials which can exhibit negative
permeability. For example, ferrite materials show negative-mu property near magnetic
resonance, although the mu changes rapidly once reaching the positive peak value,
turning to quickly descend to the negative lowest value through zero, and then gradu-
ally increasing to recover positive value. Then, over the frequency range in which the
permeability takes negative values, the ferrite material can be used as a negative-mu
(MNG) material. However, this frequency range is rather narrow, and that often checks
the practical applications.
Meanwhile, as was described previously, real MNG materials have been realized
with BaFe material and permalloy composite [108]. With the BaFe material, negative
mu can be obtained in a lower-frequency region, 2 to 5 GHz, while the permalloy
composite exhibits negative mu in higher-frequency regions, 9 to 18 GHz and beyond.
Figure 7.208 provides variation of the permeability of the permalloy composite with
respect to frequency. However, since these materials have some loss and a somewhat
high permittivity, this problem has been targeted to be improved.

220
Design and practice of small antennas I
0
1
2
3
4
10
Permeability μ
Frequency (GHz)
(a)
5
−1 1
μr′
μr′′
BaFe9(Ti0.5Co0.5)3O19
0
1
2
3
4
2
Permeability μ
Frequency (GHz)
(b)
5
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
−2
−1
0
μr′
μr′′
Permalloy composite
Figure 7.208 Dispersion characteristics of magnetic composite materials; (a) BaFe material and
(b) Permalloy composite material ([108], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 7.209 Examples of MNG material unit: (a) SRR, (b) CLL, (c) SR, and (d) omega-shaped
structure [101,109,110 and 111].
Artiﬁcial MNG materials can be implemented by other means; four examples are
illustrated in Figure 7.209, (a) SRR (Split Ring Resonator) [101], (b) capacitive-loaded
loop (CLL) [109], (c) spiral rings (SR) [110], and (d) omega shaped structure [111].
Meanwhile, artiﬁcial ENG (epsilon negative) material, as is mentioned above, can be
constituted from an array of thin wires (Figure 6.18) [102]. Meander lines arranged
in planar structure and helical windings are used as inductor materials, which can be
a substitute for ENG materials for the purpose of space resonance or matching [109].
Applications of these artiﬁcial MMs to small antennas will be shown in the next section.
7.2.5.1
Applications of SNG (Single Negative) materials
7.2.5.1.1 Mu-Negative (MNG) metamaterials (MM)
7.2.5.1.1.1 Circular patch antenna
Implementation of a miniaturized circular patch antenna loaded with MNG MM has
been introduced in [112 a, b], in which a thorough theoretical analysis of the magnetic
ﬁeld distribution underneath the patch, and the design of magnetic inclusions related

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
221
d
(a)
a
a1
ε2, μ2
ε1, μ1
(b)
DPS
DPS
MNG
MNG
xˆ
xˆ
zˆ
yˆ
yˆ
Figure 7.210 Geometry of a circular patch antenna loaded with an MNG MM [112a and b].
with their location, arrangement, and alignment, are shown. To realize the MNG MM,
multiple spiral ring resonators (MSRR) (Figure 7.209(c)) are employed as an appropriate
selection, having the dimensions that ﬁt with the limited thickness of the space between
the patch and the ground plane, while their required resonance frequency is kept despite
their small electrical size. The MSRR are aligned according to the expected preferred
direction of the magnetic ﬁeld at their location. Geometry of the patch antenna loaded
with an MNG MM is illustrated in Figure 7.210, showing (a) the 3D view and (b) the top
view of the antenna, which is partially loaded with an MNG MM underneath the patch.
With this arrangement, resonant modes can be excited on the patch, even though the
dimensions are signiﬁcantly smaller than the operating wavelength. Even with the small
dimensions, the MNG MM must provide an effective negative permeability in its com-
plex near-ﬁeld interaction with the feed and the patch. As the MNG MM has dispersion
property, the permeability μ1 is given by assuming the Drude dispersion relation as
μ1 = μ0(1 −ω2
p/(ω2 −jωδ))
(7.72)
where μ0 is the free space permeability, ωp is the magnetic plasma frequency, and δ
is the damping factor. Here the MNG media required to design an antenna shown in
Figure 7.210 for operating at 0.47 GHz is assumed to have the dispersion characteristic
as shown in Figure 7.211, where the variation of the relative permeability μ1/μ0 with
respect to the frequency is given [112a]. In this case, the geometrical parameters of the
antenna used are: radius of the substrate a = 20 mm, radius of the MNG media a1 =
12 mm, thickness of the substrate d = 5 mm, and δ = 0.01 GHz. Then the required
value of the relative permeability Re[μ1/μ0] = –2.17 at 0.47 GHz. Geometrical sketch
of the MNG integrated patch is depicted in Figure 7.212(a). In the ﬁgure, (b) illustrates
arrangement of the MSR (Multiple Split Ring), viewing from the top of the patch. With
this MSR arrangement, almost uniform ﬁeld distributions are obtained, thus exciting
the desired TM11 mode effectively all over the patch. The presence of the MSR highly
affects the current distributions underneath the patch, closing itself in an electrically
small resonant loop, which produces the desired radiation patterns and gain [112a]. The
return-loss characteristic is depicted in Figure 7.213, which shows matching features
of the antenna at two frequencies. The antenna operates at higher frequencies (around
2.44 GHz, determined by the electrical size of the patch) as well as lower frequencies.
At higher frequencies, the substrate behaves as a homogeneous material having the

222
Design and practice of small antennas I
30
25
15
20
10
5
0
−5
–10
–15
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Frequency (GHz)
Relative permeability
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Re [μ1]/μ0
Im [μ1]/μ0
Figure 7.211 Dispersion characteristic model of the MNG MM required to design the antenna of
Figure 7.210 ([112a], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
Figure 7.212 Geometry of SR implementation inside the cylindrical core cavity underneath the
patch: (a) 3D view and (b) top view of the patch, ([112a], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency (GHZ)
Return loss (dB)
–25 dB
–20 dB
–15 dB
–10 dB
–5 dB
0 dB
Figure 7.213 Return-loss characteristics ([112a], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
223
b2
d
a2
a1
x
y
z
b1
ξˆ
μ1, ε1
μ2, ε2
ξ = ξ1
ξ = ξ2
ηˆ
DPS
MNG
Figure 7.214 Geometry of an elliptical patch antenna partially loaded with an MNG MM core
surrounded by a DPS shell ([113], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
constitutive parameters ε = ε2 = 2.33 ε0 and μ = μ2 = μ0. The simulated resonance
frequencies obtained by using the full-wave commercial code CST Microwave Studio
are very close to the predictions using the theoretical cavity model, where the radius of
the circular patch antenna is only 20 mm. Radiation patterns are nearly the same as that
of an ordinary circular patch antenna. The ground plane in this model has a radius of
40 mm. Simulated gains and efﬁciencies at the two resonance frequencies, 0.47 GHz
and 2.44 GH respectively, are 3.1 dBi, 6.3 dBi and 0.67, 0.92.
7.2.5.1.1.2 Elliptical patch antenna
An elliptical patch antenna loaded with MNG material was studied and showed the
possibility of miniaturization of the antenna size and advantages of using the elliptical
geometry compared to the use of circular geometry [113]. The antenna geometry is
illustrated in Figure 7.214, which shows an elliptically shaped MNG material core of
semi-axes a1 and b1 partially loaded underneath the elliptical patch and surrounded by an
elliptically shaped DPS shell of semi-axes a2 and b2. The elliptical shape parameters are
the semi-focal length F =

a2
1 −b2
1 =

a2
2 −b2
2, and the eccentricity of the elliptical
patch e =

1 −(b2/a2)2 = 1/cosh(ξ 2)(0 ≤e < 1). Here the Cartesian coordinates x
and y are related with the elliptical system coordinates ξ and η by
x = F cos ξ cos η
(7.73)
y = F sin ξ sin η.
Another parameter is the ﬁlling ratio Г = (volume of the material core)/(overall volume
underneath the patch) (0 < Г < 1).
Based on the full-wave simulation, the antenna performances are analyzed. The param-
eters used are: surface area of the patch A = 4π cm2, Г = 0.35, e = 0.7, ε1 = ε2 =
ε0, and μ2 = μ0. Here, ε1, μ1, and ε2, μ2, respectively, are the constitutive parameters
of the MNG and the DPS materials. Since the material has dispersive characteristic,
different modes can be excited by the different set of magnetic plasma frequencies. By
the selection of ωmp = 1.286 GHz, the odd mode is excited around the design frequency
0.5 GHz, while by the selection of ωmp = 0.707 GHz, the even mode at the same res-
onance frequency is excited. Simulated return loss S11 is given in Figure 7.215, which
indicates that near the design frequency, resonances are obtained in two cases with even
and odd mode properties. In the ﬁgure, dual-band effect is observed in the odd-mode

224
Design and practice of small antennas I
–30
Frequency (GHZ)
ωp = 0.707 GHZ
ωp = 1.286 GHZ
S11 (dB)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
–25
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
Figure 7.215 Return-loss characteristics for even-mode (solid line) and odd-mode (dotted line)
excitation of the elliptical patch antenna ([113], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
case. This is an attribute of the MNG material with μ1 = –5.618 at 0.5 GHz, and –1
at 0.91 GHz, respectively, obtained by using the Drude dispersion relation (7.72) with
the magnetic plasma frequency ωmp = 1.286 GHz and 0.707 GHz, respectively. These
correspond to the excitation of both the ﬁrst odd and second even modes in the spec-
trum. In these cases, ε1 = 2ε0 is used. At higher frequencies, resonances with broader
bandwidth are observed. These correspond to standard patch resonances for even mode
(at 2.67 GHz) and odd mode (at 3.65 GHz) with μ1 = μ0, as the substrate permeability
turns to become positive.
Realization of artiﬁcial MNG material may be approached with a technique intro-
duced in the previous section employed for the circular patch [112]. Properly designed
MSRR or MSR may perform similar magnetic resonance within a sub-wavelength
volume, consistent with the miniaturized size of an antenna. Gain varies depending
on the magnetic plasma frequency. The calculated gain normalized to the case of an
ideal lossless MM at the resonance frequency (0.5 GHz) is shown in Figure 7.216. In
this case, mismatch loss at the feed is excluded and only the effect of MM absorption,
which concerns the damping frequency ωτ is included.
7.2.5.1.1.3 Small loop loaded with CLL
Artiﬁcial materials exhibiting negative mu implemented by Capacitive-Loaded Loops
(CLL) are employed for miniaturization of a loop antenna [109]. The MNG interacts
with the highly inductive near ﬁeld produced by a small loop to attain resonance and
also obtain matching in space, even though the antenna has an electrically small size,
that is, ka ≤0.5 (a: radius of a sphere circumscribing the maximum size of antenna).
Some examples, using a semi-circular loop and a rectangular loop, are illustrated in
Figure 7.217, which shows use of different types of capacitance in the CLL: (a) a
spacing between a loop, (b) an inter-digital capacitor, and (c) a lumped component.
Various types of antennas with different geometries and dimensions are designed, and

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
225
0
–10
250
500
Damping frequency ωτ (MHZ)
Normalized gain (dB)
750
1000
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
Figure 7.216 Gain normalized to the case of an ideal lossless MM at the resonance frequency with
respect to the damping frequency ([113], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
(a)
(b)
(c)
Spacing
Stub
length
Coaxial
feed
Wire radius
Antenna radius
Antenna width
Antenna width
Antenna
height
Antenna
height
Antenna length
Antenna length
Finger length
Finger
width
Finger
gap
Finger
spacing
Lumped RLC
boundary
Ceramic dielectric
Terminal electrode
Figure 7.217 Examples of small antenna combined with CLL having a capacitance of (a) a
spacing between the loop, (b) an inter-digital capacitor, and (c) a lumped component ([109],
copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
their simulated performances (radiation efﬁciency, bandwidth, and Q, and so forth), in
terms of their geometrical parameters and frequencies from 300 MHz to 6 GHz, are
introduced. High radiation efﬁciency is obtained in most of the antennas even though
the antennas have electrically small size, whereas the VSWR bandwidth is found to be
generally very narrow, as low as 4% at maximum.

226
Design and practice of small antennas I
Negative permittivity resonator
Stub
Coax
a
Ground plane
Figure 7.218 A stub antenna loaded with a semi-sphere ENG MM ([114], copyright C⃝2006 IEEE).
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.219 (a) Folded spherical helix resonator and (b) spherical-capped dipole, ([114],
copyright C⃝2006 IEEE).
7.2.5.1.2 Epsilon-Negative Metamaterials (ENG MM)
ENG MMs can be employed for miniaturizing antennas as well as MNG MMs. How-
ever, because ENG MMs are available either in the optical frequency regions or using
plasmas of the appropriate charge density, applications of ENG MM to antennas at
microwave frequencies are conﬁned to use of artiﬁcial materials. The representative
artiﬁcial material is a periodical arrangement of conductors introduced in [101, 102].
An ENG MM applied to a small antenna to increase the bandwidth (lowering Q) and
raising the efﬁciency is demonstrated in [114]. A negative permittivity metamaterial
(i.e. ENG MM) of a semi-sphere is placed on a ground plane and fed through its center
by a coaxial transmission line terminated with a small monopole stub as shown in
Figure 7.218. By this geometry, electric ﬁeld distribution within the sphere is uniform
at the fundamental resonant mode and thus the small stub protruding into the center of
the sphere provides a strong coupling between the coaxial transmission line mode and
the resonant mode of the sphere. Through the analysis, it is shown that the spherical
resonator composed of a semi-spherical ENG MM has a Q that is only 1.5 times the
Chu limit. This is comparable to the performance of the other types of small spherical
antennas such as a folded spherical helix (Figure 7.219(a)) and a spherical-capped dipole
(Figure 7.219(b)), which have Q nearly 1.5 times the Chu limit, even with the size as

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
227
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 7.220 Electric ﬁeld distribution proﬁles (a) folded spherical helix, (b) spherical-capped
dipole, and (c) ENG sphere ([114], copyright C⃝2006 IEEE).
small as around ka = 0.3. These verify the work of Wheeler, mentioning that optimal
use of the sphere volume occupying an antenna may provide optimized bandwidth for
the antenna, even though with electrically small size. The electric ﬁeld distribution
proﬁles of these three types are shown in Figure 7.220 [114], which shows for a case of
(a) spherical helix, (b) spherical-capped dipole, and (c) ENG MM loaded semi-sphere.
There is a similarity in the behavior of modes between that of the helix and that of the
ENG MM sphere.
Simulation for the antenna model shown in Figure 7.218 is performed by using these
parameters: 8 mm for the radius of the semi-sphere, 3 mm for the length of stub, which is
optimized for good impedance matching, and the plasma frequency of 3.54 GHz for the
ENG MM that obeys the Drude dispersion relation. The stub length 3 mm corresponds
to λ/50 and the overall antenna size is characterized by ka = 0.34 (radius a = λ/18.5,
where λ = 148 mm; the resonance frequency at 2025 MHz). Calculated return loss, and
impedance are shown in Figure 7.221(a) and (b), respectively. Figure 7.222 depicts the
simulated radiation pattern, which resembles that of an ordinary small monopole on the
ground plane.

228
Design and practice of small antennas I
1800
1900
2000
Frequency (MHZ)
Return loss (dB)
Impedance (ohms)
2100
2200
–200
–40
0
200
(a)
(b)
400
600
800
Resistance
3 mm stub
8 mm half-sphere
Reactance
–30
–20
–10
0
λ = 148 mm
Figure 7.221 (a) Return loss and (b) impedance ([114], copyright C⃝2006 IEEE).
0
90
Angle (degrees)
Output power (linear, normalized)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
180
0
Figure 7.222 Radiation pattern ([114], copyright C⃝2006 IEEE).
An ENG MM can be implemented by using an LH TL structure [115]. A compact
TL MM antenna consisting of two unit cells, each of which comprises a microstrip TL
loaded with ﬁve spiral inductors, is introduced in [115]. The antenna is illustrated in
Figure 7.223, in which are shown (a) 3D schematic and (b) top view photograph of
the fabricated antenna. Each of two arms works independently at its own frequency
and corresponding to two frequencies designed to be merged into one passband so that
wideband performance can be obtained. The TL MM unit cell employs a round spiral
inductor (Figure 7.224(a)), which has dimensions of d × d = 4.5 mm × 4.5 mm. The
spiral element is connected to the ground through a via, to form a shunt inductance with a
larger inductance, and is equivalently represented by a circuit shown in Figure 7.224(b),

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
229
Series
inductor Lm
Via
Shunt
inductor Lo
z
x
y
Coaxial
feed
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.223 The proposed two-arm TL-MM antenna with compact size and enhanced bandwidth:
(a) 3D schematic and (b) top view photograph ([115], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE).
10
Gap
Ri
w
s
d
d
Metal
8
6
4
2
010
30
60
Z0, θ/2
L0
Z0, θ/2
90
120
150
180
βd
Freq (GHz)
Circuit
HFSS
(b)
(a)
Figure 7.224 Spiral-inductor-loaded TL-MM unit cell: (a) geometry of the cell and (b)
transmission line representation ([115], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE).
in which the dispersion characteristics are shown, and Z0 and θ denote the TL
characteristic impedance and the electrical length per cell, respectively. The TL MM can
be considered equivalently as an ENG MM with the corresponding plasma frequency fsh
given by 1/(2 π √L0C), where L0 is a combined inductance of the spiral and the via, and
C is the intrinsic capacitance of the TL. The metallic area of the antenna (Figure 7.223) is
22.5 mm × 13.5 mm and the size of the ground plane is 50 mm × 50 mm. The return-loss
(–10 dB) bandwidth is about 100 MHz from 3.23 to 3.33 GHz, as a consequence of two
resonances merged into the frequency range of 3.25 to 3.30 GHz. The radiation pattern
is similar to that of a short monopole. Measured directivity and gain, respectively, are
2.61 dBi and 0.79 dBi, giving an efﬁciency of 65.8%. Effective extension of the band-
width achieved by using a two-resonance TL MM with a small size is recognized by the
comparison with a single patch antenna having the same bandwidth, which has a larger
size than the TL MM antenna.

230
Design and practice of small antennas I
Antenna
width
Via width
Strip
width
Printed
monopole
z
y
x
Coaxial
feed
Rogers 5880
duroidTM
Strip length
Antenna
height
Via height
Figure 7.225 Planar meander-line structure (an ENG equivalence) combined with a short
monopole ([109], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
Pitch
length
z
Metal
thickness
Monopole
antenna
length
Helix
width
Coaxial
feed
x
y
Figure 7.226 Cylindrical helix strip (an ENG equivalence) combined with a short monopole
([109], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
Other examples of ENG MM applications to small antennas are use of a planar
meander line structure and a cylindrical helix combined with a small monopole as
shown in Figure 7.225 and Figure 7.226 [109], respectively. These planar meander line
structure and cylindrical helix strip provide inductance effectively to interact with highly
capacitive ﬁelds near the electrically small monopole to obtain matching in space. The
behavior is similar to that of the ENG MM.

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
231
z
Ground plane
(a)
(b)
(c)
Inter-digital
capacitor
Stub
Via
Figure 7.227 CRLH (microstrip) materials of (a) 1D, (b) 2D, and (c) 3D structure ([116],
copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
7.2.5.2
Applications of DNG (Double Negative Materials)
The representative DNG MM is the CRLH TL MM (Composite Right/Left Handed
Transmission-Line Metamaterial), which exhibits various signiﬁcant functionalities
and/or performances predicated on the notable dispersion properties and fundamental
RH/LH duality, thus has drawn much attention of engineers for applying it to practical
antennas [116]. The typical CRLH antennas are leaky wave (LW) antennas and resonant
antennas. The LW antennas can provide full-space dynamic scanning capability, with
various types of beams and actively shaped beams. The resonant antennas offer various
performances such as multiband operation, and high efﬁciency and high directivity with
zeroth-order mode constitutions. In addition, they have distinct features in implemen-
tation of CRLH antennas in planar, small, and compact dimensions that are an urgent
requirement for various recently emerged small wireless systems.
Figure 7.227 illustrates three implemented structures: (a) 1D, (b) 2D, and (c) 3D,
respectively, of periodic CRLH materials. The unit cell of the 1D structure, which is
extendable to 2D or 3D structure, consists of a series resonant tank with a capacitor CL
(inter-digital capacitor) and an inductor LR (parasitic), and a shunt anti-resonant tank
with a capacitor CR (parasitic) and an inductor LL (a stub), which is depicted in the inset
in Figure 7.227(a). The equivalent circuit of the unit cell is shown in Figure 7.228(a). The
series tank components CL and LR are related to the metamaterial (MM) permeability

232
Design and practice of small antennas I
p
Z/2
Z/2
R/2
Z¢= Z/p
Y¢= Y/p
R¢= R/p
G¢= G/p
L¢R = LR/p
C¢R = CR/p
L¢L = LL/p
C¢L = CL/p
R/2
LR/2
CR
LL
G
Y
LR/2
2CL
2CL
12
10
8
6
4
Frequency (GHz)
2
0
0
π/(2p)
ω0
ωse
ωsh
π/p
β (rad/m)
RH low-pass stop band
LH high-pass stop band
(b)
(a)
Balanced
Unbalanced
Figure 7.228 (a) Equivalent circuit expression of CRLH TL unit-cell (primed variables represent
per-unit-length and times-unit-length quantities) and (b) dispersion characteristics of the
balanced and unbalanced CRLH TL ([116], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
μ = Z/(jωp) and the shunt tank components CR and LL are related to the MM permittivity
ε = Y/(jωp), where Z and Y are the impedance and the admittance, respectively, that
characterize the MMs, and p is the length (period) of the unit cell.
To describe these parameters, the Bloch–Floquet theorem is applied to the periodic
structure constituted of cascading unit cells shown in Figure 7.228(a), and Z and Y are
derived as
Z = R + j{ωL R −1/(ωCL)} = R + j{(ω/ωse)2 −1}/(ωCL) →Z′p(p/λg →0)
Y = G + j{ωCR −1/(ωL L)} = G + j{(ω/ωsh)2 −1}/(ωCL) →Y ′p(p/λg →0)
(7.74)
where primed variables denote per unit length (Z′, Y′, C′
R and L′
R) and times-unit
length (C′
L, L′
L) quantities. ωse = 1/√L RCL = 1/

L′
RC′
L and ωsh = 1/√L LCR =
1/

L′
LC′
R are the frequencies of series and shunt resonances, respectively, and (p/λg =
βp/(2 π) →0) indicates the inﬁnitesimal limit of the unit cell to form the perfectly uni-
form TL or homogeneous MM structure (λg: guided wavelength). The Bloch impedance
ZB obtained by the ratio of the periodic voltage and current at either port of the unit cell,
and the speciﬁc propagation constant γ B = αB + jβB are expressed by
Z B →Z(ω) = ZL = Z R
(p/λg →0)
γB →β(ω) = ω/ωR −ωL/ω
(p/λg →0)
(7.75)
where
ZL = √L L/CL, Z R = √L R/CR, ωR = √L RCR, ωL = √L LCL,
and
the
inﬁnitesimal limit of the unit cell is also assumed.
Dispersion characteristics of the CRLH TL for the balanced (ωse = ωsh = ω0, LL =
LR, CL = CR) and the unbalanced (ωse ̸= ωsh) cases are shown in Figure 7.228(b).
The CRLH TL MM has equivalent constitutive parameters given by
μ(ω) = jZ′/ω = L′
R(1 −ωse/ω)
(7.76)
ε(ω) = −jY ′/ω = C′
R(1 −ωsh/ω)

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
233
II
LH
rad.
I
LH
guided
IV
RH
guided
Source
Z
Y
X
Bwd
Broadside
Fwd
III
RH
rad.
(a)
(b)
ω0
β
θ
ω = −βco
ω = +βco
ω
Figure 7.229 Performance of CRLH LW antenna: (a) typical dispersion characteristics and
(b) scanning performance ([103(b)], copyright C⃝2004 IEEE, [116], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
which are characterized by the pole at ω = 0 and one zero at the plasma frequency (ωse,
ωsh). These parameters may take values of positive, negative or smaller than unity. In
case of both being zero/negative (balanced transmission frequency ω0), the refraction
index is zero/negative.
7.2.5.2.1 Leaky wave antenna [116]
The CRLH MM exhibits unique dispersion characteristics that contain a radiation (or
fast wave) region where |β| < k0 = ω/c (k0: free space propagation constant, and c:
velocity of light), i.e, the phase velocity vp > c, in addition to a guided (or slow wave)
region (β > k0) as shown in Figure 7.229(a). In the ﬁgure, these regions are categorized
into four; I: LH guided, II: LH radiation, III: RH radiation, and IV: RH guided regions.
An antenna constituted with an LW structure, on which a travelling wave travels faster
than the speed of light (vp > c), is referred to as a LW antenna. The radiation angle θ of
the main beam of this antenna, deﬁned from the normal direction, is given by
θ = arc sin{β(ω)/k0}.
(7.77)
In a conventional LW antenna, β is positive and not dispersive, which implies the RH
structure, where the radiation occurs in the direction θ > 0, meaning only forward
direction. In addition, broadside radiation (θ = 0) is impossible, because it requires β =
0, that requires vg (group velocity; ∂β(ω)/∂ω) = 0. This means that the guided structure
is associated with a standing wave, whereas a travelling wave is necessary for the LW
radiation. On the contrary, as a CRLH TL MM exhibits dispersion characteristics, where
β(ω) varies from the region β < –k0 to the region β > +k0, the CRLH structure performs
backﬁre-to-endﬁre frequency scanning. This can be understood by (7.77), where θ (β =
–k0) = –90◦(backﬁre radiation) and θ (β = –k0) = +90◦(endﬁre radiation). In addition,
if the CRLH structure has balanced resonances, transition of the transmission from the

234
Design and practice of small antennas I
LH regions to the RH regions with travelling wave (vg ̸= 0) is continuous at β = 0,
providing unique broadside radiation that cannot be achieved by the conventional LW
antenna. Figure 7.229(b) illustrates typical scanning operation of this type of antenna.
7.2.5.2.1.1 Beam forming
By varying circuit parameters LR, CR, LL, and CL, in the CRLH TL structure, electronic
scanning can be achieved. The easiest method is to use varactors for capacitors. When
an antenna is of 1D structure, scanning is only in one plane. In this case, the beam can
be highly directive in the y–z plane, whereas it is broad in the perpendicular direction
(y–z plane in Figure 7.229(b)). This is a fan beam.
A 1D CRLH structure can be extended to a 2D structure. The 2D CRLH structure,
when excited in its center, can support a circular wave. When the wave exists in the
CRLH dispersion regions II and III in Figure 7.229(a), it radiates in an LW manner and
produces a conical beam.
When a maximum radiation in a unique direction is required, as usually necessary for
point-to-point communications, a pencil-beam antenna is desired. The CRLH TL MM
is useful for producing such pencil-beam scanning antennas [117, 118]. The antennas
introduced in [117, 118] consist of arrays of LW elements using a combination of
frequency tuning and phase-shift tuning to achieve pencil-beam scanning. By using 2D
CRLH TL structures, pencil beams can be produced economically and ﬂexibly compared
to use of conventional phased arrays, which require complicated, lossy, burdensome
matters in design, and 2D dispersive feeding networks.
7.2.5.2.1.2 Active beam scanning
Integration of active circuits along a CRLH TL structure is suitable to manipulate
the magnitude of the signal along it as well as its phase, and active beam scanning
is easily realized. The beam width of an LW antenna constituted of TL structure is
controlled by its leakage factor, αlw (ω), which is the real part of the propagation constant
γ (ω) = αlw (ω) + jβ(ω). With passive structure, the leakage factor is ﬁxed, and hence the
effective aperture and the directivity cannot be increased, without otherwise extending
the length of the LW structure. Meanwhile, since an active CRLH LW antenna, in which
active circuitry is integrated, may have an unlimited effective aperture, it can provide
an arbitrarily high directivity with single and simple TL excitation. Incorporation of
ampliﬁers as repeaters into a CRLH LW antenna was reported in [119].
7.2.5.2.2 Resonant antennas
7.2.5.2.2.1 Multiband antennas
By reactively terminating a CRLH TL structure open to free space, by a short or an open
circuit, a resonant CRLH antenna having effective wavelength and frequency response
that are attributes of a CRLH MM property is obtained. The resonant modes of a CRLH
structure of length l are given by l = nλg/2, with n = 0, ± 1, ±2, . . . ±∞. The n
can be either positive (RH band) or negative (LH band) and even zero (at transition).
Each positive (n > 0) resonance mode (at frequencies ω+n) has a twin negative (n <
0) resonance mode (at frequencies ω–n), and a zeroth-order (n = 0) mode exists at the
transition frequency ω0 as was shown in Figure 7.207. A CRLH TL structure consisting

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
235
η = 72%, G = 5.88 dB, (no sidelobe)
η = 71%, G = 9 dB, SLL = –14 dB
η = 56%, G = 3.14 dB, (no sidelobe)
Figure 7.230 Three CRLH zeroth-order microstrip resonant antennas of different sizes operating
at 2.44 GHz with; (a) η = 56%, G = 3.14 dB, (b) η = 72%, G = 5.88 dB, and (c) η = 71%, G =
9 dB, and SLL (sidelobe level) = −14 dB. ([116], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
of N unit cells has a ﬁnite number of 2N (2N – 1 in the balanced case) resonances,
corresponding to βn p = βn (l/N) = nπ/N. Figure 7.207 shows such a discrete spectrum
of a CRLH resonator.
By utilizing the positive and negative resonance pairs of a CRLH structure, a dual-
band resonant antenna is obtained. The antenna is back fed by a coaxial line at the
off-center location for 50  matching at one frequency. In principle, all of the (2N –
1) resonances may be excited and matched to the source with proper excitation. Since
the modes of each pair have the same guided wavelength and ﬁeld distributions, input
impedance of each mode has a similar value. By this means an efﬁcient dual-mode
operation can be achieved by a single resonator.
In principle, with higher-order CRLH TL structure, operation in multibands such as
tri-band, quad-band, or even higher number of bands, is possible.
An example of this type of antenna is a square patch antenna, in which LH structures
are partially ﬁlled [116].
7.2.5.2.2.2 Zeroth-order antennas
Unique application of a CRLH TL structure to antennas is of a zeroth-order mode, by
which zeroth-order CRLH resonance (l/λg = 0, n = 0) is attained. Examples are shown
in Figure 7.230, where three different-size microstrip antennas are illustrated [116].
The unit cell of the antenna uses an inter-digital capacitor and a stub inductor shorted
at the end with a via as was shown in Figure 7.227(a). The size of a resonant CRLH
antenna may be ﬂexibly designed to attain required effective aperture and directivity, as
the operating frequency is independent of the size, but is determined by LC unit-cell
elements (Figure 7.228(a)). This feature can be used for designing either electrically
small or larger antennas. In this type of resonant CRLH LW antenna, directivity can be
enhanced by increasing the length of antenna at a given frequency. Gains and efﬁciencies,
respectively, for each antenna of the three shown in Figure 7.230, are 3.14 dB and 56%
for the smallest antenna, 5.88 dB and 72% for the middle-size antenna, and 9 dB and
71% for the longest antenna, respectively, all at 2.44 GHz.

236
Design and practice of small antennas I
Diameter:  30 mm
Figure 7.231 A CRLH loop resonant microstrip antenna ([116], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
7.2.5.2.2.3 Electric/Magnetic plane monopoles
A CRLH structure can be formed to have a closed circular loop conﬁguration by folding
a rectilinear CRLH structure as shown in Figure 7.231 [116]. This antenna in the zeroth-
order mode can be operated either as an electric or magnetic monopole by feeding to
excite either ωsh or ωse mode. In the ωsh mode, Y = 0 (Eq. 7.74), and therefore the shunt
paths are seen as open circuit, as the radial currents ﬂowing on the stubs excite only LL,
while the overall shunt resonator current is zero. This indicates that this antenna structure
acts as an electric monopole. In turn, in the ωse mode, Z = 0 (Eq. 7.74), and therefore
the series paths are seen as open circuit, and current ﬂows exist only along the loop.
This means that the antenna structure works as a magnetic loop. These two electric and
magnetic monopoles are independent (uncoupled) from each other and may be excited
simultaneously by using two different feeds (radial for ωse and azimuthal for ωsh).
A monopole radiator may also be realized by a zeroth-order CRLH resonator in a
patch conﬁguration [116]. In Figure 7.232 a CRLH magnetic monopole patch operating
in the CRLH zeroth-order resonance mode (ωsh) is illustrated. This is a complement to
the magnetic dipole of a conventional patch. The monopole is formed as a result of the
magnetic currents (uniform vertical electric ﬁeld) on the periphery of the mushroom
patch. It may be possible to realize an electric monopole patch operating in the CRLH
zeroth-order mode ωse.
7.2.5.2.3 NRI (Negative Refractive Index) TL MM antennas
When the top end of a quarter-wavelength monopole placed on a ground plane (GP) is
folded back to the GPL (ground plane), the result is half a folded dipole, on which two
mode currents, balanced and unbalanced, ﬂow. As the balanced mode does not contribute
to radiation and appears open at the input terminal, the unbalanced mode contributes to
radiation, because the in-phase current ﬂowing on both the feed terminal and its opposite
side, becomes the meaningful part. The impedance seen at the feed terminal is four times
that of the original monopole. Hence, the input impedance of a low-height monopole

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
237
z
conv.
CRLH
Ms
y
x
x
y
z
δ
ϕ
Ms
Figure 7.232 A magnetic monopole microstrip patch antenna using the CRLH zeroth-order mode
in a mushroom structure. ([116], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
can be increased by folding it and can be designed to match 50 . When a low-height
monopole is folded, in-phase current on the resultant folded dipole cannot be obtained.
In this case, a phase shifter is inserted, replacing the short at the top of the folded dipole
to obtain in-phase currents so that a high enough input impedance to match 50 , even
if the height is very low, and efﬁcient radiation is achieved. A Negative Refractive Index
(NRI) TL MM may be used as a substitute for such phase shifter and applied to realize
a small, compact, yet efﬁcient antenna.
7.2.5.2.3.1 MM ring antenna
An example of an NRI TL MM application to achieve a small antenna is a ring antenna
operating at 1.77 GHz [120], which is constituted in a compact (λ0/11 footprint; λ0:
operating wavelength) and low proﬁle (λ0/28 height). Figure 7.233 shows the antenna
structure and its geometry. The antenna consists of two MM unit cells, which are
synthesized by using conventional TL loaded with lumped series capacitors and shunt
inductors in a dual TL topology. The MM unit cells are arranged in a ring structure
implemented by microstrip technology, and designed to produce in-phase currents on
the posts (vias) connected to the antenna through the inductances at each end of the
TL structure. Lumped inductors and capacitors connected to the TL give rise to series
and shunt resonance respectively by involving the parasitic capacitance and inductance
of the TL. The short vertical posts are connected to the antenna surface through the
lumped inductor at each end of the TLs, and act as the radiation element. Even though
the length of the post (radiator) is very small (λ0/28), the radiation resistance is adjusted
to match 50 , and S11 obtained at the operating frequency of 1.77 GHz is nearly
–30 dB. The lumped capacitance and inductance used, respectively, are 0.4 pF and 15
µH. The radiation pattern is similar to that of a short monopole, and gain and efﬁciency,
respectively, are 1.245 dB and 54%. This is shown in Figure 7.234.

238
Design and practice of small antennas I
Holding brackets
Metal TL
14.8 mm
13.1 mm
Via
Feed
Ground plane
Dielectric
32 mil
6 mm
Caps
2Lo2
2Lo1
y
x
z
Figure 7.233 Geometry of a metamaterial ring antenna ([120], copyright C⃝2005 IEEE).
E−Plane
0
330
300
270
240
(a)
(b)
210
180
60
90
−3
−35 −2
−25 −1
−15 −5
120
150
H−Plane
0
330
300
270
240
210
180
60
90
−3
−35 −2
−25 −1
−15 −5
−35 −25 −15 −5
−35 −25 −15 −5
120
150
30
30
5
5
Eθ Measured
Eθ Simulated
Eϕ Measured 
Eϕ Simulated
Eθ Measured
Eθ Simulated
Eϕ Measured 
Eϕ Simulated
Figure 7.234 Radiation patterns: (a) E-plane and (b) H-plane ([120], copyright C⃝2005 IEEE).
7.2.5.2.3.2 Multiple-folded monopole
An electrically small NRI TL MM antenna operating at 3 GHz band is introduced in
[121]. The antenna consists of four folded monopoles, to which NRI TL MM tech-
nology is applied to realize a small, compact, and broadband antenna with very small

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
239
Shunt
inductor
Series
capacitor
C0
L0
C0
C0
C0
C0
L0
L0
L0
L0
Via
Via
Via
Via
Coaxial feed
(a)
(b)
(c)
45 mm
45 mm
4.8 mm
0.4 mm
1.23 mm
MTM
unit
cell
x
y
z
Figure 7.235 Electrically small NRI-TL metamaterial antenna: (a) perspective view, (b) top view,
and (c) 3D view ([121], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
dimensions (λ0/10 × λ0/10 × λ0/10 over 0.45λ0 × 0.45λ0 ground plane; λ0: the
operating wavelength). Figure 7.235 illustrates the antenna; (a) perspective view, (b)
top view, and (c) 3D view. The NRI TL MM unit cell is constituted of a conventional
TL, to which lumped capacitors and inductors are loaded to ensure series and shunt
resonances respectively with parasitic inductance and capacitance inherently existing
in the microstrip TL structure. By adjusting the values of the loaded elements and the
unit cell size, amplitude and phase of signals propagating along an NRI TL structure
can be aligned to obtain in-phase excitation of monopoles so that efﬁcient radiation
can be achieved. The monopoles are top-loaded with a square plate, on which the NRI
TL MM structure is constituted, and consequently, appropriate radiation impedance to
match 50  is attained even though the antenna height is very low. As can be seen in
Figure 7.235(b), an NRI MM unit cell consists of a square plate, acting as a TL, to which
a lumped inductance L0 is connected, and a lumped capacitance C0, bridging two TLs,
thus resulting in an NRI TL MM.
Each of four square plates stands with a vertical post on a ground plane, one of which
is the feeding post, and currents on each post are adjusted to be in-phase so that they are
excited all in phase and efﬁcient radiation can be obtained. It should be noted that use of
folding monopole technology to increase the radiation resistance Rr, as was discussed
in the previous section, is applied to this antenna structure, so obtained by placing an
NRI MM between two posts.

240
Design and practice of small antennas I
z
y
x
FR4
Wm,p
hsub
Lp
Lm
h
Ls
Lg
Wg
SMA
connector
via
Ground
Figure 7.236 NRI-TL metamaterial microstrip antenna ([122], copyright C⃝2002 IEEE).
L01
Z0
Z0
C0
L02
d
θ/2
θ/2
Figure 7.237 NRI-TL metamaterial π-unit cell ([122], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE).
For an antenna of N folded arms, the input impedance Rin is given by
Rin = N 2Rr.
(7.78)
This antenna has four posts and Rr = 4 , if the post height is 5 mm, then λ0/20 at
3 GHz, Rin becomes 64 . This is sufﬁciently close in value to 50  for good matching.
The antenna does not use a balun with the ground plane of 45 mm square. Simulated
results by using HFSS show bandwidth of 42 MHz (−10dB), directivity of 1.31 dB and
efﬁciency of 72.3%.
7.2.5.2.3.3 Dual-mode monopole antenna
An NRI TL MM unit cell employed in a small monopole to achieve a folded monopole
structure and combined with a ground plane that acts as a radiator so as to obtain
dual-mode operation is introduced in [122]. The antenna geometry and the dimensional
parameters are illustrated in Figure 7.236. The total size of antenna is 20 mm × 30 mm.
The MM unit cell is implemented by placing a small rectangular patch behind the printed
monopole patch, which is equivalently expressed by a Pi-network shown in Figure 7.237.
The series capacitance C0 is formed between these two patches and the shunt inductance
L01 is formed at the base of the monopole, while L02 is formed by a thin inductive strip
and a via that connects the patch behind the monopole patch and the ground plane (GP).

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
241
x
(a)
y
z
x
(b)
y
z
Figure 7.238 Surface current distributions on the conductors of the MTM-loaded monopole
antenna: (a) 5.5 GHz and (b) 3.55 GHz ([122], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE).
These elements are incorporated with TLs, which are comprised of the two monopole
patches, to constitute a Pi MM unit cell. With this structure, currents ﬂowing on these
two patches can be arranged in-phase as Figure 7.238(a) shows, thus effectively a folded
monopole structure is created, by which radiation resistance of the small monopole is
increased. The original patch antenna (without MM loading) exhibits a single resonance
at 6.3 GHz, whereas an MM-loaded monopole exhibits broadband dual resonance; these
are a desired resonance at 5.5 GHz along with additional resonance at 3.55 GHz. The
resonance around 3.55 GHz can be adjusted by changing the width of the GP.
At 3.55 GHz, the antenna acts as a dipole oriented along the y-axis, not as a folded
monopole, because of the induced current on the top edge of the ground plane, which
is shown in Figure 7.238(b). In the circuit shown in Figure 7.237, the TL section is
negligible at the lower frequency and the circuit is simply transformed effectively into a
series resonator, comprised of the capacitance C0 and the inductances L01 + L02. When
the antenna is fed through L01, the series resonator represents an MM loaded monopole
and forms a short circuit, thus acting as balun for the currents on the GP. Since the
currents on both sides of the feed line are in-phase, the top edges of the ground plane
radiate just as a dipole with a different polarization (orthogonal) to that of the MM
monopole, which operates at 5.5 GHz.
Measured –10 dB bandwidth is 4.06 GHz, from 3.14 to 7.20 GHz, and efﬁciency is
on the order of 90% at both 3.5 GHz and 5.5 GHz. Bandwidth increase as a result of
loading the NRI MM to a monopole antenna is veriﬁed by comparison with bandwidth
of the unloaded monopole antenna, which is 2.48 GHz from 5.35 to 7.83 GHz in terms
of the –10 dB bandwidth.
By means of NRI TL MM loading to a conventional microstrip patch antenna, a
compact, broadband, dual-radiation-mode antenna, that is, a short folded monopole
operating at 5.5 GHz and a small dipole antenna operating at 3.55 GHz, is realized.
7.2.5.2.3.4 Tri-band monopole antenna
A planar monopole, to which an NRI TL MM structure is loaded, and a defected ground
structure is employed, operating in three modes, is described in [123]. (A Defected

242
Design and practice of small antennas I
z
y
x
C1
FR4
Slot
Ground
Air
bridge
SMA
connector
L2
L1
C2
hsub
Lg
(a)
(b)
Lm
LR1
WC1
WS1
WC2
Wg1
Wg2
Wm
Ls2
LR2
Ls1
h
Wg
Figure 7.239 Tri-band monopole antenna with single-cell MTM loading and a defected-ground
plane: (a) top view and (b) 3D view. ([123], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
Ground Structure (DGS) is deﬁned as a unit cell EBG or an EBG with limited number of
cells and a period.) The antenna geometry and the dimensional parameters are illustrated
in Figure 7.239, where (a) is top view and (b) is 3D view. A coplanar waveguide (CPW)-
fed monopole antenna is loaded with a single NRI TL MM-based Pi-unit cell. The series
capacitance C1 is formed between the monopole on the top of the substrate and the
rectangular patch placed opposite to the monopole. The TL MM cell is asymmetrically
loaded with two shunt inductances, L1 and L2. As can be seen in Figure 7.239, L1 is
formed by the inductive strip to feed the monopole and L2 is formed by the thin inductive
strip that connects the rectangular patch beneath the monopole to the rectangular patch
beneath the RH ground plane (GP). A capacitance C2, formed between the rectangular
patch and the RH GP, connects the shunt inductor L2 to the ground. By appropriately
adjusting these parameters in addition to the geometrical parameters of the antenna,
current ﬂows on the feed strip (L1) to the monopole and the inductive strip (L2) to the
rectangular patch behind the monopole, can be made in-phase at the resonance frequency,
thus the antenna performs effectively as a two-arm folded monopole. Figure 7.240(a)
shows the current ﬂows with arrows and indicates the antenna operates in the folded
monopole mode. The resonance frequency in this case is around 5.0 GHz–6.0 GHz.
In this antenna structure loaded with an NRI TL MM, resonance occurs at lower
frequency around 2.4 GHz–2.5 GHz in addition to the higher frequency with other
modes. Major current ﬂows on the GP are depicted in Figure 7.240(b), which shows
that the currents along the CPW feed line are symmetric, while those on the upper
edges of the GP are in-phase. This means that the currents on the edges of the GP
contribute radiation and the antenna effectively performs as a dipole, which radiates
in a direction orthogonal to that of the monopole mode. The in-phase currents on the
top edges of the GP are produced by designing the series circuit comprising C1, C2,
L1 and L2 to resonate at a frequency that overlaps with the dipole mode resonance, as
the series circuit becomes short. The resonance frequency depends on the length of the
current path, related with the size of the GP, Wg + 2Lg, (Figure 7.239). Based on the
design consideration discussed above, the optimized loading patches have dimensions

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
243
x
y
z
(a)
(b)
(c)
x
y
z
x
y
z
Figure 7.240 Current distributions on the conductor of the tri-band monopole antenna shown in
Figure 7.239: (a) folded monopole mode (5.80 GHz), (b) dipole mode (2.44 GHz), and (c) effect
of defected ground plane (3.76 GHz) ([123], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
of 3.0 mm × 3.0 mm and 2.5 mm × 2.5 mm, respectively, and the two sections of
thin strips have the same length of 5.5 mm and width of 0.25 mm. As the current ﬂow
takes a longer path than the length of the edge of the GP, a lower resonance frequency
is achieved in comparison with the antenna introduced in the previous section [122],
where the dipole-mode currents ﬂow only on the top edges of the GP. This implies that
a larger miniaturization factor is attained by this antenna structure.
In addition to the dipole mode, the antenna is designed to perform with a third mode,
which is achieved by using a defected GP structure, formed by cutting an L-shaped slot
out on the left-side of the CPW on the GP as shown in Figure 7.240. With this slot,
resonance occurs around 3.5 GHz, while the dual-mode operation at around 2.5 GHz
and 6.0 GHz is preserved. Current distributions on the GP at the resonance frequency

244
Design and practice of small antennas I
–40
–30
–20
–10
1
Frequency (GHz)
7
6
5
4
3
2
0
|S11| (dB)
Measured
Simulated
Figure 7.241 Simulated and measured return loss ([123], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
3.76 GHz are shown in Figure 7.240(c), which illustrates a strong concentration of the
currents that ﬂow so as to wrap around the L-shaped slot on the left-side of the GP,
thus taking a longer path of approximately λg/2 at the resonance of the third mode. The
vertical and horizontal length of the slot Ls1 and Ls2, respectively, are adjusted to achieve
a good impedance match throughout the 3.5 GHz band. The slot is located far enough
away from the CPW so that it does not affect the balanced CPW mode.
Tri-band performance of this antenna is shown by the return-loss S11 characteristics
of a fabricated antenna as Figure 7.241 illustrates. In the ﬁgure, measured and simulated
S11 values are given by the dark line and dotted line, respectively. The measured –10dB
bandwidths are 90 MHz for the 2.5 GHz band, 5.20 GHz to beyond 7 GHz for the
5.5 GHz band, and 620 MHz for the 3.5 GHz band. Each band corresponds to the
lower and higher band of WiFi, and WiMAX band, respectively. The measured radiation
efﬁciencies are 67.4% at 2.45 GHz, 86.3% at 3.5 GHz, and 85.3% at 5.5GHz. The full
size of the antenna is 20.0 mm × 23.5 mm × 1.59 mm (or λ0/6.3 × λ0/5.3 × λ0/78.6
with respect to the lowest resonant frequency of 2.45 GHz), including the GP size
Lg × Wg = 11.0 mm × 23.5 mm.
7.2.5.2.3.5 Multi-frequency and dual-mode patch antenna
A microstrip square patch antenna, to which a CRLH structure is partially ﬁlled, enabling
multi-frequency and dual-mode operation with miniaturized dimensions, is introduced
in [124]. The antenna geometry and the structure are shown in Figure 7.242. As can
be seen in the ﬁgure, the CRLH structure is implemented by using mushroom struc-
tures, the unit cell of which is composed of metal patches with vias to the GP (ground
plane), forming an inductance LL, and gaps between adjacent cells, forming a coupling
capacitance CL. The LH performance of these cells is provided by these equivalent cir-
cuit parameters, LL and CL, while the current ﬂux (LR) and the parallel plate capacitor
between the metal patch and the GP (CR) render the RH nature. Rectangular patch rather
than square patch will be used, because by using its longer side, larger coupling between

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
245
Dielectric
Dielectric
Vias
Vias
Coax feed
Coax probe
h
L
d
Lm
Wm
g2
g1
w
Gaps
Metal patches
Metal patches
x
y
z
Ground plane
Ground plane
Figure 7.242 Microstrip patch antenna partially ﬁlled with a 2 × 1 arrangement of CRLH cells
([124], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
adjacent cells is obtained, giving lower operating frequency and leading to miniaturiza-
tion of the antenna.
Meanwhile, the square patch is a conventional microstrip antenna, which is modeled
as an open-ended TL resonator, composed equivalently with a series inductance Lms and
a shunt capacitance Cms. The propagation constant βRH along this RH TL structure is
expressed by
βRH = ω

LmsCms.
(7.79)
The square patch partially loaded with a CRLH structure is treated as a combined TL of
two RH and one LH TL structures. An open ended or short circuited RH + LH + RH
TL works as a resonator that exhibits a behavior similar to a CRLH resonator at lower

246
Design and practice of small antennas I
frequencies and a RH resonator at higher frequencies. The propagation constant along
the LH section is given by
βLH = −1/(pω

L LCL)
(7.80)
where p denotes the length of the unit cell, smaller than λg/4 and LL and CL, respectively,
are inductance and capacitance per unit cell. The antenna is designed to operate at three
modes, n = ± 1 and 0.
At lower frequencies, where |βLH| > |βRH|, an antenna with a mode n = –1 can be
obtained as β–1 L = – π (β–1: the propagation constant along the TL of the length L at
n = –1, and L: the length of the RH + LH + RH TL structure). The antenna operates
here with a fundamental mode just as a conventional patch, which has two radiating slots
having the same amplitude and opposite phase, thus the radiation pattern is dipolar.
As the frequency increases, βLH increases, while βRH decreases. Then, a mode n = 0
can be excited by making βLH + βRH = β0 L = 0. The electric ﬁeld distribution of this
mode is constant, and so two radiation slots of the patch have the same amplitude and
phase, leading to a monopole-like radiation at the resonance frequency f0.
At frequencies higher than f0, |βLH| is greater than |βRH| and thus the resonance
condition for n = +1 mode can be achieved, where β+1 L = + π. This mode has the same
ﬁeld distribution and radiation property as the fundamental mode of the conventional
patches.
Since the frequencies of the lower modes n ≤0 depend on the CRLH (mushroom)
structure, desired operating frequencies at lower bands are obtained by appropriate
design of the mushroom structure.
For desired operating frequencies at higher bands, as the frequencies at higher mode
n = +1 depend on the patch itself, the patch dimensions are so designed as the conven-
tional patch without mushroom.
The proposed antenna having dimensions of (L × W) = 42 mm × 42 mm, the substrate
with εr = 2.2 and thickness h = 10 mm is used. The mushroom structure is comprised
with a 2 × 1 cell array and has the dimensions (Lm × Wm) 10.6 mm × 17.8 mm, the
gap between the two mushrooms is 0.40 mm, and the separation gap between the LH
structure and the microstrip patch is 0.2 mm. The diameter of the vias is 0.7 mm. The
coaxial feed probe is placed 14 mm from the center and the size of the GP is 80 mm ×
80 mm. These dimensional parameters are chosen to obtain the resonant frequencies at
1 GHz for the n = –1 mode, used in GSM (Global Systems for Mobile Communications),
at 1.5 GHz for the n = 0 mode, used in navigation systems, and 2.2 GHz for n = +1
mode, used in UMTS (Universal Mobile Telephone Systems).
Experimental results are: for n = –1 mode (f0 = 1.06 GHz), D (directivity) = 4.5 dB,
G (Gain) = –3 dB, E (efﬁciency) = 17.8%, and BW (–6 dB bandwidth) = 3%; for the
n = 0 mode (f0 = 1.45 GHz), D = 5.1 dB, G = 1 dB, E = 39%, BW = 3%; and for the
n = +1 mode (f0 = 2.16 GHz), D = 7.4 dB, G = 6.5 dB, E = 82%, and BW = 13%. The
lengths of the antenna in terms of the resonance frequency are λ0/6.74, λ0/4.92, and
λ0/3.31 for the mode n = –1, 0, and +1, respectively, indicating that at the lower modes,
signiﬁcant reduction of the antenna size is observed compared with the conventional
λ/2 patch antenna. The antenna presents two dipole modes (n = ±1) and one monopole

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
247
Antenna
Feeding
line
Ground
plane
y
x
Figure 7.243 Geometry of the RH/LH TLs loaded planar antenna ([125], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
mode (n = 0), and radiation patterns at the different operating modes are dipolar and
monopolar.
A dual-frequency patch antenna, which aims at application to DCS at 1.8 GHz and
UMTS at 2.2 GHz, was designed by using the same concept and an example is shown
in [124]. In this case, a 2 × 2 CRLH structure is employed so that the two modes are
excited, excluding n = 0 mode. The mushroom conﬁguration was changed to be square
and the number of cells was increased to four. The dimensions of this antenna are larger
than the ﬁrst one, with length of λ0/3.44 at the lower frequency and λ0/2.83 at the higher
frequency. With increased size, efﬁciency of the antenna is made higher (60%) than the
ﬁrst one for n = –1.
7.2.5.2.3.6 Compact CRLH MM-loaded slot antenna
A planar antenna utilizing cascaded RH/LH TLs to realize compact size is introduced in
[125]. The antenna geometry is depicted in Figure 7.243, where the constitutive elements
of the RH/LH TL are shown by black parts (printed capacitors) and slots (inductors).
The RH TL consists of a series inductance and a shunt capacitance in a Pi-network
structure, while the LH TL consists of a series capacitance and a shunt inductance
in a T-network structure. They are connected with an open-circuit at the unconnected
port of the LH TL, by which the TL works as a resonator. Along the power travelling
direction, the RH and LH TLs have opposite phase property from each other, hence a
ZOR (zeroth-order resonance) structure can be formed and the size of the antenna can be
designed arbitrarily without regard to the wavelength since it is speciﬁed by the circuit
parameters. The circuit elements are realized by using printed elements. The size of
printed patches is designed to have proper capacitance against the ground, while the
length of the metal traces or the size of slots on the ground plane is designed to
create required inductance. The realized proposed antenna of straight type is shown in
Figure 7.244. Layout of the antenna of L-shaped type is illustrated in Figure 7.245(a),
in which dark lines show the top metal part and dotted lines give the bottom metal part.
In the ﬁgure, (a) shows that three patches on the top metal part realize capacitances C1,
C2, and C3, respectively, and two narrow metal slots placed on the bottom metal, which

248
Design and practice of small antennas I
y
x
y
x
C3
C2
(a)
(b)
C2
C3
L1
L1
L2
C1
C1
L2
Figure 7.244 Layout of straight type antenna, (a) horizontal arrangement and (b) vertical
arrangement ([125], copyright C⃝2005 IEEE).
(a)
(b)
C3
C1
L2
L1
L1
L2
C2
C3
C1
C2
g
wc
wc
wc
W
L
Ls1
Ls2
Zin
Ls3
Figure 7.245 Layout of L-shaped type (a) the composition of metamaterial components and (b) the
equivalent circuit of a π-model for RH TL and a T-model for LH TL ([125], copyright C⃝2008
IEEE).
is considered as the ground plane (GP), produce inductances L1 and L2. A closed loop
is formed by these elements, on which current ﬂows in order of C1, L1, C2, C3, and L2,
and then back to C1. The dimensional parameters (in mm) are L = W = 11.5, wc =
4, Ls3 = 9.5, g = 1.3, Ls1 = 7.2, Ls2 = 3.2, and the slot (L1) width is 0.5. The size of
the GP is 40 mm × 30 mm. All three capacitances are designed to have the same value
2.6 pF and both inductances have the same value of 1.62 nH. The equivalent circuit
consisting of these circuit elements is given in Figure 7.245(b). Magnetic currents ﬂow
around C2 and C3, but currents on both sides have opposite phase and do not contribute
to radiation, while the top sides of both elements operate as the radiating edges, and
contribute to radiation. Since the ﬁeld produced by C1 is very weak, it is not taken into

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
249
La
Ca
Ca
–Ca
ra
ra
Z0
Z0
Figure 7.246 Negative capacitance replacing a large inductance in the resonance circuit of a small
antenna.
consideration. The operating frequency is 2.45 GHz. Measured results show a resonant
frequency of 2.35 GHz with return loss of 23 dB and the –10 dB bandwidth of 4.5%.
From the radiation patterns, the gain is evaluated to be 0.16 dBi.
The proposed antenna as fabricated by using small patches and slots could offer fairly
good performance with a compact size of λ0/11 square that is very small as compared
with a conventional λ0/2 antenna (λ0: free space wavelength).
7.2.6
Active circuit applications to impedance matching
An antenna always needs impedance matching in practical use. As was mentioned
frequently, matching at the feed terminals of an electrically small antenna is a crucial
problem, because of the need to compensate its highly reactive impedance with low
loss, and to transform its low resistive impedance to the load impedance (50 ). To
overcome this difﬁculty, two methods have recently been disclosed; one is the use of
active circuits and another is matching in the near ﬁeld of a radiator, instead of matching
at the feed terminals. The latter has been described in 6.2.5. Meanwhile, active circuits
are applied, for instance, to cancel the large capacitance Ca of a short dipole. In practice,
as Figure 7.246 shows, a negative reactance –Ca is used instead of a large inductance
La corresponding to the Ca of a short dipole. In the ﬁgure, ra denotes the radiation
resistance of the dipole. Since La must be large enough to cancel Ca, it may have a large

250
Design and practice of small antennas I
NIC
NIC
ZL
Cin
ZL
–ZL
–ZL
R2
R1
C
Zin = –kZL
(k > 0)
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.247 Negative impedance converter (NIC) and example of practical implementation: (a)
grounded type and (b) ﬂoating type.
loss that reduces the radiation efﬁciency, and hence, –Ca substitutes for it. The negative
capacitance –Ca can be achieved by a negative reactance circuit, which is constituted
of transistors. The negative reactance circuits can be realized by NIC as is illustrated
in Figure 7.247, which shows two types of NIC; (a) grounded NIC and (b) ﬂoating
NIC [126–134]. Examples of transistor circuits are shown on the right-hand side in the
ﬁgure, where Cin (–C) and –ZL, respectively, are the capacitance converted from C by
the grounded NIC and the impedance converted from ZL by the ﬂoating NIC.
On the recent advent of NIC application to antennas, antenna engineers have acquired
a pragmatic and effective design technique to develop a novel electrically small antenna
having high efﬁciency and possibly wide bandwidth.
Active circuits, which do not follow Foster Reactance Theorem, are referred to as
Non-Foster circuits. Another way to obtain proper matching in small antennas is the
use of metamaterials (MM), which can represent negative reactance, instead of NIC. An
MNG introduced in 7.2.5.1 is a typical example.
It must be noted, when negative reactance circuits are used, that the circuit should
maintain stable condition, noise be kept as low as possible, and the linearity be kept as
high as possible.
Regarding stability, an NIC needs inevitably to be open-circuit stable (OCS) at one
port and short-circuit stable (SCS) at the other port. OCS means that the network is
stable for any passive load on one side with the other port open, while SCS means that
the network is stable for any passive load on one port with the other port short. The
inherent conditional stability of an NIC constrains the magnitude of the impedances that
can be connected to the OCS port and to the SCS port. This can be interpreted by the
requirements |ZL1| >|Zin1| and |ZL2| < |Zin2|. Figure 7.248(c) illustrates an NIC that has
impedances ZL1 and ZL2, respectively, at each load terminal and impedances Zin1 and
Zin2 at the input terminals of each side. In designing an NIC circuit, these requirements
must always be met.
In addition, there is inconvenience in using the active circuit, as the transistor circuits
are generally unidirectional, whereas an antenna is bi-directional, and hence the appli-
cation is limited to either transmitter or receiver. In addition, transistor circuits need the
bias supply, for which additional circuits are required within the antenna system.

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
251
ZL
ZL
NIC
NIC
NIC
Zin1
Zin2
(a)
(b)
(c) ZL1
ZL2
Figure 7.248 NIC circuit and stability requirements: (a) shows OCS state, (b) gives SCS state, and
(c) illustrates impedances that concern stability of an NIC; ZL1 ZL2 at the load and Zin1, Zin2 at
the input terminals each side.
L
–L
–L
Figure 7.249 Impedance transformer between a low resistance and the load (characteristic
impedance Zo).
Instead, an NMG material, if it could be available, is greatly advantageous, since
the material enables bi-directional application feasibility that is favorable in antenna
applications.
Nevertheless, there are distinct advantages of using negative circuits in antenna design,
as they can overcome matching difﬁculty and thus assist in enhancing gain and efﬁciency
in transmitter applications, even when the size of antenna is electrically small, while
they may facilitate extension of bandwidth and improvement of signal-to-noise ratio in
receiver applications.
NIC may also be used as a circuit that converts low radiation resistance of small
antennas to the load (or source) resistance (50 ) after the reactance is compensated.
For this purpose, a T-shaped inductance circuit, for example, may be used. Figure 7.249
depicts the circuit, which is formed of a shunt L and two series –Ls. Here, the –L can
be produced by an NIC. The matching circuit is then designed to employ NICs, which
represent –Ca and –Lm as shown in Figure 7.250.

252
Design and practice of small antennas I
Ca
–Ca
ra
–L
–L
L
Ca
–Ca
ra
–Lm
–Lm
Lm
NIC
NIC
NIC
Figure 7.250 Matching circuit and impedance transformer using negative reactance.
7.2.6.1
Antenna matching in transmitter/receiver
NICs are applied to matching circuits of antennas in the transmitter or the receiver [132,
133]. An example of antenna matching in the transmitter is introduced in [132], which
describes a 15–30 MHz band transmitter, for which a two-foot monopole antenna is
used. The matching circuit is illustrated in Figure 7.251, where two cases are shown:
(a) passive matching and (b) active matching. In these circuits, an inductance L = 1.8
µH is used for tuning at 20 MHz with the antenna capacitance Ca = 33 pF and a serial
L-C circuit, which derives 50  of the load resistance RL from the low resistance 4 
at the output stage of the tuning circuit, is used. This 4 at the output of the tuning
circuit is attributed to the loss of the inductance L, whereas the radiation resistance of
the antenna at 20 MHz is 1.
In order to transform 1  to the source 50 , a serial L-C network is used as shown
in Figure 7.251, which is a different type of circuit to that shown in Figure 7.249.
Meanwhile, in the active matching, a ﬂoating NIC, which uses two transistors, each
being a pair of npn-pnp, is used to cancel L and Ca, to which the impedance trans-
forming circuit is connected. Then the overall matching circuit will be that as shown in
Figure 7.251(b).
The matching characteristics depend on the biasing of the NIC transistors. In [132],
the matching characteristics are evaluated by |S21|2, which provides the ratio of the
power delivered to the 1  load to the power from the source (50 ), and is compared
with that of the passive matching. In the active matching, two biasing cases, that is,
conventional class A and class B biasing, are compared.

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
253
4396B
4396B
50
50
1Ω
1Ω
1.8 μH
1.8 μH
1.8 μH
33 pF
33 pF
33 pF
≈ 4Ω
≈ 4Ω
neg L, C
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.251 Matching circuits for small antenna: (a) passive case and (b) active case [132].
The active matching showed power efﬁciency that exceeds 20 dB over that of the
passive matching for the lower frequency band. The class B biasing demonstrates higher
peak power delivery (about 24 dBm) than the best possible passive match near the center
frequency (23 MHz) of the band, while the class A biasing shows nearly constant power
level (15 dBm over the passive case) for the entire frequency band (15–30 MHz).
Application of NIC circuits to a receiver is discussed in [133]. A six-inch monopole
antenna is used and the transmitter used for evaluation of the receiver performance
is arranged to transmit the frequency of 20–110 MHz. The receiver has 4 dB noise
ﬁgure achieved by using a low noise RF ampliﬁer. In the matching circuit an NIC is
used to represent –Ca as shown in Figure 7.246. At 30 MHz, the antenna reactance
–730  was brought down to –14.6 , not zero reactance, after the NIC. This results
from the inevitable parasitic reactance. Measured signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) exhibits
improvement 	 of 6 to a few dB over the entire frequency band. Figure 7.252 gives
comparison of S1/N1 (active matching case) to S0/N0 (a case when the antenna and the
receiver are directly connected).
7.2.6.2
Monopole antenna
Active circuit matching is described in [134], in which a case where an electrically
small monopole placed on the inﬁnite ground plane is considered. A two-port circuit
model representing an antenna system is considered through simulation and the antenna
performances, radiation efﬁciency, and bandwidth, of both passive and active matching
cases are studied. The antenna considered here is a cylindrical monopole of 0.6 m in
length and 0.010 m in diameter and the operating frequency is assumed to be 30 to
90 MHz. The matching circuit is basically the same as that shown in Figure 7.250,
where an NIC is used to implement negative reactance corresponding to the series

254
Design and practice of small antennas I
70
10log (S1/N1)
10log (S0/N0)
60
40
50
30
20
20
30
40
50
Frequency (MHz)
dB
60
70
80
110
100
90
Figure 7.252 Comparison of S/N between passive and active matching cases [133].
antenna capacitance Ca and inductance La and an inductance Lm of the transformer
section that converts the small antenna resistance to 50  (the load resistance). Lm
here is designed to equal √R0Z0/ω0 where Z0 is the desired impedance level, which is
here 50 . The active device used is a silicon bipolar NPN transistor. Simulated return
loss and total efﬁciency of the antenna/matching network combination are illustrated
in Figure 7.253, where (a) is the passive matching case and (b) is the active matching
case. As can be seen in the ﬁgure, the bandwidth is extended from about 3 MHz (–3 dB
efﬁciency) in the passive case to about 36 MHz to beyond 90 MHz (–10 dB return loss)
in the active case. The total efﬁciency in the active case is better than 95% from about
36 MHz to above 90 MHz.
Another example of NIC application to a small monopole antenna is introduced in
[135]. The antenna is a 3-inch wire monopole with 1.5 mm diameter placed on a ﬁnite
ground plane (3 inch × 3 inch with 1 mm thickness) and a negative capacitor to make
a 50  load (generator) match to the antenna, for which an NIC is used. The frequency
range considered is 1 MHz to 1 GHz. The total reactance of the antenna in the active
matching case becomes lower than that of the antenna in the passive matching case.
Consequently the transducer gain between the source and the antenna becomes 16.23
dB higher in the frequency range from 50 MHz to 644 MHz in the active matching
case. This result is signiﬁcant, since the antenna electrical length is very small; λ/79 at
50 MHz and λ/6 at 644 MHz.
7.2.6.3
Loop and planar antenna
To improve the bandwidth and reduce the size of the antenna, a non-Foster matching
network is designed. A loop antenna is considered as an example. As a small loop
antenna has different impedance behavior from that of a small dipole, the matching
circuit must be optimized to meet the variation of the loop impedance. Then the circuit
consisting of a shunt inductance and an optimized non-Foster network is taken into
consideration [136]. Return loss of a 6-inch loop is depicted in Figure 7.254(a), where
the inset shows the loop, and the return loss of the antenna with active matching network

7.2 Design and practice of ESA
255
0
(a)
(b)
−10
−20
30
40
50
Frequency (MHz)
60
70
50
100
Total efficiency (%)
Return loss (dB)
80
90
0
0
−20
−30
−40
−10
−50
30
40
50
Frequency (MHz)
60
70
110
100
90
80
70
Total efficiency (%)
Return loss (dB)
80
90
60
Return loss
Total efficiency
Total efficiency
Return loss
Figure 7.253 Return losses: (a) passive matching case and (b) active matching case ([134],
copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
is given in Figure 7.254(b). The optimized non-Foster matching network is shown in
Figure 7.254(c). From (a) and (b), increased bandwidth from 50 MHz to over 320 MHz
can be observed after the non-Foster matching network is used.
In [136], a planar dipole antenna, to which a non-Foster matching network is applied,
is treated. The antenna is printed on a very thin, ﬂexible dielectric sheet, and the antenna
size is λ/4 × λ/5 at 250 MHz. It has a gain greater than 0 dB from 250 MHz to
1000 MHz, meaning 4 to 1 bandwidth. Since a simple matching circuit at the feed is not
sufﬁcient, two additional ports apart from the feed point within the antenna structure
are deﬁned, to which negative capacitances are added, producing a resistance around
50  from 50 MHz to 300 MHz. With this resistance the optimized matching circuit is
designed by using a non-Foster matching network, in which three negative inductances

256
Design and practice of small antennas I
0
−5
−10
−15
−112 nH
−500 nH
28 nH
Feed
Antenna
−0.5 pF
0.2
0.4
0.6
(a)
0.8
1.0
1.2
0
−10
−20
−30
0.2
0.4
0.6
GHz
GHz
(b)
0.8
1.0
1.2
(c)
50 MHz
320 MHz
6” (inch)
Figure 7.254 Matching performance of a 6-inch loop: return loss in the case of (a) passive
matching, (b) active matching, and (c) Non-Foster matching network ([136], copyright C⃝2009
IEEE).
L = 9 mm
W = 16 mm
Lstub = 10.07 mm
L1 = 17 mm
W2 = 1.19 mm
W1 = 2.31 mm
Figure 7.255 The reference antenna ([137], copyright C⃝2007 IEEE).
and two negative capacitances are used. As a consequence, the imaginary part of the
antenna impedance is cancelled from around 80 MHz to 275 MHz. This results in size
reduction of the antenna having a λ/12 × λ/18 planar dipole with a 3.5 to 1 bandwidth
(80 MHz to 270 MHz) with gain greater than 0 dBi.

References
257
0
−10
−20
−30
−40
−50
7
8
9
10
11
10.683 GHz
Frequency (GHz)
Active antenna (with negative inductance)
Return loss (dB)
12
Microstrip line feed RMSA
Reference antenna
Active antenna (with negative capacitance)
Figure 7.256 Return loss in both passive and active matching ([137], copyright C⃝2007 IEEE).
7.2.6.4
Microstrip antenna
Either negative inductance or negative capacitance is applied to a rectangular microstrip
antenna to enhance the bandwidth [137]. The patch dimensions are W (width) = 16
mm, L (length) = 9 mm and the ground plane size is a 50 mm square. The operating
frequency is 10.55 GHz with |S11|= 21.5 dB at the resonance frequency.
A ﬂoating negative inductance is realized by using two FETs inserted between the
antenna and the source (transmitter). The bandwidth is increased from 12.2% in passive
matching case to 24.5% in the active matching case.
In case of connecting a negative capacitance circuit to the output of the antenna, the
bandwidth can be enhanced from 12.2% to 16.96%. The gain is increased from 6.6
dB to 9.2 dB. The reference antenna is illustrated in Figure 7.255, which shows that
a matching stub is connected to the feed line. The return loss |S11|of both active and
passive matching cases are shown in Figure 7.256.
References
[1] H. Nakano, H. Tagami, A. Yoshizawa, and J. Yamauchi, Shortening Ratios of Modiﬁed
Dipole Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 32, 1984, no. 4,
pp. 385–386.
[2] L. C. Godara (ed.), Handbook of Antennas In Wireless Communications, CRC Press 2000,
chapter 12.2.2.2, pp. 12–13–12–18.
[3] K. Noguchi, et al., Impedance Characteristics of a Small Meander Line Antenna, Trans-
actions of IEICE vol. JB, BII, no. 2, 1998, pp. 183–184.
[4] L. C. Godara (ed.), Handbook of Antennas In Wireless Communications, CRC Press 2000,
Chapter 12.2.2, pp. 12–11–12–19.
[5] F. Kuroki and H. Ohta, Miniaturized Cross Meander-Line Antenna Etched on Both Sides
of Dielectric Substrate, International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation (ISAP)
2006, Singapore a258 r266.

258
Design and practice of small antennas I
[6] H. Choo and H. Ling, Design of Planar, Electrically Small Antennas with Inductively
Coupled Feed Using a Genetic Algorithm, IEEE International Symposium on Antennas
and Propagation 2003, 22.1.
[7] C. W. P. Huang et al., FDTD Characterization on Meander Line Antennas for RF and Wire-
less Communications, Progress in Electromagnetics Research PIER, 24, 1991, pp. 185–
199.
[8] C-I. Lin, F-W. Chi, and K-L. Wang, Internal Meander Line Antenna for GSM/DCS/PCS
Multiband Operation in Mobile Phones, International Symposium on Antennas and Prop-
agation (ISAP), 2006, Singapore a62 r93.
[9a] L. C. Godara (ed.), Handbook of Antennas In Wireless Communications, CRC Press 2000,
chs. 12.2.3–12.2.5, pp. 12–27–12–34.
[9b] L. C. Godara (ed.), Handbook of Antennas In Wireless Communications, CRC Press 2000,
chs. 12.2.6 and 12.2.7, pp. 12–34–12–39.
[10] K. Noguchi et al., Increasing the Bandwidth of Meander Line Antennas Consisting of Two
Strips, Transactions of IEICE, vol. JB2-B, 1999, no. 3, pp. 402–409.
[11] C. A. Balanis, Antenna Theory, Analysis and Design, 2nd edn., 1982, pp. 459–461.
[12] K. Noguchi, et al., Impedance Characteristics of a Meander Line Antenna Mounted on a
Conducting Plane, IEICE National Convention, B-1–106, 1999, p. 106.
[13] M. Takiguchi and Y. Yamada, Radiation and Ohmic Resistances in Very Small Meander
Line Antennas of Less than 0.1 Wavelength, Transactions of IEICE, vol. J87-B, 2004,
no. 9, pp. 1336–1346.
[14] Y. Yamada and N. Michishita, Efﬁciency Improvement of a Miniaturized Meander Line
Antenna by Loading a High εr Material, IEEE iWAT, 2005.
[15] R. L. Bell, C. T. Elfving, and R. E. Franks, Near Field Measurement on a Logarithmically
Periodic Antenna, IRE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 8, 1960, pp. 559–
567.
[16] P. E. Mayes, Balanced Backﬁre Zigzag Antennas, 1964 IEEE International Conference
Record pt. 1, pp. 158–165.
[17] S. H. Lee, Theory of Zigzag Antennas, Ph.D. Dissertation, Dept. of Electrical Engineering
University of California, Berkeley, June, 1968, pp. 20, 31–33.
[18] S. H. Lee and K. K. Mei, Analysis of Zigzag Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas
and Propagation, vol. 18, 1970, no. 6, pp. 760–764.
[19] N. Inagaki, K. Tamura, and K. Fujimoto, Theoretical Investigation on the Resonance
Length of Normal Mode Helical Antennas, Technical Report of Nagoya Institute of Tech-
nology, vol. 23, 1971, pp. 335–341.
[20] K. Fujimoto et al., Small Antennas, Research Studies Press, 1987, pp. 59–75.
[21] N. Inagaki, T. Marui, and K. Fujii, Newly Devised MoM Analysis and Design Data for
NMHA, Technical Report of IEICE, AP2007–194(2008–03) pp. 123–128.
[22] T. Endo, Y. Sunahara, and Y. Hoshihara, Resonance Frequency of Dielectric Loaded
Normal Mode Helical Antenna, IEICE Technical Report, vol. 95, 1995, no. 535, pp. 1–6.
[23] J. S. Carreno and J. S. Solis, Broadband Log-periodic Normal Mode Helical Antennas,
IEEE APS International Symposium, vol. 1, 2003, pp. 249–252.
[24] Y. Ogura, K. Asakawa, and T. Maeda, Folded Normal Mode Helical Antennas, IEICE
Technical Report, vol. 104, 2004, no. 395.
[25] K. Noguchi et al., Impedance Characteristics of Two-wire Helical Antenna in Normal
Mode, Electronics and Communications in Japan, vol. 81, 1998, no. 12, pp. 37–44.

References
259
[26] S. R. Best, A Discussion on the Properties of Electrically Small Self-Resonant Wire
Antennas, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 46, 2004, no. 6, pp. 9–22.
[27] H. A. Wheeler, Small Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, AP-23,
1975, pp. 462–469.
[28] A. D. Yaghjian and S. R. Best, Impedance Bandwidth and Q of Antennas, IEEE Interna-
tional Symposium on Antennas and Propagation, Digest, vol. I, 2003, pp. 501–504.
[29] K-L. Wong, Compact and Broadband Microstrip Antennas, John Wiley and Sons, 2002,
p. 5.
[30] H. A. Wheeler, Fundamental Limitation of Small Antennas, Proceedings of IRE, vol. 35,
Dec 1947, pp. 1479–1484.
[31a] H. A. Wheeler, The Spherical Coil as an Inductor, Shield or Antenna, Proceedings of IRE,
vol. 58, September 1958, pp. 1595–1602.
[31b] H. A. Wheeler, The Radian Sphere Around a Small Antenna, Proceedings of IRE, vol. 59,
1959, pp. 1325–1331.
[32] J. S. McLean, A Re-examination of the Fundamental Limits on the Radiation Q of Elec-
trically Small Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, AP-44, May
1996, pp. 672–675.
[33] N. Engheta and R. W. Ziolkowsky, Metamaterials-Physics and Engineering Explorations,
John Wiley and Sons, 2006. p. 378.
[34a] C. P. Baliarda, J. Romeu, and A. Cardama, The Koch Monopole: A Small Fractal Antenna,
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 48, 2000, no. 11, pp. 1773–
1781.
[34b] J. P. Gianvittorio and Y. Rahmat-Samii, Fractal Antenna: A Novel Antenna Miniaturization
Technique and Applications, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 44, 2002,
no. 1, pp. 20–36.
[34c] D. H. Werner and S. Ganguly, An Overview of Fractal Antenna Engineering Research,
IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 45, February 2003, no. 1, pp. 39–40.
[35] J. R-Mohassel, A. Mehdipour, and H. Aliakbarian, New Schemes of Size Reduction in
Space Filling Resonant Dipole Antennas, 3rd European Conference on Antennas and
Propagation, vol. 23–27, 2009, pp. 2430–2432.
[36] H. K. Ryu and J. M. Woo, Miniaturization of Rectangular Loop Antenna using Meander
Line for RFID Tags, Electronics Letters, vol. 43, March 2007, pp. 372–374.
[37] H. K. Ryu, S. Lim, and J. M. Woo, Design of Electrically Small, Folded Monopole
Antenna using C-shaped Meander for Active 433.92 MHz RFID Tag in Metallic Container
Application, Electronics Letters, vol. 44, 2008, pp. 1445–1447.
[38] C. Borja and J. Romeu, On the Behavior of Koch Fractal Boundary Microstrip Patch
Antenna, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 51, 2003, no. 6, pp. 281–
291.
[39] S. R. Best, On the Performance of the Koch Fractal and Other Bent Wire Monopole, IEEE
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 51, 2003, no. 6, pp. 1292–1300.
[40] N. Engheta and R. W. Ziolkowsky, Metamaterials Physics and Engineering Explorations,
John Wiley and Sons, 2006, pp. 378–381.
[41] J. Zhu, A. Hoorfar, and N. Engheta, Peano Antennas, Antennas and Wireless Propagation
Letters, vol. 3, 2004, pp. 71–74.
[42] X. Chen, S. S-Naemi, and Y. Liu, A Down-Sized Hilbert Antenna for UHF Band, IEEE
International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation 2003, pp. 581–584.

260
Design and practice of small antennas I
[43] H. Huang and A. Hoorfer, Miniaturization of Dual-Band Planar Inverted-F Antennas using
Peano-Curve Elements, International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation (ISAP)
2006, a292 r206.
[44] J. P. Gianvittorio and Y. Rahmat-Samii, Fractal Antenna: A Novel Antenna Miniaturization
Technique and Applications, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 44, 2002,
no. 1, pp. 20–36.
[45] S. R. Best, A Comparison of the Resonant Properties of Small Space-Filling Fractal
Antennas, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 2, 2003, pp. 197–
200.
[46] W. J. Krzysztoﬁk, Modiﬁed Sierpinsky Fractal Monopole for ISM-Bands Handset
Applications, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 57, 2009, no. 3,
pp. 606–615.
[47] D.H. Werner and S. Ganguly, An Overview of Fractal Antenna Engineering Research,
IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 45, 2003, no. 1, pp. 38–57.
[48] W. L Stutzman and G. A. Thiele, Antenna Theory and Design, 2nd edn., John Wiley and
Sons, pp. 252–258.
[49] M. McFadden and W. R. Scott, Analysis of the Equiangular Spiral Antenna on a Dielec-
tric Substrate, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 55, 2007, no. 11,
pp. 3163–3171.
[50] H. Nakano et al., Equiangular Spiral Antenna Backed by a Shallow Cavity With Absorbing
Strips, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56, 2008, no. 8, pp. 2742–
2747.
[51] J. L. Volakis, N. W. Nurnberger, and D. S. Filipovic, A Broadband Cavity-Backed Slot
Spiral Antenna, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 43, 2001, no. 6, pp. 15–
26.
[52] M. W. Nurnberger and J. L. Volakis, Extremely Broadband Slot Spiral Antennas with
Shallow Reﬂecting Cavities, Electromagnetics, vol. 20, 1996, no. 4, pp. 130–131.
[53] B. A. Kramer et al., Design and Performance of an Ultra Wideband Ceramic-loaded Slot
Spiral, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 53, 2005, no. 7, pp. 2193–
2199.
[54] D. S. Filipovic and J. L. Volakis, Broadband Meanderline Slot Spiral Antenna, IEE
Proceedings-Microwaves Antennas and Propagation, vol. 149, 2002, no. 2, pp. 98–105.
[55] M. Nurnberger and J. L. Volakis, New Termination for Ultra Wide-band Slot Spirals, IEEE
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 50, 2002, no. 1, pp. 82–85.
[56] D. S. Filipovic and J. L. Volakis, Novel Slot Spiral Antenna Design for Dual- band/
Multi-band Operation, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 51, 2003,
no. 3, pp. 430–440.
[57] D. S. Filipovic and J. L. Volakis, A Flush Mounted Multifunctional Slot Aperture (Combo-
antenna) for Automotive Applications, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation
vol. 52, 2004, no. 2, pp. 563–571.
[58] B. A. Kramer et al., Miniature Conformal Aperture with Volumetric Inductive Loading,
IEEE APS International Symposium, 2006, Digest vol. 44, pp. 3693–3696.
[59] B. A. Kramer et al., Miniature UWB Antenna with Enhanced Inductive Loading, Small
Antennas Novel Metamaterials, IEEE iWAT 2006 International Workshop, pp. 289–292.
[60] C. C. Chen and J. L. Volakis, Spiral Antennas: Overview, Properties and Miniaturization
Techniques, in R. Waterhouse, (ed.), Printed Antennas for Wireless Communications, John
Wiley and Sons, 2007.

References
261
[61] M. Lee et al., Distributed Lumped Loads and Lossy Transmission Line Model for Wide-
band Spiral Antenna Miniaturization and Characterization, IEEE Transactions on Anten-
nas and Propagation vol. 55, 2007, no. 10, pp. 2671–2678.
[62] B. A. Kramer et al., Size Reduction and a Low-proﬁle Spiral Antenna using Inductive
and Dielectric Loading, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 7, 2008,
pp. 22–25.
[63] J. L. Volakis, C. C. Chen, and K. Fujimoto, Small Antennas-Miniaturization Techniques
and Applications, McGraw-Hill, 2010.
[64] R. W. Klopfenstein, A Transmission Line Taper of Improved Design, Proceedings of IRE,
vol. 44, 1956, no. 1, pp. 31–35.
[65] J. Abadia et al., 3D-Spiral Small Antenna Design and Realization for Biomedical Teleme-
try in the MICS band, Radioengineering, Proceedings of Czech and Slovak Technical
Universities and URSI Committees, vol. 18, 2009, no. 4, pp. 359–366.
[66] Victrex R⃝
PEEK
polymers,
available
at;
www.victrex.com/en/products/victrex-
peek-polymers/victrex-peek-polymers.php.
[67] J. H. Wheeler, Fundamental Limitations of Small Antennas, Proceedings of IRE, vol. 35,
December 1947, pp. 1479–1484.
[68] J. C. Cardoso and A. Safaal-Jazi, Spherical Helical Antenna with Circular Polarization
over a Broad Beam, Electronics Letters, vol. 29, 1993, no. 4, pp. 325–326.
[69] A. Safaal-Jazi and J. C. Cardoso, Radiation Characteristics of a Spherical Helix Antenna,
Proceedings of Institution of Electrical Engineers Microwave Antennas Propagation,
vol. 143, 1996, no. 1, pp. 7–12.
[70] H. T. Hui et al., The Input Impedance and the Antenna Gain of the Spherical Helix Antenna,
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 49, 2001, pp. 1235–1237.
[71] S. R. Best, The Radiation Properties of Electrically Small Folded Spherical Helix Anten-
nas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation vol. 52, 2004, no. 4, pp. 953–960.
[72] S. R. Best, Low Q Electrically Small Linear and Elliptical Polarized Spherical Dipole
Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 53, 2003, no. 3, pp. 1047–
1053.
[73] S. R. Best, A Comparison of the Cylindrical Folded Helix Q to the Gustafsson Limit,
EuCap 2009, Berlin, pp. 2554–2557.
[74] S. R. Best, The Quality Factor of the Folded Cylindrical Helix, Radio Engineering, Pro-
ceedings of Czech and Slovak Technical Universities and URSI Committee, vol. 18, 2009,
no. 4, pp. 343–347.
[75] A. Mehdipour, H. Aliakbarian, and J. Rashed-Mohassel, A Novel Electrically Small Spher-
ical Wire Antenna With Almost Isotropic Radiation Pattern, IEEE Antennas and Wireless
Propagation Letters, vol. 7, 2009, pp. 396–399.
[76] S. R. Best, A Low Q Electrically Small Magnetic (TE Mode) Dipole, IEEE Antennas and
Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 8, 2009, pp. 572–575.
[77] H. L. Thal, New Radiation Q Limits for Spherical Wire Antennas, IEEE Transactions on
Antennas and Propagation, vol. 54, 2006, no. 10, pp. 2757–2763.
[78] O. S. Kim, Low-Q Electrically Small Spherical Magnetic Dipole Antennas, IEEE Trans-
actions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 7, pp. 2210–2217.
[79] H. A. W. Alsawara and A. Safaai-Jazi, Ultrawideband Hemispherical Helical Antenna,
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 10, pp. 3175–3181.
[80] J. Ramsay, Highlights of Antenna History, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society
Newsletter, December 1981, p. 8.

262
Design and practice of small antennas I
[81] C. W. Harrison, Monopole with Inductive Loading, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation, AP-11, 1963, pp. 394–400.
[82] T. L. Simpson, The Disk Loaded Monopole Antenna, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation vol. 52, 2008, no. 2, pp. 542–550.
[83a] S. R. Best and D. L. Hanna, A Performance Comparison of Fundamental Small-Antenna
Designs, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 52, 2010, no. 1, pp. 47–70.
[83b] S. R. Best, Small and Fractal Antennas, in C. A. Balanis (ed.), Modern Antenna Handbook,
John Wiley and Sons, 2008, 10.6.3.
[84] Z. Xing and X. Yadong, A Novel Electrically Small Monopole Load by Open-Circuited
Transmission Line, IEEE APS International Symposium vol. 44, 2006, pp. 615–618.
[85] L. J-Ying and G. Y-Beng, Characteristics of Broadband Top-Loaded Open-Sleeve
Monopole, IEEE APS International Symposium 2006, 157.7, pp. 635–638.
[86] K. Surabandi and R. Azadegan, Design of an Efﬁcient Miniaturized UHF Planar Antenna,
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 51, 2003, no. 6, pp. 1270–1276.
[87] N. Begdad and K. Sarabandi, Bandwidth Enhancement and Further Size Reduction of a
Class of Miniaturized Slot Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 52, 2004, no. 8, pp. 1928–1934.
[88] P. Xu, K. Fujimoto, and L. Shiming, Performance of Quasi-self-complementary Antenna,
IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society International Symposium, vol. 40, 2002, pp. 464–
467.
[89] Y. Mushiake, Self-Complementary Antennas, Springer, 1996, pp. 40–42.
[90] Xu Pu and K. Fujimoto, L-shaped Self-complementary Antenna, IEEE APS International
Symposium, vol. 3, 2003, pp. 95–98.
[91] R. Azadegan and K. Sarabandi, Bandwidth Enhancement of Miniaturized Slot Antennas
Using Folded, Complementary, and Self-Complementary Realization, IEEE Transactions
on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 55, 2007, no. 9, pp. 2435–2444.
[92] L. Guo, S. Wang, X. Chen, and C. Oarini, A Small Printed Quasi-Self-Complementary
Antenna for Ultrawideband Systems, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters,
vol. 8, 2009, pp. 554–557.
[93] M. C. Buck and D. S. Filipovic, Two-Arm Sinuous Antennas, IEEE Transactions on
Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56, 2008, no. 5, pp. 1229–1235.
[94] K. G. Schroeder and K. M. S. Hoo, Electrically Small Complementary Pair (ESCP) with
Interelement Coupling, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, AP-24, 1976,
no. 4, pp. 411–418.
[95] D-H. Kwon et al., Small Printed Combined Electric-Magnetic Type Ultrawideband
Antenna With Directive Radiation Characteristics, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation, vol. 56, 2008, no. 1, pp. 237–241.
[96] M. A. P. Lazzaro and R. Judaschke, A 150-GHz CPW-fed tapered-slot antenna, IEEE
Microwave Wireless Components Letters, vol. 14, 2004, no. 2, pp. 62–64.
[97] X.-C. Lin and C.-C. Yu, A Dual-band Slot-Monopole Hybrid Antenna, IEEE Transactions
on Antenna and Propagation, vol. 56, 2008, no. 1, pp. 282–285.
[98] W. S. C. Lin and W. R. Chen, CPW-fed Compact Meandered Patch Antenna for Dual-band
Operation, Electronics Letters, vol. 40, 2004, no. 18, pp. 1094–1095.
[99] W. S. Chen and K. L. Wong, A Coplanar Waveguide-fed Printed Slot Antenna for Dual-
frequency Operation, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society International Symposium,
vol. 2, 2001, pp. 140–143.

References
263
[100] W. Hong and K. Sarabandi, Low Proﬁle Miniaturized Planar Antenna With Omnidirec-
tional Vertically Polarized Radiation, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 24, 1976, no. 4, pp. 411–418.
[101a] J. B. Pendry et al., Low Frequency Plasmons in Thin-wire Structures, Journal of Physics:
Condensed Matter, vol. 10, 1998, pp. 4785–4809.
[101b] S. Tretyakov, Analytical Modeling in Applied Electromagnetics, Artech House, 2003.
[101c] N. Engheta and R. W. Ziolkowsky, Metamaterials: Physics and Engineering Explorations,
Wiley-IEEE Press, 2006, pp. 88–90.
[101d] W. Rotman, Plasma simulation by artiﬁcial and parallel-plate media, IEEE Transactions
on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 10, 1962, no. 1, pp. 82–95.
[102a] J. B. Pendry et al., Magnetism from Conductors and Enhanced Nonlinear Phenomena,
IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, vol. 47, 1999, no. 11, pp. 2075–
2084.
[102b] D. R. Smith et al., A Composite Medium with Simultaneously Negative Permeability and
Permittivity, Physical Review Letters, vol. 84, 2000, no. 18, pp. 4184–4187.
[103a] C. Caloz and T. Itoh, Applications of the Transmission line Theory to Left-handed (LH)
Materials, USNC/URSI, San Antonio, 2002.
[103b] A. Lai, C. Caloz, and T. Itoh, Composite Right/Left-Handed Transmission Line Metama-
terials, IEEE Microwave Magazine, September 2004, pp. 34–50.
[103c] A. K. Iyer and G. V. Eleftheriades, Negative Refractive Index Metamaterials Support-
ing 2D Waves, Proceedings of IEEE International Microwave Theory and Techniques
Symposium, Seattle, 2002.
[104] C. Caloz and T. Itoh, Electromagnetic Metamaterials, Transmission Line Theory and
Microwave Applications, Wiley-IEEE Press, 2005.
[105] G. V. Eleftheriades and K. G. Balmain (eds.), Negative Refraction Metamaterials: Funda-
mental Principles and Applications, Wiley-IEEE Press, 2005.
[106] D. Guha and Y. M. M. Antar (eds.), Microstrip and Printed Antennas, John Wiley and
Sons, 2011, chapter 11.
[107] D. Guha and Y. M. M. Antar, Microstrip and Printed Antennas, John Wiley and Sons,
2011, p. 365.
[108] T. Tsutaoka, et al., Negative Permeability Spectra of Magnetic Materials, IEEE iWAT
2008, P202, pp. 279–281.
[109] A. Erentok and R. W. Ziolkowsky, Metamaterial-Inspired Efﬁcient Electrically Small
Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56, 2008, no. 3, pp. 691–
707.
[110] J. D. Baena, R. Marques, and F. Medina, Artiﬁcial Magnetic Metamaterial Design Using
Spiral Resonators, Physical Review B, vol. 69, 2004, 014402.
[111] C. R. Simovski and S. He, Frequency Range and Explicit Expressions for Negative Permit-
tivity and Permeability for Isotropic Medium Formed by a Lattice of Perfectly Conducting
 particles, Physics Letters A, vol. 311, 2003, p. 254.
[112a] F. Bilotti, A. Alu, and L. Vegni, Design of Miniaturized Metamaterial Patch Antennas
with µ–Negative Loading, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56,
2008, no. 6, pp. 1640–1647.
[112b] A. Alu et al., Subwavelength, Compact, Resonant Patch Antennas Loaded with Meta-
materials, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 55, 2007, no. 1,
pp. 13–25.

264
Design and practice of small antennas I
[113] P. Y. Chen and A. Alu, Sub-Wavelength Elliptical Patch Antenna Loaded with µ–Negative
Metamaterials, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 9,
pp. 2909–2919.
[114] H. R. Stuart and A. Pidwerbetsky, Electrically Small Antenna Elements Using Negative
Permittivity Resonators, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 54, 2006,
no. 6, pp. 1644–1653.
[115] J. Zhu and G. V. Eleftheriades, A Compact Transmission-Line Metamaterial Antenna
With Extended Bandwidth, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 8,
2009, pp. 295–298.
[116] C. Caloz, T. Itoh, and A. Rennings, CRLH Metamaterial Leaky-Wave and Resonant
Antennas, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 50, 2008, no. 5, pp. 26–39.
[117] C. A. Allen, K. M. K. H. Leong, and T. Itoh, 2-D Frequency Controlled Beam-scanning
by a Leaky Guided Wave Transmission Line Array, IEEE International Symposium on
Microwave Theory and Techniques Digest, 2006, pp. 457–460.
[118] T. Kaneda, A. Sanada, and N. Kubo, 2-D Beam Scanning Plane Antenna Array Using
Composite Right/Left-Handed Leaky Wave Antennas, IEICE Transactions on Electronics,
vol. 89, 2006, no. 12, pp. 1904–1911.
[119] F. P. Casares-Miranda, C. Camacho-Ponalosa, and C. Caloz, High-Gain Active Composite
Right/Left-Handed Leaky Wave Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propaga-
tion AP-54, 2006, no. 8, pp. 2292–2300.
[120] F. Qureshi, M. A. Antoniades, and G. V. Eleftheriades, A Compact and Low-Proﬁle Meta-
material Ring Antenna with Vertical Polarization, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propaga-
tion Letters, vol. 4, 2005, pp. 333–336.
[121] M. A. Antoniades and G. V. Eleftheriades, A Folded-Monopole Model for Electrically
Small NRI-TL Metamaterial Antennas, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters,
vol. 7, 2008, pp. 425–428.
[122] M. Antoniades and G. V. Eleftheriades, A Broadband Dual-Mode Monopole Antenna
Using NRI-TL Metamaterial Loading, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters,
vol. 8, 2009, pp. 258–261.
[123] J. Zhu, M. A. Antoniades, and G. V. Eleftheriades, A Compact Tri-band Monopole Antenna
With Single-Cell Metamaterial Loading, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 58, 2010, no. 4, pp. 1031–1038.
[124] P. J. Herritz-Martinez et al., Multifrequency and Dual-Mode Patch Antennas Filled With
Left-Handed Structures, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56, 2008,
no. 8, pp. 2527–2539.
[125] Y.-S. Wang, M.-F. Hsu, and S.-J. Chung, A Compact Slot Antenna Utilizing a Right/Left-
Handed Transmission Line Feed, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 56, 2008, no. 3, pp. 675–682.
[126] T. K. Albee, Broadband VLF Loop Antenna System, US Patent no. 3953799, April 27,
1976.
[127] S. Koley and J. L. Gautier, Using a Negative Capacitance to Increase the Tuning Range
of a Varactor Diode in MMIC Technology, IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and
Techniques, vol. 49, 2001, pp. 2425–2430.
[128] A. Kaya, et al., Bandwidth Enhancement of a Microstrip Antenna Using Negative
Inductance as Impedance Matching Device, Microwave and Optical Technology Letters,
vol. 421, 2004, pp. 476–478.

References
265
[129] J. G. Linvill, Transistor Negative Impedance Converter, Proceedings of IRE, vol. 41, 1953,
pp. 725–729.
[130] T. Yanagisawa, RC Active Networks Using Current Inversion Type Negative Impedance
Converters, IRE Transactions on Circuit Theory, vol. 4, 1957, pp. 140–144.
[131] H. Yogo and K. Kato, Cirucuit Realization of Negative Impedance Converter at VHF,
Electronics Letters, vol. 10, 1974, no. 9, pp. 155–156.
[132] S. E. Sussman-Fort and R. M. Rudish, Non-Foster Impedance Matching for Transmit
Applications, IEEE iWAT, 2006, pp. 53–56.
[133] S. E. Sussman-Fort, Matching Network Design Using Non-Foster Impedances, Interna-
tional Journal of RF and Microwave Computer-Aided Engineering, 2006, no. 16, pp. 135–
142.
[134] J. T. Aberle, Two-Port Representation of an Antenna With Application to Non-Foster
Matching Networks, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56, 2008,
no. 5, pp. 1218–1222.
[135] K.-S. Song and R. G. Rojas, Electrically Small Wire Monopole Antenna with Non-Foster
Impedance Element, EuCAP 2010, A02-1.
[136] S. Koulouridis and J. L. Volakis, Non-Foster Circuits for Small Broadband Antennas,
IEEE APS International Symposium 2009, digest, pp. 1973–1976.
[137] A. Kaya and E.Y. Yukel, Investigation of Compensated Rectangular Microstrip Antenna
With Negative Capacitor and Negative Inductor for Bandwidth Enhancement, IEEE Trans-
actions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 55, 2007, pp. 1275–1282.

8
Design and practice of
small antennas II
8.1
FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
8.1.1
Introduction
A Functionally Small Antenna (FSA) is an antenna system that has enhanced or improved
performances without increasing the antenna dimensions. The FSA is constituted by
(1) integrating or combining either radiating or non-radiating components into an antenna
system so as to improve or enhance the antenna performance, and (2) adding some
function to an antenna so that the antenna will perform with newly added function. The
Functionally Small Antenna system is not necessarily dimensionally small; however, it
can be referred to equivalently as a small antenna, because enhanced performances or
added functions compare to a larger antenna that could not be accomplished otherwise
without enlarging the antenna dimensions.
Components to be integrated or combined into an antenna structure are electronic
devices (either passive or active). There are many cases where antenna elements, regard-
less of either linear or planar, are combined with other antenna elements to constitute an
integrated antenna. An antenna composed with integrated structure is referred to as an
Integrated Antenna System (IAS). An IAS containing active components is referred to
as an active IAS.
8.1.2
Integration technique
There is a three-fold beneﬁt of the integration techniques: (a) enhancement/improvement
of antenna performances; (b) reduction of antenna dimensions; and (c) addition of some
functions to an antenna system. The design target pertaining to (a) is enhancement/
improvement of bandwidth, including multiband as well as wideband performance, and
of gain or efﬁciency. Factors in (b) lead to miniaturization, and those in (c) include
addition of functions such as variable tuning facility, reconﬁgurable operation as well
as ampliﬁcation, frequency conversion, oscillation, and so forth, all integrated into an
antenna system.
8.1.2.1
Enhancement/improvement of antenna performances
When designing a small antenna, to keep the bandwidth at least the same or increase it
without degradation in gain and efﬁciency is the prime factor to consider. The integration
technique may be employed as one of the most useful approaches for this purpose.

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
267
8.1.2.1.1 Bandwidth enhancement and multiband operation
Fundamentally, there are a few methods to accomplish wideband or multiband perfor-
mance: (a) increase the radiation modes or number of resonance frequencies; (b) modify
the antenna geometry; and (c) change substrate parameters used in the antenna structure.
It is also important to design the matching circuitry for wideband operation. For this
purpose, feeding structure, ground plane parameters, and application of metamaterials
as well as networks consisting of several tuning circuits are considered. Radiation modes
can be increased by combining two or more radiation sources that can be implemented
by combining, for example, an electric source and a magnetic source, and by increasing
the number of currents ﬂowing on the antenna element, which interact with each other to
increase the number of resonance frequencies, resulting in wider bandwidth. Wideband
performance is also achieved by way of coupling between two resonators; for instance,
a patch, which is a resonator by itself, may be coupled with another patch to function
over a wider frequency band as a consequence of interaction between two closely sepa-
rated resonant frequencies. A typical example of combining an electrical source with a
magnetic source is a complementary antenna that is implemented by a monopole and a
slot. Another example is an antenna of conjugate structure. An increase in the number
of currents with different lengths of paths on the antenna element results in increase in
the number of resonance frequencies; that produces wideband or multiband operation.
For this purpose, an area of the radiator surface is expanded so that the current will
ﬂow over a wider area, taking different lengths of paths. A typical example is a bow-tie
antenna. The coupling concept is realized by cutting slots or notches (or slits) on the
planar antenna surface, by which the current ﬂow will take circuitous routes around the
slots or slits, resulting in the wideband or multiband operation. The term wideband is
usually deﬁned as the relative bandwidth of greater than 10% in terms of the –10 dB
reﬂection coefﬁcient or VSWR ≤2. Wideband antennas include antennas used in UWB
systems, which operate in the frequency range from 3.1 GHz to 10.6 GHz.
There have been numerous papers introducing methods to accomplish wideband
characteristics in small antennas. Wideband antennas are implemented practically by
modiﬁcation of antenna geometry, increasing area of planar antenna surface on which
currents ﬂow in different paths so that resonance occurs at different frequencies, creating
wide bandwidth or producing multi-resonance. Various shaping of metallization such
as circular, elliptical, rectangular, even irregular proﬁles have been explored. Arranging
slots or slits (notches) on a planar antenna surface is another useful way to implement
wideband or multiband antennas.
8.1.2.1.1.1 Modiﬁcation of antenna geometry
The rectangular patch is an ordinal geometry of microstrip antennas. The shape can
be modiﬁed to rectangle, triangle, circle, ellipse, and other forms such as L, E, and H
shapes for obtaining wideband performance.
8.1.2.1.1.1.1 E-shaped microstrip antenna
For the purpose of bandwidth enhancement, two slots are incorporated in parallel into the
antenna patch to form an E-shape, as shown in Figure 8.1, which illustrates (a) top view

268
Design and practice of small antennas II
Y
W
Ground plane
Patch
Slot
coax
h
Air
Top view
Side view
Ws
Ls
(Xf , Yf)·
Ps
L
X
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.1 Geometry of a wideband E-shaped patch antenna: (a) top view and (b) side view ([1],
copyright C⃝2001 IEEE).
L
L
L
J
J
Equivalent circuit
for patch
Patch
shape
Patch
shape
Equivalent circuit
for center part,
high frequency
Equivalent circuit
for top and bottom parts,
low frequency
C
C
C
ΔLS
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.2 Principle of wideband operation: (a) an ordinary rectangular patch antenna, (b) an
E-shaped patch antenna and two equivalent circuits, one for the center part and another for two
side parts of the patch [1].
and (b) side view [1]. In the ﬁgure, antenna geometrical parameters are also provided;
for the patch, the length L, the width W, and the height h, and regarding the slot, the
length Ls and the width Ws, and the position Ps, distance from the center of the patch,
and the feed position (Xf, Yf). The principle of the wideband operation is explained by
using a model shown in Figure 8.2, in which (a) an ordinary rectangular patch and the
equivalent LC circuit are shown for a comparison, along with (b) an E-shaped patch

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
269
and the two equivalent LC circuits; one for the center part of the patch and another for
the two side parts of the E-shaped patch. On the ordinary rectangular patch, current J
ﬂows from the feed point to the top and bottom edges of the patch and these current path
lengths determine the inductance L and the capacitance C, as Figure 8.2(a) shows. On
the other hand, a current on the E-shaped patch ﬂows on the center part of the E-shape
like an ordinary patch and other current ﬂows into side parts of the E-shape taking
the roundabout path, as Figure 8.2(b) shows. The center part of the E-shape patch can be
modeled by a simple LC resonant circuit like the ordinary patch circuit, while the side
part of the E-shape patch is modeled by a circuit with an additional series inductance 	Ls
to L as shown in Figure 8.2(b). Hence, the equivalent circuit of the side part resonates
at lower frequency than that of the center part. This means that a model of an E-shaped
patch antenna changes from a single-resonance circuit to a dual-resonance circuit. Thus,
coupling together of these circuits leads to wideband performance.
Essential parameters in the design of an E-shaped patch antenna are slot length Ls, slot
position Ps, and slot width Ws. The slot length Ls is the important factor to characterize
the resonance frequency; when the Ls is too short, the antenna has only one resonance
frequency. As Ls increases, another lower resonance frequency appears. The longer Ls
becomes, the lower the second resonance frequency will be. Ps is a parameter that
can adjust matching conditions properly. When Ps becomes somewhat larger, the two
resonance frequencies become distinct and a wideband match is obtained. However, as Ps
further increases, the S11 between two resonance frequencies is larger than –10 dB. Then
the antenna does not perform as a wideband antenna, but as a dual-band antenna. The
third parameter Ws is a useful parameter to adjust coupling and achieve good matching.
An E-shaped patch antenna was developed for use in wireless communications oper-
ating at 1.9–2.4 GHz [1]. The antenna geometrical parameters are L = 70, W = 50, h =
15, Xf = 35, Yf = 6, Ls = 40, Ws = 6, and Ps = 10, where dimensions are all in mm.
Calculated and measured S11 are shown in Figure 8.3, in which S11 of two other ordinary
patch antennas (without slots) are provided for comparison. They have the same height
and width as the E-shaped patch antenna, but the narrow patch antenna is one having the
same length as the middle part of the E-shaped patch, and has a bandwidth about only
10%, while the wide patch is one with the same length as the E-shaped patch antenna
and does not match well to 50 . On the contrary, the E-shaped patch antenna has shown
resonance at two frequencies, 1.9 GHz and 2.4 GHz, and the bandwidth is 30.3%.
It should be noted that the ground plane (GP) often becomes a critical factor when a
platform to mount an antenna is small. In this example [1], the size of GP is chosen to be
14 × 21 cm, which is about eight times that of the patch size. By observing the current
distributions on the GP obtained by calculation, most currents ﬂow under the patch, but a
larger area is required for lower frequencies than higher frequencies. It was concluded
that a 1λ (1.9 GHz) square plate is sufﬁcient for proper operation of the antenna.
Directivity of the antenna is calculated to be 8.5 dB at 2.4 GHz and 6.7 dB at 1.9 GHz.
The measured radiation patterns agree well with the calculated results. In the E-plane,
the 3-dB beamwidth is 42◦at 2.4 GHz and 63◦at 1.9 GHz. The peak cross polarization
at 2.4 GHz is –25 dB, and is lower than –15 dB at 1.9 GHz. In the H-plane, the radiation
patterns are similar to those of the E-plane, and the 3-dB beamwidth is 60◦at both

270
Design and practice of small antennas II
E–shaped, measured
1.5
–25
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
2
Frequency (GHz)
S11 (dB)
2.5
3
E–shaped, calculated
Narrow patch, calculated
Wide patch, calculated
Figure 8.3 S11 of the E-shaped patch antenna, compared with simple patch without slots ([1],
copyright C⃝2001 IEEE).
frequencies. The peak cross polarization is –7 dB at 50◦, a rather high level that is due
to the leaky radiation of the slots.
Another example shown in [1] is a wider band that was achieved by adjusting the
parameters of the slots and the feeding point of an E-shaped patch antenna. The antenna
has two distinct resonant frequencies at 2.12 GHz and 2.66 GHz and the frequency band
ranges from 2.05–2.64 GHz, resulting in bandwidth as wide as 32.3%.
Another example of an E-shaped patch antenna introduced in [2] is designed to operate
in the 800 MHz band and has wide bandwidth of 164 MHz. In order to obtain wider
bandwidth, an LC circuit comprised of a small spiral, which produces an inductance,
and a circular plate, which introduces a capacitance to compensate the inductance of
the spiral and the feed line, thus producing a new resonance, is integrated into the feed
circuit. This resonance frequency is very close to that of the E-shaped patch and thus
wider bandwidth can be achieved.
An E-shaped patch antenna radiates a linearly polarized wave when currents on both
side parts of the E-shaped surface are the same; however, when they are different as
shown in Figure 8.4 [3], elliptically or circularly polarized (CP) waves are radiated. As
can be observed in the ﬁgure, when the slot length varies, currents ﬂowing on both sides
of the E-shaped surface become unbalanced. When by this means, the x-directed current
is made equal in magnitude to the y-directed current with a 90-degree phase difference,

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
271
Figure 8.4 Current ﬂow across the E-shaped patch: (a) symmetrical ﬂow and (b) asymmetrical
ﬂow ([2, 3], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
L
F
P
x
y
y
z
Ls1
Ls2
W
h
Ws
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.5 Geometry of a patch antenna with slots of different length: (a) top view and (b) side
view ([2, 3], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
an E-shaped antenna radiates a CP wave. The parameters to be considered in the design
of a CP antenna are: each length of its two slots, Ls1 and Ls2; the slot width Ws; the
separation P between two slots and the location of the feed point F with a given patch
size; length L; and width W. The antenna geometry is shown in Figure 8.5, (a) top and
(b) side views.

272
Design and practice of small antennas II
Table 8.1 Dimensions of circularly polarized E-shaped patch
[mm] ([3], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE)
εr
h
W
L
Ws
Ls1
Ls2
P
F
1
10
77
47.5
7
19
44.5
14
17
2.2
6.7
63
33.5
4
27
6
20
10
The design procedure starts with an E-shape having the same length Ls1 and Ls2, then
shortens either Ls1 or Ls2 to obtain circular polarization. Next change the probe position
F to have improved AR (axial ratio) and S11, and align Ls2 or Ls1 for ﬁne enhancement
of AR as well as alignment with the S11 band. Finally, the design procedure ends when
desired CP is obtained, otherwise, iterate back to the second step and repeat the steps
again to satisfy the requirements. In the second step, make Ls1 shorter with Ls2 ﬁxed, if
left-handed (LH) CP is required, whereas if right-handed (RH) CP is desired, follow the
opposite procedure. When making Ls1 shorter, the resonance frequency becomes higher
and at the same time AR decreases from larger values showing linear polarization to
smaller values to show CP, as the Ls1 changes electrical path length of the x-directed
current. In this process, there is a state where Ls1 takes optimum values for the minimum
AR as the phase difference between orthogonal currents approaches 90 degrees. Beyond
this critical value, the phase difference between the orthogonal currents departs from 90
degrees. The design goal is to achieve desired AR bandwidth, which is deﬁned as the
frequency range across the 3-dB AR level, and to obtain required impedance and AR
bandwidth together.
A CP E-shaped patch antenna to cover the IEEE 802.11b/g band (2.4–2.5 GHz) is
proposed and antenna performances are introduced [3]. Dimensions of the antenna are
provided in Table 8.1 (in mm). The metallic patch is fabricated via milling a thin copper-
clad substrate, which has εr = 2.2 and thickness of 0.787 mm. The patch is mounted
above a ground plane of 200 × 95 mm by using a via of 0.75 mm radius, which is
connected to the center pin of the 50- connector. Simulated and measured S11 are
shown in Figure 8.6. The measured impedance bandwidth is 9.27% (2.34–2.57 GHz)
while simulated bandwidth is 10.27% (2.31–2.57 GHz). AR obtained by simulation and
measurement is given in Figure 8.7, by which AR bandwidth is observed to be 8.1%
(2.28–2.45 GHz) in simulation, while 16% (2.3–2.7 GHz) in measurement. Bandwidths
for S11 and AR overlap in the range 2.34–2.57 GHz (9.27%). The maximum measured
gain is 8.3 dBi with 15.5% 3-dB bandwidth. This can be observed in Figure 8.8, which
depicts gain with respect to frequency. The bandwidth common to all of AR, gain, and
S11 is 9.27%.
The E-shaped patch antenna may have great potential to be applied in various purposes
such as reconﬁgurable antenna, diversity antenna, etc. For example, implementation of
a reconﬁgurable antenna becomes feasible by inserting RF switches in appropriate
locations across each slot and turning them on or off to make the two slot lengths
unequal, thereby producing CP radiation as a consequence.

2
–25
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
F(GHz)
S11 (dB)
s-parameters
2.6
2.7
Measured
HFSS
2.8
2.9
3
Figure 8.6 Simulated and measured S11 of the CP E-shaped patch antenna ([3], copyright C⃝2010
IEEE).
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
02
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
F(GHz)
Axial ratio (dB)
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
3
Measured
HFSS
Figure 8.7 Simulated and measured AR of the CP E-shaped patch antenna ([3], copyright C⃝2010
IEEE).
–5
2.1
2
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
F(GHZ)
Circular gain (dB)
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
3
–2.5
0
2.5
5
7.5
10
Measured
HFSS
Figure 8.8 Simulated and measured gain of the E-shaped patch antenna ([3], copyright C⃝2010
IEEE).

274
Design and practice of small antennas II
23
26
19
6
6
Y
X
48.50
(a)
(b)
Ground plane
Foam substrate
Substrate
ψ-shape patch
Figure 8.9 A ψ-shape patch antenna modiﬁed from an E-shape patch antenna ([4a, 4b], copyright
C⃝2009 and 2007 IEEE).
It can be also said that the E-shaped patch antenna is attractive for use in modern
wireless systems.
8.1.2.1.1.1.2 ψ-shaped microstrip antenna
An E-shape can be modiﬁed to a ψ-shape by rotating the E-shape 90 degrees and
removing the bottom side out slightly, excepting the center part. A resultant ψ-shape
patch is shown in Figure 8.9 [4a, 4b], where antenna geometry is illustrated; (a) top
view and (b) side view, along with dimensions of slots in mm. With this structure,
wider bandwidth over that of an E-shaped patch can be obtained as a consequence of
improvement in the current distributions on the patch that attributes to removal of the
bottom side conductor in the E-shaped patch.
The removed part at the bottom side of the patch acts in an important role for
controlling the current distributions on the patch so that the bandwidth is increased.
The ψ-shaped patch is etched on the substrate (εr = 2.50, tan δ = 0.002) of thickness
h = 0.33 mm placed on the foam substrate (εr = 1.06, tan δ = 0.0002) of thickness
h = 6.0 mm. Dimensions of the original rectangular patch are 48.5 mm in width and
26 mm in length, respectively, including two slots 6 mm wide and 19 mm long cut
symmetrically around the patch center, and two conductor-removed parts at the bottom
side of the patch, 6 mm long and 23 mm wide, resulting in a tail part. The ground plane
size is 75 mm × 75 mm, which is determined by the parametric study.
The simulated and measured S11 are shown in Figure 8.10, by which the simu-
lated bandwidth is observed to be 55.02% (4.15 to 7.30 GHz) and measured band-
width is 53.60% (4.10 GHz to 7.10 GHz), except that an S11 of –9 dB is seen near
4.75 GHz.
These results show much wider bandwidth than that of an E-shaped patch antenna,
introduced in the previous section as 32% [1]. A small discrepancy is observed between
the simulated and measured results possibly due to fabrication error, mainly stemming

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
275
0
−5
−15
−10
−20
−25
−35
−30
−40
3.5
4
4.5
5
Frequency (GHz)
Simulated
Measured
Reflection coefficient (S11,dB)
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
Figure 8.10 Simulated and measured S11 ([4a], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE).
from the difference in the foam thickness, increased from 6 mm to 6.4 mm, that is
determined by the simulation, assuming somewhat different structures from the prac-
tical foam substrate. However, it can be said that they are in reasonable agreement,
notwithstanding that discrepancy.
8.1.2.1.1.1.3 H-shaped microstrip antenna
For exciting a circular polarization (CP), another shape of patch antenna, an H-shaped
one, is proposed [5]. The antenna geometry is shown in Figure 8.11 with top and side
views. The antenna is a single H-shaped copper plate, 0.5 mm thick, suspended by using
three nylon bolts over a very thin dielectric layer, having εr = 3.38, tan δ = 0.0021, and
thickness 0.2 mm, which is identiﬁed as the feed layer, where a horizontal strip line is
printed on this layer to feed the patch. The H-shape is formed from a square, on which
two rectangular slots are cut away from the top and bottom sides of the square. The
square has side S = 37 mm (0.30 λ at 2.45 GHz) and the rectangular slot, which forms
an H-shape, has size a =13 and b = 14 mm, respectively. Generally, to excite a CP
wave, a square patch is fed at a point on the diagonal line. With a small perturbation on
the two sides of a square, CP can be excited, although with a somewhat narrow band of
operation, whereas with a large rectangular perturbation a wideband CP operation can
be produced.
To excite a left-hand-sense CP wave, the H-shape patch is fed through a probe placed
at a point on the diagonal line of the square where a printed monopole is placed at
45 degrees with respect to the axis. The printed monopole is arranged toward the patch
corner instead of the center, and used to compensate the feed inductance due to the long
probe, thereby making better impedance matching easy. The patch is placed at height
H = 32 mm (0.26λ) from the ground plane and the feed layer is placed at height Fv =
24 mm, which equals the length of the vertical probe. The width and length of the
horizontal monopole are Fw = 2 and FH = 5 (in mm), respectively.
Measured return loss and boresight axial ratio (AR) are shown in Figure 8.12, where
simulated results are also given for a comparison. It shows that bandwidth in terms of

276
Design and practice of small antennas II
H
FH
Fw
a
b
S
S
RO4003C
x
z
Nylon bolt
1 mm
Fv
Ground plane
45°
x
y
Printed monopole
Suspended patch
p
d
Figure 8.11 Geometry of CP H-shape patch antenna ([5], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
5
2.22
2.64
2.21
2.3
2.28
2.77
10
20
15
25
30
35
40
7
6
4
5
3
2
1
0
2.2
2.3
2.4 2.45
Frequency (GHz)
Simulated RL
Measured RL
Return loss (dB)
Axial ratio (dB)
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
Simulated AR
Measured AR
Figure 8.12 Measured and simulated return loss and axial ratio ([5], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
277
10-dB return-loss is 2.22–2.64 GHz (17.2%) in the measurement and is 2.21–2.77 GHz
(22.5%) in simulation. The 3 dB axial ratio bandwidth is 2.3–2.77 GHz (18.5%) in simu-
lation and 2.28–2.77 GHz (19.8%) in the measurement. These wideband characteristics
are attributed to the inclusion of a thick air substrate (0.26λ) in the design. This dis-
crepancy between measured and simulated results is possibly attributed to the practical
structures, which are not included in the simulation, and to fabrication tolerances. By
using thick air substrate and low-loss mechanisms, the antenna can show the maximum
gain of 5.7 dBic and high efﬁciency of 95% at 2.45 GHz.
8.1.2.1.1.1.4 S-shaped-slot patch antenna
A dual-band single-feed circularly polarized S-shape-slotted patch antenna is proposed
in [6]. The antenna geometry is depicted in Figure 8.13, which shows (a) side view, (b)
S-shape-slotted patch radiator, and (c) aperture-coupled feeding structure. An S-shaped
slot is embedded at the center of the patch surface and fed by a microstrip line located
underneath the center of the coupling aperture ground plane. The frequency ratio of
the two frequencies can be controlled by adjusting the length of the S-shaped slot and
attained ﬁnally to be 1.28. The measured 10-dB return loss bandwidth for the lower and
higher bands are 16% (1.103–1.297 GHz) and 12.5% (1.568–1.577 GHz), respectively.
Measured and simulated return loss are illustrated in Figure 8.14. The measured axial
ratio bandwidth is 6.9% for the lower band (1.195–1.128 GHz) and 0.6% for the higher
band (1.568–1.577 GHz). The measured gain is observed more than 5 dBc both lower and
higher bands. Measured and simulated gain and axial ratio are shown in Figure 8.15(a)
and (b), respectively. The overall antenna size is 0.46λ0 × 0.46λ0 × 0.086λ0 at f0 =
1.2 GHz.
The antenna exhibits good impedance matching, high gain, small dual-band frequency
ratio, and wide CP (Circular Polarization) beamwidth. The antenna is suitable for GPS
applications and array design.
8.1.2.1.1.2 Use of slot/notch (slit) on planar antenna surface
Embedding a slot/notch (slit) on a planar antenna is quite beneﬁcial to implement a
small, compact, low-proﬁle, wideband antenna, yet with enhanced performances such
as higher gain, circular polarization, and so forth. The shape, number, and location
of slots or notches, are essential parameters in designing a wideband antenna, and in
turn, the type, size, shape, and dimensions are the essential antenna parameters. The
most popular types of antenna are Planar Inverted-L antenna (PILA), Planar Inverted-F
antenna (PIFA), and various shapes of microstrip antenna (MSA) such as rectangle,
triangle, circle, and so forth. Slots/notches may be embedded also on the ground plane
as well as on the radiating surface of the patch to reduce the antenna size and generate
multiband operation.
In a practical example, small mobile terminals employ slots/notches (slits) on a planar
antenna (a PIFA is the most representative type of antenna) to enhance the bandwidth
or increase the number of operating frequency bands without increasing the antenna
dimensions, keeping the antenna structure compact. Modiﬁed PIFAs have been observed,
on which slots or slits are embedded to the point where the structure is transformed to

278
Design and practice of small antennas II
Aperture
Microstrip feed-line
L
L
Ws
S2
S5
S3
S4
S4
S1
S6
S2
S5
S6
y
x
(a)
S-shaped-slotted
patch radiator
(b)
(c)
Dielectric substrate
Ground plane
Foam h2
h1
H
z
x
G
G
Sf
La
Wf
Wa
y
x
Figure 8.13 Geometry of S-shaped-slot antenna: (a) cross sectional view, (b) S-shaped-slotted
patch radiator, and (c) aperture-coupled feeding structure ([6], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
279
1.0
30
1.2
1.4
Frequency (GHZ)
Return loss (dB)
1.6
1.8
25
20
15
10
5
0
Measured
Simulated
Figure 8.14 Measured and simulated return loss ([6], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
Gain dBic
Frequency (GHz)
12
1.0
1.2
1.4
10
8
6
4
2
0
−2
1.6
1.8
Measured  
Simulated
(a)
AR, dB
Frequency (GHz)
30
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
25
20
15
10
5
0
1.8
Measured  
Simulated
(b)
Figure 8.15 (a) Simulated and measured gain at the boresight and (b) measured and simulated
axial ratio at the boresight ([6], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
be so complicated that it may hardly be recognized as a PIFA. Use of slots or slits is,
however, considered as the best means to realize a multiband antenna that accommodates
the need of the recently deployed wireless communication systems, even with small size
that can be ﬁt within the extremely limited space in the small equipment.
8.1.2.1.1.2.1 Microstrip slot antennas
Microstrip monopole slot antennas with different shapes such as straight, L, and T, have
been investigated and demonstrated that a wide bandwidth could be obtained by proper

280
Design and practice of small antennas II
Z
Slot
X
X
Y
Ground
plane
50 ohm
SMA probe
Slot
Sw
Gw
GL
h
εr
Lf
Fl
St
Ls
50 ohm
SMA probe
Microstrip
feed line
Figure 8.16 Geometry of microstrip monopole slot antenna on a small ground plane fed by a
microstrip line ([7a], copyright C⃝2005 IEEE).
selection of antenna parameters, length of feed line, position of the feed over the slot,
and stub length [7a]. These antennas are placed on a small ground plane, which is about
the size of a typical PC wireless adapter card.
Geometries of microstrip monopole slot antennas on a small ground plane fed with
a microstrip line are illustrated in Figure 8.16 (straight), Figure 8.17 (L-shape) and
Figure 8.18 (T-shape), in which dimensional parameters are also given. In Figure 8.17,
three different feeding shapes are shown. The size of the ground plane is width GW =
50 and length GL = 80 (in mm). The slot in each antenna is open at its end, positioned at
the center of the narrow ground plane edge, and fed with a 50- microstrip transmission
line.
The straight slot has length Ls = 30, width Sw = 30, and length of feed lines F1 =
24, and S1 = 11. In the optimized design, the substrate with εr = 2.5 and tan δ = 0.001,
having thickness h = 1.57 is used (measurements in mm). The simulated return loss
(–10 dB) bandwidth of this antenna is 58.8% (2.46 GHz to 4.51 GHz) as can be observed
in Figure 8.19.
Regarding the L-slot antenna, simulated return loss bandwidth is shown in
Figure 8.20, where comparisons depending on the feed shape, straight, inclined, and
bent, are provided. The geometrical parameters of the antennas fed with different shapes
of feed line, respectively, are L1 = 18.5, L2 = 11.5, Sw = 7, Gw = 50, GL = 80 as

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
281
Gw
GL
Sw
Lf
L1
L1
Fl
Fl
Fl
St
St
St
L1
L2
L2
L2
Y
X
Slot
Microstrip
feed line
Microstrip
feed line
Microstrip
feed line
50 ohm
SMA probe
50 ohm
SMA probe
50 ohm
SMA probe
Ground
plane
Ground
plane
Ground
plane
Gw
Sw
Slot
Gw
Sw
Slot
(a)
(b)
(c)
Y
X
GL
GL
Figure 8.17 Geometry of L-slot antenna fed by a line with different shape: (a) straight,
(b) inclined, and (c) bent ([7a], copyright C⃝2005 IEEE).
common dimensions and Lf = 11, Ft = 18.5, St = 9 in the straight feed line, Ft = 16.5,
St = 7.5 in the bent feed line, and Ft = 17, St = 7.5 in the inclined feed line. The substrate
used is common to all antennas, with εr = 4.5 and tan δ = 0.002, having thickness
h = 0.81 (in mm). The impedance bandwidths of antennas with straight feed line, bent
feed line, and inclined feed line, respectively, are 82% (2.24 GHz to 5.36 GHz), 75.7%
(2.48 GHz to 5.5 GHz) and 75.7% (2.47 GHz to 4.97 GHz). By replacing the substrate
with a low loss one, with εr = 2.5 and tan δ = 0.001, having thickness h = 0.79, an
improved bandwidth of 82% (2.42 GHz to 5.78 GHz) can be obtained.

282
Design and practice of small antennas II
Microstrip
feed line
Slot
50 ohm
SMA probe
Ground
plane
Gw
GL
Lf
F1
S1
L2
L1
Sw
Figure 8.18 Geometry of T-slot antenna fed by a microstrip line ([7a], copyright C⃝2005 IEEE).
–30
2
2.5
Return loss, S11 (dB)
Frequency (GHz)
3.5
4
3
4.5
5
–25
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
Figure 8.19 Simulated return loss of the antenna shown in Figure 8.16 ([7a], copyright C⃝2005
IEEE).
With the T-slot, having Sw = 7, Lf = 75, Fl = 23.5, St = 10, L1 = 7, L2 = 23 mm,
using the same substrate as the other slot-type antennas, simulated return loss is depicted
in Figure 8.21. The impedance bandwidth of 78% (2.56 GHz to 5.8 GHz) is obtained,
while 80% (2.74 GHz to 6.4 GHz) resulted with low-loss substrate.
A novel compact open-end slot antenna fed by a short-circuited microstrip line is
introduced in [7b]. The antenna has reduced dimensions by virtue of placing two
matching capacitors at both sides of an electrically small open-end slot. With the pro-
posed conﬁguration, the antenna resonance frequency is 2.45 GHz, having the slot of

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
283
+++
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Straight feed line
Bent feed line
2
−35
−30
−25
−15
−5
−20
−10
0
3
4
Frequency (GHz)
Return loss, S11 (dB)
5
6
2.5
3.5
4.5
5.5
Inclined feed line
Figure 8.20 Simulated return loss of the L-shape antenna shown in Figure 8.17 ([7a], copyright
C⃝2005 IEEE).
2.5
3
3.5
Frequency (GHZ)
Return loss, S11 (dB)
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
–40
–35
–30
–25
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
Figure 8.21 Simulated return loss of T-slot antenna shown in Figure 8.18 ([7a], copyright C⃝2005
IEEE).
9 mm long and 1.5 mm wide, originally a 4.8 GHz antenna in a conventional design. The
equivalent circuit model is developed, and input impedance of the antenna for variations
in the feed position is calculated. The results of calculation agree well with full wave
simulation. By adding two capacitances to the slot for cancelling the inductive reactance
of the slot at lower frequencies, the resonance frequency can be lowered. The antenna
length becomes shorter than one-eighth the wavelength at the operating frequency. The
measured bandwidth of 109 MHz at 2.45 GHz and peak gain of 1.89 dBi demonstrate
the performance of the proposed small-sized slot antenna design.

284
Design and practice of small antennas II
Ground plane
U-shaped slot
Ground plane
Rectangular patch
Coaxial feed
Dprobe
t
Ls
Fp
Ws
εr
L
c
b
W
Figure 8.22 The basic geometry of U-slot patch antenna ([8b], copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).
8.1.2.1.1.2.2 Microstrip patch antennas
8.1.2.1.1.2.2.1 Patch antennas with U-slot
A patch antenna with a U-slot was introduced in 1995 [8a] as an antenna capable of
providing a wide impedance bandwidth in a range of 25–30%. Since then, a number
of studies followed and recent interest has arisen to design a U-slot patch antenna
for multiband operation and circular polarization as well as wideband operation. Size
reduction is also a signiﬁcant requirement, as the resonance length of a conventional
patch antenna was about a half-wavelength, which was too large for small wireless
portable devices. To meet the requirement, various techniques have been developed to
decrease the size of the U-slot patch antenna, keeping its wide bandwidth unchanged.
Typical examples are use of an L-shaped probe to feed [8b, 8c], a shorting wall [8b, 8d],
a shorting pin [8b, 8e], or reduction of a U-shape to a half-U-shape [8b, 8f, 9], which
corresponds to an L-shape.
The basic geometry of a U-slot antenna is illustrated in Figure 8.22, where dimen-
sional parameters are given [8b]. Basically, the slot dimensions determine the resonance
frequency as well as the patch dimensions. By appropriately designing slot and patch
dimensions, wideband or multiband resonance can be attained. The U-slot cancels out
the feed inductance and currents around the U-slot create additional resonance that
makes the antenna broadband as a result of combination with the resonance of the
patch.
A reduced-size U-slot patch antenna of the basic structure (Figure 8.22) by increasing
the substrate εr is introduced. Design parameters are provided in Table 8.2, which shows
cases for three values of εr, including an air substrate case εr = 1. The operating

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
285
Table 8.2 Design parameters for 900 MHz U-shaped patch antenna
[cm] ([8b], copyright C⃝2000 IEEE)
εr = 1.0
εr = 2.33
εr = 4.0
W
21.97 (0.659λ0)
12.40 (0.372λ0)
9.29 (0.201λ0)
L
12.45 (0.374λ0)
8.96 (0.269λ0)
6.71 (0.201λ0)
Ws
6.86
4.82
3.61
Ls
8.22
6.20
4.65
b
1.94
1.38
1.03
c
0.89
0.69
0.52
Fp
6.22
4.48
3.36
t
2.69 (0.081λ0)
2.76 (0.083λ0)
2.40 (0.072λ0)
Dprobe
0.3
0.34
0.17
Ground plane
Ground plane
Rectangular patch
L-shaped probe
Coaxial feed
Air or foam
t
t2
t1
Lp
εr
L
D
W
Figure 8.23 Geometry of L-probe-fed patch antenna ([8b], copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).
frequency f0 of the antenna is 900 MHz. The patch length L is initially 0.374λ0 with
εr = 1.0, but reduced to 0.201λ0 with increased εr = 4.0. The patch size, deﬁned here
as the normalized area in comparison with the U-slot patch area (21.97 × 12.45 =
273.53 mm2) when εr = 1, is also decreased to 23% (εr = 4.2) of that with εr = 1. Size
reduction is achieved with sacriﬁce of the bandwidth, being decreased to 22.1% (εr =
4.2) from 42% (εr = 1), although it is still substantially wideband.
By using an L-probe to feed the U-slot patch as shown in Figure 8.23 [8b, 8c],
nearly the same amount of size reduction with the increase in εr can be achieved,

286
Design and practice of small antennas II
Table 8.3(a) Design parameters of L-probe patches (mm) ([8b], copyright
C⃝2000 IEEE)
εr = 1.0
εr = 2.32
W
15.0 (0.383λ0)
15.0 (0.315λ0)
L
13.0 (0.332λ0)
13.0 (0.273λ0)
Lp
7.0
7.6
D
3.0
3.0
t1
−
5.0
t2
−
1.58
t = t1 + t2
6.0 (0.15λ0)
6.58 (0.14λ0)
dprobe
1.0
1.0
4.5
5
1
2
3
4
5
6
1.5
2.5
3.5
4.5
5.5
5.5
6
VSWR (Experiment)
VSWR (Simulation)
Frequency (GHz)
VSWR or gain/dBi
Gain
6.5
7
7.5
8
Figure 8.24 Simulated and measured VSWR and measured gain of an L-probe fed patch antenna
([8b], copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).
while substantially wide bandwidth is kept. The L-probe-fed U-slot patch antenna is
fabricated practically by embedding a horizontal arm on the foam substrate beneath
the dielectric substrate, on which the patch is embedded. An L-probe-fed U-slot patch
antenna with two-layer conﬁguration to operate at the 6-GHz band is designed with the
antenna parameters given in Table 8.3(a) for cases of two values of εr. The simulated and
measured VSWR and measured gain for the case of εr = 2.32 are shown in Figure 8.24
and the results are provided in Table 8.3(b) with the patch dimensions.
As another way to reduce the size of the U-slot patch, a shorting wall is introduced
on the substrate as shown in Figure 8.25 [8b, 8d], in which geometrical parameters are
also given. A U-slot patch antenna with a shorting wall is fabricated on a substrate with
εr = 4.4. The center frequency f0 = 2.5915 GHz and the design parameters are; W =
14, L = 14, Ws = 9, Ls = 12, b = d = 1, c = 2, Fp = 2, Dprobe = 1, and the thickness
t = 12.1 (units are mm). The patch is a square with the sides measuring 0.121λ0 and

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
287
Table 8.3(b) Measured results of two-layer L-probe patch ([8b], copyright C⃝2000 IEEE)
Patch Dimensions
(mm)
Thickness
(mm)
f0
(GHz)
Normalized
f0
BW
Gain
1.0
15.0 × 13.0
6.0 (0.15λ0)
7.66
1.0
36%
6.5 dBi
2.32
15.0 × 13.0
6.0 (0.15λ0)
6.3
0.82
36%
4.5 dBi
Ground plane
Rectangular patch
Shorting wall
Dprobe
Coaxial feed
Ground plane
Fp
Ls
L
εr
t
b
c
Ws
W
Figure 8.25 Geometry of U-slot patch antenna with a shorting wall on a substrate ([8b], copyright
C⃝2003 IEEE).
thickness of 0.105λ0. The area occupied by the patch is 0.01446λ2, a 94% area reduction
compared to a square half-wave patch. Figure 8.26 illustrates the simulated and measured
VSWR.
Another way to reduce the patch size is to use a shorting pin, which is added in close
proximity to the probe feed as shown in Figure 8.27 [8b, 8e]. The shorting pin and the
feed are placed at the opposite sides of the patch. The shorting pin couples equivalently
capacitively with the resonance circuit of the patch, consequently effectively increasing
the permittivity of the substrate. A U-slot patch antenna with a shorting pin is designed
for operation at approximately f0 = 4 GHz. The design parameters are; W = 18, L =
15, Ws = 16, Ls = 10, b = 4, c = 4.5, Fs = 4, Fp = 14.5, Dprobe = 1, Dshort = 2, and the
thickness t = 7 (units are mm). Figure 8.28 illustrates simulated and measured VSWR
and measured gain. The bandwidth (VSWR ≤2.0) obtained through simulation is 30%
and the average gain is 2 dBi. The patch is a 0.200λ0 by 0.240λ0 rectangle supported

288
Design and practice of small antennas II
2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
2.25
2.5
2.75
3
3.25
Frequency (GHz)
VSWR
Measurement
Simulation
Figure 8.26 Simulated and measured VSWR for the U-slot patch antenna with a shorting wall
([8b], copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).
Ground plane
Rectangular patch
Shorting pin
Dshort
Dprobe
Coaxial feed
Ground plane
Lp
L
Fs
εr
t
b
c
W
Ws
Fp
Figure 8.27 Geometry of a U-slot patch antenna with a shorting pin ([8b], copyright C⃝2003
IEEE).
by a foam substrate with 0.093λ0 thickness. The area occupied by the patch is 0.048λ2,
80.8% smaller than that of a square half-wave patch.
A full-size U-slot is halved to form a half-U-slot or an L-slot by removing the patch
area along the line of symmetry as is shown in Figure 8.29 [8b, 8f, 9]. In the ﬁgure,

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
289
VSWR (Experiment)
Gain (Experiment)
Gain
2.5 2.75
3
4
5
3.25
4.25
3.75
Frequency (GHz)
4.75
3.5
4.5
VSWR
VSWR or gain/dBi
VSWR (Simulation)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Figure 8.28 Simulated and measured VSWR and measured gain of the U-slot antenna with a
shorting pin ([8b], copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).
L = 70
L = 70
W = 84
W = 42
Shorting pin
Shorting pin
air
Line of symmetry
x 
y 
x 
y 
z 
y 
17.6
47.7
28
23
10
48.8
16.4
44
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.29 Geometry of a half-U-slot patch antenna (in [mm], not to scale), (a) half-U-slot and
(b) full-U-slot ([8f], copyright C⃝2005 IEEE).

290
Design and practice of small antennas II
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
Frequency (GHz)
SWR
SWR
full-U
half-U
0.95
1
1.05
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Figure 8.30 Measured (dark line) and simulated (dotted line) SWR of the half-U-slot patch
antenna with a shorting pin. Thin line and thin dotted line provide measured and simulated data,
respectively, for the full-U-slot patch for a comparison ([8f], copyright C⃝2005 IEEE).
the dimensions of an example antenna with length L = 70 mm (0.21λ0), and width
W = 42 mm (0.13λ0) (f0 = 0.9 GHz) are given along with the size of the half-size
slot. The feed probe line (radius of 2 mm) and the shorting pin (radius of 4.65mm)
support the patch in air and they are located at the non-radiating edge of the half-U-slot
patch. The ground plane is a square with side of 1λ0. Measured and simulated SWR of
the half-U-slot patch with shorting pin are shown in Figure 8.30, where for comparison,
those of a full U-slot patch antenna are also provided. In the ﬁgure, thick line and
thick dotted line, respectively, indicate measured and simulated VSWR of the half-U
slot patch and thin line and thin dotted line. respectively, give those of the full U-slot
patch.
A U-slot embedded on a rectangular patch is modiﬁed to achieve various functions
such as wideband, multiband, and circular polarizations. Figure 8.31 shows representative
ones: (a) double U-slots [9, 10], (b) a U-slot on a square patch with truncation [9], and
(c) an unequal arm U-slot patch [9, 11]. Parametric analysis of design for the U-slot
rectangular patch antennas has been described in [12]. A U-slot can be applied to a
triangular patch to achieve wideband operation [13].
8.1.2.1.1.2.2.2 Rectangular patch with square slot
Bandwidth can be enhanced by embedding slots/slits with various shapes on the surface
of the patch antenna as has been shown in previous sections. Similar methods can be
applied to achieve multiband operation.
A square patch with a square slot fed by a microstrip line is a typical design example
for wideband operation [14]. The antenna geometry with dimensional parameters is
illustrated in Figure 8.32, where two types of feeding are shown: (a) with a fork-like

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
291
(a)
(b)
(c)
W
Ux
Uy
Ua
Wgd
Lgd
Wp
Wu
Ws
Lul
Lf
Lur
Lub
SMA connector
hgd
h
Lp
d
H
Ud
L
y
x
a
a
y
x
Figure 8.31 Geometries of (a) the triple-band antenna with two U-slots, (b) perturbed patch
antenna with U-slot, and (c) patch antenna with unequal length U-slot ([9], copyright C⃝2010
IEEE).
tuning stub, and (b) with a simple tuning stub, which is a conventional method of
feeding. By properly selecting stub lengths ℓ1, ℓ2, and ℓ3, a good impedance matching
across a widely enhanced bandwidth can be achieved. Return loss for three antennas
with different stub lengths are shown in Figure 8.33, where comparison with that of the
reference antenna is provided. Antenna parameters are: substrate εr = 4.4, thickness

292
Design and practice of small antennas II
Ground plane
and slot
Microstrip
line
x
Wλ
W
L
Wℓ
b
y
ℓ3
ℓ1
ℓ2
50-Ω microstrip
line
(a)
(b)
Wℓ
Figure 8.32 A printed antenna with a square slot fed by (a) a fork-like stub and (b) a simple tuning
stub ([14], copyright C⃝2001 IEEE).
1.4
40
1.8
2.2
Frequency (GHZ)
Antenna 3
Antenna 2
VSWR = 1.5
Antenna 1
Reference antenna
Return loss (dB)
2.6
3.0
30
20
10
0
Figure 8.33 Measured return-loss characteristics: comparing antennas 1–3 with reference antenna
([14], copyright C⃝2001 IEEE).
h = 0.8, antenna L = W = 53.7, wf = 1.5, and ground plane size = 110 × 110. The
stub sizes are: for the reference antenna ℓ= 28; for Antenna 1 ℓ1 = 10, ℓ2 = 2, and
ℓ3 = 20.6; for Antenna 2 ℓ1 = 15, ℓ2 = 2, and ℓ3 = 15.9; and for Antenna 3 ℓ1 =
15, ℓ2 = 0, and ℓ3 = 24.9 (all in mm). Antenna 2 has widest bandwidth 1091 MHz in
terms of VSWR ≤1.5, followed by Antenna 3 with 268 MHz and next Antenna 1 with
197 MHz. They are wider than that of the Reference Antenna, 115 MHz, exhibiting
signiﬁcant improvement in the bandwidth. Within this wide bandwidth, the operating
bandwidth with usable broadside radiation pattern is observed to be still wide, being
about 580 MHz, and the peak antenna gain is about 5 dBi with variation of less than
1.5 dBi within the operating bandwidth.

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
293
24.7
α
50-Ω microstrip feed line
Ground
1.6 mm-FR4 substrate
70 mm
70
L
3
X
Y
24.7
Figure 8.34 Geometry of antenna with a rotated square slot fed by microstrip line ([15], copyright
C⃝2005 IEEE).
When the square slot is rotated as shown in Figure 8.34, the bandwidth is further
enhanced with proper selection of rotation angle α and length L of the feed line [15].
With a square slot size of 24.7 mm designed for operation at 4 GHz as shown in the
ﬁgure, nearly 2.2 GHz impedance bandwidth for –10 dB VSWR is obtained when α =
45◦and L = 31.5 mm, This wide bandwidth is about four times that of the corresponding
conventional microstrip line-fed wide-slot patch antenna.
8.1.2.1.2 Multiband and wideband
8.1.2.1.2.1 Multiband antenna
Recent small wireless equipment requires small antennas with not only compact struc-
ture, but also multifunctional operation in nature. Late-model mobile phones have
evolved from telephone devices toward information terminals dealing with multimedia
information, involving audio, video as both still and dynamic media, data, radio, digital
TV, and internet access. All of this, in addition to telephone voice, requires antennas that
are small, compact, built-in, low cost, yet able to provide high-performance facilities to
deal with high-data-rate information, and handle multiband communications.
Types of antennas for these applications are necessarily small, compact planar types,
generally represented by various printed patch antennas and modiﬁed PIFA (Planar
Inverted-F Antenna) combined with variously shaped wire elements or printed strips,
stubs, slots, and so forth. Antennas are designed to be installed not only in mobile
terminals, but also in various small wireless equipment and apparatuses, on which
wireless systems are installed, including small portable terminals, personal computers
including standard, laptop, and tablet types, USB cards and dongles, and TVs.

294
Design and practice of small antennas II
Typical wireless systems, including mobile phones, are as follows:
Mobile phones
GSM 850 (850 MHz band),
GSM 900 (900 MHz band),
GSM 1800 (1.8 GHz band),
GSM 1900 (1.9 GHz band),
UMTS (Universal Mobile Telephone Systems) (2 GHz band),
LTE (Long Term Evolution) (700 MHz, 2.3 GHz, and 2.5 GHz bands)
Wireless systems
Bluetooth (2.4 GHz band),
WiFi (IEEE 802 11 a/g/n: 2.4 and 5 GHz bands),
WLAN (IEEE 802.11 b: 2.45/5.2/5.8 GHz),
WiMAX (Fixed: IEEE 802 16 2004: 3.5 and 5.8 GHz bands and
Mobile: IEEE 802 16e: 2.3, 2.5, and 3.5 GHz)
GPS (1.5 GHz band)
Various types of multiband microstrip patch antennas composed with various shapes
combined with slots/slits embedded on the patch surface have so far been introduced. In
this section, however, antennas for operating at more than two bands will be described.
8.1.2.1.2.1.1 A printed λ/8 PIFA operating at penta-band
A PIFA is designed to operate at one-eighth (λ/8) wavelength as the fundamental
resonance mode for applying to WWAN (Wireless Wide Area Network) system [16].
The antenna is installed in a mobile phone, having a simple structure comprised of two
radiating strips of length about λ/8 at 900 MHz. The conﬁguration generates two λ/8
modes to cover two lower modes for operation of GSM 850/900, and at the same time,
two higher-order modes or λ/4 modes at about 1900 MHz to operate at a wider upper
band for GSM 1800/1900/UMTS. The antenna geometry is illustrated in Figure 8.35, in
which dimensional parameters are given. The antenna covers penta band, yet occupies
only a small printed area of 15 mm × 31 mm or 465 mm2. The antenna is fed using a
coupling feed, by which the ordinarily large input impedance of a traditional λ/8 mode
PIFA is greatly reduced, and successful excitation of the λ/8 mode for a PIFA is achieved.
Measured and simulated return-loss characteristics are depicted in Figure 8.36.
8.1.2.1.2.1.2 Bent-monopole penta-band antenna
A metal-wire bent-monopole antenna (BMA) fed by mini-coaxial cable jointly with
a thin printed ground line demonstrates that it operates at penta-band: CDMA, GSM,
DCS, PCS, and WCDMA bands [17]. The antenna geometry is illustrated in Figure 8.37,
which shows (a) antenna geometry and its feed point, (b) front- and back-side views
of PCB (Printed Circuit Board). The feed and ground points are connected to a 50-
coaxial cable (10 cm long) with an SMA connector. The dimensions of the BMA are
a = 38, b = 40, and c = 6 (in mm), and the radius and the length, respectively, of the
feeding mini-coaxial cable are 1.13 and 46 mm, which is put tightly on the BMA to
serve as a reactive loading. The effect of the reactive loading is reduction of the electrical

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
295
50-Ω microstrip
feed line
Plastic casing
(εr = 3.5, tanδ = 0.06)
A: feed line point
B: shorting point
Via hole
System ground plane
on back side
(40 × 100 mm2)
0.8-mm thick
FR4 substrate
(40 ×115 mm2)
15 mm
A
B
10
10
3.2
4
Side view
1 mm
50-Ω microstrip
feed line
Shorting strip,
length s = 20 mm
Strip 1 (section CD),
length = 35 mm
Strip 2 (section CE),
length = 33 mm
Coupling gap,
g = 0.3 mm
Coupling strip,
t = 12 mm
Feeding strip,
length 12 mm
4.2
3
A
E
B
F
C
D
14
10
31 mm
14
1.5
15
13
7
4.5
1.5
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.35 (a) Geometry of printed λ/8-PIFA for penta-band operation and (b) dimensions of
PIFA pattern ([16], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE).
500
30
2180
1708
962
822
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Measured
3:1 VSWR
Simulated
Frequency (MHZ)
Return loss (dB)
20
10
0
Figure 8.36 Measured and simulated return loss ([16], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE).

296
Design and practice of small antennas II
Slit
Feed point
80 mm
40 mm
Bent monopole antenna
Mini-coaxial cable
Ground plane (double-side)
70 mm x 40 mm
Coaxial cable
Printed thin ground line
A
B
(a)
(b)
5 mm
3 mm
Front side of PCB
Back side of PCB
w
a
c
s
d
b
Figure 8.37 (a) Dimensions of antenna and (b) geometry of the antenna ([17], copyright C⃝2011
IEEE).
length of monopole antenna and increase in the bandwidth of lower and upper operating
frequencies. The total length of (a + b + c) is designed for the lower frequency band of
about 892 MHz and the length b is designed for the upper frequency band of 1800 MHz.
Good impedance matching is obtained by proper selection of parameters s (slit-space),
w (width of ground line), and d (spacing between the ground plane and the BMA). There
are two points A and B to connect the mini-coaxial cable. At the point A, the inner and
outer conductor of the mini-coaxial cable are connected to the feed and ground point
of the PCB, respectively, while at the point B, the inner conductor is connected to the
corner of the BMA and the outer conductor is insulated from the BMA. The thin ground
line contributes to obtaining the wide bandwidth for lower frequency bands.
In the experiment, an antenna with size of 40 × 5 × 6 mm is placed on the top side of
a rectangular FR4 substrate (thickness of 1.5 mm, εr of 4.3 and tan δ of 0.023) having
size 80 × 40 mm, which is assumed to be a substitute for a mobile phone platform. By
the parametric analysis, dimensions s = 2, w = 0.5, and d = 5 (in mm) are selected
to achieve desired bandwidth for penta-bands. The measured and simulated return-loss
characteristics are given in Figure 8.38, which shows nearly 200 MHz (22%) in the lower
operating band (CDMA/GSM) and 540 MHz (30%) in the upper operating band (DCS,
PCS, and WCDMA). Radiation patterns are similar to those of a monopole antenna and
maximum gain in the x–y plane is obtained as 1.87 dBi and 0.91 dBi for 960 MHz and

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
297
Frequency (MHz)
S11 (dB)
0
40
700
900
1100
VSWR  2.5:1
1300
1500
1700
1900
2100
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
Measured result
Simulated result
Figure 8.38 Measured and simulated return-loss characteristics ([17], copyright C⃝2011 IEEE).
1880 MHz, respectively, and in the x–z plane (horizontal plane), 0.7 dBi and 2.07 dBi
for 960 MHz and 1880 MHz, respectively.
Addition of a printed thin ground line behind the antenna contributes to increasing the
bandwidth at both lower and higher bands, also providing an effect to form a balanced-
feed structure like a sleeve balun, because of its length being nearly λ/4 at 1800 MHz,
allowing a short circuit at the base to present an inﬁnite impedance at the top.
The balanced feed to a balanced antenna is useful to reduce the current ﬂow on
the ground plane so that the operator’s hand effect on the antenna performance can be
mitigated.
8.1.2.1.2.1.3 Loop antenna with a U-shaped tuning element for
hepta-band operation
The printed loop antenna is designed to cover GSM 850/900/DCS/PCS/UMTS and
WiMAX, with a U-shaped tuning element printed on the back side of the circuit
board when applied to a laptop computer [18]. The antenna geometry is illustrated
in Figure 8.39, which shows (a) 3D view, (b) plan view of the front side, and (c) plan
view of the back side. The antenna is printed on an FR4 substrate with thickness of
0.8 mm, εr = 4.4, and mounted on the top right corner of a vertical ground plane of
size 200 × 160 mm, which is the supporting metal frame of an LCD panel. The antenna
measures only 65 × 10 × 0.8 mm, because it is coated on double sided PCB. The
U-shape on the back side is a tuning element, which is afﬁxed to the ground plane.
Measured and simulated reﬂection coefﬁcients are shown in Figure 8.40. The results
exhibit bandwidth for –6 dB reﬂection coefﬁcient 140 MHz (820–960 MHz) in the GSM
band and 1190 MHz (1710–2900 MHz) in the DCS/PCS/UMTS bands. It also shows
that –10 dB bandwidth is sufﬁcient for WLAN and WiMAX applications. Radiation
patterns are similar to that of a monopole. Table 8.4 gives average gain, peak gains, and
efﬁciency for ﬁve frequency bands.

298
Design and practice of small antennas II
1.5 mm
1.5 mm
31 mm
1 mm
7 mm
s
P
Feed point
Strip width: 1 mm
LCD
200 mm × 160 mm
50 Ω mini-coaxial
cable
x
z
y
10
mm
65
mm
3
mm
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 8.39 Geometry of the antenna: (a) 3D view, (b) plan view of the front side, and (c) plan
view of the back side ([18], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
0.5
Frequency (GHz)
Reflection coefficient (S11)
Without middle line
With middle line
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
Figure 8.40 Return loss with and without middle line ([18], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
299
Table 8.4 Measured peak and average gains and efﬁciency ([18], copyright
C⃝2010 IEEE)
Frequency (GHz)
0.9
1.80
2.10
2.45
2.70
Peak Gain (dBi)
1.12
3.13
2.26
1.82
3.21
Average Gain (dBi)
−3.21
−4.87
−1.24
−0.83
−0.79
Efﬁciency (%)
46.4
60.5
80.6
74.8
67.6
Main ground
on back side
(60 × 100 mm2)
1-mm thick
plastic housing
(εr = 3, σ = 0.02 S/m)
Gap1 = 0.5
d = 10.5
w = 5
t = 37
Gap2 = 1
0.5
0.8-mm thick FR4 substrate
as main circuit board
(a)
(b)
Feeding point
Shorting point,
via to main ground
18
16
4
8
2
4
21
3
24
B A
9
D
C
4
15
0.5
1
A
B
10
64
119
Figure 8.41 Geometry of the antenna in the mobile phone: (a) antenna structure and (b) antenna
embedded on the ground plane ([19], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
8.1.2.1.2.1.4 Planar printed strip monopole for eight-band operation
A planar printed strip monopole with closely coupled parasitic shorted strips for eight-
band LTE/GSM/UMTS operation to be used in a mobile phone is described in [19].
Geometry of the antenna along with the dimensions are illustrated in Figure 8.41. The
antenna has a simple structure comprised of a driven planar monopole (section A to C

300
Design and practice of small antennas II
40
20
10
970
1700
2910
3:1 VSWR
665
500
Frequency (MHz)
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
0
Return loss (dB)
Simulated
Measured
Figure 8.42 Measured and simulated return loss ([19], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
in Figure 8.41) and a parasitic shorted strip (section B to D in Figure 8.41), both with
comparable length and closely coupled to each other. An FR4 substrate with thickness
of 0.8 mm and size of 115 × 60 mm is used as the systems circuit board. Point A of the
driven strip monopole is the feeding point of the antenna, while point B of the parasitic
strip is short-circuited to the top edge of the system ground plane through a via-hole in
the system circuit board.
There are two gaps between the driven strip monopole and parasitic shorted strip: gap
1 of 0.5 mm in the front section and gap 2 of 1 mm in the remaining section of length t =
37 mm. These gaps provide capacitive coupling between the two strips, and adjustment
of the coupling will make good impedance matching easy. The length of the driven strip
monopole and parasitic shorted strips are both close to a quarter wavelength, although
slightly different lengths. The two strips are designed to contribute to their lowest
resonance modes, with one at frequencies lower than about 800 MHz and the other one
at frequencies higher than about 800 MHz. Two resonance modes can be incorporated
to produce a wide bandwidth to cover the frequency range of 698 to 960 MHz. The
parasitic shorted strip can contribute to producing two higher resonance modes of about
1700 MHz and 2700 MHz and lead to wide upper band coverage of the frequency range
from 1710 MHz to 2690 MHz by incorporating higher-order resonance modes of the
driven strip monopole.
Measured and simulated return loss is given in Figure 8.42, which shows a wide
bandwidth of 305 MHz (665–970 MHz), covering LTE 700/GSM 850/900 operations.
The upper band shows a further wide bandwidth of 1210 MHz (1700–2910 MHz), which
covers GSM 1800/1900/UMTS/LTE 2300/2500 operation.
The antenna exhibits gain of −0.4 to 1.1 dBi for the lower band (698–960 MHz) and
2.7 to 4.4 dBi for the higher band (1710–2690 MHz), and efﬁciency of 53%–76% and
52%–75% over the lower and higher bands, respectively.
Since the antenna is designed for installing on a mobile phone handset, SAR (Spe-
ciﬁc Absorption Rate) values pertaining to an operator’s head should be taken into

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
301
L
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
L
h
h
L
L
α
Figure 8.43 Square planar monopole: (a) on the ground plane, (b) with asymmetric beveling,
(c) with symmetrical beveling, and (d) with a shorting post ([20], copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).
consideration as an important subject when the antenna is designed. The SAR values are
calculated by using the simulator SEMCAD for a case where the proposed antenna is
mounted at the bottom of the system circuit board. By using the input power of 24 dBm
for the GSM 850/900 and 21 dBm for the GSM 1800/1900, UMTS, and LTE operations,
the SAR values per gram of head tissue are obtained all well below the SAR value limit
of 1.6 W/kg. This result indicates that the proposed antenna can be employed in mobile
phone handsets without any concern over effect of radiation from the mobile phone.
8.1.2.1.2.2 Wideband antennas
8.1.2.1.2.2.1 Planar monopole antennas
A planar quarter-wavelength monopole is a simple wideband antenna, which is generally
convenient to match to 50  with unbalanced feed, and does not require a balun. The
planar monopole antenna was ﬁrst described brieﬂy in the literature in 1968 [20] and
more detail was given in 1976 in [21], where wide impedance characteristics of a pla-
nar quarter-wave monopole were discussed. Subsequently studies on planar monopoles
have continued, dealing with various types and shapes of antennas theoretically and
experimentally. Among them, an example was that a disk-shaped planar monopole had
shown return loss greater than 10 dB over an impedance bandwidth ratio in excess
of 10 to 1 [22]. One of the simplest typical planar shapes is a square monopole ver-
tically standing on the ground plane as shown in Figure 8.43, which depicts (a) the

302
Design and practice of small antennas II
a
h
w1
w2
wt
s
d
l
Figure 8.44 Geometry of a folded loop [27b].
basic geometry, (b) modiﬁed versions at its bottom side with asymmetrical beveling,
(c) with symmetrical beveling, and (d) with a shorting post. There have been various
planar geometries such as rectangle, trapezoid, triangle, and so forth [23–25].
In practical applications, a conventional monopole structure, comprising an antenna
standing vertically on the ground plane, is not preferable, because it usually requires an
inﬁnite or comparable ground plane, leading to increasing the antenna volume, contrary
to the need to make the antenna small and compact. The recent trend is to use planar
monopole structures, comprised of the antenna and the ground plane being placed in
the same plane. By this means the antenna size can be reduced, granted that the size
of ground plane is reduced. To maintain the wide bandwidth with reduced-size ground
planes, various techniques have been developed. Antenna proﬁles can be all sorts of
planar geometries; disk, rectangle, triangle, ellipse, and so forth. Some of them will be
described later.
8.1.2.1.2.2.2 Folded loop antenna
The folded loop antenna was initially designed as an antenna having a balanced structure
and fed by a balanced line to suppress the current ﬂowing into the ground. This is impor-
tant in portable devices in order to mitigate the body effect on the antenna performance,
produced by the current on the ground plane, which is perturbed by the operator’s hand
and head [26].
The antenna is fabricated by folding a long thin rectangular loop of total one wave-
length to form a half-wavelength folded dipole, which appears as a folded two-wire
transmission line as illustrated in Figure 8.44 [27a]. The antenna is effectively divided
into two parts; a dipole structure and a two-wire transmission line. The dipole part essen-
tially contributes to radiation while the two-wire transmission line plays a signiﬁcant
role for determining the antenna impedance [27b] (refer to Appendix I following this

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
303
coaxial
cable
(b) unbalanced
      system
(a) balanced
      system
two-wire
line
36.3
119.4
Unit [mm]
36.3
2.1
1
z
y
Figure 8.45 Geometry of the folded loop placed on the ground plane [27b, 28].
λ1/2
d      0
+
+
(a) f/f0 = 0.80
f/f0 = 1.21
λ2/2
+
+
+
+
(b) f/f0 = 1.01
(c)
λ3/2
+ −
+
+
d      0
d      0
Figure 8.46 Current distributions for resonance on the folded loop element ([27b, 28], copyright
C⃝2001 IEICE).
section). The antenna is typically mounted on a ground plane in small equipment as
shown in Figure 8.45, in which feeding structure is depicted in the inset, and dimensions
are given as an example when the antenna is used for a typical mobile phone handset
using ﬁnite ground plane [27c].
With this antenna structure, resonance occurs at several frequencies as several cur-
rent modes are observed on the antenna elements, which are depicted in Figure 8.46.
Resonances occur at (a) the ﬁrst frequency f1 = 0.80 f0, (b) the second frequency f2 =
1.01 f0, and (c) the third frequency f3 = 1.21 f0, where f0 is the center frequency of
the frequency band [27c]. It was found that a wideband performance was obtained as
a result of combined excitation of three closely separated frequencies. Calculated and
measured VSWR characteristics when the center frequency f0 is 3470 MHz are shown in
Figure 8.47, which indicates a wide bandwidth covering from 0.8 to 1.2 f/f0 for VSWR

304
Design and practice of small antennas II
0.65
1
0.75
0.85
Measured
Calculated
0.95
1.05
1.15
1.25
Relative frequency ( f/f 0)
VSWR
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Figure 8.47 Calculated and measured VSWR (s = 20, h = 8, d = 1, w1 = w3 = 1, w2 = 4 [mm])
([28], copyright C⃝2001 IEICE).
less than two. Current ﬂows on the ground plane of a handset model are also calculated
and shown to be very low as shown in Figure 8.48 [27, 28], illustrating almost all areas
of the ground plane having about 30 dB lower values compared with that on the antenna
element. Reduction of currents on the ground plane is also beneﬁcial to mitigate the
SAR (Speciﬁc Absorption Rate) value against the human head [29].
Having the balanced structure, another important feature is to bestow the antenna self-
balance property (refer to Appendix II following this section), with which a balun is not
required and direct feeding with a coaxial line (unbalanced line) is allowable [27b, 30].
A folded loop can be modiﬁed to place sideward on the ground plane and further
reduce the size in half as Figure 8.49 shows [31]. The ﬁgure illustrates a practical half-
size folded-loop antenna, hereafter referred to as a BFMA (Built-in Folded Monopole
Antenna), being mounted on the ground plane of a mobile phone, along with dimensional
parameters [31].
A PIFA and a BFMA, both resonating at the same frequency, are compared in terms
of physical volume and bandwidth. It is assumed that a PIFA is mounted on the same
size ground plane as a BFMA as Figure 8.50 shows, and the PIFA has the size (a = b =
19.5, d = 5, and h = 7 mm), by which the resonance frequency is the same as the center
frequency 2250 MHz of the BFMA. Measured bandwidth for the PIFA and BFMA are
380 MHz and 340 MHZ, respectively, corresponding to 16.0% and 15.1% in the relative
bandwidth with respect to the center frequency, and the physical volume of BFMA is
estimated to be 42% of that of PIFA [31]. It can be said from this result that BFMA is
smaller than PIFA, yet exhibits wider bandwidth.
8.1.2.1.2.3 Ultrawideband antennas
Ultrawideband (UWB) system is a recent hot topic in both industrial and academic ﬁelds.
A UWB system is deﬁned as a communication system that has either a bandwidth larger
than 500 MHz or a relative bandwidth larger than 0.2 times the center frequency. The FCC
allocated the frequency band between 3.1 GHz and 10.6 GHz for unlicensed systems

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
305
0 dB
(a) f/f0 = 0.80
(b) f/f0 = 1.01
(c) f/f0 = 1.21
−2 dB
−4 dB
−6 dB
−8 dB
−10 dB
−12 dB
−14 dB
−16 dB
−18 dB
−20 dB
−22 dB
−24 dB
−26 dB
−28 dB
−30 dB
−32 dB
−34 dB
−36 dB
−38 dB
−40 dB
Figure 8.48 Current distributions on the ground plane: (a) f/f0 = 0.80, (b) f/f0 = 1.01, and
(c) f/f0 = 1.21 ([27][28], copyright C⃝2001 and 2002 IEICE).
119.4
15.0
18.85
s
h
b
d
w2
w1
wt
36.3
17.4
Unit [mm]
Figure 8.49 BFMA conﬁguration and the antenna on the ground plane (w1 = w2 = 5, wt = 1.5,
b = 0.5, h = 7, s = 12 [mm]) [27b].

306
Design and practice of small antennas II
119.4
15.0
h
Z
Y
X
a
d
b
36.3
17.4
Unit (mm)
Figure 8.50 PIFA for comparison (a = b = 19.5, d = 5, h = 7 [mm]) [27b].
operating with a power spectrum below –41.6 dBm. Since those systems operate with
relatively low power, the communication link is limited to a short range and equipment
is generally constructed in small size. Hence, antennas to be installed in such small
equipment should accordingly be small. However, since the systems are designed for
using signal transmissions that concern high-data-rate information, new challenges are
imposed to develop small antennas yet having wideband.
Preferred antenna types to be used for UWB systems are planar ones with small
dimensions, yet being simple, compact, low cost, and of course having appropriate per-
formances that satisfy the system operation. In many cases electrically small antennas
(ESA) with wideband features are required. Since conventional ESAs have generally
narrow bandwidths, development of such small wideband antennas needs additional
considerations beyond the techniques used to develop conventional ESAs. The simplest
technique to produce wide bandwidth is full use of an area for the radiator, or generation
of multiple resonances at closely spaced frequencies within a single antenna structure.
For this purpose, a planar structure is fully used as a radiator, and current paths on the
antenna surface are modiﬁed by modifying antenna shape and introducing slots/slits on
the surface of the antenna. How to obtain a wide bandwidth with small-sized antennas is
another serious problem. Reduction of the antenna size is attained not only by reduction
of radiator size, but also reduction of the ground plane size. It should be noted that
since the ground plane in small antennas often acts as a part of the radiator when the
feeding system of the antenna is an unbalanced structure, and inﬂuences the radiation
performance, special considerations to achieve required antenna performance are
needed. An application of a DGS (Defected Ground Structure) concept can be one
of the candidates. The DGS technique will be described in the next section, because
it is a modiﬁed version of an EBG (Electromagnetic Band Gap) and exhibits bandgap
properties and slow-wave effects that help to reduce the ground-plane size.
Planar structure is advantageous in applying antennas to very small equipment, as it
can be easily embedded on a printed circuit board or integrated with other RF electronic

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
307
Ant. A
Ant. B
Ant. C
Ant. D
Figure 8.51 Planar square dipole: (a) original dipole, (b) dipole with beveling at one-side,
(c) asymmetrically fed dipole, and (d) dipole with a shorting stub at one side [32].
devices. Also feed and matching structures play an important role for achieving wideband
performance.
In UWB antennas, time response as well as frequency response usually is studied, as
the UWB system was initially used for impulse communication systems. However, time
response is not discussed here, because antennas described here are generally applied
to ordinary wideband communication and other wireless wideband systems that are not
concerned with such impulse systems.
There have been many papers treating UWB antennas. Various types of UWB antenna
have been introduced; dipole types [32, 33], monopole types [34–42], shape modiﬁed
antennas [35–38, 46, 47], antennas with reduced ground plane [39], slot/slit embedded
antennas [40–45], and so forth.
The representative types of UWB antennas will be described here.
8.1.2.1.2.3.1 Dipole-type UWB antennas
8.1.2.1.2.3.1.1 Square patch dipoles
The simplest dipole antennas are illustrated in Figure 8.51, which shows A: a center-fed
square dipole, B: a beveled center-fed square dipole, C: an offset-fed square dipole and
D: a center-fed square dipole with a shorting pin [32].

308
Design and practice of small antennas II
4.20
3.99
R 4.00
2.80
3.07
6.80
8.40
(Gap = 0.08)
172.2°
Frequency (GHz)
20
15
10
5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
VSWR
1
FE-BI
Measured
HFSS
(b)
(a)
Figure 8.52 Initial ﬂare dipole (a) Geometry and dimensions (in inches) and (b) shaped dipole and
frequency characteristics ([33], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE).
Impedance bandwidth for S11 < –10 dB of these antennas are: A: 3.60–8.21, B: 3.40–
10.17, C: 3.61–15.30, and D: 2.87–10.04 (in GHz). In terms of bandwidth, antenna
C has widest, while antenna A has the narrowest. In addition, antenna C exhibits the
most stable impedance response compared with other types. Antenna D introduces an
additional resonance at about 2.7 GHz due to the shorting pin, which also provides
inductive reactance below 2.7 GHz, while other types are capacitive.
8.1.2.1.2.3.1.2 A ﬂare dipole with shape optimized using splines
A novel planar wideband antenna capable of operating from 190 MHz to 1000 MHz
with gains greater than 0 dBi (having size λ/5 × λ/7 at 190 MHz) is introduced in
[33a]. The initial ﬂare dipole has the outer curve which draws a 172.2◦arc with 4 inches
radius, being connected to a trapezoid as is depicted in Figure 8.52(a), where dimensions
in inches are given. Bandwidth characteristics of the initial ﬂare dipole are also shown.
The shaped dipole is depicted in Figure 8.52(b), which has dimensions of 13.68 inches
long (including the gap) and 8.40 inches wide, corresponding to λ/3 × λ/5 at 280 MHz.
Although the initial ﬂare dipole has wide bandwidth of 3.5:1 (280 to 1000 MHz) as shown
in Figure 8.52(b), further wide bandwidth of 5.25:1 (190 to 1000 MHz) is targeted and

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
309
Original
curve
Points define
spline curve
Boundary
where the
design is
restricted
Points are moving
perpendicular to
original curve
Optimized
spline curve
Optimized
area
Non-
optimized
section
Figure 8.53 Shape optimization for the ﬂare dipole; a spline is deﬁned at points placed around the
perimeter of the ﬂare dipole arc ([33a], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE and [33b], copyright C⃝2007
IEEE).
achieved by optimizing the ﬂare shape and employing multiple stage L-C matching
circuits at its feeding port. The initial ﬂare dipole has gain greater than 0 dBi beyond
280 MHz, but the same gain at lower frequencies around 190 MHz without affecting
bandwidth is achieved by an optimized ﬂare dipole.
To lower the resonance frequency, the outer shape curved portion is modiﬁed by
optimization of the shape, taking points distributed along the circular arc to deﬁne a
spline as shown in Figure 8.53, illustrating an approach for shape optimization of the
ﬂare dipole; points are placed around the arc perimeter to deﬁne a Spline.
A printed shape-optimized dipole is illustrated in Figure 8.54: (a) the photo,
(b) simulated and measured return loss, (c) measured gain for the original and opti-
mized dipole, and (d) an enlarged version for the lower frequency regions of (c).
To match the antenna impedance, N number of two port network/stages are designed
by applying the optimizing process, which is described in [33b].
More about spline-shaped UWB antennas will be described in the next section.
8.1.2.1.2.3.2 Monopole UWB antennas
The simplest monopole UWB antenna is a half-sized planar square dipole with the
ground plane on the same plane. Most monopole-type UWB antennas have modiﬁed

310
Design and practice of small antennas II
GHz
dB
0
−10
−15
−5
−20
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Return loss
1.0
Measured
Simulated with HFSS
(b)
(a)
GHz
dBi
dBi
10
−10
−15
−20
5
−5
0
−25
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Measured  gain
1.0
Shape optimized
Original flare dipole
GHz
1
−2
−3
−4
0
−1
−50.15
0.18
0.21
0.24
0.27
90 MHz
Measured  gain
0.30
Shape optimized
Original flare dipole
(c)
(d)
Figure 8.54 (a) Printed shape optimized ﬂare dipole, (b) simulated and measured return loss of the
optimized dipole, (c) measured gain of the original and optimized dipole, and (d) expanded
version of (c) around 0.2 GHz. ([33], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE).
shape, that is, the patch sides are modiﬁed to attain longer current paths, and the number
of current paths increases so as to achieve multiple resonances beginning from lower
frequencies, and consequently produce wideband behavior. The representative ones are
illustrated in Figure 8.55, where (a) and (b) are a beveled square patch [34], (c) a patch
with binomial curve [35], (d) with staircase-proﬁle [36], and (e) with spline-shape [38].

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
311
(a)
(b)
(c)
(e)
(d)
Figure 8.55 Various planar monopole antennas.
Most monopole UWB antennas have planar structure and are placed on the same plane
with the reduced-size ground plane that allows reduction of total size (volume) of the
antenna and makes integration of an antenna into electronic devices easy.
8.1.2.1.2.3.2.1 Binomial-curved patch antenna
The edge curve of a printed patch modiﬁed in shape according to the binomial function
is introduced in [35]. Antenna geometry is illustrated along with geometrical parameters
in Figure 8.56. The curved boundary as a function of the coordinates (x, y) is expressed
by
y = f (x) = G + ℓ(x/2w)N
(8.1)
where G is the gap between the patch and the ground plane, w is the width of the
top side of the patch, ℓis the length of the patch, and N is the order of the binomial
function. As N increases from unity toward inﬁnity, the shape varies from triangular
to nearly rectangular. By parametric analysis, it was found that the optimum values for
G and N are 0.45 mm and 4, respectively, with other parameters ﬁxed; w = 30 mm,

312
Design and practice of small antennas II
w
y
x
L
G
E(w/2, )
W
Figure 8.56 Geometry of the planar binomial-curved monopole antenna ([34], copyright C⃝2010
IEEE).
Frequency (GHz)
Return loss (dB)
0
20
30
10
40
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
11
N = 1
N = 2
N = 3
N = 4
N = 5
N = 6
Figure 8.57 Simulated return loss of the antenna with different N ([35], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
ℓ= 20 mm, W = 46 mm, and L = 50 mm. With these parameters, the widest 10-dB
return loss bandwidth obtained by simulation was from 2.7 GHz to 11 GHz, while from
2.59 to 10.97 GHz by measurement. Simulated return loss is shown in Figure 8.57. The
measured peak (average) gain for the frequencies 3.1, 5.0, and 8.0 GHz, respectively,
are –0.88 (–3.65), –2.36 (4.51), and 1.54 (–2.1) (all in dBi).

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
313
y
z
x
w2
w6
w1
(x2, y2)
(x1, y1)
(xN, yN)
(b)
y
z
x
w2
w6
w1
(a)
w4
w5
w3
Figure 8.58 Spline curved planar monopole antenna, indicating points for deﬁning spline;
(a) front view and (b) back view ([38a], copyright C⃝2007 IEEE).
8.1.2.1.2.3.2.2 Spline-shaped antenna
A spline-shaped UWB antenna was synthesized [38a]. An innovative design approach
based on the use of a spline description is applied to create a novel UWB antenna
geometry. It is also used for formulation of the synthesis in terms of return loss at the
input port and coupling properties of a system with identical antennas modeling the UWB
communication. A suitable implementation of the PSO (Particle Swarm Optimization)
has been integrated with spline-based shape generator and a MoM-based electromagnetic
simulator.
The representative parameters to be optimized are shown in Figure 8.58, where the
coordinates of the nth control points to be determined by the optimization are given as
Pn (xn, yn), taken on the coordinate (x, y). Here n = 1,2, . . . N; N being the total number
of the control points used to describe the antenna geometry.
The antenna is printed on the front side of the substrate (thickness 0.78 mm and εr =
3.38), having length w1 = 69.2 mm and half-width w2 = 10 mm, and the ground plane
of length w6 = 51 mm is printed on the lower part of the back side of the substrate. The
antenna geometry is characterized by the array of geometric variables
X = {(xn, yn), n = 1, . . . , N; w1, w2, . . . , w6}.
(8.2)
In the UWB communication system, impedance matching and distortionless conditions
for the UWB bandwidth are imposed as the electrical constraints. As for the impedance
matching over the UWB bandwidth,
|S11( f )| ≤−10 dB.

314
Design and practice of small antennas II
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.59 A proto-type dongle antenna: (a) front view and (b) back view ([38a], copyright
C⃝2007 IEEE).
And for the condition of distortionless system, the antenna is required to satisfy a
condition pertaining to the magnitude of S21, |S21 (f)| to be
	|S21| ≤6 dB.
And the group delay τ g,
	τg ≤1 ns.
Here 	|S21| and 	τ g, respectively, denote the maximum variation in the whole frequency
band of |S21| and τ g.
The antenna is required to be placed on the platform of the size 100 × 60 (in mm).
By the optimization, coordinates of the control points are; p1 (6.9, 50.6), p2 (9, 55.5),
p3 (7, 62.7), p4 (2.7, 66.3), and p5 (1.9, 61.8) all in mm. As for the feeding line, w4 =
5.4, and w3 and w5, which deﬁne the range of contour variations along the y-axis, are
51.6 and 56, respectively. A prototype antenna is illustrated in Figure 8.59, (a) front view
and (b) back view. Simulated and measured return loss is shown in Figure 8.60.
The spline-shaped UWB antenna is applied to integrate in a wireless USB (Universal
Serial Bus) dongle [38b]. It has a miniaturized planar structure with maximum extension
39.2 × 19.2, within which the radiator occupies only an area of 16.2 × 19.2 mm. The
antenna is printed on a two-sided dielectric substrate (εr = 3.38 and thickness 0.78 mm)
and the geometry is deﬁned by the set of values of the descriptive parameters; ϕ1 (length
of the substrate) = 39.2, ϕ2 (half-width of the substrate) = 9.6, ϕ3 (half width of the
feeding point) = 2.1, and ϕ4 (length of the ground plane) = 23.0 (in mm). Antenna
geometry is determined by the spline-description, giving control points on the (x, y)

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
315
0
−5
−10
−15
−20
−25
−30
−35
|S11| (dB)
1
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
Frequency (GHz)
Simulated data
Measured data
Figure 8.60 Simulated and measured return loss of the dongle antenna ([38a], copyright C⃝2007
IEEE).
P4
P5
P3
P6
P2
P1
ϕ1
ϕ3
ϕ2
y
x
z
P7
Figure 8.61 Geometry of a UWB dongle antenna front view ([38b], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
coordinates as: p1 = (2.1, 25.0), p2 = (6.6, 29.5), p3 = (8.6, 29.4), p4 = (7.3, 35.9), p5 =
(6.9, 34.9), p6 = (2.2, 32.4), and p7 = (0.0, 33.8). These points are given on the antenna
geometry illustrated in Figure 8.61.
Measured and simulated return loss is given in Figure 8.62. It shows bandwidth of
2 GHz from 3 GHz to 5 GHz for –10 dB return loss. In terms of 	 |S21|, it is 5 dB,
which is smaller than the requirement, with average |S21| it is about –23 dB.

316
Design and practice of small antennas II
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
–25
–20
–15
–10
–5
Measured data
Frequency (GHz)
|S11| (dB)
Simulated data
Figure 8.62 Return loss of a UWB dongle antenna ([38b], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
8.1.2.1.2.3.3 UWB antennas with slot/slit embedded on the patch surface
Slots/slits are embedded on the patch surface in order to lengthen the current paths and
increase the number of currents so that multiple resonances occur, leading to production
of ultra wide bandwidth. Use of slots/slits has another objective; that is, to produce stop
bands within the UWB system band for avoiding interference against other wireless
systems, for instance, WLAN (5-GHz bands). For another purpose, a slit is used on the
patch to reduce the current on the ground plane so that contribution of the ground plane
to radiation is reduced. This leads to reduction in the size of the ground plane at the
same time.
Various shapes of slots/slits are applied to patch antennas, depending on the purposes.
Examples of such patch antennas with band-notch performance are U-slot on a square
patch [39], circular/elliptical patch [40a], circular/ elliptical slot [40b], circular/elliptical
slot with U-shaped tuning stub [40c], H-shaped plate and rectangular slots [41], rectan-
gular patch with a notch and a strip [42], pentagon shaped-slot [43], tapered ring slot
[44], and octagonal wide slot with square ring [45].
8.1.2.1.2.3.3.1 A beveled square monopole patch with U-slot
A beveled square monopole patch is introduced in the previous section [20] as one
of the useful UWB antennas. In order to avoid interference from other wireless sys-
tems operating in the UWB band, a slot/slit (notch) is embedded on the patch surface.
Figure 8.63(a) depicts a square beveled monopole patch along with S11 characteristics,
and the patch, in which a thin U-slot is employed, is shown in Figure 8.63(b), which also
provides dimensional parameters [39]. Figure 8.63(c) is the S11 characteristics, giving
a stop band within the UWB band as a result of a U-slot application. On a beveled
square monopole patch antenna, four mode currents J0, J1, J2, and J3 ﬂow on the surface
as Figure 8.64 illustrates. J0 is loop current, which is a special non-resonant inductive
mode, J1 is vertical current ﬂowing along the monopole, associated with resonance at

Frequency (GHz)
S11 (dB)
 (b)
0
−15
−20
−25
−5
−10
−30
2
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
11
(c)
Frequency (GHz)
S11 (dB)
0
−15
−20
−25
−5
−10
2
10 11
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
12
(a)
h0
hs
l2
l1
h0
L
L
t
L
L
Figure 8.63 (a) Geometry of a beveled square planar monopole (L = 19 mm, h0 = 0.2 mm) with
S11 characteristics, (b) geometry of a beveled square monopole with a resonant U-slot (L = 19,
l1 = 10, l2 = 8, t = 1, hs = 4, and h0 = 0.2 (in mm)), and (c) reﬂection coefﬁcient of the antenna
([39], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
Mode J0 (3 GHz)
Mode J1 (3 GHz)
Mode J2 (7 GHz)
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
Mode J3 (11 GHz)
Figure 8.64 Normalized current distributions on the beveled square monopole antenna for the ﬁrst
four characteristic modes ([39], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).

318
Design and practice of small antennas II
Mode J0
Mode J1
Mode J2
Mode J3
Slot mode
Figure 8.65 Symbolic patterns of the current distributions on the beveled square monopole
antenna loaded with a thin inverted-U-slot for the ﬁrst four characteristic modes ([39], copyright
C⃝2010 IEEE).
2.75 GHz, J2 is horizontal current parallel to the ground plane, associated with resonance
at 7 GHz, and J3 is higher-order-mode vertical current with null near the base of the
patch, associated with resonance at 12 GHz. With a U-slot on the patch, an additional
current mode is produced, generating an additional resonance in the structure. Graphical
representation of the current ﬂows on the beveled square patch with a thin U-slot is
illustrated in Figure 8.65, in which current ﬂows of ﬁve modes, from J0 to J3 and an
additional mode, referred to as a slot mode Js, are shown with arrows. These currents,
except Js, ﬂow in paths similar to those on the patch without the U-slot. Js is divided into
two at the center of the patch, and each of them ﬂows symmetrically circling around the
U-slot as shown in Figure 8.65, and contributes to producing a sharp increase in antenna
impedance, entailing a narrow rejection band. As a consequence, a steep band-reject
performance is observed in the S11 characteristics as Figure 8.63(c) illustrated.
8.1.2.1.2.3.3.2 Circular/Elliptical slot UWB antennas
Circular/Elliptical CPW-fed slot UWB antennas are introduced in [40a], where a
microstrip line-fed UWB antenna is also discussed. Antenna geometry along with
dimensional parameters is illustrated in Figure 8.66. The antenna is comprised of a
circular/elliptical stub that excites a similar-shaped slot aperture. Three models
(elliptical/circular) fed by a CPW and one model (elliptical) fed by a microstrip line
are examined to ﬁnd that all models exhibit wide enough bandwidth for UWB operation
with satisfactory radiation efﬁciency and radiation patterns. The antenna element is

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
319
Table 8.5 Dimensional parameters of four antennas I, II, III and IV (h = 1.575 mm and εr = 3) ([40a],
copyright C⃝2006 IEEE)
in (mm)
L
W
L1
R1
L2
R2
d
dw
Type
Prototype I
40
35
6
8
12
16
8
0.3
CPW Elliptical
Prototype II
40
40
7.5
7.5
15
15
8
0.3
CPW Circular
Prototype III
90
90
20
20
35
35
12
0.3
CPW Circular
Prototype IV
40
35
6
8
12
16
8
0.3
Microstrip Elliptical
x
y
z
L
W
L2
dw
g
s
d
L1
R1
R2
Figure 8.66 Geometry of antenna and dimensional parameters ([40a], copyright C⃝2006 IEEE).
etched on the substrate of 1.575 mm thickness with εr = 3, and dimensions of the four
types of antenna given in Table 8.5 are used.
From the experimental results, bandwidth observed for the Prototype I (ellipti-
cal model) is 17.35 GHz (from 2.65 to 20 GHz), or 153%. For the Prototype II
(circular model) it is 17.05 GHz (2.95 GHz to 20 GHz), or 148%, and the Prototype III
(circular model) demonstrates 175%, beginning from 1.3 GHz that is a lower frequency
than that of other models, being at 2 GHz band, as a consequence of the enlarged ground
plane. Regarding the radiation patterns, an almost omnidirectional proﬁle is observed in
lower frequencies, becoming somewhat directional in higher frequencies. The maximum
gain obtained is about 4.5 dBi.
Design of a slightly modiﬁed circular/elliptical slot UWB antenna is described in
[40b]. Geometries of the elliptical- or circular-shaped monopole antennas are depicted
in Figure 8.67(a) and (c), respectively, and the complementary versions of these antennas
are also shown in (b) and (d). The antenna structure is formed with planar conducting
surfaces of either two ellipses or circles in a two-sided conductor-coated substrate. The
primary radiating element and the microstrip feed are on one side of the substrate, while
the ground plane is on the other side. The radiating slot is formed by the intersection

320
Design and practice of small antennas II
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
w
t
Y-axis
X-axis
wm
g
D1
D2
C2
C1
Figure 8.67 Four UWB antennas: (a) elliptical E-monopole, (b) complementary elliptical
E-monopole, (c) circular E-monopole, and (d) complementary circular E-monopole ([40b],
copyright C⃝2009 IEEE).
of two ellipses/circles in the manner shown in Figure 8.66. The size of the slot opening
determines the lowest frequency fℓof the operation and is selected to be λeff/2 (λeff =
c/fℓ: effective wavelength, εeff = (εr + 1)/2 and c : velocity of light). The dimensions
D1 and D2 are chosen as D1 = w and D2 = w/2, respectively, and w and ℓ, respectively,
are selected to be λeff/2 and λeff/4. The ground plane has the shape of a half ellipse
(circle) for the elliptical (circular) monopole whose dimensions are chosen to be similar
to those for the larger ellipse (circle) of the radiating structure. Dimensions of the center
of large and small ellipses (circles) C1 and C2, respectively, measured from the end of
the feeder are determined by taking ratios R1 and R2 as C1 = D1 R1/2 and C2 = D2
R2/2 + wm, where wm is the width of the feed line and R1 and R2 take a value 0.5 for
the ellipse and 1.0 for the circle. Here the width g between the radiator and the ground
plane is taken as wm/2, which is around half of the feeder width. For the complementary
versions, C2 = D2 R2/2.
Four types of antenna models were manufactured, and analysis of antenna per-
formance was carried out by changing the substrate having different εr and thick-
ness. The results exhibit that the proposed design formulas enable the development

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
321
Ground plane
Substrate
Microstrip feed line
on the back
Microstrip feed line
(a)
2B
W1
2A
r
R
W
L
t
r
H
x
x
y
z
S
θ
Ground plane
Substrate
50Ω coplanar
waveguide
(b)
2B
W1 g
g
2A
r
R
W
L
r
W
L
R
t
r
H
x
x
y
z
S
θ
Figure 8.68 Geometry of printed elliptical slot antenna with U-stub fed by (a) microstrip line and
(b) CPW ([40c], copyright C⃝2006 IEEE).
of UWB antennas with suitable radiation characteristics, covering UWB bandwidth
with well-behaved omnidirectional radiation patterns and more than 90% radiation
efﬁciency.
Elliptical/circular slot antennas with U-shaped stub [40c] are studied both theoretically
and experimentally and shown to have satisfying UWB characteristics with smaller size.
Figure 8.68 illustrates antenna geometries of different feeding types by (a) microstrip

322
Design and practice of small antennas II
Table 8.6 Optimized dimensions of printed elliptical/circular slot antenna ([40c],
copyright C⃝2006 IEEE)
Microstrip line fed
CPW fed
Elliptical Slot
Circular Slot
Elliptical Slot
Circular Slot
A (mm)
16
13.3
14.5
13.3
B (mm)
11.5
13.3
10
13.3
S (mm)
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.4
R (mm)
5.9
5
5.5
5
r (mm)
2.9
1.8
2.5
1.8
H (mm)
3.3
3.1
2.5
3.1
W (mm)
3
3.2
3
3.2
L (mm)
6
6.7
3
4.3
Table 8.7 Measured and simulated bandwidth of printed elliptical/circular slot
antennas ([40c], copyright C⃝2006 IEEE)
Simulated −10
dB bandwidth
(GHz)
Measured −10
dB bandwidth
(GHz)
Microstrip line fed
Elliptical Slot
2.6–10.6
2.6–10.22
Circular Slot
3.45–13.22
3.46–10.9
CPW fed
Elliptical Slot
3.0–11.4
3.1–10.6
Circular Slot
3.5–12.3
3.75–10.3
line and (b) CPW. With optimized dimensions of four types of antennas tabulated in
Table 8.6, measured and simulated bandwidth are given in Table 8.7, demonstrating
much wider bandwidth compared with other antennas described in [40d–40f].
A novel modiﬁed UWB planar monopole antenna with variable frequency band-notch
function is described in [41].
8.1.2.1.2.3.3.3 A rectangular monopole patch with a notch and a strip
A small printed rectangular patch with a notch and strip is described in [42a]. The
antenna is featured in reduced ground plane effect by cutting a notch from the radiator
and attaching a strip asymmetrically to the radiator, while keeping wide bandwidth
covering the UWB band. Figure 8.69 depicts antenna geometry, showing (a) a printed
rectangular monopole patch and (b) a rectangular monopole patch with a notch and a
strip. By slotting the radiator and/or modifying the shape of the radiator as well as the
ground plane, the size can be reduced to 30 × 30 or 25 × 25 (in mm) from 40 × 50 mm,
a usual size for similar printed antennas [42b, 42c].
In addition, by adding a strip to the top side of the rectangular radiator, the length of the
radiator can be reduced to 30 mm as illustrated in Figure 8.69(b). Further reduction of the

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
323
Bottom view
Top view
Side view
Ground plane
Strip
Ground plane
Dielectric
substrate
Radiator
Ground plane
Radiator
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.69 (a) Planar rectangular monopole with the ﬁnite ground plane and (b) the antenna with
a strip ([42a], copyright C⃝2007 IEEE).
antenna size can be attained by cutting a notch on the radiator as shown in Figure 8.70(a),
where dimensional parameters are also described. Presence of the notch on the radiator
leads to concentration of the current distributions on the right portion of the radiator,
where the notch is cut, while the currents at the left portion of the radiator as well as
the ground plane are very weak. Figure 8.70 illustrates the current distributions on the
radiator and the ground plane, comparing (b) with notch and (c) without notch at 3, 5,
6, and 10 GHz. Observing this current distribution, it can be said that the notch plays a
signiﬁcant role to determine the lower operating frequencies, and subsequent impedance
matching at around 3 GHz will become more sensitive to the notch dimension than
the shape and size of the ground plane. The reason for this is that the currents on the
ground plane are much weaker than those on the radiator. Thus it is important to notice
that the effects of the ground plane and RF cable on the antenna performance at lower
frequencies can be suppressed greatly by the notch [42a]. As the operating frequency
increases, current ﬂow becomes stronger on the feeding strip, on the junction of the
radiator and the feeding strip, and on the ground plane. Thus impedance matching is
greatly affected by the gap g between the patch and ground plane. The lowest frequency
fℓis determined by the path length Lℓof the current ﬂow around the notch on the right
portion of the patch, which is the sum of the horizontal path from the feeding point,
the vertical path from the bottom of the radiator, and the length and the width of the
horizontal strip, giving fℓ= c/λℓ(λℓ= 2Lℓ
√εr + 1/2).
Here fℓ= 3.10 GHz. Simulated and measured return loss is provided in Figure 8.71.
The radiation patterns are almost omnidirectional at lower frequencies, while more
directional at higher frequencies. The radiation efﬁciency varies from 79% to 95%
across the entire bandwidth 3.1–10.6 GHz.

324
Design and practice of small antennas II
25
2
3.5
1.52
mm
Roger 4003
3
2
2
y
ls
lg
ds
d
ws
wrs
lrs
25
g
x
εr = 3.38
Roger 4003
Current path
(a)
(b)
(c)
3 GHZ
5 GHZ
3 GHZ
5 GHZ
6 GHZ
10 GHZ
6 GHZ
εr = 3.38
10 GHZ
Figure 8.70 Planar rectangular monopole antenna with a strip and a notch; (a) antenna geometry,
(b) current distributions on the antenna with a notch, and (c) the antenna without notch ([42a],
copyright C⃝2007 IEEE).
2
4
6
8
10
12
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
Measured
Frequency (GHz)
|S11| (dB)
Simulated
Figure 8.71 Measured and simulated return loss ([42a], copyright C⃝2007 IEEE).

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
325
X
10 mm
Substrate, εr 
thickness, h
Y
10 mm
10 mm
25 mm
Ground plane
Slot
80 mm
50 mm
5 mm
Feed line
SMA coaxial probe
5 mm
Rod 1
Figure 8.72 Pentagon-shape microstrip slot antenna fed by a microstrip line ([43], copyright
C⃝2009 IEEE).
8.1.2.1.2.3.4 Modiﬁed shaped UWB antennas
Planar antennas with modiﬁed shapes are also developed for the UWB applications.
Two examples of them are (a) pentagonal shaped-slot antenna, and (b) sectorial loop
antenna.
8.1.2.1.2.3.4.1 Pentagon-shape microstrip slot antenna
The antenna geometry is illustrated in Figure 8.72 [43]. Three models are considered;
model A with a straight feed line, model B with tilted feed line and model C with tilted
feed line on a different substrate from that of the model A and B. The substrate used
for models A and B has εr = 2.20 and tan δ = 0.0004, whereas for model C, εr = 4.50
and tan δ = 0.02, The thickness of the substrate is 1.58 mm for all the models. The
antenna can be designed to mount on the small substrate (ground plane) with the size
of 50 mm × 80 mm, which is a similar size to the wireless card used in usual wireless
equipment. The antenna will occupy only the top 20 mm or 25% of the ground plane
length, leaving enough space available to mount RF devices and circuitry on it. Even
with this small size, the impedance bandwidth obtained was maximum 124% (2.65–
11.30 GHz), exceeding the UWB bandwidth of 110% (3.10–10.60 GHz), as a result of
combination of the pentagon-shaped slot, feed line, and pentagon stub. For models B and
C, the feed line is rotated by 15◦. In terms of the bandwidth, model A exhibited 106%
(2.6–8.4 GHz), model B provided the largest of all 124% and model C obtained 116%

326
Design and practice of small antennas II
(b)
(a)
(c)
Antenna 2
z
z
y
x
Antenna
Ground plane
Probe feed
Antenna 1
I2
I1 + I2
I1
Rout
Rin
τ
α
α
θ
φ
Figure 8.73 (a) A sectorial loop antenna, (b) coupled sectorial loop antenna (CSLA), and (c) a half
of CSLA over the ground plane ([47], copyright C⃝2005 IEEE).
(2.4–9 GHz). The tilted feed in models B and C can enhance the bandwidth compared
with model A. The radiation pattern is nearly omnidirectional, but becomes directional
in higher-frequency ranges. The gain variation was 3.25 dBi (3.00–6.25 dBi) over the
frequency range between 3.5 GHz and 13.0 GHz.
In order to obtain a directional pattern, a conducting sheet as a reﬂector is applied
on the back of model B. A 50-mm square sheet is placed with spacing d, varying from
5 mm to 25 mm and it was found for obtaining the directional patterns within the UWB
range that d = 10 mm was suitable for the lower-frequency range (3–7GHz) while d =
5 mm was suitable for the higher-frequency range (8–11 GHz).
Other types of wideband or multiband slot antenna are a tapered ring slot antenna
[44], antenna using square ring resonator [45], and a V-shaped antenna [46].
8.1.2.1.2.3.4.2 Sectorial loop antenna (SLA)
A compact loop antenna, being referred to as a sectorial loop antenna (SLA), composed
of an arch and two sectors, is depicted in Figure 8.73, showing (a) topology of the SLA,
(b) topology of the coupled SLA, and (c) a half of an SLA placed on the ground plane
[47]. The antenna can provide wide enough bandwidth to cover the UWB operation
band by combining two identical SLAs in parallel and controlling the mutual coupling
between them as shown in Figure 8.73(b). When two identical SLAs are connected in
parallel, the antenna system is equivalently expressed in two-port network terms by using
relationships between the impedances Zij and currents Iij (i = 1 for one antenna and j =
2 for another antenna) as follows:
V1 = Z11I1 + Z12I2·
(8.3)
V2 = Z21I1 + Z22I2

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
327
Here Z11 and Z22 are self-impedance of each antenna, Zij is the mutual impedance
between two antennas, and V1, V2, I1, and I2 are voltages and currents at the input port
of the antenna elements as Figure 8.73(b) shows. Since the two antennas are identical
and the system is symmetrical, Z11 = Z22, and Z12 = Z21. Also V1 = V2, and I1 = I2 =
I. Thus the input impedance Zin of the antenna is given by
Zin = (Z11 + Z12)/2.
(8.4)
To obtain wide bandwidth, variation of Z11 and Z12 with respect to frequency must
counteract each other. This can be achieved by optimizing the geometrical parameters
of the antenna that are the loop inner and outer radii Rin and Rout and the sector angle α.
When Rin and Rout, respectively, are 13 and 14 mm, relatively constant Zin is obtained for
40◦< α < 80◦. These three parameters also determine the lowest operating frequency
fℓ, which is given by
fℓ= 2c/(π −α + 2)(Rin + Rout)√εr.
(8.5)
By using this, the average radius of the loop Rav = (Rin + Rout)/2 can be determined.
Then optimum α and τ = (Rin – Rout) need to be determined. Through studies of some
experimentally fabricated antennas, the optimum values for these parameters are found.
They are α = 60◦, Rav = 13.5 mm, and τ = 0.4 mm. This τ = 0.4 mm, which is
the smallest value (thinnest loop radius), is chosen, because bandwidth becomes wider
as τ tends to be smaller. With these parameters, an antenna with bandwidth of 3.7 to
11.6 GHz is obtained.
8.1.3
Integration of functions into antenna
An antenna, into which active devices or circuits are integrated to enhance the antenna
performance or function, is referred to as AIAS (Active Integrated Antenna System)
[48]. It has received considerable attention, because the technique will provide surpassing
performances or functions to antennas without enlarging the dimensions. There have
been quite a few papers and books which have dealt with AIAS [49–51]. The AIAS
is not necessarily ESA, but most of them are FSA. However, they have useful features
in possibly being manufactured with relatively small size, compact structure, and yet
low cost. Representative AIASs are those with enhanced gain [52], operating band [53,
54], and functions of reconﬁgurable performances such as variation of tuning frequency,
switching of operating bands [55, 56], or control of radiation patterns [57–59], and so
forth.
IPASs (Integrated Passive Antenna Systems) also play an important role in reducing
the antenna size and enhancing the antenna performances; however, because integration
of slots/slits into antenna systems has been treated in other sections, it is not mentioned
here.
Here in this section, three examples will be described.
8.1.3.1
An oscillator-loaded microstrip antenna
Conﬁguration of the antenna along with the dimensions is shown in Figure 8.74 [60].
The antenna is comprised of two transmission lines, one wide line as a radiator and

328
Design and practice of small antennas II
Gate
2-D
Transistor
Drain
Source
x
y
4.88
Capacitor
6.88
4.88
1.00
2.14
Figure 8.74 Geometry and dimensions of single-element antenna integrated with an oscillator
along with dimensional parameters ([60], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
one narrow line to serve as a feedback loop. A transistor oscillator circuit is mounted
on the wider transmission line with two source terminals connected to the central line
with narrow width and the drain and gate terminals connected to the two wider lines.
The length of the two radiating sections combined with the feedback loop is 3/2λg (λg:
guided wavelength). Similar current and charge distributions are created by this circuit
arrangement and the radiation patterns typical of a microstrip patch antenna can be
obtained. The antenna pattern is etched on the microwave laminate with thickness of
0.635 mm and dielectric constant of 10.2. The transistor is an HF FET (High Frequency
Field Effect Transistor) having super low-noise characteristics and gain of 8.5–9 dB
over the frequency range between 6 and 12 GHz. A 1.2 pF capacitor is placed on the
radiator line to serve as DC isolation between the drain and gate and at the same time
provide RF feedback from the drain to gate. The transistor circuit is biased using a single
1.5 V battery between the source and drain terminals with the gate terminal remaining
open.
This antenna is fabricated for testing and the performances are measured. The gain
is 10 dBi at 8.5 GHz and the EIRP is 11.2 dBm. The phase noise is –87.5 dBc/Hz at
100 kHz offset, that is attributed primarily to the transmission feedback circuit in addition
to low-noise characteristics of the HF FET. Figure 8.75 shows measured transmission
data S21 with Vdrain = 1.2 V and Vgate = 0, and for the no-transistor case. The inset in
the ﬁgure depicts radiated power.

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
329
Frequency (GHz)
Frequency GHz
8.56 GHz
8.56 GHz
S21 (dB)
Received power dBm
20
10
0
−30
−40
−10
−20
−50
−100
8.550
8.555
8.560
8.565
8.570
−90
−80
−70
−60
−50
−40
−30
−20
8
9
8.8
8.6
8.4
8.2
Vdrain = 1.2 V
Vgate = open
No transistor
Figure 8.75 Measured transmission data S21 with Vdrain and Vgate ([60], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
8.1.3.2
A reconﬁgurable PIFA with integrated PIN-diode and varactor
By integrating a PIN-Diode for switching and a varactor for ﬁne-tuning into a PIFA
structure, an antenna capable of multiband operation for several mobile communication
systems is proposed [61]. The geometry of the antenna and its dimensional parameters
are illustrated in Figure 8.76, showing (a) 3D view, (b) top view, (c) side view, and
(d) front view. By varying capacitance of the varactor on an impedance-matching short-
line, ﬁne-tuning of operating frequencies can easily be achieved and by switching the
radiating elements by means of the PIN-diode status (on and off), operating frequency
bands largely separated can be selected. The antenna can cover four bands; USPCS
(1.85–1.99 GHz), WCDMA (1.92–2.18 GHz), m-WiMAX (3.4–3.6 GHz), and WLAN
(5.15–5.825 GHz).
8.1.3.3
Pattern reconﬁgurable cubic antenna
A unique single-feed cubic antenna capable of pattern reconﬁgurable performance is
introduced in [59]. The antenna is a metallic cubic cavity with a slot radiator on each
of its six surfaces and can radiate in a 4π steradian range to receive incident waves
with any polarization. The pattern reconﬁguration is achieved by using a PIN diode
which opens or shorts at the center of the slot on the cube, thus producing change of the
radiation pattern. The operating frequency is 5 GHz. Schematic drawing of the antenna
is shown in Figure 8.77. The performances of this structure are described by two aspects;
resonance modes of the cube which radiate through the slot and the resonance of the slot.
The cube dimension a can be determined by taking these two effects into account and
considering the ﬁrst fundamental modes TE011, TE101, and TE110. With cube dimension
a = 37.5 mm, slot length ls = 27 mm, and probe length lp = 27 mm, the resonance
frequencies of the cube and the slot are 5.8 GHz (bandwidth is about 2.5%) and 5 GHz

330
Design and practice of small antennas II
Feeder
PIN diode
PIN diode
Additional
radiator
Main radiator
SMA connnector
SMA connnector
0.6 φ
Feeding conductor
Feeding
conductor
Ground
Ground
Folded part
Folded
part
Substrate, εr = 4.4
(c)
(0,0)
(b)
Z
X
Y
(d)
Varactor
Varactor
Varactor
Short
line
Short
line
Short line
Short
line
W2
G2
G3
G1
H1
H
L3
W7
W6
G4
L3
L4
L2
L6
L
W
L1
L5
L1
G2
L7
(x0,y0)
(x0,y0)
W1
W3
W4
W5
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 8.76 Geometry of a PIFA loaded with a PIN-diode: (a) 3D view, (b) top view, (c) side view,
and (d) front view ([61], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
Figure 8.77 3D view of a cubic reconﬁgurable antenna ([59], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE).
(bandwidth is about 6.5%), respectively. To have two frequencies close in order to obtain
a wider bandwidth, the cube length and probe length are changed to ls = 39 mm and
lp = 38 mm, respectively and achieved the bandwidth of 11.3% at 5.2 GHz with the
resonance frequencies of the cube at 5.05 GHz and the slot at 5.4 GHz, respectively. The

8.1 FSA (Functionally Small Antennas)
331
Gϕ
Gθ
(a)
(b)
z
z
z
z
y
y
y
y
y
y
z
z
(c)
Phi
Phi
Phi
Phi
Phi
Phi
Phi
Phi
Phi
Phi
Phi
Phi
Phi
Phi
Phi
Phi
Phi
Phi
Theta
Theta
Theta
Theta
Theta
Theta
Theta
Theta
Theta
Theta
Theta
Theta
Theta
Theta
Theta
Theta
Theta
Theta
Figure 8.78 Simulated radiation patterns along ϕ (on left) and θ (on right) for (a) conﬁguration 1,
(b) conﬁguration 2, and (c) conﬁguration 3 ([59], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE).
radiation patterns are varied by short-circuiting or open-circuiting the center of the slot,
resulting in cancelling or producing radiation. This action can be performed by using a
PIN diode which switches the state of on or off to cause short- or open-circuiting the slot.
Reconﬁguration of the pattern is realized by selecting which slots are short-circuited.
Three conﬁgurations 1, 2, and 3 are considered; each one contains two short-circuited
slots on the lower sides and one on the upper side on the cube. Figure 8.78(a), (b), and (c),
respectively, illustrate the simulated radiation patterns at 5.4 GHz for the conﬁgurations
1, 2, and 3, for Gϕ (gain pattern along ϕ) on the left and Gθ (gain pattern along θ)
on the right. Switching the conﬁguration is equivalent to rotating the cube around the
probe on an angle of 120◦. As can be noted in Figure 8.78 the antenna radiates in a 4π
steradian range with a maximum gain toward a certain direction, and hence by switching
the conﬁguration the maximum gain direction changes. The maximum gain is evaluated
as approximately 3.7 dBi. In addition to the variation in the maximum gain direction,
the radiated powers, in other words Gϕ and Gθ, in a given direction are not identical

332
Design and practice of small antennas II
depending upon in which conﬁguration the antenna is set. That is, a ratio Gϕ/Gθ can be
higher or lower than unity. By taking advantage of this pattern performance, the antenna
can achieve pattern diversity in terms of polarization. It can be also said that the antenna
is applicable to diversity of not only polarization, but also power and phase by means of
the conﬁguration switching.
Diversity performance is evaluated both theoretically and experimentally. A measure
of the diversity performance is the correlation coefﬁcient ρ, which determines the quality
of the communication channel in diversity and is deﬁned as the correlation between
incident wave envelopes of different polarizations [62]. It is a function of complex
incident ﬁelds of two polarizations, XPD, a ratio of incident wave powers, and arrival
angle distributions of incident waves. With assumption of uniform distribution in the
angle of arrival (AoA) and XPD < –10 dB, the simulated ρ is less than 0.12, but with non-
uniform distributions, ρ takes different values depending on the conﬁguration, because
incident waves have different envelopes depending on the AoA. Thus three envelope
correlations, ρ12, ρ13, and ρ23, because of three available pattern conﬁgurations, must
be taken into consideration. As for the non-uniform AoA distributions, a Laplacian
distribution is assumed [59]. With assumption of the Laplacian distribution and XPD =
0 (indoor condition) and 6 dB (urban ﬁeld condition), ρ is evaluated higher than that
in case of uniform distributions, but is estimated to be less than 0.47, which is still a
practical and useful value. Experiments veriﬁed these simulated results.
It can be said that the reconﬁgurable cubic antenna is well suited to apply pattern
diversity and also power, phase, and polarization diversity.
8.2
Design and practice of PCSA (Physically Constrained Small Antennas)
A PCSA is an antenna that is not necessarily ESA, but has portions sized similarly to
ESA. Typical PCSAs would be low-proﬁle antennas, having the height comparable with
the size of ESA. They are microstrip antennas, PIFAs, and printed antennas.
8.2.1
Low-proﬁle structure
Low-proﬁle structure can be comprised of an antenna element and a ground plane,
which provides an image effect. When the ground plane is a PEC (Perfect Electric
Conductor), the image effect is negative for an electric source placed parallel to the
ground plane, whereas it is a positive effect for a magnetic source. The PEC ground
plane can be replaced by a high impedance surface (HIS) or a surface that exhibits
an electromagnetic bandgap (EBG) property that can produce a positive image of the
antenna, reducing the antenna proﬁle as well as improving the antenna performance. Use
of EBG is quite beneﬁcial not only for miniaturizing the dimensions, increasing gain,
and bandwidth, but also for reducing the mutual coupling between two closely mounted
antennas. Recently, much interest has focused on applications of DGS (Defected Ground
Surface) associated with low-proﬁle antennas and development of small antennas.

8.2 Design and practice of PCSA
333
Capacitive FSS
Dielectric
spacer
z
y
x
Metal backplane
Metal rods or vias
t2
Figure 8.79 3D view of a mushroom-like HIS structure ([64], copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).
8.2.2
Application of HIS (High Impedance Surface)
The concept of HIS was ﬁrst introduced in 1999 [63], where a mushroom-like HIS
surface was treated. The mushroom-like surface has periodic structure, consisting of
a lattice of metal plates connected to a solid metal sheet by vertical conducting metal
vias. Figure 8.79 shows a sketch of the typical mushroom-like structure [64]. The
structure can be visualized as mushrooms protruding from the back-plane surface. Since
the protrusions are small compared to the operating wavelength, their electromagnetic
properties can be described by using lumped capacitors and inductors, behaving as
a network of parallel resonant L-C circuits, which acts as a two-dimensional ﬁlter
to block the current ﬂow along the surface. The surface impedance is modeled as a
parallel resonant L-C circuit, which exhibits high impedance over a predetermined tuned
frequency band. The surface acts equivalently as a frequency selective surface (FSS).
The HIS can be considered as a kind of two-dimensional photonic crystal that prevents
the propagation of radio frequency surface currents within the bandgap. The surface does
not support propagating surface waves and its image currents are not in phase reversal,
but in-phase, allowing a radiating element to lie directly adjacent to the surface, while
still radiating efﬁciently. Figure 8.80(a) shows an example of the transmission coefﬁcient
S21 of a surface with suppression bandwidth from 0.98 to 1.35 GHz and (b) gives the
phase of the reﬂection coefﬁcient of a surface with an operational bandwidth from 0.88
to 1.35 GHz [64].
The HIS has proven to be useful as an antenna ground plane on which the surface
wave is suppressed, resulting in less radiation in the backward direction. The reﬂection
phase is unusual, allowing an antenna to lie directly adjacent to the ground plane (HIS)
without being shorted out, by which antenna gain is enhanced [63].
Design methodology for the mushroom-like HIS was described in [64].
An HIS can be constituted by surfaces other than the mushroom-like one. Use of
periodically corrugated reﬂectors shown in Figure 8.81 is an example, where a planar
hexagonal dipole is placed close to the surface with its axis parallel to the grooves,
which in this case is referred to as a system of H-type corrugation surface [65]. When a
dipole is placed with its axis perpendicular to the grooves, it is referred to as a system
of E-type corrugation surface. By combining E-type and H-type corrugated reﬂectors,
and by applying a UWB dipole with only 21-mm proﬁle on the surface, a very wide

334
Design and practice of small antennas II
AMC 1-18
AMC 1-4
AMC 1-2
−10
−15
−20
−25
−30
−30
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
−60
−90
−120
−150
−1800.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
−40
−35
S21 (dB)
−45
−50
−55
−60
400
600
800
1000 1200 1400
Frequency (MHz)
1600 1800 2000 2200 2400
1350
MHz
TE
TE
TM
TM
Surface wave measurements: thick foam-core AMC, 1 in 2 vias
+90
−90
981
MHz
Frequency (GHz)
Frequency (GHz)
1547 MHz
882 MHz
Phase (degrees)
(b)
(a)
Figure 8.80 Measured (a) surface wave transmission coefﬁcient and (b) phase for HIS ([64],
copyright C⃝2003 IEEE).
Figure 8.81 A source dipole antenna over the corrugated ground plane ([65], copyright C⃝2010
IEEE).

8.2 Design and practice of PCSA
335
Figure 8.82 The FSS unit cell ([66], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
impedance bandwidth was obtained, for VSWR < 2, from 2.75 to 8.35 GHz. The
radiation pattern was stable and unidirectional, and gain over 6 dB within the frequency
band of 2.75 to 6.0 GHz was obtained.
Another example is an FSS with a periodical array of cells, having a pattern that is
a combination of a Jerusalem cross and a three-step fractal patch shown in Figure 8.82
[66]. The low-proﬁle monopole antenna on the HIS ground plane with the substrate
thickness of 0.07λ was able to obtain an enhanced gain of 7.73 dB from 5.35 dB.
8.2.3
Applications of EBG (Electromagnetic Band Gap)
8.2.3.1
Miniaturization
A probe-fed patch antenna backed by a mushroom-type EBG substrate is designed, and
it demonstrates miniaturization that achieved 66.83% [67]. Miniaturization is achieved
by employing the property of EBG structures, which supports slow wave propagation
as its ﬁrst propagating mode, having a longer effective wavelength than those in free
space and dielectrics. The EBG structure, over which a patch antenna will be embedded,
is designed to operate in its slow wave region in order to achieve a lower frequency
operation of the patch antenna for the size reduction. Here the operating frequency of
2.4 GHz is used, to which the size of a conventional patch antenna is designed to be
31.9 mm in length and 40.9 mm in width. A proposed patch antenna embedded on the
mushroom-type EBG surface is illustrated in Figure 8.83, in which a unit cell is shown
by its top and side views along with dimensional parameters. The number of cells is
designed to have slightly larger area than the patch, so a square surface with 4 × 4 cells
to cover the patch is selected. In the initial design, the unit cell size a is chosen to be
5.5 mm, based on the wavelength of slow wave mode λslow = 34.5 mm. Other parameters
are Dvia = 0.8, g = 0.25, h1 = 1.524, and h2 = 0.762. The dielectric constant of the
substrate is 3.66. By doing optimization, starting from the initial values with λslow/2, the
patch size, L (length) × W (width), respectively, is determined to be 18.3 × 17.4 mm.
The reduction of the patch area from the area of a conventional patch is estimated to
be 66.83% in its ratio, and 49.58% even when the area of the EBG surface is included.

336
Design and practice of small antennas II
a
g
Top view
Coax feed
Patch antenna
Superstrate
Substrate
EBG patch
Ground
a
Side view
Dvia
Lpatch
Wpatch
h2
h1
y
x
z
Figure 8.83 Miniaturized patch antenna on a mushroom type EBG substrate ([67], copyright
C⃝2010 IEEE).
z
y
x
m
g
L1
L2
w
h
ϕ
Ground
Unit cell
0.1 mm
Dielectric substrate
Dipole
Figure 8.84 A dipole closely placed over an EBG surface ([69], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
The antenna exhibits rather narrow bandwidth and low efﬁciency because of the thin
substrate.
In the paper [67], the effect of EBG on the coupling between two antennas is inves-
tigated, showing that H-plane coupling between two units of this type of EBG patch
antenna is much lower than that of conventional patches.
8.2.3.2
Enhancement of gain
It is natural that gain can be enhanced by a patch antenna when embedded on the
EBG surface, because the surface wave on the ground plane is suppressed. Subse-
quently current ﬂow into the backside of the ground plane can be reduced, leading to
increase of radiation into forward directions. A simple example is a dipole antenna
embedded on the mushroom-type EBG surface described in [63, 68, 69]. A wideband
dipole embedded on the EBG surface is described in [69]. Figure 8.84 illustrates a
schematic of the EBG with dipole, giving also dimensional parameters. The antenna
is designed to obtain wide bandwidth as well as higher gain based on the optimiza-
tion of the interaction between impedances of a primary antenna and its imaginary
dipoles with the reﬂection phase of a mushroom-type EBG structure. The peak gain
obtained by calculation is between 5.5 and 8.3 dBi over the frequency region from

8.2 Design and practice of PCSA
337
Figure 8.85 Planer bow-tie antenna closely placed over the EBG ground plane ([71], copyright
C⃝2008 IEEE).
1.7 GHz to 2.5 GHz, while measured and simulated bandwidths are 38% and 41%,
respectively. Since the antenna is a balanced type, a balun is necessary for avoiding
interference of unbalanced current produced on the feeding cable without a balun. By
using a wideband balun, the antenna was shown to obtain wider bandwidth as compared
with a case without a balun. The dipole is made of two metal strips with 1-mm width
and 45.7-mm length, and is printed on the substrate with εr = 4.5, having the size of
94 × 94 mm. The EBG structure is composed with 6 × 8 cells, each cell (mushroom)
having the size of 12.4 mm in width, and 6.0 mm in height, being arrayed with gaps
of 0.4 mm. The bandwidth of 1.6–2.5 GHz covers frequency bands of several wire-
less systems such as DCS (Digital Communication Systems: 1.71–1.88 GHz), GSM
(Global Systems for Mobile Communication: 1.85–1.99 GHz), PCS (Personal Com-
munication Systems: 1.85–1.99 GHz), UMTS (Universal Mobile Telecommunication
System: 1.92–2.17 GHz), and WLAN (Wireless Local Network: 2.4–2.485 GHz).
8.2.3.3
Enhancement of bandwidth
With the close spacing of a thin dipole and its image element, currents of these ele-
ments are in phase, leading to decrease in the reactive energy surrounding the dipole.
Consequentially, the operating bandwidth increases. It was shown that the EBG ground
plane requires a reﬂection phase in the range of 90◦± 45◦for a low-proﬁle straight wire
dipole antenna to exhibit a good return loss [70] and the design of the EBG ground plane
follows to meet this requirement at a desired operating frequency. A dipole is designed
to operate at the same frequency, with consideration to placing it closely over the EBG
surface.
A dipole antenna introduced previously in [69] was designed by following the above
design concept and it demonstrated a fairly wideband performance covering 1.7 GHz–
2.5 GHz with center frequency of about 2.0 GHz.
A dipole antenna embedded over the EBG ground plane designed to exhibit about
1.4:1 impedance bandwidth is shown in [71]. In the same way, a bow-tie dipole antenna
over the EBG ground plane is described to show much greater bandwidth. Figure 8.85
depicts the antenna placed over the EBG ground plane. The bow-tie dipole antenna
has the thickness of 0.01λ, an overall length of 0.30λ, and an overall width of 0.26λ
at 300 MHz. It is located 0.02λ over the EBG ground plane, which is composed of

338
Design and practice of small antennas II
Figure 8.86 A folded bow-tie dipole over the EBG surface ([71], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
Antenna substrate
Dipole
h
EBG patches
EBG substrate
Ground
Air
Figure 8.87 A diamond dipole backed by the EBG ([72], copyright C⃝2007 IEEE).
8 × 8 cells (mushrooms), with each cell having the size of 0.12λ, via radius of 0.005λ,
gap between cells of 0.02λ, and the substrate (εr = 2.2) thickness of 0.04λ at a frequency
of 300 MHz. To obtain good matching for a wide bandwidth, the antenna is modiﬁed
to a folded structure, with both edges of the bow-tie element folded by a narrow strip
over the bow-tie element as shown in Figure 8.86. With this folded bow-tie structure,
the –10 dB return loss bandwidth spanned a frequency range from 306 MHz through
419.5 MHz.
Other types of antennas than straight wire and bow-tie can be useful. A square-patch
dipole, called a diamond dipole, shown in Figure 8.87 [72] is embedded on the EBG
surface and achieved a wide return-loss bandwidth of 1.4:1 (33%) taking the radiation
pattern into consideration. Also a sleeve dipole over the EBG is treated similarly and
shown to have a bandwidth of 1.28:1 (26%) [72].
8.2.3.4
Reduction of mutual coupling
Since the EBG structure has a feature of suppressing the surface wave propagation on
the EBG surface because of its bandgap property, the mutual coupling between two

8.2 Design and practice of PCSA
339
M2
M1
Figure 8.88 Microstrip antennas separated by the mushroom-type EBG ([68a], copyright C⃝2007
IEEE).
antennas can be suppressed by locating them over the EBG structure, if the antennas
operate within the EBG bandgap frequency band [68a]. For an array of two antennas,
for instance, the EBG substrate is placed between two antennas to allow arraying them
with close separation as shown in Figure 8.88 [68a]. The EBG structure, in this example
consisting of four columns of cells (patches), is inserted between two patches. The two
patches have the same size of 7 × 4 mm and are placed at a distance of 38.8 mm
(0.75λ at 5.8 GHz). The substrate thickness of the system is 2 mm, and εr is 10.2. Here,
the cell (mushroom) size of the EBG structure is considered for three cases, 2, 3, and
4 mm, the gap between cells is 0.5 mm, and the via radius is 0.3 mm. Figure 8.89(a)
provides the return loss S11 and (b) gives S21, corresponding to the mutual coupling. In
each ﬁgure, comparisons between cases with and without the EBG structure are shown.
All the antennas resonate around 5.8 GHz and show better than –10 dB matches, although
the EBG substrate may somewhat affect the impedance match of the antennas. Without
the EBG structure, the antennas show strong mutual coupling of –16.15 dB, whereas the
mutual coupling level changes with the EBG structure’s presence. When the cell size
is 2 mm, since the EBG bandgap is higher than the resonance frequency, the mutual
coupling is not reduced, leaving still the high level of –15.85 dB. In case of 3-mm
cell size, the resonance frequency 5.8 GHz falls inside the EBG bandgap so that the
surface waves are suppressed and the mutual coupling is greatly reduced to the level of
–25.03 dB. When the cell size is increased to 4 mm, the EBG bandgap becomes lower
than the resonance frequency. Thus the mutual coupling is not improved, leaving the
level as strong as –16.27 dB.
8.2.4
Application of DGS (Defected Ground Surface)
The concept of DGS emerged from studies of PBG structure in electromagnetics, now
being referred to as the EBG structure [73]. An EBG substrate is implemented on
the ground plane surface to achieve the stopband property over a frequency range and
thus a “defected” ground plane surface (DGS) is created. The DGS structure is con-
stituted of modiﬁed EBG structures, having some compact geometries such as a unit
cell as a single defect, or in periodic conﬁguration with a small period number on the
ground plane, which provides stopbands and slow-wave nature over a frequency range
with a different manner of EBG. Hence, the DGS can be referred to as a unit cell

340
Design and practice of small antennas II
No EBG
2 mm
3 mm
4 mm
0
−5
−10
−15
−20
5.2
5.4
5.6
5.8
6
6.2
6.4
−10
−15
−20
S21 (dB)
S11 (dB)
(b)
(a)
Frequency (GHz)
Frequency (GHz)
−25
−30
5.2
5.4
5.6
5.8
6
6.2
6.4
No EBG
2 mm
3 mm
4 mm
Figure 8.89 (a) Return loss and (b) mutual coupling ([72], copyright C⃝2007 IEEE).
EBG, or as an EBG having limited number of cells and a period of repetition. In a
practical DGS, the defects can be created by etching periodic or single patterns on the
ground plane substrate. Various shapes and sizes have been explored so far, including
ring, meander line, triangle, dumbbells, spirals, H-shape, U-shape, and their modiﬁca-
tions. Figure 8.90 depicts some geometries of the DGS unit. The DGS structure can be
applied to antennas, microwave ﬁlters, power ampliﬁers, oscillators, and so forth. Shapes
and sizes of the structure depend on the desired operating frequency and the required
performances.
8.2.4.1
Ring-shaped DGS
Figure 8.91 illustrates a concentric-ring DGS [74]. Two conﬁgurations with DGS struc-
ture etched on the ground plane are shown in the ﬁgure; (a) is #1 and (b) is #2, which

8.2 Design and practice of PCSA
341
(a)
(b)
(e)
(f)
(c)
(d)
Figure 8.90 Some examples of DGS geometries: (a) ring (b) meander line (c) triangle
(d) dumbbell (e) spiral H-shape and (f) U-shape.
Microstrip
line printed
on reverse
side
Defects
w
e
e
Ring #1
Ring #2
Ring #3
(a)
(b)
s
e
s
s
Figure 8.91 Concentric ring (CR) DGS: (a) conﬁguration no. 1 and (b) conﬁguration no. 2 ([74],
copyright C⃝2006 IEEE).
is similar to #1 but with a small circle defect at the center. The DGS circles are etched
on the ground plane and are shown by dark color in the ﬁgure. A pair of dotted lines
represents a microstrip line etched on the reverse side of the substrate. The substrate εr
is 2.33 and the thickness is 1.575 mm. The dimensions of the DGS are: 2e = 0.1λg =
2 mm, h = 0.08λ, and s = 3e, where the operating frequency fg = 10 GHz. The width of
the microstrip line w = 4.7 mm. Figure 8.92 shows measured and simulated transmission
characteristics S21 of DGS #1, comparing measured S21 with and without DGS. It shows
the stopband effect of DGS by S21 < –10 dB over the frequency range of 9 to 11 GHz.
With the DGS #2, an almost identical result was obtained.
As a modiﬁcation of these DGSs, a case where the DGS structure is backed by a
secondary ground plane, a metal plate, is studied, and the performance measured. In

342
Design and practice of small antennas II
8
−20
Measured with CR-DGS #1
Simulated with CR-DGS #1
Measured with normal GP
−10
0
9
10
Frequency (GHz)
S21 (dB)
11
12
Figure 8.92 Measured and simulated transmission characteristics of a microstrip etched on
CR-DGS no. 1 and a normal ground plane ([74], copyright C⃝2006 IEEE).
this case, a deeper stopband was observed over the frequency range of 10.6 to 11.4 GHz
compared with the case without the second ground plane. This type of DGS is useful for
suppressing interference, phase noise, and harmonics in microstrip-based active antenna
design [74].
Another modiﬁed DGS is a structure having the half-ring geometry. Measured data are
shown to be wide stopband operation over 8 to 10 GHz and agreement with simulation
was noted.
The ring-shape DGS can be applied to suppress mutual coupling between circular
microstrip antenna array elements.
8.2.4.2
Multiband circular disk monopole patch antenna
A compact multiband patch antenna consisting of a circular disk monopole with an
L-shape slot cut on the ground plane, forming a DGS surface is proposed [75]. The
slot creates two orthogonal current paths on the ground plane, producing two additional
resonances in the impedance of the antenna. The geometry of the antenna is depicted
in Figure 8.93, where (a) shows top view and (b) gives perspective view. Dimensional
parameters are also provided in the ﬁgure. The antenna structure is low proﬁle, con-
structed in completely uniplanar form, since it does not require use of any via as in
the mushroom structure or lumped-element components. The antenna is designed on a
low-cost substrate having εr = 4.34, tan δ = 0.016, and height hsub = 1.59 mm. Other
dimensional parameters are the length of the monopole Lm = λg/4, and the radius of
the disk r = 8 mm, which is designed to produce the low resonance frequency around
3.1 GHz. The ground plane size is determined to be Lg × Wg = 12 × 24 mm taking
as granted that the antenna will be employed for a card-size module used in MIMO
(Multi-Input Multi-Output) systems, to which mounting at least three antennas on the
size of 75 × 34 × 5 mm is possible. Resonance frequencies are 5.6 and 8 GHz and the
return-loss performance below –10 dB is from 3.7 to 9.3 GHz.

8.2 Design and practice of PCSA
343
(a)
(b)
SMA
Connector
Slot
Ground
Lm
Lg
Wg
hsub
Scpw
Ls1
Ws
Ls2
Wcpw
z
r
y
x
h
Figure 8.93 Multiband printed monopole antenna with a DGS ([75], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
1. 6553e+003
Jsur f [A /m]
3. 0618e+002
1. 5081e+002
7. 4287e+001
3. 6592e+001
1. 8024e+001
8. 8782e+000
4. 3732e+000
2. 1541e+000
1. 0611e+000
5. 2265e-001
2. 5744e-001
1. 2681e-001
6. 2463e-002
3. 0768e-002
1. 5155e-002
7. 4651e-003
02
03
Figure 8.94 Simulated surface current on the conductors of the multiband monopole antenna on
the DGS at 2.7 GHz ([75], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
Employing the DGS structure by inserting an L-slot on the ground plane, two addi-
tional resonances around 3 GHz result, while retaining the original high-frequency
resonances around 5.6 and 8 GHz. Change in the surface current distributions on the
ground plane due to the L-shaped slot can be observed in Figure 8.94. The L-slot forces
current on the left-side of the ground plane to wrap around the slot, while the current

344
Design and practice of small antennas II
0
10
8
6
4
2
−35
−40
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
Measured
(a)
(b)
Frequency (GHz)
|S11| (dB)
Simulated
0
10
8
6
4
2
−20
−30
−25
−15
−10
−5
0
Measured
Frequency (GHz)
|S11| (dB)
Simulated
Figure 8.95 Comparison of the return loss of a circular disk monopole antenna (a) without and (b)
with DGS (simulated and measured results) ([75], copyright C⃝2008 IEEE).
on the right-side of the ground plane ﬂows along the top edge. The L-slot thus creates
alternate current paths on the left-side ground plane, which are orthogonal to the current
on the right-side ground plane, ﬂowing on the top edge of the ground plane. Because
these two currents have slightly different path lengths, two resonance frequencies result.
Also these two currents generate orthogonal polarization, allowing two distinct adja-
cent resonances to merge, which contributes to extending the bandwidth around 3 GHz.
Figure 8.95 illustrates measured and simulated return loss for (a) without DGS (no
L-slot on the ground plane) and (b) with DGS. From the ﬁgure, it is observed that the
simulation shows –10 dB S11 bandwidth of 520 MHz for the low band (2.62–3.14 GHz)
and 4.51 GHz for high-band (4.66–9.17 GHz), and slightly different but still similar
results by measurement.
There have been many papers treating application of DGS. Some of them are sup-
pression of cross polarization [76], reduction of harmonics [77], and reconﬁgurable

8.2 Design and practice of PCSA
345
Unit cell length ∼λg/2
K
(b)
K
(d)
(a)
Bandgap
3.00
2.90
2.80
Frequency (GHz)
DBE
RBE
2.70
2.60
2.50
ω
ω
−π
π
K
(c)
−π
π
0.7π
0.8π
0.9π
π
Figure 8.96 (a) Simple printed loop antenna, (b) dispersion characteristics of a unit cell forming
the rectangular loop antenna, (c) bending k–ω characteristics to shift resonance to lower
frequencies, and (d) magniﬁed view of the dispersion characteristics around the band edge ([83],
copyright C⃝2009 IEEE).
DGS [78], which has a potential of a number of applications, where the reconﬁguration
performance is required.
8.2.5
Application of DBE (Degenerated Band Edge) structure
EBG structures have unique properties of frequency bandgap and group delay diminish-
ing (∂ω/∂k = 0) near the bandgap. This property has been employed to improve antenna
performance in various ways as was described in previous sections. In order to realize
miniaturization of antennas, the typical common techniques are lowering the resonance
frequency and reducing the wave velocity in the antenna structure. Reducing the band
edge frequency of the EBG structure satisﬁes this concept. However, if lowering the
band edge frequency can be realized, further downsizing of the antenna will be possible.
The DBE structure is a device that can be harnessed.
The general properties and applications of DBE structure have been discussed in detail
by J. L. Volakis [79–83]. The concept of emulating the DBE structure, not using materials
like a crystal, but a microstrip substrate is demonstrated by a printed loop structure, for
example, as depicted in Figure 8.96(a) [83]. Lowering the band edge frequency can

346
Design and practice of small antennas II
Uncoupled-A1
Uncoupled-A1
Coupled-A2
ε
Figure 8.97 Concept of creating a DBE surface on a microstrip substrate using a pair of coupled
and uncoupled transmission lines ([83], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE).
be explained by using the dispersion diagram of Figure 8.96(b), which is generated by
using a half of the loop as the unit cells to form the periodic structure shown in the
Figure 8.96(a). The loop consists of two unit cells formed by the top and bottom half
loops. Two traces on the dispersion diagram (Figure 8.96(b)) indicate two propagating
modes of either positive or negative k, and resonance frequencies are given at points
k = ± π and 0, because these points are associated with phases of matching for two
propagating waves on the loop. To achieve lower resonance frequency, it is necessary to
lower the k–ω curve at k = π as shown in Figure 8.96(c). This can be achieved by using
DBE structure, which exhibits a 4th-order k–ω curve, descending more sharply around
the band edge than conventional EBG structure having a 2nd-order k–ω curve as shown
in Figure 8.96(d).
A practical structure to replace a volumetric DBE material (crystal) composed of mis-
aligned anisotropic layers can be equivalently implemented by coupled and uncoupled
transmission line pairs printed on a uniform substrate as shown in Figure 8.97 [83]. A
microstrip (MS) DBE antenna composed of two-circularly cascaded unit cells designed
for resonance at 2.59 GHz is illustrated in Figure 8.98. The antenna has broadside gain
of 6.9 dB at 2.59 GHz with 0.8% bandwidth for |S11| < –10 dB. A physical footprint
of the antenna on the Duroid substrate (εr = 2.2) is λ0/4.3 × λ0/5. The radiated ﬁeld
is linearly polarized and the radiation efﬁciency is over 95%. The narrow bandwidth
can be improved by using a thicker substrate. By changing the substrate thickness from
250 mils to 500 mils, the bandwidth increased to 8.7%, but with lowered resonance
frequency to 2.3 GHz and reduced gain to 6.2 dB. As the antenna features a highly
concentrated ﬁeld at the center of the antenna, it is suited to an array that can be
tightly arranged. Figure 8.99 depicts an example of such an array, which is a 4 × 4
array, constructed in the size of 1.2λ0 × 1.2λ0, with separation of each element λ0/15
at the center frequency f0 = 2.55 GHz. The directivity is 13 dB and the bandwidth
is 2%.
A DBE antenna with reduced size and yet wide bandwidth is designed. The antenna
depicted in Figure 8.100(a) has reduced footprint of 0.85 × 0.88 (in inches) (λ0/9.6 ×
λ0/9.3 × λ0/16 at 1.45 GHz) etched on 2 × 2 inches alumina substrate (εr = 9.6, tan δ =
3 × 10−4) with thickness of 500 mils, having a metal plate as the ground plane on the
back surface. On the alumina substrate, the resonance frequency is down to 1.455 GHz

8.3 Design and practice of PSA
347
50 Ω Coaxial cable
(capacitively coupled)
0.88 inch (2.24 cm)
1.05 inch (2.67 cm)
Figure 8.98 Microstrip (MS) DBE layout on a 2 × 2 (in inches) substrate ([83], copyright C⃝2009
IEEE).
13 dB directivity
array elements
11.7 dB realized gain
2% bandwidth
Y
Z
X
Theta
Figure 8.99 Radiation pattern of a 4 × 4 MS-DBE array using element in Fig. 8.98 ([83],
copyright C⃝2009 IEEE).
and the bandwidth is increased to 3.5%. Tangential electric ﬁeld magnitude on the top
surface around the antenna element is shown in Figure 8.100(b).
8.3
Design and practice of PSA (Physically Small Antennas)
A PSA is an antenna that is not necessarily ESA, but simply is a physically small
antenna, including ESA. Various recently emerged wireless systems, for not only

348
Design and practice of small antennas II
0.85 inch (2.16 cm)
(a)
(b)
1.5000e+004
1.4000e+004
1.3000e+004
1.2000e+004
1.1000e+004
1.0000e+004
9.0004e+003
8.0005e+003
7.0005e+003
6.0006e+003
5.0007e+003
4.0007e+003
3.0008e+003
2.0009e+003
1.0009e+003
1.0000e+003
50 Ω Coaxial cable
2 inch (5.08 cm)
2 inch (5.08 cm)
0.88 inch (2.24 cm)
Figure 8.100 (a) Small-sized MS-DBE layout on a 2 × 2 (in inches) substrate and (b) tangential
electric ﬁeld magnitude on the top surface ([83], copyright C⃝2009 IEEE).
communications, but also for control, sensor, data transmission, identiﬁcation, remote
sensing, wireless power transmission, and so forth, require small antennas to ﬁt into
the units of small pieces of equipment for those systems. Typical wireless appli-
cations are such systems as various short-range communications, for instance NFC
(Near Field Communications), including RFID (Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation), where
numerous applications have been deployed practically in the recent decade, and radio
watches/clocks, which operate very precisely with nearly standard time, being synchro-
nized automatically by receiving time signals from long-wave standard-time broadcast-
ing stations.
Types of antennas are not necessarily speciﬁc to these applications, but generally they
are conventional types. However, most of them are speciﬁcally designed to ﬁt into the
small equipment used in the various applications and yet satisfy the requirements for
each system. Antennas are not necessarily ESAs; however, antennas in almost all these
cases need to be miniaturized and ESA techniques are employed as almost inevitable
means. The techniques include application of slow-wave concepts, lowering resonance
frequency, ﬁlling space with radiation elements, increase of radiation modes, and so
forth, as covered previously in this chapter.
As the antenna dimensions become smaller, evaluation of antenna performances
tends to become harder to obtain correct results. Special techniques to evaluate
antenna performances often are required. However, the appropriate electromagnetic
simulations may gain greater importance for replacing the measurements when eval-
uating antenna performances. The simulation can be used even for design of small
antennas.
Another important problem is impedance matching of antenna to the load, conven-
tionally a resistance of 50 . In cases of very small RFID equipment, for example, the
antenna is often directly connected to the RF circuits, which has impedance not of 50
, but usually a much higher impedance. Further, connection of a type of balanced
antenna with unbalanced circuits or vice versa may often be encountered. Without good

8.3 Design and practice of PSA
349
Antenna
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.101 (a) A wristwatch front view and (b) inside view to show a small coil antenna
installed wristwatch ([84], copyright C⃝2007 IEEE, and [85], copyright C⃝2006 IEEE).
matching between the antenna and the load, the best system performance cannot be
realized, meaning the desired operation range in the RFID system, for instance, might
never be attained. Unfortunately, it has so far been recognized that there have been
many systems operating in mismatched condition without careful considerations on the
design. It may not be easy to obtain the perfect matching conditions, especially when
the system operates over a wide frequency band; however, since it is an indispensable
requirement, a means must be contrived to achieve suitably good matching. The method
is not very speciﬁc, but conventional ways of matching can be applied.
8.3.1
Small antennas for radio watch/clock systems
Standard-time signals are broadcast from numerous radio stations of the world. In
Japan, there are two long-wave broadcasting stations for JST (Japan Standard Time),
which provide accuracy of ±1 × 10−12. A watch/clock, into which a very small receiver
with a small magnetic-core loop antenna is integrated, receives the JST signal through
the broadcasting of either 40 or 60 kHz from one of the two stations and automatically
adjusts the time display to agree closely with the JST. A view of a wristwatch, in which
a small receiver with a coil antenna is installed, is illustrated in Figure 8.101; (a) the
front view and (b) the inside view, where the antenna is indicated with an arrow [84]. An
example of a coil antenna is shown in Figure 8.102 [84, 85]. In the case of amorphous
metal material, the core is composed of multilayered very thin ﬁlm materials as shown
in Figure 8.102. The amorphous material has permeability μr of around 8800, the
thickness of a ﬁlm is 0.16 µm, and a core is comprised of 40 ﬁlms, half of which are bent
slightly upward at the edge of the core to improve the sensitivity, Figure 8.103 shows a
fabricated antenna. The antenna is designed to operate at 40 and/or 60 kHz, with length

350
Design and practice of small antennas II
Coil
Resin mold
Amorphous metal film
Figure 8.102 A small amorphous metal laminated core loop antenna [84–85].
Figure 8.103 Fabricated amorphous metal core loop antenna [84–85].
of 16 mm and number of turns about 1200. It was found that permalloy material can
also be used for the core of the antenna instead of amorphous metal materials.
8.3.2
Small antennas for RFID
The main function of the RFID systems is to retrieve data or information about speciﬁc
objects which were previously inserted. The systems include a transmitter and receiver,
which are generally referred to as interrogator and transponder, respectively, and the
operating frequency ranges cover from LF to UHF bands, dependent on the purpose of
the system, and the communication ranges differ from almost zero distance to far-ﬁeld
distances as deﬁned by radio-wave propagation. There are two types of systems, passive
and active types. In the passive type, the transponder does not have an internal power
source, whereas the active-type transponder is powered. The passive transponder operates
with the received power from the electromagnetic ﬁeld generated by the interrogator.
Hence, the operating range of the passive system is very limited to almost zero distance
in the range of tens of centimeters by using frequencies of LF and HF bands, to which
electromagnetic coupling or an inductive communication system is usually employed to
make an air link. By contrast, the active system can perform long-range operation, using
higher frequencies such as VHF and UHF. The systems operating at higher frequencies
than UHF regions are referred to as Microwave RFID systems.
Antenna types depend on the type of the systems. For the passive RFID systems,
where the magnetic coupling or inductive communication system is employed, loop or
coil type antennas are generally used. The devices that carry data or information are

8.3 Design and practice of PSA
351
0.24λ × 0.05λ
0.3λ × 0.04λ
0.27λ × 0.27λ
0.27λ × 0.01λ
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 8.104 Examples of small wire-type RFID antennas ([87], copyright C⃝2006 IEEE, and
[90], copyright C⃝2006 IEEE).
often called a tag, instead of transponder, because of their physical shape, and they
can also function as visual tags for pallets or cases of goods. Other types of antennas
can be used in the tag. Antennas in tags, which have generally small, compact, or thin
structures, are designed by applying miniaturization techniques.
For the active RFID systems, transponders have an internal power source, typically a
battery, by which devices in the interrogator can be triggered for sending signals back
to the interrogator. The interrogators are also called readers, because in earlier RFID
systems, they were only capable of reading data or information sent from transponders.
Varieties of antennas are employed for both transponders and interrogators in the active
systems, although small antennas are still preferred. Numerous types of antennas have
been developed and employed in practice for various types of RFID equipment. In this
section, some typical RFID antennas are described.
8.3.2.1
Dipole and monopole types
To reduce the antenna size, meander line structures are widely employed in various types
of RFID antennas. Some examples are shown in Figure 8.104 [86]. In the ﬁgure, (a)
shows an antenna (f = 915 MHz) with a loop to couple with the meander line [87];
(b) depicts a meander line antenna (f = 920 MHz) loaded with a bar, by which antenna
impedance can be adjusted along with the meander line length [88]; (c) is a doubly
folded L-shaped dipole (f = 915 MHz), useful to ﬁt the corner of a box and being
visible from almost every angle [89]; and (d) provides a multi-conductor antenna (f =
900 MHz) having double T-match scheme and spiral folding to achieve the required
inductance [90]. There are many other meander line RFID antennas; however, here only
a few among them are introduced.
A unique-conﬁguration antenna, named forked shape monopole antenna is proposed
in [91]. The antenna is designed for a compact USB dongle application. The geometry of

352
Design and practice of small antennas II
DVB tuner
FSMA
Figure 8.105 A FSMA installed USB dongle ([91], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
the antenna is illustrated in Figure 8.105. The fork line is used to create a capacitive
coupling effect to reduce the antenna size and enhance the bandwidth. The antenna is
designed to operate in a very wide frequency band, 470 to 860 MHz, so as to receive
digital video broadcasting (DVB). Furthermore, the upper frequency band of the antenna
can be extended to 1142 MHz, leading to use in the GSM (Global System for Mobile
Communications) band.
A wired bow-tie dipole RFID tag antenna recessed in a cavity is introduced in [92].
Figure 8.106 illustrates antenna geometry with top view in (a) and cut view in (b).
The antenna is a cavity-backed type, allowing easy installation in a metallic container,
vehicle, aircraft, and so forth. The antenna having the total length of 89 mm and the
wing width of 38 mm is designed to operate at 915 MHz and is placed on the sur-
face of the cavity, having the size of 140 × 80 × 50 mm. Through experiment, it was
conﬁrmed that maximum reading distance by using the antenna with optimized dimen-
sions was about 3.2 times greater when compared with a commercial label-type RFID
tag.
A planar dipole antenna (f = 915 MHz) designed to allow direct mounting on materials
often encountered in practical applications is described in [93]. The outer shape of the
planar element is an inverse exponential curve, which is illustrated in Figure 8.107. An
inductive coil is attached to the input of the antenna to ease matching to an RFID chip
that is mounted at the center of the coil. The size of the antenna is 100 × 25 mm.
The reﬂection coefﬁcient was lower than –5 dB from 860 to 960 MHz. The range
performance of the antenna was examined when placed on materials such as cardboard,
a paper block, plastic, wood, a bottle of tap water, and a glass bottle, in terms of material
relative permittivity and the material thickness. It was found that if the tag is placed on
materials such as cardboard, plastic, wood or in free space, having lower permittivity and
less thickness, the tag range was around 8 m. However, materials of higher permittivity

8.3 Design and practice of PSA
353
l4
l3
l2
l1
gx
xw
yw
xc
yc
gy
w
x
y
b
Chip
Cavity
Metallic wing
d
a
xc
zc
x
z
h
Cavity
Air
Chip
Bow-tie
antenna
Substrate (εr)
Metallic wing
xw
(b)
(a)
Figure 8.106 Geometry of wired bow-tie RFID tag antenna: (a) top view and (b) cut view ([93],
copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
Silver ink
Paper
100 mm
25 mm
x
y
z
Aluminum coil
RFID chip
Figure 8.107 A ﬂared planar dipole antenna loaded with an RFID reader ([93], copyright C⃝2010
IEEE).
and greater thickness such as thick paper block, bottle of tap water, glass bottle either
empty or ﬁlled with water, affect the tag range and decrease it to about 2 m.
8.3.2.2
Inverted-F conﬁguration antennas
To reduce the length of a monopole antenna the element is folded, and to ease the
impedance matching, a shorting pin is added to form an Inverted-F (IF) shape. Various

354
Design and practice of small antennas II
(a)
(c)
(d)
Ground
Chip
(b)
0.19λ × 0.19λ
0.13λ × 0.16λ
0.11λ × 0.08λ
0.09λ × 0.108λ
εr
εr
Figure 8.108 Examples of modiﬁed Inverted-F type planar antennas: (a) conventional type,
(b) two-layer double-PIFA tag fed by a small rectangular loop, (c) coplanar I-F antenna with an
additional stub, and (d) coplanar IF antenna with multiple folded lines ([94], [95–96], copyright
C⃝2006 IEEE).
modiﬁed IF conﬁgurations are applied to form RFID antennas. Figure 8.108(a) shows
a PIFA (Planar IF Antenna) (f = 870 MHz) with a square element [86, 94]; (b) depicts
a double-PIFA tag (f = 900 MHz) fed by a small rectangular loop [95]; (c) illustrates a
PIFA (f = 870 MHz) with an additional horizontal stub [96]; and (d) a dual-band PIFA
(f = 2400 MHz and 5300 MHz) with multiple folded elements [97].
Another type of antenna to which IF conﬁguration is applied is a miniaturized IFA
loaded with an element having a Hilbert trace at the end of the IFA element as shown
in Figure 8.109 [98]. The antenna size is 35 × 6 × 1.6 mm including the ground plane.
The center frequency is 2.45 GHz, return loss is 29 dB, and bandwidth for less than
10 dB return loss is 230 MHz (2.33–2.56 GHz), corresponding to 9.4% in terms of the
relative bandwidth. The operating frequency can be shifted by adjusting the length of
the Hilbert trace, which also leads to increasing the bandwidth. The gain can be adjusted

8.3 Design and practice of PSA
355
Y
Y
L
Z
X
X
X
Via
Feed
W
h
Lb
Wb
Wc
Lc
Figure 8.109 Geometry of an IFA top loaded with Hilbert trace [97].
W
L
a
y
x
z
d
b
p
Wg
Lg
Folded
patch
Substrate
Insulator
Body
εI
εs hs
hI
g
Figure 8.110 A folded patch with H-shaped slot loaded with a chip ([99], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
by appropriately designing the size and the shape of the ground plane. With this antenna
conﬁguration, antenna performances can be improved, while achieving miniaturization
of the antenna.
8.3.2.3
Slot type antennas
A slot embedded folded rectangular patch is designed to apply to a wearable UHF RFID
sensor tag [99]. Layout of the tag is illustrated in Figure 8.110, where dimensional
parameters are also provided. The antenna is essentially a series-fed L-shaped patch and
radiates from the open edge of the patch and the slot embedded on the planar element.
A sensor chip is located in the middle of the gap between the two slots. Two prototype

356
Design and practice of small antennas II
Table 8.8 Parameters of two tags [mm]
([99], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE)
Parameter
TAG-1
TAG-2
Wg
60
90
W
60
80
Lg
49
60
L
49
49
p
L/2
15
a
8
18
b
10
9
d
10
10
g
3
4
hs
4
4
9 cm
6 cm
8 cm
4.9 cm
6 cm
6 cm
Figure 8.111 Fabricated antenna TAG-1(left) and TAG-2 (right) ([99], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
RFID tags TAG-1 and TAG-2 are fabricated (Figure 8.111) and the parameters are
given in Table 8.8. A mechanical motion-vibration sensor is integrated into the antenna
structure. This kind of sensor is useful for detection of motion in medical applications, to
assist diagnosis of some neurological diseases, involving compulsory arm movements
in domestic healthcare, for example to track the behavior of aged persons [99]. The
maximum reading range of TAG-1 is 1.5 m by using a short-range reader that emits not
more than 0.5 W EIRP at the tag’s microchip power of −30 dBm, while 2.1 m for TAG-2.
When a long-range reader (emitting up to 3.2 W EIRP) is used, it increases to 4 m for
the TAG-1 and 5.5 m for the TAG-2.
The antenna has a size comparable to a credit card and can be applied to any part of
the body. Improvement of the tag is concerned with realization of ﬂexible conformal
tags by applying textile technology.
A compact antenna using series OCSRR (Open Complementary Split Ring Res-
onator) is designed for the passive RFID tags [100]. The OCSRR unit is composed of a
circular slot and a conductor loop inserted inside the slot as shown in Figure 8.112(a).
Figure 8.112(b) gives the equivalent circuit of the OCSRR unit. The inductance LOCSRR

8.3 Design and practice of PSA
357
(a) Port 2
LOCSRR
COCSRR
(b) Port 2
V
f
d
h
m
c
r0
g
n
Port 1
Port 1
Figure 8.112 (a) An OCSRR unit and its dimensional parameters and (b) the equivalent circuit
([100], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
W
S
H
x
p
y
Port
k
q
Figure 8.113 Proposed UHF RFID antenna comprised of series connected OCSRR units ([100],
copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
is created by the conducting loop between the two inner and outer ring slots and the
capacitance COCSRR is between the inner conducting disk and the surrounding outer
conducting planes. By connecting OCSRR units in series, and adjusting the size, input
resistance and bandwidth can be increased, which is advantageous for matching of small
tag antennas that generally have small resistance and high reactance components. Par-
ticularly with several units, the inductance becomes four times that of the conventional
CSRR and makes for a feasible power harvesting circuit in the passive IC on the RFID
tag. The antenna is comprised of four units of OCSRR as shown in Figure 8.113.
The antenna operates at 920 MHz and obtains a maximum reading range of 5.48 m
with dimensions of 0.036λ0 × 0.17λ0 (λ0 is the free space wavelength at 920 MHz).
Other examples of RFID tags using slots are a thin L-shaped slot dipole loaded with
a meander line at the end of the dipole as shown in Figure 8.114 [101], and a patch
antenna on which circular slots are embedded to produce circular polarization as shown
in Figure 8.115 [102].

358
Design and practice of small antennas II
Lh
L1
L2
W1
W2
Lv
Figure 8.114 Geometry of a proposed slot dipole antenna loaded with meandered line having
RFID chip ([101], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
Asymmetric circular
shaped slotted patch
Dielectric substrate
Ground plane
(a)
(b)
Coaxial probe
z
x
y
x
H
D1
r1
r4
x0
S, S
S, S
r2
r3
S, S
S, S
D4
D3
D2
L
Figure 8.115 Unequal size circular slots embedded square patch: (a) cross sectional view and
(b) top view ([102], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).

8.3 Design and practice of PSA
359
2 mm
(a)
(b)
2 mm
98 mm
98 mm
D1
D2
y
x
z
y
x
z
L2
L1
Figure 8.116 Circular loop antenna with extended line fed by (a) internal line and (b) external line
([103], copyright C⃝2006 IEEE).
8.3.2.4
Loop antenna
A small circular loop antenna (CLA) operating at 911.25 MHz is designed for application
to an RFID tag [103]. A one-wavelength and a half-wavelength CLA with a short stub are
fabricated as shown in Figure 8.116, where (a) depicts an antenna with an internal stub,
while (b) illustrates an antenna with an outer stub. The antenna dimensions are given
in the ﬁgure. The stub increases the loop length so that the current path is increased
and the diameter of the loop is reduced. The ratios of size reduction compared with
a general CLA are 83% and 92%, respectively, for the one-wavelength CLA and the
half-wavelength CLA. The return loss, −10 dB bandwidth, and gain are −11.9 dB,
12 MHz (1.3%), and 1.18 dBi, for the one wavelength CLA and −16.5 dB, 48 MHz (5%)
and −0.58 dBi, respectively.
Another example is a square loop, but a part of the element is taken out, leaving three
corners, as shown in Figure 8.117(a) [104]. Two elements are used to form a quasi-Yagi
type antenna, with one element as a driver and another as a reﬂector, in order to produce
a directional pattern as depicted in Figure 8.117(b), and consequent higher gain. The
antenna is designed to install in a hand-held RFID reader as illustrated in Figure 8.117(c)
for its operation in the near-ﬁeld environment. The total dimensions of the antenna are
115 × 115 × 13.8 mm for operation of 433.92 MHz. The 10-dB bandwidth is 2.31 MHz
(0.53%), covering the required bandwidth of 433.67–434.17 MHz for the ISO/IEC
standards. When the reader is held by an operator, the radiation pattern deviates slightly
from the desired direction, the orientation of the reader, because the operators typically
hold the reader at a slant. Then, the gain is 2.5 dBi at angle θ = 20◦(azimuth) at ϕ = 0◦
(elevation), while 2.1 dBi at θ = 0◦.
The antenna radiates circular polarization and the bandwidth in terms of both
impedance and for axial ratio less than 3, is 0.58% (433.23–435.7 MHz) and 1.01%
(430.5–434.9 MHz) at θ = 0◦and 20◦, respectively.

360
Design and practice of small antennas II
Desired
direction
Antenna
Director’s
direction
Feed
a
Director
a: 13.8 mm (0.02λ)
Driver
b
c
b: 115 mm (0.166λ)
c: 115 mm (0.166λ)
Feed
b
c
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 8.117 A hand-held RFID device loaded with a two-wired broken square loop antenna
([104], copyright C⃝2010 IEEE).
2r1
2r2
V0
s
L
L
Figure 8.A1 A folded dipole [27b].
(a)
Vb
Vb
Ib(0)
Ib(0)
(a)
Vu viIu(0)
(1–vi)Iu(0)
Figure 8.A2 Equivalent expression of a folded dipole: (a) balanced mode and (b) unbalanced mode
[27b].
Appendix I
By folding an antenna structure, the input impedance depends on the ratio νi of the
current distributions on the antenna elements. A folded antenna of length 2L is modeled
as depicted in Figure 8A.1 [27b], in which current ﬂows on each element having radius
of r1 and r2 are denoted as I1 and I2, respectively, and the driven voltage is V0. This
model is equivalently divided into two parts as shown in Figure 8A.2; one is a balanced

8.3 Design and practice of PSA
361
= I1 − I2
I3
I1
b
a
I2
I1
Figure 8.A3 Current distributions at the feed point of the folded dipole connected with a coaxial
cable [27b].
mode shown in (a), on which the currents Ib(0) ﬂow on both elements [I(0) : current at
the driven terminals] and the driven voltage is Vb. The other part is an unbalanced mode
shown in (b), on which current ﬂow on one element is Iu1 = (1 – νi) I(0) and on other
element is Iu2 = νi I(0), respectively, and the driven voltage is Vu. Relationships between
these voltages are given by
2(1 −νi)Vb + Vu = V0·
(A8.1)
−2νiVb + Vu = 0
From this
Vb = V0/2
·
(A8.2)
Vu = νiV0
Then, input impedance Zin of the antenna is given by
Zin = V0/[νi Iu(0) + Ib(0)]
= 1/[(Zu/νi) −1 + 2Zb −1]
(A8.3)
where Zu = Vu/Iu (0) and Zb = Vb/Ib.
When two elements have the same radius, νi = 1/2.
Appendix II
When a coaxial cable is directly connected to a folded dipole as shown in Figure 8A.3,
current I1 ﬂowing into the dipole from the inner conductor of the coax returns to
the coax as the sum of the current I2, current at the opposite terminal of the dipole,
and I3, current on the outer conductor of the coax, which is equal to the differ-
ence of currents I1 and I2 [27b]. This is equivalently rewritten as a model shown in
Figure 8A.4(a). This model is further divided into two modes; A and B, respectively,
as Figure 8A.4(b) and (c) show. In each mode, the following relationships exist, by

362
Design and practice of small antennas II
d
c
2L
i
a
b
b′
V0
I1 − I2
(a)
d
c
a
a
b
b′
I1 − I2
I1 − I2
+
=
2
(b)
V0
2
V0
V0
2
I1 − I2
2
c
i
b
b′
I1 + I2
2
(c)
V0
2
d
c
a
a
(b′, a)
I1 − I2
I1 − I2
2
(b′)
0
0
I1 − I2
2
c
i
b′
I1 + I2
2
(c′)
I1 + I2
2
Figure 8.A4 Current and voltage at the feed point of a folded dipole (a) original mode, (b) and
(b′) A mode, and (c) and (c′) B mode [27b].
using Za and Zb, impedances of A mode and B mode, respectively, seen at the terminals
b–d,
V0/2 = (I1 −I2)/Za for A mode,
·
(A8.4)
V0 = (I1 + I2)Zb/2 for B mode.
From these,
(I1 −I2) = V0/(2Za)
·
(A8.5)
(I1 + I2) = V0/(Zb/2)
When the length of antenna L is a half wavelength, that is, one side is a quarter wave-
length, Za becomes inﬁnite, then I1 = I2 = I, and (I1 + I2)/2 = I. This means that the
current on the outer conductor of the coax (I1 – I2) disappears, and the same current
I ﬂows in and out from the coax, implying that a balun is not required. This is the

References
363
I
I
I
λ/2
I
Figure 8.A5 Direct connection of a coaxial cable to a half-wave folded dipole [27b].
self-balanced property of a folded dipole. With this property, the coax can be directly
connected to the folded dipole, as Figure 8A.5 depicts [27b, 30].
References
[1] F. Yang, X-X Zhang, and Y. Rahmat-Samii, Wide-Band E-Shaped Patch Antennas for
Wireless Communications, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 49,
2001, no. 7, pp. 1094–1100.
[2] Y. Chen, S. Yang, and Z. Nie, Bandwidth Enhancement Method for Low Proﬁle E-Shaped
Microstrip Patch Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58,
2010, no. 7, pp. 2442–2447.
[3] A. Khidre, K. F. Lee, F. Yang, and A. Elsherbeni, Wideband Circularly Polarized E-Shaped
Patch Antenna for Wireless Applications, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine,
vol. 52, 2010, no. 5, pp. 219–229.
[4a] S. K. Sharma and L. Shafai, Performance of a Novel ψ-shape Microstrip Patch Antenna
with Wide Bandwidth, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 8, 2009,
pp. 468–471.
[4b] S. K. Sharma and L. Shafai, Investigation of a Novel ψ-shape Microstrip Patch Antenna
With Wide Impedance Bandwidth, IEEE APS International Symposium June 2007, Digest
vol. 45, pp. 881–884.
[5] K. L Chung, A Wideband Circularly Polarized H-Shaped Patch Antenna, IEEE Transactions
on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, pp. 3379–3383.
[6] Z. N. C. Nasimuddin and X. Qing, Dual-Band Circularly Polarized S-Shaped Slotted Patch
Antenna with a Small Frequency Ratio, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 58, 2010, pp. 2112–2225.
[7a] S. I. Latif, L. Shafai, and S. K. Sharma, Bandwidth Enhancement and Size Reduction of
Microstrip Slot Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 53, 2005,
no. 3, pp. 994–1003.
[7b] Y-Shin Wang and S-J Chung, A Short Open-End Antenna with Equivalent Circuit Analysis,
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 5, pp. 1771–1775.
[8a] T. Huynh and K. F. Lee, Single-Layer Single-Patch Wideband Microstrip Antenna,
Electronics Letters, vol. 31, 1997, no. 16, pp. 1310–1312.
[8b] A. K. Shackelford, K. F. Lee, and K. M. Luk, Design of Small-Size Wide-Bandwidth
Microstrip-Patch Antennas, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 45, 2003,
no. 1, pp. 75–83.

364
Design and practice of small antennas II
[8c] C. L. Mak, K. M. Luk, K. F. Lee, and Y. L. Chow, Experimental Study of a Microstrip
Patch Antenna with an L-shaped Probe, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 48, 2000, no. 5, pp. 777–783.
[8d] K. F. Lee, Y. X. Guo, J. A. Hawkins, R. Chiar, and K. M. Luk, Theory and Experiment on
Microstrip Patch Antennas with Shorting Wall, IEE Proceedings, Microwaves, Antennas &
Propagation, vol. 147, 2000, pp. 521–525.
[8e] A. K. Shackelford, K. F. Lee, K. M. Luk, and R. Chair, U-Slot Patch Antenna with Shorting
Pin, Electronics Letters, vol. 37, 2001, no. 12, pp. 729–730.
[8f] R. Chair et al., Miniature Wide-Band Half U-Slot and Half E-Shaped Patch Antennas,
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 53, 2005, no. 8, pp. 2645–2652.
[8g] C. L. Mak, R. Chair, K. F. Lee, K. M. Luk, and A. A. Kishk, Half-U-slot Patch Antenna
with Shorting Wall, International Symposium USNC/CNC/URSI National Radio Science
Meeting, vol. 2, 2003, pp. 876–879.
[9] K. F. Lee et al., The Versatile U-Slot Antenna, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine,
vol. 52, 2010, no. 1, pp. 71–88, and p. 86 in vol. 52, 2010, no. 2.
[10] K. F. Lee, S. L. Steven, and A. Kishk, Dual- and Multiband U-Slot Patch Antennas, IEEE
Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 2, 2008, p. 64.
[11] K. F. Tong and T. P. Wong, Circular Polarized U-Slot Antenna, IEEE Transactions on
Antennas and Propagation, vol. 55, 2007, no. 8, pp. 2382–2385.
[12] S. Weigand et al., Analysis and Design of Broad-Band Single-Layer Rectangular U-Slot
Microstrip Patch Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 51,
2003, no. 3, pp. 457–468.
[13] K.-L. Wong, Compact and Broadband Microstrip Antennas, John Wiley & Sons, 2002,
p. 239.
[14] J.-Y. Sze and K.-L. Wong, Bandwidth Enhancement of a Microstrip-Line-Fed Printed
Wide-Slot Antenna, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 49, 2001, no. 7,
pp. 1020–1024.
[15] J.-Y. Jan and J.-W. Su, Bandwidth Enhancement of a Printed Wide-Slot Antenna With a
Rotated Square, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 53, 2005, no. 6,
pp. 2111–2114.
[16] C.-H. Chang and K.-L. Wong, Printed λ/8-PIFA for Penta-Band WWAN Operation in the
Mobile Phone, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 57, 2009, no. 5,
pp. 1373–1381.
[17] C.-M. Peng et al., Bandwidth Enhancement of Internal Antenna by Using Reactive Loading
for Penta-Band Mobile Handset Application, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propa-
gation, vol. 59, 2011, no. 5, pp. 1728–1733.
[18] C.-W. Chiu and Y.-J. Chi, Printed Loop Antenna with a U-Shaped Tuning Element for Hepta-
Band Laptop Applications, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010,
no. 11, pp. 3464–3470.
[19] F.-H. Chu and K.-Lu Wong, Planar Printed Strip Monopole with a Closely-Coupled Parasitic
Shorted Strip for Eight-Band LTE/GSM/UMTS Mobile Phone, IEEE Transactions on
Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 10, pp. 3426–3431.
[20] M. J. Ammann and Z. N. Chen, Wideband Monopole Antennas for Multi-Band Wireless
Systems, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 45, 2003, no. 2, pp. 146–150.
[21] G. Dubost and S. Zisler, Antennas a Large Bande, Masson, 1976, pp. 128–129.
[22] S. Honda et al., On a Broadband Disk Monopole Antenna, Technical Report of Television
Society Japan, ROFT 91–55 (1991–10) 1991.

References
365
[23] J. A. Evans and M. J. Ammann, Planar Trapezoidal and Pentagonal Monopole with
Impedance Bandwidth in Excess of 10:1, IEEE APS International Symposium Digest,
vol. 3, Orlando, 1999, pp. 1558–1561.
[24] Z. N. Chen and M. Y. W. Chia, Impedance Characteristics of EMC Triangular Planar
Monopoles, Electronics Letters, vol. 37, 2001, no. 21, pp. 1271–1272.
[25] Z. N. Chen, Impedance Characteristics of Planar Bow-Tie Like Monopole Antennas, Elec-
tronics Letters, vol. 36, 2000, no. 13, pp. 1100–1101.
[26] H. Morishita, H. Furuuchi, and K. Fujimoto, Performance of Balanced-fed Antenna System
for Handsets in the Vicinity of a Human Head or Hand, IEE Proceedings, Microwaves,
Antennas & Propagation, vol. 149, 1999, no. 2, pp. 85–91.
[27a] H. Morishita et al., A Balance-Fed Loop Antenna System for Handset, IEICE Transactions
on Fundamentals of Electronics, Communications and Computer Sciences, vol. E82-A,
1999, no. 7, pp. 1138–1143.
[27b] S. Hayashida, Analysis and Design of Folded Loop Antennas, Doctoral Dissertation,
National Defense Academy, Japan, 2006. (in Japanese).
[27c] S. Hayashida, H. Morishita, and K. Fujimoto, A Wideband Folded Loop Antenna for
Handsets, IEICE, vol. J86-B, 2003, no. 9, pp. 1799–1805 (in Japanese).
[28] Y. Kim et al., A Folded Loop Antenna system for Handsets Developed and Based on the
Advanced Design Concept, IEICE Transactions on Communications, vol. E84-B, 2001,
no. 9, pp. 2468–2475.
[29] H. Morishita, Y. Kim, and K. Fujimoto, Analysis of Handset Antennas in the Vicinity of
the Human Body by the Electromagnetic Simulator, IEICE Transactions on Electronics,
vol. E84-C, 2001, no. 7, pp. 937–947.
[30] S. Hayashida, H. Morishita, and K. Fujimoto, Self-Balanced Wideband Folded Loop
Antenna, IEE Proceedings, Microwaves, Antennas & Propagation, vol. 153, 2006, no. 1,
pp. 7–12.
[31] S. Hayashida et al., Characteristics of Built-in Folded Monopole Antenna for Hand-
sets, IEICE Transactions on Communications, vol. E88-B, 2005, no. 6, pp. 2275–
2283.
[32] X. H. Wu and Z. N. Chen, Comparison of Planar Dipoles in UWB Applications,
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 53, 2005, no. 6, pp. 1973–
1983.
[33a] S. Koulouridis and J. L. Volakis, A Novel Planar Conformal Antenna Designed with Splines,
IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 8, 2009, pp. 34–36.
[33b] S. Koulouridis and J. L. Volakis, Miniaturization of Flare Dipole via Shape Optimization
and Matching Circuits, IEEE APS International Symposium 2007, pp. 4785–4788.
[34] W. Dullaert and H. Rogier, Novel Compact Model for the Radiation Pattern of UWB Anten-
nas Using Vector Spherical and Slepian, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 58, 2010, no. 2, pp. 287–298.
[35] C.-W. Ling et al., Planar Binomial Curved Monopole Antennas for Ultra-wideband Commu-
nication, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 55, 2007, no. 9, pp. 2622–
2624.
[36] D. Valderas et al., UWB Staircase-Proﬁle Printed Monopole Design, IEEE Antennas and
Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 7, 2008, pp. 255–259.
[37] M. Sun, Y. P. Zhang, and Y. Lu, Miniaturization of Planar Monopole Antenna for Ultra-
wideband Radios, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 7,
pp. 2420–2425.

366
Design and practice of small antennas II
[38a] L. Lizzi et al., Optimization of a Spline-Shaped UWB Antenna by PSO, IEEE Antennas
and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 6, 2007, pp. 182–185.
[38b] F. Viani et al., A Miniaturized UWB Antenna for Wireless Dongle Devices, IEEE Antennas
and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 7, 2008, pp. 714–717.
[39] E. A-Daviu et al., Modal Analysis and Design of Band-Notched UWB Planar Monopole
Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 5, pp. 1457–
1467.
[40a] E. S. Angelopoulos et al., Circular and Elliptical CPE-Fed Slot and Microstrip-Fed Antennas
for Ultrawideband Applications, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 5,
2006, pp. 294–297.
[40b] A. M. Abbosh and E. Bialkowsky, Design of Ultrawideband Planar Monopole Antenna
of Circular and Elliptical Shape, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 7,
2009, pp. 17–23.
[40c] P. Li and X. Chen, Study of Printed Elliptical/Circular Slot Antennas for Ultrawideband
Applications, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 54, 2006, no. 6.
pp. 1670–1675.
[40d] J. Y. Chion, J. Y. See, and K. L. Wong, A Broadband CPW-fed Strip Loaded Square Slot
Antenna, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 51, 2003, no. 4, pp. 719–
721.
[40e] H. D. Chen, Broadband CPW-fed Square Slot Antennas with a Wideband Tuning Stub,
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 51, 2003, no. 8, pp. 1982–
1986.
[40f] R. Chair, A. A. Kishk, and K. F. Lee, Ultrawide-band Coplanar Waveguide-fed Rectangular
Slot Antenna, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 3, 2004, no. 12,
pp. 227–229.
[41] R. Zaker and J. Nourinia, Novel Modiﬁed UWB Planar Monopole Antenna with Variable
Frequency Band-Notch Function, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 7,
2008, pp. 112–116.
[42a] Z. N. Chen, T. S. P. See, and X. Qing, Small Printed Ultrawideband Antenna with Reduced
Ground Plane, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 55, 2007, no. 2,
pp. 383–388.
[42b] H. S. Choi et al., A New Ultra-wideband Antenna for UWB Applications, Microwave
Optical Technology Letters, vol. 40, 2004, no. 5, pp. 399–401.
[42c] K. Chung, H. Park, and J. Choi, Wideband Microstrip-fed Monopole Antenna with a Narrow
Slit, Microwave Optical Technology Letters, vol. 47, 2005, no. 4, pp. 400–402.
[43] S. K. Rajgopal and S. K. Sharma, Investigation on Ultrawideband Pentagon Shape
Microstrip Slot Antenna for Wireless Communications, IEEE Transactions on Antennas
and Propagation, vol. 57, 2009, no. 5, pp. 1353–1359.
[44] T.-G. Ma and C.-H. Tseng, An Ultrawideband Coplanar Waveguide-Fed Tapered Ring Slot
Antenna, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 54, 2006, no. 4, pp. 1105–
1110.
[45] W.-J. Lui, C.-H. Cheng, and H.-B. Zhu, Improved Frequency Notched Ultrawide-band Slot
Antenna Using Square Ring Resonator, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 55, 2007, no. 9, pp. 2445–2450.
[46] H. Elsadek and D. Nashaat, Multiband and UWB V-Shaped Antenna Conﬁguration for
Wireless Communications Applications, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters,
vol. 7, 2008, pp. 89–91.

References
367
[47] N. Behdad and K. Sarabandi, A Compact Antenna for Ultrawide-Band Applications, IEEE
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 53, 2005, no. 7, pp. 2185–2191.
[48] K. Fujimoto, Integrated Antenna Systems, in K. Chang (ed.) Encyclopedia of RF and
Microwave Engineering, vol. 3, John Wiley and Sons, 2005, pp. 2113–2147.
[49] A. Mortazawi, T. Itoh, and J. Harvey, Active Antennas and Quasi-Optical Arrays, IEEE
Press, 1999.
[50] J. A. Navarrow and K. Chang, Integrated Active Antennas and Spatial Power Combining,
John Wiley and Sons, 1996.
[51] K. Chang, R. A. York, P. S. Hall, and T. Itoh, Active Integrated Antennas, IEEE Transactions
on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 50, 2002, no. 3, pp. 937–943.
[52] G. Elli and S. Liw, Active Planar Inverted-F Antenna for Wireless Applications, IEEE
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 57, 2009, no. 10, pp. 2899–2906.
[53] C. R. White and G. M. Rebeiz, Single- and Dual-Polarized Tunable Slot-Ring Antennas,
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 51, 2003, no. 1, pp. 19–26.
[54] L. M. Feldner et al., Electrically Small Frequency-Agile PIFA-as-a Package for Portable
Wireless Devices, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 55, 2007, no. 11,
pp. 3310–3319.
[55] S.-L. S. Yang and A. A. Kishk, Frequency Reconﬁgurable U-Slot Microstrip Patch Antenna,
IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 7, 2008, pp. 127–129.
[56] D. E. Anagnostou and A. A. Gheethan, A Coplanar Reconﬁgurable Folded Slot Antenna
Without Bias Network for WLAN Applications, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation
Letters, vol. 8, 2009, pp. 1057–1060.
[57] C. Zhang et al., A Low-Proﬁle Branched Monopole Loop Reconﬁgurable Multiband
Antenna for Wireless Applications, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters,
vol. 8, 2009, pp. 216–219.
[58] A. Edalati and T. A. Denidni, Reconﬁgurable Beamwidth Antenna Based on Active Par-
tially Reﬂective Surfaces, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 8, 2009,
pp. 1087–1090.
[59] J. Sarrazin, Y. Mahe, and S. Avrillon, Pattern Reconﬁgurable Cubic Antenna, IEEE Trans-
actions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 57, 2009, no. 2, pp. 310–317.
[60] C. H Mueller et al., Small-Size X-Band Active Integrated Antenna with Feedback Loop,
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56, 2008, no. 5, pp. 1236–1241.
[61] J-H Lim et al., A Reconﬁgurable PIFA Using a Switchable PIN-Diode and a Fine-Tuning
Varactor for USPCS/WCDMA/m-WiMAX/WLAN, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 7, pp. 2404–2411.
[62] K. Fujimoto (ed.) Antenna Systems for Mobile Communications, Artech House, 2009,
pp. 247–248.
[63] D. Sievenpiper et al., High-Impedance Electromagnetic Surfaces with a Forbidden Fre-
quency Band, IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, vol. 47, 1999,
no. 11, pp. 2059–2074.
[64] S. Clavijo, R. E. Diaz, and W. E. Mckinzie, Design Methodology for Sievenpiper High-
Impedance Surfaces: An Artiﬁcial Magnetic Conductor for Positive Gain Electrically Small
Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 51, 2003, no. 10, pp. 2678–
2690.
[65] Q. Wu, J. Geng, and D. Su, On the Performance of Printed Dipole Antenna with Novel Com-
posite Corrugated-Reﬂectors for Low-Proﬁle Ultrawideband Applications, IEEE Transac-
tions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 12, pp. 3829–3846.

368
Design and practice of small antennas II
[66] G. Gampala, R. Sammeta, and C. J. Reddy, A Thin, Low-Proﬁle Antenna Using a Novel
High Impedance Ground Plane, Microwave Journal, July 2010, pp. 70–80.
[67] A. Suntives and R. Abhari, Design of a Compact Miniaturized Probe-Fed Patch Antennas
Using Electromagnetic Bandgap Structure, IEEE APS International Symposium, 2010,
[68a] F. Yang and Y. Rahmat-Samii, Microwave Antennas Integrated with Electromagnetic Band-
Gap (EBG) Structure: A Low Mutual Coupling Design for Array Applications, IEEE
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 51, 2003, no. 10, pp. 2936–2946.
[68b] Z. Li and Y. Rahmat-Samii, PBC, PMC, and PEC Ground Plane: A Case Study for Dipole
Antenna, IEEE APS International Symposium 2000, vol. 4, pp. 2258–2261.
[69] M. Z. Azad and M. Ali, Novel Wideband Directional Dipole Antenna on a Mushroom Like
EBG Structure, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56, 2008, no. 5,
pp. 1242–1250.
[70] F. Yang and Y. Rahmat Samii, Reﬂection Phase Characterizations of the EBG Ground
Plane for Low Proﬁle Wire Antenna Applications, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation, vol. 51, 2003, no. 10, pp. 2691–2703.
[71] S. R. Best and D. L. Hanna, Design of a Broadband Dipole in Proximity to an EBG Ground
Plane, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 50, 2008, no. 6, pp. 52–64.
[72] L. Akhoondzadeh-Asl, et al., Wideband Dipoles on Electromagnetic Bandgap Ground
Plane, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 55, 2007, no. 9, pp. 2426–
2434.
[73] D. Guha, S. Biswas, and Y. M. M. Antar, Defected Ground Structure for Microstrip Anten-
nas, in D. Guha and Y. M. M. Antar (eds.) Microstrip and Printed Antennas, John Wiley
and Sons, 2011, Chapter 12.
[74] D. Guha, et al., Concentric Ring-shaped Defected Ground Structures for Microstrip Appli-
cations, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 5, 2006, pp. 402–405.
[75] M. A. Antoniades and G. V. Eleftheriades, A Compact Multiband Monopole Antenna with
a Defected Ground Plane, IEEE Antenna and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 7, 2008,
pp. 652–655.
[76] D. Guha, M. Biswas, and Y. M.M. Antar, Microstrip Patch Antenna with Defected Ground
Structure for Cross Polarization Suppression, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation
Letters, vol. 4, 2005, pp. 455–458.
[77] Y. J. Sung, M. Kim, and Y. S. Kim, Harmonic Reduction with Defected Ground Structure
for a Microstrip Patch Antenna, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 2,
2003, pp. 111–113.
[78] H. B. El-Shaarawy et al., Novel Reconﬁgurable Defected Ground Structure Resonator on
Coplanar Waveguide, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010,
no. 11, pp. 3622–3628.
[79a] J. L. Volakis et al., Antenna Miniaturization Using Magnetic Photonic and Degenerated
Band-Edge Crystals, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 48, 2008, no. 5,
pp. 12–27.
[79b] J. L Volakis, C. Chen, and K. Fujimoto, Small Antennas: Miniaturization Technique &
Applications, McGraw-Hill, 2010, chapter 7.
[80] S. Yarga, K. Sertel, and J. L. Volakis, Degenerate Band Edge Crystals for Directive Anten-
nas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56, 2008, no. 1, pp. 119–126.
[81] S. Yarga, K. Sertel, and J. L. Volakis, A Directive Resonator Antenna Using Degenerate
Band Edge Crystals, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 57, 2009, no. 3,
pp. 799–803.

References
369
[82] S. Yarga, K. Sertel, and J. L. Volakis, Multilayer Directive Resonator Antenna Operating at
Degenerate Band Edge Modes, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 8,
2009, pp. 287–290.
[83] G. Mumcu, K. Sertel, and J. L. Volakis, Miniature Antenna Using Printed Coupled Lines
Emulating Degenerate Band Edge Crystals, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propaga-
tion, vol. 57, 2009, no. 6, pp. 1618–1623.
[84] K. Abe, Analysis and Design of Very Small Antennas for Receiving Long Wave Signals,
Doctoral Dissertation, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2007.
[85] K. Abe and J. Takada, Performance Evaluation of a Very Small Magnetic Core Loop antenna
for an LF Receiver, Proceedings of Asia-Paciﬁc Microwave Conference, 2006, TH3C-4,
pp. 935–938.
[86] G. Marrocco, The Art of UHF RFID Antenna Design: Impedance-Matching and Size-
Reduction Techniques, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 50, 2008, no. 1
pp. 66–79.
[87] W. Choi et al., RFID Tag Antenna with a Meandered Dipole and Inductively Coupled Feed,
IEEE APS International Symposium, 2006, pp. 1347–1350.
[88] A. Toccafondi and P. Braconi, Compact Load-Bars Meander Line Antenna for UHF RDID
Transponder, First European Conference on Antennas and Propagation, Nice France, 2006,
p. 804.
[89] S. A. Delichatsios et al., Albano Multidimensional UHD Passive RFID Tag Antenna Design,
International Journal of Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation Technology and Applications, 1.1
January 2006, pp. 24–40.
[90] C. Cho, H. Cho, and I. Park, Design of Novel RFID Tag Antenna for Metallic Objects,
IEEE APS International Symposium, 2006, pp. 3245–3248.
[91] C.-K. Hsu and S.-J. Chung, A Wideband DVB Forked Shape Monopole Antenna with Cou-
pling Effect for USB Dongle Application, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 58, 2010, no. 9, pp. 2029–3036.
[92] D. Kim and J. Yeo, A Passive RFID Tag Antenna Installed in a Recessed Cavity in a
Metallic Platform, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 12,
pp. 3814–3820.
[93] T. Deleruyelle et al., An RFID Tag Antenna Tolerant to Mounted Materials, IEEE Antennas
and Propagation Magazine, vol. 52, 2010, no. 4, pp. 14–19.
[94] H. Hirvonenen et al., Planar Inverted-F Antenna for Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation, Elec-
tronics Letters, vol. 40, 2004, no. 4, pp. 848–850.
[95] B. Yu et al., Balanced RFID Tag Antenna Mountable on Metallic Plates, IEEE APS Inter-
national Symposium 2006, pp. 3237–3240.
[96] C. H. Cheng and R. D. Murch, Asymmetric RFID Tag Antenna, IEEE APS International
Symposium 2006, digest, pp. 1363–1366.
[97] I. Y. Chen et al., Folded Dual-Band (2.4/5.2 GHz) Antenna Fabricated on Silicon Suspended
Parylene Membrane, Asia Paciﬁc Microwave Conference Proceedings, December 2005,
Proc. no. 4, pp. 4–8.
[98] J.-T. Huang, J.-H. Shiao, and J.-M. Wu, A Miniaturized Hilbert Inverted-F Antenna for
Wireless Sensor Network Applications, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 58, 2010, no. 9, pp. 3100–3103.
[99] C. Occhuzzi, S. Cippitelli, and G. Marrocco, Modeling, Design and Experimentation of
Wearable RFID Sensor Tag, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58,
2010, no. 8, pp. 2490–2498.

370
Design and practice of small antennas II
[100] B. D. Braaten, A Novel Compact UHF RFID Tag Antenna Designed with Series Connected
Open Complementary Split Ring Resonator (OCSRR) Particles, IEEE Transactions on
Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 11, pp. 3728–3733.
[101] J. Kim et al., Design of a Meandered Slot Antenna for UHF RFID Applications, IEEE APS
International Symposium 2010, 206.5
[102] Z. N. C. Nasimuddin and X. Qing, Asymmetric-Circular Shaped Slotted Microstrip Anten-
nas for Circular Polarization and RFID Applications, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 12, pp. 3821–3828.
[103] H.-K. Ryu and J.-M. Woo, Small Circular Loop Antenna for RFID Tag, International
Symposium on Antennas and Propagation, 2006, a341, r315.
[104] J. J. Yu and S. Lim, A Miniaturized Circularly Polarized Antenna for an Active 433.92 MHz
RFID Handheld Reader, IEEE APS International Symposium 2010, 206.1.

9
Evaluation of small antenna
performance
9.1
General
Generally, evaluation of small antenna performance tends to be difﬁcult, as the size of
an antenna becomes very small. The difﬁculty of small-antenna measurement originates
in small dimensions, asymmetry of antenna structure, and the antenna characteristics
sensitive to the inﬂuence of its environment. Determination of correct or precise antenna
performance will become difﬁcult as the antenna dimension becomes smaller. Evalu-
ation of antenna performance is performed by means of EM simulation and measure-
ment. In this chapter, measurement of small antenna performances is described, whereas
simulation is dealt with in Chapter 10. There are no essential differences between
small antenna measurement and ordinary antenna measurement. However, as the size
of an antenna becomes smaller, special considerations are required in order to assure
the reliable evaluation of small antenna performances. Typical attentions are paid for
cases:
(1) When the size of an antenna is very small compared with its wavelength or the size
of a nearby conductor.
(2) When antenna structure is asymmetric and complicated.
(3) When an antenna is located in a complicated environment.
Although particular considerations are given to the measurement of small antennas, there
may be some cases where no effective method is found for the accurate determination of
the antenna characteristics. For example, when the size of the antenna is extremely small,
the resistance becomes too small to be determined. Another case is where the antenna
structure is so complicated that precise measurement is very difﬁcult to perform.
To measure very small input resistance of a small antenna, for example, disturbance
due to the connection of the instrument, which might be much larger than the size of the
input terminals of the antenna, would give rise to signiﬁcant errors in the measurement,
etc.
When an antenna structure is symmetric, the antenna characteristics equivalent to
those of the full structure can be measured by the image theory using a ground plane
with a size of several wavelengths. If a ground plane can be used, it will become easier
to perform exact evaluation of antenna performances as compared with the measure-
ment without using a ground plane. Therefore, when an antenna to be measured has
a simple and symmetrical structure, the antenna structure may be halved by placing it

372
Evaluation of small antenna performance
over a ground plane, and the use of a coaxial cable for feeding the antenna becomes
easy. In measurement by using a coaxial cable and ground plane, a balun (Balanced-to-
Unbalanced Transformer) becomes unnecessary. Moreover, the measurement becomes
stable, since noise and interference are isolatable from the feed of the antenna. Further-
more, it is also an advantage that there is no unbalanced current, which would likely
disturb measurements, by feeding an antenna with a coaxial cable from beneath a ground
plane. As, for example, with portable mobile terminals having an unbalanced mode ter-
minal as an antenna connection terminal, a coaxial cable can be used in measurement.
However, in actual measurement, since a ground plane is not inﬁnitely large, unwanted
unbalanced currents arise on a ground plane, and these currents also ﬂow around to
the back side of a ground plane. As a consequence, exact measurement of the input
impedance becomes difﬁcult, and radiation patterns will be distorted. For this reason,
in order to measure the antenna characteristics in an environment as near as possible to
free-space conditions, a ground plane with the size of a few wavelengths is usually used.
However, in radiation pattern measurement, even if the ground plane has any kind of
size, the inﬂuence by a ﬁnite size of a ground plane is not avoided, owing to the scattered
wave from the edge of a ground plane and radiation produced by the currents ﬂowing to
the back side of the ground plane.
Since the characteristics of a small antenna installed in small wireless equipment are
strongly inﬂuenced by nearby materials including electronic components and equipment
case, special considerations are required for measurement. The coaxial cable connected
to an antenna for measurement becomes especially a problem. Since a coaxial cable
is a metallic line, it needs to be arranged so that current may not ﬂow on the out-
side conductor of the coaxial cable when it is connected to the antenna, and it is
most important how this is realized for the small antenna measurement on a portable
mobile terminal. Furthermore, since the antenna characteristics are greatly dependent
on the spatial relationship of a human body and an antenna, it is also important to
perform measurements with consideration of the antenna characteristics under their
environment.
There is a serious problem in measurement when an antenna has a balanced terminal at
the feed point and a coaxial cable is connected to the terminal, and unbalanced currents
are induced on the outside surface of the feed cable. A similar situation is encountered
when a small antenna has asymmetry, irregular, or complicated structure. In that case,
a balun should be used, and careful means for avoiding coupling, proximity inﬂuence,
etc. must be taken. Thus, since the image theory by PEC (perfect electric conductor)
GP ground plane cannot be used in case of measurements under conditions close to
actual use, a special device is needed. The method for reducing undesired current on
the outside surface of a coaxial cable in the unbalanced-fed antenna is different from
that in the balanced-fed antenna. In the case of unbalanced-fed antennas, ferrite beads
may be attached to a coaxial cable, or a coaxial cable feed is arranged near the antenna
to attain measurement error as low as possible. For example, a coaxial cable might be
oriented so that it may intersect perpendicularly with linear polarization when radiation
patterns are measured. A simple way to check the inﬂuence of the coaxial cable is to

9.2 Practical method of measurement
373
touch the cable by hand and observe variation of the input impedance characteristics on
the network analyzer. Balanced-fed antennas need baluns when they are fed by a coaxial
cable.
Such is a case often observed when a balanced-fed antenna is directly connected
with a coaxial cable, where undesired currents may ﬂow on the outside surface of
the coaxial cable, greatly inﬂuencing measurements. If such unwanted current on the
outside surface of a coaxial cable can be prevented from ﬂowing by the above-mentioned
measure, the input impedance characteristic of an antenna can be measured. However,
radiation pattern measurement needs special attention around the nulls of the radiation
pattern, since the original antenna characteristic may change due to the existence of a
coaxial cable between the antennas. Moreover, there is the method of connecting a small
oscillator directly to an antenna, without using a coaxial cable. As a small oscillator is
installed inside a mobile portable terminal and is connected with an antenna directly or
through a balun, measurement of a radiation pattern is possible without the inﬂuence of
a coaxial cable, but input impedance cannot be measured this way. Therefore, to obtain
complete results, it is necessary to measure input impedance characteristics by another
method.
There is a method of using an optical system for the measuring method that con-
quers the above-mentioned fault. This method transforms radio frequency signals into
light signals and transmits the light signals by an optical ﬁber. After that, light signals
are transformed back into radio frequency signals. By using the optical cable made of
dielectric instead of a coaxial cable, the inﬂuence of currents ﬂowing on the outside of a
coaxial cable can be removed. Moreover, in this method, input impedance characteristics
can also be measured, and balanced-to-unbalanced transformation also made unneces-
sary by miniaturizing the area connected with an antenna. Therefore, this is a promising
measuring method for the future.
9.2
Practical method of measurement
Because of the great variety of antenna conﬁgurations, the method of measurement
should be selected in such a way that the proper measurement can be performed, depend-
ing on the antenna conﬁgurations and mounting conditions, to achieve accurate results.
When an antenna under test has a conﬁguration that is not simple and symmetric, there
are many factors that must be taken into account to achieve accurate results from the
measurement.
The small antennas installed on portable mobile terminals can be classiﬁed into the
unbalanced-fed antenna types shown in Figure 9.1 and the balanced-fed antenna types
shown in Figure 9.2 according to the feeding structure. As examples of unbalanced-
fed antennas, there are a monopole antenna on a case, an inverted-F antenna, a
microstrip antenna and so on. As a balanced-fed antenna, there is a loop antenna etc. by
return.

374
Evaluation of small antenna performance
Antenna
Il
IR
Il > IR
Il − IR = Il
Il
Figure 9.1 Unbalanced-fed antenna.
Antenna
Il
IR
Il = IR
Figure 9.2 Balanced-fed antenna.
9.2.1
Measurement by using a coaxial cable
9.2.1.1
Measurement of unbalanced-fed antennas
It is possible to measure the input impedance characteristics in the tip of a coaxial cable
by connecting the outside conductor of a coaxial cable to the case of a portable terminal
and connecting a central conductor to the antenna for the unbalanced-fed antenna.
Moreover, if the case structure is designed so that a coaxial connector may be attached
in a case and the central conductor of the coaxial cable may serve as a feed line to an
antenna, that is convenient for measurement. In this case, by short-circuiting the center
pin and case of a coaxial connector linked to the antenna side, the electrical contribution
from the measuring side at the tip of a coaxial cable can be known and compensated.
Besides, it is necessary to choose carefully the position and direction for alignment of
the coaxial cable connecting to the case so as to not disturb the current ﬂowing on the
case, and to align the coaxial cable in a direction that does not affect the radiation pattern
[1]. Moreover, the balun method of preventing unwanted currents on the outside of the
coaxial cable, including the dual-band balun of the same structure as the Spertopf, or
bazooka balun of a sleeve antenna is also effective [2][3]. If the optical ﬁber explained
in Section 9.2.3.1 is used instead of a coaxial cable, ideal measurements will be attained
even when current ﬂows on a whole metal case.

9.2 Practical method of measurement
375
I1
I
I
I − I1
Figure 9.3 Current in the connection between the balanced antenna and the coaxial cable.
9.2.1.2
Measurement of balanced-fed antenna
In measurement of balanced-fed antennas, a balun is needed between the antenna and
the coaxial cable linked to a measuring instrument. Figure 9.3 shows a branch of the
current in the connection between the balanced antenna and the coaxial cable. The
effect which reduces the current ﬂowing on the outside conductor of the coaxial cable
is provided by the balun. As the undesired current is suppressed by using a balun, the
unwanted radiation by the current on the surface of a cable disappears. Moreover, since
a balanced antenna is also excited in balanced mode, the measurement of the original
antenna characteristics can be attained.
Figure 9.4 shows some typical balun conﬁgurations which have been used. There are
a strip type, a Bazooka type, a quarter-wavelength coaxial type, and a half-wavelength
coaxial type, and all of these are simple to produce. As each of these baluns has about
10% relative bandwidth, it is sufﬁcient to manufacture a single balun for the center
frequency in antenna measurement of mobile terminals. However, the above-mentioned
baluns have a large fault in antenna measurement of mobile terminals, because they have
sizes comparable to a wavelength. There is another balun, however, which consists of a
180-degree hybrid to use in a higher-frequency band [4]. The characteristic of this balun
is improved by putting in some resistance. It is possible to make this balun easily on a
printed circuit board and various sizes and frequencies can be chosen according to the
purpose. Such are the advantages of this balun, shown in Figure 9.5.
9.2.2
Method of measurement by using small oscillator
For radiation pattern measurement, use of a small, integrated oscillator which removes
the inﬂuence of an external coaxial cable is very effective [5]. Although the measurement
using a small oscillator is inexpensive and easy, it cannot measure phase information. The
small oscillator, which operates from a battery in the metal case, is shown in Figure 9.6
[5]. Under the present circumstances, it is useful to insert a small ﬁxed attenuation
(6 dB for example) between an antenna and the small oscillator. Thereby, inﬂuence on
the oscillator resulting from a mismatch of the antenna is minimized.
The system of measurement using a small oscillator is shown in Figure 9.7. Since
measurement over a frequency band may require tuning the oscillator throughout a
frequency band, it is useful to connect a spectrum analyzer to the receiving probe
antenna. Quantitative measurements then are taken by comparing the spectrum analyzer

376
Evaluation of small antenna performance
Parallel line
Blocking bushing
Coaxial line
(a) Spertopf
(b) Bypass conductor balun
(c) Half-wavelength bypass line balun
(Principle figure(left) Practical structure(right))
(d) Split balun
Parallel line
Slot
Coaxial line
Half-wavelength
bypass line
Coaxial line
Coaxial cable
Coaxial line
Short
Branch conductor
Connecting line
For various parallel antenna
Parallel line
Coaxial cable
Bypass line
(Half-wavelength)
Short
Parallel line
Split tube Short pin
λ/4
l
I-i
I-i
i
i
E
E
I/2
I/2
I/2
EI
E
2E
I
I
l
Figure 9.4 Typical Balun conﬁguration: (a) Spertopf, (b) bypass conductor balun,
(c) half-wavelength bypass line balun, and (d) split balun.
readings when the oscillator is connected to a standard dipole antenna, to readings
obtained when the same oscillator is connected to the unit under test.
The distance between the antenna of a personal mobile terminal in the presence of
a human body at the time of measurement, and a receiving antenna is needed to be at
least 2D2/λ [6]. D is the size of the portion considered to contribute to radiation of
the antenna containing a human body, and λ is the operating wavelength. For exam-
ple, when the spherical model with a diameter of 20 cm is used as a human body
head model and there is 10 cm distance between a spherical model and an antenna,
D is 30 cm.

9.2 Practical method of measurement
377
Resistant
Resistant
Coaxial cable
Coaxial cable
Dipole antenna
Hybrid
180˚
180˚
0˚
Figure 9.5 Balun with 180◦hybrid.
Antenna
Connector
Oscillator
Card-type
Radio
Terminal
Figure 9.6 Antenna on a metal box with a small built-in oscillator.
9.2.3
Method of measurement by using optical system
Fiber-optics for feed instead of coaxial cables has been introduced in order to remove the
undesired inﬂuence of coaxial cables [1]. Although conventional methods using a small
oscillator can remove the inﬂuence of the coaxial cable for radiation patterns, much
effort is required to measure at multiple frequencies because it can measure only one
frequency for one measurement. Further, phase pattern and impedance characteristics

378
Evaluation of small antenna performance
Spectrum
analyzer
Figure 9.7 System of measurement using a small oscillator.
Circulator
Box of terminal
LD
Battery
LD
PD
PD
RF Cable
F.O.
#3
#4
#5
#1
#2
Network
analyzer
Figure 9.8 Measurement system for impedance.
cannot be obtained using a small oscillator. For example, measurement systems for the
input impedance and the radiation pattern by using ﬁber-optics are shown.
9.2.3.1
Measurement for the input impedance by using ﬁber-optics
Figure 9.8 shows measurement systems for the input impedance of the antenna on a
radio terminal by using ﬁber-optics. Fiber-optics transmit optical signals modulated
by RF (radio frequency) to and from the radio terminal. A laser diode module (LD)
with direct laser modulation converts RF signal to the optical domain. A photo diode
module (PD) then re-converts the optical signal to an RF signal. Batteries supply the
LD and PD modules with electric power in the radio terminal. In these measurement
systems, no metallic cable is connected to the radio terminal. Therefore, the inﬂuence
of measurement cables is reduced remarkably. The SOLT (Short, Open, Load, Through)
method can be used to calibrate the measurement results of the impedance.
Figure 9.9 shows the measurement model. A quarter-wavelength monopole antenna is
mounted on the top of a rectangular box, which represents a radio terminal. The length
of the box is L as a parameter. This model is measured by both RF cable and ﬁber-optics
for comparison. When we use RF cable, it is connected at either position A or B. In case

9.2 Practical method of measurement
379
86
10
10
20
40
L
unit [mm]
cable connected
position A
cable connected
position B
observation
direction
Z
X
Y
θ
ϕ
Figure 9.9 Measurement model.
Z–X plane
Z–Y plane
Z–X plane
Z
Z
Z
Z
Y
Y
Y
Y
X
X
X
X
(a) cable position A
(b) cable position B
Z–Y plane
Figure 9.10 Cable setting for radiation pattern measurement.
of ﬁber-optics, the cable is connected at position A. For radiation pattern measurement,
the RF cable is set up as Figure 9.10. Every measurement is performed in the 900 MHz
band.
The measured input impedance characteristics obtained by using RF cable and ﬁber-
optics are shown in Figures 9.11 and 9.12, where calculated results using FDTD are
also shown. The length of the radio terminal L is different in Figures 9.11 and 9.12.
In Figure 9.11 with L = 80 mm, results with the RF cable at position A are much

380
Evaluation of small antenna performance
960 MHz
810 MHz
Start 700 MHz 
RF-A
RF-B
F.O.
Cal.
Stop 1000 MHz
Figure 9.11 Measurement results for impedance (L = 80 mm).
960 MHz
810 MHz
RF-A
RF-B
F.O.
Cal.
Figure 9.12 Measurement results for impedance (L = 100 mm).
different from calculations because of the inﬂuence of the RF cable. Measurements with
RF cable at position B and with ﬁber-optics agree well with calculations in this case. In
Figure 9.12 with L = 100 mm, results with RF cable at position A and B disagree with
calculations. Only the result of ﬁber-optics agrees well with calculations in this case. It
can be said from these facts that a measurement system using ﬁber-optics can achieve
accurate results without dependence on the measurement model.
9.2.3.2
Measurement of the radiation pattern by using ﬁber-optics
Figure 9.13 shows measurement systems for the radiation pattern. This system is based
on the radiation pattern measurement system using a network analyzer. Only one cable
feeding the radio terminal is replaced by optical ﬁber. For radiation pattern measurement,

9.2 Practical method of measurement
381
RF Cable
F.O.
Receiver
Converter
Synthesizer
Battery
PD
LD
ATT
6 dB
Figure 9.13 Measurement system for the radiation pattern.
0
Eθ
Eθ
θ [deg]
Eφ
Eφ
0
phase[deg]
0
cal
meas
cal
meas
180
360
270
90
180
−180
0
180
10 [dB/div]
(a) Amplitude
(b) Phase
Figure 9.14 Radiation pattern measured by the RF cable at position A.
only the PD and battery to drive the PD should be mounted on the radio terminal. Using
this system, phase patterns can be obtained. Further, multiple frequency measurement is
available for one measurement setup. Therefore, the effort required to measure multiple
frequency characteristics can be reduced compared with conventional methods using a
small oscillator.
The radiation patterns with L = 80 mm using RF cable and the ﬁber-optics are shown in
Figures 9.14 –9.16. In Figure 9.14, RF cable connected at position A inﬂuences results of
amplitude and phase patterns. Measured results do not agree with calculations. In the case
of RF cable at position B as shown in Figure 9.15, accuracy of measurement is improved,
but there is still error between measured and calculated results. In Figure 9.16, measured
results obtained by using ﬁber-optics can achieve good agreement with calculated results.
These facts show the advantages of the measurement systems using ﬁber-optics.

382
Evaluation of small antenna performance
0
Eθ
Eθ
θ [deg]
Eφ
Eφ
0
phase [deg]
0
meas
cal
180
360
270
90
180
−180
0
180
10 [dB/div]
(a) Amplitude
(b) Phase
cal
meas
Figure 9.15 Radiation pattern measured by the RF cable at position B.
0
Eθ
Eθ
θ [deg]
Eφ
Eφ
0
phase [deg]
0
meas
cal
180
360
270
90
180
−180
0
180
10 [dB/div]
(a) Amplitude
(b) Phase
cal
meas
Figure 9.16 Radiation pattern measured by ﬁber-optics.
9.3
Practice of measurement
9.3.1
Input impedance and bandwidth
Small antennas have some characteristics that distinguish them from ordinary antennas.
A very small antenna can be considered essentially as an electric dipole or a magnetic
dipole and the reactive impedance is highly capacitive or inductive, whereas the resistive
impedance is very small. With this impedance characteristic, particular care must be
taken for small antennas. If the length of a dipole is shorter than 0.1λ, perfect match to
the load of 50  is very difﬁcult.
If the antenna under test has such small size that its resistance is, for example,
several ohms or less, the instrument to be used should have high enough accuracy and
preciseness to measure such a low resistance value. A typical case is where the efﬁciency

9.3 Practice of measurement
383
center monopole
dielectric loading
εr = 2.30, 3.16, 4.76, 6.84, 12.0)
ground plane
(900 × 1000 mm2)
Unit : mm
6.0
ϕ 9.6
ϕ 1.3
Figure 9.17 Dielectric-material loaded dipole.
of an Electrically Small Antenna (ESA) that has dimensions on the order of 0.1λ or less is
determined. When an antenna resistance component in the VHF–UHF or higher ranges
is less than 0.5 , for example, there may be no way to determine the true impedance
because instruments with high enough accuracy to determine such a small value may
not be available.
One possible way to overcome this problem is to use a scale model, which is made
with n-times enlarged dimensions of the original antenna, and use lower frequency,
1/n of the operating frequency for the antenna under test. This n is referred to as the
scale factor, being greater than unity. With the enlarged model, the measurement is
easily performed and error in the measurement can be made smaller. This method is
based on the similarity relation, in which the Maxwell equation can be equally applied
to both an original antenna and an enlarged antenna, which has similar shape, but
n-times scaled dimensions. The typical electromagnetic parameters in this case, where
ω1 = nω2, are denoted by permeability ε1 = ε2, permittivity μ1 = μ2, conductivity
σ 1 = nσ 2, impedance Z1 = Z2 and directivity D1 = D2, where ω1 and ω2, respec-
tively, are the operating frequency of the original antenna and the frequency used in
measurement.
The features of using a scale model are: (1) evaluation is easily performed by using
a convenient size and in a less disturbed environment, (2) parameters can be ﬂexibly
selected in the measurement, and (3) cost necessary for instrument and fabrication of
model are low. The scale factor can be smaller than unity, when an antenna under test
is very large or heavy, and evaluation can be performed by a smaller antenna with the
concept similar to the case when n is greater than unity.
Meanwhile, a successful measurement for very small impedance with reasonable
accuracy was reported in [7], in which very low impedances of dielectric-material loaded
dipoles (Figure 9.17) were introduced. The results are shown in Figure 9.18, where small
values of radiation resistance and inverse of input reactance with respect to the relative
permittivity of loaded dielectric material are shown. Efﬁciency–bandwidth ratio, which
corresponds to Wheeler’s radiation power factor, is used to evaluate small values of
radiation resistance along with the Wheeler-cap method for efﬁciency measurement.

384
Evaluation of small antenna performance
Relative permittivity of dielectric loading εr
Relative permittivity of dielectric loading εr
Radiation resistance Rr (Ω)
Inverse of input reactance
1/Xr [Ω−1]
2
4
6
8
10
12
2
4
6
8
10
12
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Calculated
Measured
Calculated
Measured
(a)
(b)
0.030
0.025
0.005
0.000
0.010
0.020
0.015
Figure 9.18 Radiation resistance and inverse of input reactance.
Stability of the instrument is also important because, if the instrument is not stable
enough, errors due to ﬂuctuation in the measurement system become involved in the
measured results. For instance, when a small impedance of an ESA, e.g., about 1  is
measured, stability of the instrument must be high enough to determine one-tenth of
1  or so. The results obtained by the measurement with an unstable instrument are
meaningless.
The bandwidth 	f is the range of frequencies on either side of a center frequency, at
which the antenna characteristics such as impedance, gain, radiation efﬁciency, and so
forth, are within an acceptable range of those at the center frequency. For narrow band
antennas like small antennas, a ratio of 	 f/f0 = B is deﬁned as
B = 	f/f0 = ( f1 −f2)/f0
(9.1)
where f1 and f2, respectively, are the higher and the lower frequencies, at which the
power declines 3 dB from the maximum and f0 is the center frequency of the bandwidth
	f. This B is referred to as the relative bandwidth and is practically used instead of the
bandwidth 	f. The center frequency f0 is given by
f0 = ( f1 + f2)/2.
(9.2)
Quality factor Q can be used instead of the relative bandwidth B when the bandwidth
	f is narrow (B < 10 %),
B = 1/Q.
(9.3)
9.3.2
Radiation patterns and gain
The radiation ﬁeld for an antenna consists of a near-ﬁeld region close to the antenna
and a far-ﬁeld region further away from the antenna. Here, measurement for the far-ﬁeld
radiation pattern is presented. The far-ﬁeld region can be deﬁned by calculating the
phase error due to the ﬁnite size of the antenna. Figure 9.19 shows the difference in
the path length from the observation point to the center of the antenna system, and to the
end of the antenna. This path length difference can be translated into a phase difference

9.3 Practice of measurement
385
R′
R
D
Figure 9.19 Deﬁnition of the far ﬁeld.
as indicated by the equation:
	ϕ = 2π
λ

R′ −R

= 2π
λ
⎧
⎨
⎩

R2 +
 D
2
2
−R
⎫
⎬
⎭
(9.4)
= 2π
λ
1
R
 D
2
2
= π D2
4λR .
For the phase error to be less than π/8, the distance R from the antenna must be such
that:
R > 2D2/λ.
(9.5)
The above equation is often used to deﬁne the far-ﬁeld distance for antennas.
9.3.3
Efﬁciency measurement
There are three typical methods to determine the antenna efﬁciency: pattern integration
method, Q-factor method, and Wheeler method [8].
The pattern integral method determines Prad from the integration of the radiation
pattern intensity, which is obtained from the far-ﬁeld measurement. While pattern inte-
gration is considered the most accurate method available, especially when the absolute
efﬁciency of an antenna is desired, it usually takes a rather long time, because it needs
to measure radiation patterns and to perform integration of the radiation patterns over a
spherical surface completely enclosing the antenna.
On the contrary, Q-factor and Wheeler methods have the advantage of being quick
and easy to employ, as compared to the pattern integration method. These two methods
relate the antenna efﬁciency to the input impedance rather than the far-ﬁeld pattern
integration. These two methods have the advantage that the measurement does not require
any particular system, but can employ ordinary methods, and also can be performed in
ordinary laboratory rooms. However, there is a trade-off between the accuracy and ease
of the measurement because the accuracy of the antenna efﬁciency obtained by these
two methods is relatively lower than by the pattern integration method.
The Q-factor method is based on a measurement of two antenna Q values, one is
the QRL of the test antenna and another is the QR of an ideal antenna. QRL can be
determined by measuring the impedance of the test antenna. QR can be determined
from calculation based on Chu’s theory. If the Q of an antenna is high, it can be
interpreted as the reciprocal of the relative bandwidth B. The B can be known from the
impedance–frequency characteristics. B is deﬁned as the bandwidth for the half-power

386
Evaluation of small antenna performance
Rrad
R′rad
Rloss
Rloss
Wheeler cap
Ground plane
(a)
(b)
Rin
Rin
Rret
R′ret
R0
R0
∼
∼
Figure 9.20 Wheeler method.
frequencies that occur for a power reﬂection coefﬁcient of 0.5 (VSWR = 5.83). Because
of the inherent difﬁculty in determining QR, the Wheeler method is recommended
because it is simpler in practice.
In the Wheeler method (Figure 9.20), the antenna resistance is measured in two
ways: Rin of an antenna reradiating into free space and Rloss of an antenna placed
within a Wheeler cap, which eliminates radiation from the antenna. By using these two
resistances Rloss and Rin, Rrad can be found, since Rin = Rrad + Rloss. Then the efﬁciency
η is calculated from
η = Rrad/(Rrad + Rloss).
(9.6)
The dimension of a cap is recommended to be about λ/2π, although there have
been no exact theories to prove this idea. By experimental studies, it is understood that
there seems to be no severe limitation in the cap size unless it greatly exceeds λ/2π.
It was also conﬁrmed that the radius of the Wheeler cap can be as large as 10 times
a radian length, granted that resonance and interference of the Wheeler cap on the
frequency characteristics of the testing antenna can be avoided [9]. For the shape of a
cap, other types than a sphere such as a cube, a rectangular solid, can be used. The shape
somehow depends on the size and type of test antennas. For a thin, short monopole,
both hemispheric and cubic shapes can be used. A cubic shape seems to be better for
antennas such as an inverted-F antenna, because it has an element parallel to the sides of
the cap, and the distance between the antenna element and the cap can be made nearly
equal; thereby, variation in the antenna current is made small after the cap covers the
antenna.
In any case, care must be observed for the resonance or anti-resonance of the antenna,
cap, or both. Note that the principle of the Wheeler method is based on the measurement
of the series resistance or the parallel conductance. At or near resonance or anti-resonance
frequencies, resistance or conductance becomes very low or approaches an inﬁnitely
large value and no consistency in the measured values can be expected.

9.3 Practice of measurement
387
Real
Imaginary
mA/V
mA/V
0.5
5.0
0 0-1.0
Without cap
Spherical cap
Cubic cap
0.3 0.1 0.0
0.2 0.4 0.6
Figure 9.21 Current distributions on inverted F antenna element (800 MHz).
The inner surface of a cap should be plated to reduce the ohmic loss. Usually, the
interaction of the cap surface current with the antenna current is ignored because it can
be assumed to be very small. However, it may become an appreciable value when the
antenna element approaches the inner surface of the cap because the cap surface current
may interact with antenna current. Then the cap surface loss becomes included in the
antenna loss. Plating the cap surface with gold is best.
Another problem in the Wheeler method lies in an assumption that the antenna current
is not changed by the presence of the Wheeler cap. This is not really true. Figure 9.21
shows that the antenna current of an inverted-F antenna varies due to a Wheeler cap [10].
Variation of the current depends on the shape and the size of the Wheeler cap as well
as the type and the size of the antenna. Errors in the measurement are greatly increased,
especially at the frequency of resonance or anti-resonance, which depend on the type
and size of the antenna as well as the shape and size of the Wheeler cap.
Radiation efﬁciency of a small antenna located in some complicated environment can
be evaluated in the reverberation chamber [11]. The radiation efﬁciency, for instance,
of a small built-in antenna installed in a small handset, which is held by an operator,
differs from that of a small antenna located in free space, because the radiated power
from the handset is varied by the environmental materials. In addition, in practical
operation, especially in an urban ﬁeld, the incident or generated ﬁeld by the antenna
is not uniform, but rather random, including cross-polarized radio waves, due to the
environmental conditions in the wave propagation path. In the reverberation chamber,

388
Evaluation of small antenna performance
radiation efﬁciency can be evaluated in an environment, where non-uniform ﬁeld, which
equivalently corresponds to the ﬁeld around the antenna, can be easily produced. In the
evaluation of the radiation efﬁciency, the radiation power from the handset is measured
in the reverberation chamber and the efﬁciency is determined by taking a ratio of the
radiated power to the input power to the antenna [12].
Input impedance of a very small antenna located near lossy materials can also be
evaluated in the reverberation chamber [13]. An example is again a small built-in
antenna installed in a small handset and a lossy human operator holds the handset.
References
[1] T. Fukasawa, K. Shimomura, and M. Ohtsuka, Accurate Measurement Method for Char-
acteristics of an Antenna on a Portable Telephone (in Japanese), IEICE Transactions on
Communications, vol. J86-B, September 2003, no. 9, pp. 1895–1905.
[2] C. Icheln, J. Krogerus, and P. Vainikainen, Use of Balun Chokes in Small-Antenna Radiation
Measurements, IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 53, April
2004, no. 2, pp. 498–506.
[3] C. A. Balanis, Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design, 2nd edn., John Wiley and Sons,
1997.
[4] H. Garn, M. Buchmayr, and W. Mullner, Tracing Antenna Factors of Precision Dipoles to
Basic Quantities, IEEE Transactions on Electromagnetic Compatibility, vol. 40, November
1998, no. 4, pp. 297–310.
[5] H. Saito, I. Nagano, S. Yagitani, and H. Haruki, Radiation Characteristics of Antenna for a
Small Radio Terminal in Vicinity of a Human Body (in Japanese), IEICE Transactions on
Communications, vol. J83-B, October 2000, no. 10, pp. 1437–1445.
[6] T. Uno and S. Adachi, Range Distance Requirements for Large Antenna Measurements,
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 37, June 1989, no. 6, pp. 707–720.
[7] I. Ida, T. Sekizawa, H. Yoshimura, and K. Ito, Dependence of the efﬁciency-bandwidth
product of small dielectric loaded antennas on the permittivity, Proceedings of ISAP 2000,
vol. 1, pp. 61–64.
[8] E. D. Newman, P. Bohley, and C. H. Walter, Two methods for measurement of antenna efﬁ-
ciency, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. AP-23, 1975, no. 3, pp. 457–
461.
[9] M. Muramoto, N. Ishii, and K. Itoh, Studies of Radiation Efﬁciency Measurement by Using
Wheeler Cap, IEICE Transactions, vol. J-78-B-II, 1995, no. 6. pp. 454–460.
[10] R. Y. Chao, K. Hirasawa, and K. Fujimoto, Wire Antenna Current Distributions within a
Wheeler Cap, IEICE Transactions, vol. J71-B, 1988, no. 11, pp. 1370–1372.
[11] K. Rosengren et al., Characterization of Antennas for Mobile and Wireless Terminals in
Reverberation Chambers, Improved Accuracy by Platform Stirring, Microwave and Optical
Technology Letters, vol. 30, 2001, pp. 391–397.
[12] T. Sugiyama, T. Shinozuka, and K. Iwasaki, Estimation of Radiated Power of Radio Trans-
mitter Using a Reverberation Chamber, IEICE Transactons on Communications, vol. E88-B,
2005, no. 8, pp. 3158–3163.
[13] P. S. Kildal and R. K. Rosengren, Measurement of Free Space Impedances of Small
Antennas in Reverberation Chamber, Microwave and Optical Technology Letters, vol. 32,
2002, pp. 112–115.

10
Electromagnetic simulation
10.1
Concept of electromagnetic simulation
Generally, there are some analytical methods to obtain antenna characteristics. However,
it can be difﬁcult to obtain the characteristics of small antennas, because they are
very limited in dimension and inﬂuenced quite sensitively by environmental conditions
around them. In many cases, it is hard to verify the performance of small antennas by
experiments. For example, when the size of the antenna is extremely small, the radiation
resistance becomes too small to be determined accurately. Another case is where the
antenna structure is so complicated that precise measurement becomes very difﬁcult to
perform.
Recently, antenna engineers have become able to rely on highly specialized electro-
magnetic (EM) simulators to develop and optimize antenna design [1, 2]. Computer-
aided analysis and optimization have replaced the design process of iterative exper-
imental modiﬁcation of the initial design. Therefore, the EM simulators become of
paramount importance in the efﬁcient research and development of new small antennas.
An accurate computer-aided design (CAD) could support a clear physical interpretation
for characteristics of small antennas.
The operation of an EM simulator is based on the numerical solution of Maxwell’s
equations in differential or integral form.
Antennas for small mobile terminals are typical small antennas in practice and the
EM simulators are often used to design them. Here, the concept of electromagnetic
simulation is described along with antennas for small mobile terminals.
The EM simulations including antenna and propagation problems are widely used
nowadays as the capabilities of personal computers and workstations increase rapidly.
On the other hand, mobile communication systems, such as mobile phones recently
deployed under various wireless systems having multiple functions including broadband
and near-ﬁeld communications, and also Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation applications
(RFID), have become common. Small and hand-held equipment used in those systems
demand reduction in size and weight. Antennas used for such handsets must also follow
downsizing of the handset unit, yet must keep the antenna performance unchanged
or even improved. Especially, built-in antennas are required for handsets for the sake
of convenience and durability. Because the environmental factors such as the handset
material itself and the nearby human body affect the sensitivity and performance of the
antenna mounted on the handset, it is not easy to realize an optimum antenna system.

390
Electromagnetic simulation
To obtain the characteristics of the installed antenna, considered as one uniﬁed system
composed of an antenna element and a conducting handset case, analysis by using an EM
simulator is very effective [2, 3]. However, as the simulators are not perfect for analyzing
antenna problems, designers need to have adequate experience using the simulator and
be acquainted with the strengths and weaknesses of the various simulation methods.
Representative applications of many analyses of small antennas used in mobile handsets
by using EM simulators on the basis of method of moments [4, 5] and FDTD (Finite-
Difference Time-Domain) method [3, 6] have been reported so far. In the method of
moment (MoM), both the antenna element and the conducting handset case are simulated
by a wire-grid model and they are treated as one uniﬁed system with the entire system
made up of wire elements only [4, 5]. By using FDTD method, the analysis of the handset
antenna including the effects of the surrounding objects such as the handset unit and a
human body can be easily performed instead of applying approximate methods [3, 6].
However, the EM simulators generally are proprietary in nature and the details of their
internal workings are not widely available to general users.
10.2
Typical electromagnetic simulators for small antennas
The electromagnetic simulator is based on the numerical solution of Maxwell’s equations
in differential or integral form. Integral-equation methods make use of Maxwell’s equa-
tions in integral-equation form to formulate the electromagnetic problem. The kernel of
the integrals is formed by a Green’s function tensor.
Differential-equation methods are derived directly from Maxwell’s curl equations or
the Helmholtz wave equations. The most popular differential-equation-based methods
are the Finite Element Method (FEM), utilized in Ansoft’s HFSS software package, and
the Finite-Difference Time-Domain Method (FDTD), which is employed by CST’s time
domain transient solver.
FEM, like FDTD, is a method based on solving a partial differential equation, rather
than an integral equation, as in the case for MoM. Both the differential-equation methods
are particularly suitable for modeling full three-dimensional volumes that have complex
geometrical details.
Here, four types of EM simulators are explained. The IE3D, FIDELITY, HFSS, and
Microwave Studio EM simulators, which are commercial software products, are based
on MoM, FDTD (Finite-Difference Time-Domain), FEM (Finite Element Method), and
FIT(Finite Integration Technique), respectively.
The IE3D simulator is the electromagnetic simulator based on the method of moments,
and the primary formulation of IE3D is an integral equation obtained through the use of
Green’s function. Primary features are: (a) modeling of three-dimensional metallic and
dielectric structures, (b) automatic generation of non-uniform meshing with rectangular
and triangular cells, (c) automatic creation of small cells on the edges, and so forth.
There is no limitation on the shape and orientation of the metallic structures. In the
calculation, the IE3D simulator employs a three-dimensional non-uniform triangular
and rectangular mixed meshing scheme automatically, and the shape of the antenna and

10.3 Example (balanced antennas for mobile handsets)
391
conductor consists of a combination of polygons. In the IE3D simulator, the source
program is not open to the public and only a brief description of the method of moments
is given in the IE3D User’s Manual [8].
The FIDELITY simulator is the electromagnetic simulator based on the FDTD (Finite-
Difference Time-Domain) method and its basic principle is to use a ﬁnite difference to
represent the differential in Maxwell’s equations. The basis is to combine the electric and
magnetic ﬁelds by employing Yee’s algorithm [9]. Primary features are: (a) modeling
both planar and three-dimensional structures with isotropic or non-isotropic dielectric
material, (b) three-dimensional electric ﬁeld and magnetic ﬁeld display with slicing
capability, (c) automatic non-uniform meshing and meshing-independent geometry, and
so on. In the FIDELITY simulator, the source program is also not open to the public and
only a brief description of the FDTD method is given in the FIDELITY User’s Manual
[10].
The HFSS simulator is the electromagnetic simulator based on the full-wave FEM
(Finite Element Method). This simulator can analyze the characteristics of a small
antenna automatically by solving Maxwell’s equations. Primary features are: (a) mod-
eling three-dimensional structures with CAD and dynamic geometry rotation, (b) auto-
matic adaptive mesh generation and reﬁnement, (c) comprehensive materials database
containing permittivity, permeability, electric and magnetic loss tangents for common
substances, and so on.
Microwave Studio is based on the Finite Integration Technique (FIT) and it allows
choosing the time-domain as well as the frequency-domain approach. The Finite Inte-
gration Technique ﬁrst describes Maxwell’s equations on a grid space, maintaining
properties such as energy conservation, and then forms the speciﬁc differential equa-
tions, such as the Poisson or wave equations. The Finite Integration Technique can be
formulated on different kinds of grids, e.g., Cartesian or general non-orthogonal grids.
In the time domain, which is our ﬁeld of interest, the resulting discrete grid equations
of the Finite Integration Technique are at least in “some” cases identical to the discrete
equations derived with the classical Finite-Difference Time-Domain (FDTD) method.
FDTD was introduced in the mid 1960s, and uses a coordinate-based staggered-grid
system and the famous Yee cell. In contrast to the Finite Integration Technique, which
is applied to the integral form of the ﬁeld equations, FDTD (as a subset of the Finite
Integration Method) is applied to the differential form of the governing Maxwell curl
equations.
10.3
Example (balanced antennas for mobile handsets)
This section describes an example of simulation for performance of a small antenna
located in a complicated environment. A typical example is a built-in antenna installed in
a small mobile terminal, where the antenna is surrounded by various materials, electronic
components, and devices that seriously affect antenna performances, and furthermore
inﬂuenced by an operator who holds the terminal unit. Mobile phone handsets and other
wireless terminals in the recent decade have made remarkable progress, and their size

392
Electromagnetic simulation
and weights have been dramatically reduced [11]. Accordingly, antennas used for such
terminals must have followed their downsizing trends, for which some issues are taken
up on the design of antenna systems.
Since antennas for mobile handsets cannot be designed in isolation from their host
equipment, it is desirable to think of an antenna as a system. Moreover, the antenna
performances are signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by the effects of the surrounding environments
such as the human body which is considered as a big lossy medium existing near the
antenna. The inﬂuence by the human body cannot be neglected as it disturbs the radiation,
varies in the input impedance, and causes mismatching loss [11]. Accordingly, a system
designer should consider some factors in designing antenna systems for mobile handsets
as follows:
r The antenna performances should be maintained or enhanced although the antenna
was miniaturized.
r The degradation of the antenna performances caused by a human body should be
mitigated.
r The effect on the human body from the antenna radiation should be reduced.
r The antenna performances should be maintained under the multi-path radio
environments.
The essential concept in designing antenna systems for handsets is that the anten-
nas should be (1) small size and compact, (2) lightweight, (3) low-proﬁle or built-in
type, and have structure to (4) mitigate antenna performance degradation due to body
effect, particularly, operator’s hand and head, and to (5) reduce the SAR value (Speciﬁc
Absorption Rate) in the human head. The factors (4) and (5) are required for the latest
handset design and need the new technology for realizing antenna systems.
In addition to the above issues, with new deployment of various wireless systems,
there is an increasing demand for mobile terminals to enhance functions such as wide-
band or multiband operation, yet maintaining small dimensions. Thus, additional design
considerations to meet such requirements have become an urgent issue.
The design concept so far applied to most built-in handset antennas is to use the GP
(Ground Plane over which an antenna element is placed) as a part of the radiator. This
is particularly true because antennas should have small size, and the assistance of the
GP is needed in order to achieve enough gain and particularly wide-enough bandwidth.
Regarding (1) to (3), e.g., small size and low-proﬁle, antennas having magnetic current
as the radiation source placed in parallel to the GP is not only to realize low-proﬁle
structure, but also to use its image of the antenna so that the twofold ﬁeld-strength
enhancement is obtained as a result of superposition of the ﬁeld produced by the image,
as shown in Figure 10.1 [12]. In order to realize (4) and (5), antennas having balanced
terminals and being fed by a balanced line have been proposed. The effectiveness of
using such antennas has been shown in some previous papers [13–16].
So far the planar inverted F antenna (PIFA) has been used in many handsets, as it
matches the needs (1), (2), and (3) mentioned above [17]. However, in practical use, gain
degradation, which is serious sometimes, has been observed when an operator holds the
handset. This is caused by the variation in the current distributions on the GP, which

10.3 Example (balanced antennas for mobile handsets)
393
Small loop
Ground plane
Magnetic current
Electrical image
Figure 10.1 Small loop antenna on a ground plane and magnetic current.
are produced by the excitation of the built-in PIFA element. These current distributions
on the GP actually assist the antenna performance, contributing to improve gain and
also bandwidth. In turn when the body effect exists, particularly when the operator’s
hand grasps the handset, these currents vary and as a result the antenna performance
degrades; sometimes serious gain reduction and frequency change are observed. It has
been commonly observed in handsets where small antennas, not only PIFA but also
other types of antennas like ceramic chips, are built in. Thus in order to avoid such
antenna-performance degradation, reduction of the currents on the GP has been desired
and antennas having balanced structure and being fed by a balanced line have been
developed.
There has been a report that has shown another way to reduce the currents on the GP. It
is the use of a half-wave monopole applied to a rectangular conducting box that simulates
the handset body. The analysis of it has shown almost no current ﬂow on the handset
body with use of a half-wave monopole [18]. In practice; however, a 3/8 wavelength or
a 5/8 wavelength monopole has been used for the handsets, as they have appropriate
input impedance to match the load, and yet cause only a small current ﬂow on the GP.
The results of this analysis [8] have contributed to establishing the design concept for
the antennas used in conventional PDC handsets. However, antennas designed with this
concept do not satisfy the requirements (1) to (3) and (5).
Now it is rather natural that antennas for the latest handsets have been reconsidered
and have progressed to be designed with advanced concepts. At the same time, the recent
trends that antennas should be small in size, yet have enough performance and enhanced
functions are consistently kept in mind and embraced in the design concept. In practice,
in order to realize antenna systems which can satisfy the requirements (4) and (5) in
addition to (1) to (3), new design concepts should be introduced.
For the purpose of realization of (4) and (5), various types of antennas having balanced
structure have been taken into consideration [13–16]. Regarding small-sized and low-
proﬁle antennas, use of antennas having a magnetic current source was introduced. One
of these was a small loop antenna which was regarded as a magnetic dipole normal to
the surface of the loop [12] and it was successfully applied practically to the box-type
pager’s antenna [19]. A small loop antenna built into a pager was placed in the pager
body in such a way that the loop surface was perpendicular to the human body instead of

394
Electromagnetic simulation
to the GP so that the ﬁeld produced by the image loop was superposed to obtain twofold
ﬁeld strength in front of the human body.
Pager systems have become disused in practice; however, the design concept employed
for the pager antenna can still be applied to realize small antennas.
Another useful way to create a small antenna is the integration technique, by which
an antenna is combined with other elements or devices so that the radiation mode is
increased and the antenna performance is enhanced, even when the antenna size is made
small. A folded loop antenna introduced here is a typical example of this type of antenna,
which also has balanced structure.
The design concept for handset antennas thus favors a balanced structure in order to
achieve small antennas and yet maintain performance that does not degrade in the vicinity
of the human hand and head. In designing the latest handset antennas, other signiﬁcant
considerations are included; these are on the realization of very small antennas, feasibility
of impedance matching for wide bandwidth, and so forth.
10.3.1
Balanced-fed folded loop antenna
In the previous sections, it has been shown that antennas having balanced structures and
being fed with a balanced line are very effective to mitigate the antenna performance
degradation due to the body effect and also reduce the radiation toward the human head
[13–16]. As Figure 10.2 shows, various types of antennas, such as rectangular loop and
L-type loop, which have balanced terminals and are fed with a balanced line, have been
introduced. The principle of using a balanced structure is to reduce the current ﬂow on
the GP excited by the antenna element placed on the GP.
In turn by applying this concept to the handset antenna design, a further serious
issue has been raised. That is how to realize an antenna which has enough gain and
bandwidth, even when the size has been made small and the assistance of the GP as a
part of the radiator is removed. Problems are to design an antenna which has enough
gain and bandwidth with a small-sized structure. The proper impedance matching is
also a problem, because there is some difﬁculty in obtaining desired impedance by
conventional antennas, as shown in Table 10.1. Use of a balun in order to feed antennas
with balanced terminals provides a sort of complexity for impedance matching and
usually makes the bandwidth narrow.
Then a folded loop antenna is taken into consideration as one of the candidates which
solves these problems and satisﬁes the requirements in the design concepts. This antenna
has an integrated structure, which is composed of a radiating element and a reactive
element; these being constituted by using a two-wire transmission line, and folded at
a quarter-wavelength to form a folded half-wave dipole equivalently. The equivalent
folded dipole acts mainly as the radiator, and the two-wire line is used for adjusting the
antenna impedance [20–22]. The antenna has a one-wavelength loop structure so that no
unbalanced current may be produced on the feed line; that is to say, this antenna has a self-
balanced structure [21], which is useful to reduce the current ﬂow on the GP. In addition,
since this antenna can be built in a small volume by means of its folded structure, small
size and low proﬁle can be achieved. Furthermore, use of a two-wire transmission line can

10.3 Example (balanced antennas for mobile handsets)
395
Table 10.1 Input impedance of balanced-fed
antennas (f0 = 186 GHz)
Input impedance []
Rectangular loop Type A
74.31 + j 1393
Rectangular loop Type B
119.7 + j 1494
Helical dipole
0.934 + j 80.47
L-type loop
32.81 + j 997.5
(a) Rectangular loop antenna (Type A)
(b) Rectangular loop antenna (Type B)
(c) L-type loop antenna
x
x
x
z
y
Eθ
Eθ
z
y
Eφ
z
y
Eφ
Figure 10.2 Balanced-fed antennas: (a) rectangular loop antenna (Type A), (b) rectangular loop
antenna (Type B), and (c) L-type loop antenna.
make possible ﬂexible adjustment of antenna impedance by changing parameters such as
the length and the width of wires, and the distance between the two wires, and no balun is
necessary. This antenna can be designed to have enough gain and bandwidth to be applied
to handsets presently used in practice. In order to achieve wide bandwidth, the wire
should be replaced by a ribbon-shaped element with wider width. A parasitic element
placed along with the folded loop element is effective to achieve further wide bandwidth.

396
Electromagnetic simulation
d
λ = 161.3 mm, l = 0.44 λ, d = 0.006 λ, w = 0.003 λ, a = 0.225 λ, h = 0.056 λ, s = 0.006 λ
w
w
l
a
s
d
h
∼
∼
Figure 10.3 Folded loop antenna element.
10.3.2
Antenna structure
A folded loop introduced here is the antenna previously described in 8.1.2 (2)-2b, which
is essentially a two-wire transmission line, folded at about a quarter-wavelength to form
an equivalent half-wave folded dipole, and yet appears as a one-wavelength loop antenna,
from which the antenna is referred to as a folded loop. The element taken as an example
here is made of thin copper wire with a diameter of 0.5 mm. The folded wire element
forms a very thin (d ≪λ) rectangular loop that is considered as a folded dipole as shown
in Figure 10.3. The length l of the folded loop is about 1/2 wavelength at the center
frequency f0 which equivalently corresponds to a half-wavelength folded dipole and at
the same time to a one-wavelength loop. By selecting the two-wire transmission line
parameters, the antenna input impedance can be adjusted ﬂexibly, since the reactance of
the transmission line can be adjusted by selecting the length and the width of the wires
and the distance between the two lines. This is the important feature of this antenna,
which is constituted by applying the integration technology.
Figure 10.4 shows the conﬁguration of the antenna element and the ﬁnite GP that
represents a shielding plate when it is used in the handset. The antenna element is placed
very closely to the rectangular GP, which has the perimeter of about two wavelengths.
Both unbalanced and balanced type of feed are considered here as Figure 10.4(a) and (b)
show. The unbalanced feed is tested only to conﬁrm the effectiveness of the unbalanced
feed for the folded loop, as the folded loop of a half wavelength has performance
similar to the balanced system. The antenna element is fed by either a coaxial cable
(Figure 10.4(a)) or a parallel line (Figure 10.4(b)). In the experiment, a semi-rigid
coaxial cable with a diameter of 0.011λ is used and the load of a 50  : 50  chip balun
is used for the balanced system. The center frequency f0 is 1860 MHz.
In the numerical analysis, various types of electromagnetic simulators are applied
based on the method of moments (MoM) [23], ﬁnite-difference time-domain (FDTD)
method [24], ﬁnite element method (FEM) [25], and ﬁnite integration method (FIM) [26].

10.3 Example (balanced antennas for mobile handsets)
397
(a) Unbalanced-fed
(b) Balanced-fed
Chip balun
119.4
36.3
Ground plane
2.1
dz
z
y
x
Unit [mm]
Coaxial cable
(0.011λφ)
∼
Figure 10.4 Antenna structure: (a) unbalanced feed and (b) balanced feed.
The electromagnetic simulators including antenna and propagation problems are widely
used nowadays as the computational capacities of personal computers and workstations
have become adequate. However, as the simulators are not perfect for analyzing antenna
problems, users need to have experience with the simulators and be acquainted with
their individual characteristics.
Figure 10.5 shows the feeding method of each electromagnetic simulator. In the MoM
simulation, since the models are divided into small cells automatically, the standard
frequency of the division employs 2500 MHz, higher than the required frequency. To
conﬁrm the convergence, the results of four models which have divisions from 10
to 30 cells per wavelength (i.e., size ranging from 0.03λ to 0.1λ) are compared and
discussed. When the number of cells per wavelength is 20, the numbers of total cells of
unbalanced-fed and balanced-fed models are 509 and 458, respectively. The feed type
used in simulation is horizontal port which is called “Extension for MMIC” (Monolithic
Microwave Integrated Circuit). A length of the edge cell is one tenth of the feed line’s
width empirically.
In the FDTD simulator, models are divided into non-uniform meshing of 0.5 to 4 mm.
Around the feed point the structure is divided into minimum cells of 0.5 mm, while the
part where there is no inﬂuence in the calculation is divided into larger cells to reduce
the total number of cells. The total number of cells is 49 140 and all parts of models use
Perfect Matching Layer, which is referred to as PML, as absorbing boundary conditions.
The feed type used in the simulation is “Coaxial Port” and “Gap Port.”
In the FEM simulator, models are divided by using automatic adaptive mesh. There-
fore, the model of the handset, which is used here as an example, is divided into small
cells effectively. The total number of cells is 389 160. The large models such as human

398
Electromagnetic simulation
Balanced-fed
(Gap feeding)
Method of
Moments
Antenna
+
−
Antenna
Ground plane
Ground plane
Ground plane
Ground plane
Ground plane
Short pin
Antenna
Antenna
Ground plane
Short pin
Antenna
Antenna
Antenna
Antenna
Ground plane
Ground plane
Waveguide port
Feed pin
Feed pin
Coaxial port
Feed pin
Wave port
Short pin
Short pin
FDTD
Method
Finite
Element
Method
Finite
Integration
Method
Unbalanced-fed
(Coaxial cable)
+
−
Figure 10.5 Feeding method of each electromagnetic simulator.
head or hand model are divided into the larger cells by using manual mesh to reduce the
number of total cells. The feed type used in the simulation is a coaxial port.
10.3.3
Analytical results
Figure 10.6 shows the simulated current distribution on the GP at the center frequency
by using the MoM simulator, where (a) shows for the case of an unbalanced system and
(b) shows for the case of a balanced system. Since the antenna element is placed on
the GP so as to make the system structure symmetrical with respect to the center of the
GP (the x–z plane) the current distributions on the GP obviously become symmetrical.
The ﬁgure illustrates the current distributions on the GP only, not including those of the
antenna element, and the amplitude of currents is shown with gray shading. In the ﬁgure,
the fainter shading indicates greater current ﬂow while the darker color part indicates
smaller current ﬂow. The antenna element is located on the left side of the GP.
As shown in the ﬁgure, while only a slight difference is seen around the feed point
between the current distributions in both unbalanced and balanced system, at other
points they have almost the same amplitudes. For the unbalanced system, the current

10.3 Example (balanced antennas for mobile handsets)
399
0 dB
(a) Unbalanced-fed
(b) Balanced-fed
-2 dB
-4 dB
-6 dB
-8 dB
-10 dB
-12 dB
-14 dB
-16 dB
-18 dB
-20 dB
-22 dB
-24 dB
-26 dB
-28 dB
-30 dB
-32 dB
-34 dB
-36 dB
-38 dB
-40 dB
Figure 10.6 Simulated current distribution on a ground plane (Method of Moments): (a)
unbalanced fed and (b) balanced fed.
distributions on the GP become almost symmetric with respect to the x-axis as well as
the balanced system, even though it is fed by an unbalanced feed line.
The measured current distribution at the center frequency is obtained by using Schmid
& Partner Engineering AG’s DASY-3 package for near-ﬁeld evaluation [27]. The mag-
netic ﬁeld above the antenna system is detected in phase and amplitude by a probe
antenna scanning a plane surface that is about λ/10 from the GP of the antenna structure.
The surface current density J is related to the magnetic ﬁeld H through the equation n ×
H = J (n is a unit vector pointing in the outward direction from the surface). The current
distribution is measured in each 3/100 λ span on a rectangular plane surface above the
antenna structure. The measured current distribution on the GP in the two-dimensional
plane is shown in Figure 10.7. In the experimental result, the brightest shading part in
the dense contour lines indicates greatest current ﬂow and diminishing in the current
ﬂow is shown by the variation of contour lines that become gradually coarse. The cur-
rent distributions are almost the same for both unbalanced and balanced systems, while
there is a slight difference around the folded loop element, resulting from inclusion of
current distributions of not only on the GP but also on the antenna element, and they are
symmetric with respect to the x-axis in both unbalanced and balanced systems. These
tendencies are very similar to those of calculated results.
From those results, it can be seen as was expected that a folded loop element with
a length of half-wavelength has a self-balance property and hence the unbalanced cur-
rent does not ﬂow on the feed line nor on the GP, even with a folded loop element
fed via the unbalanced line. The self-balance property is described in Appendix II in
8.1.2 (2)-2b.
Figure 10.8 shows the current distribution on the GP simulated by each simulator for
the unbalanced-fed model, where (a), (b), and (c) are the results using the FDTD, FEM,

400
Electromagnetic simulation
0 dB
(a) Unbalanced-fed
(b) Balanced-fed
-2 dB
-4 dB
-6 dB
-8 dB
-10 dB
-12 dB
-14 dB
-16 dB
-18 dB
-20 dB
-22 dB
-24 dB
-26 dB
-28 dB
-30 dB
-32 dB
-34 dB
-36 dB
-38 dB
-40 dB
Figure 10.7 Measured current distribution on a ground plane: (a) unbalanced feed and
(b) balanced feed.
and FIM simulators, respectively. In all cases, the current on the GP is reduced by the
balanced feeding method, which is the same result as the MoM simulator.
Figure 10.9 shows the measured and simulated return-loss characteristics. The simu-
lated result of each simulator is similar to the measured results. For the results obtained
by the MoM simulator, the frequency at the lowest return loss is low in the case of the
number of cells per wavelength of 10, compared to other cases. For the results obtained
by the FDTD simulator, it is apparent that the calculated results show wider bandwidth
than the measured results. For the results of the FEM and FIM simulators, the frequency
at the lowest return loss becomes higher as the number of the total cells increases, but
remains lower than the measured one.
Figure 10.10 shows the simulated return-loss characteristics of unbalanced and
balanced-fed models by using the optimized conditions in all the simulators as well
as the measured results. All the simulated results agree very well with the measured
results in both models.
Figure 10.11 shows the simulated and measured radiation patterns. All the simulated
results agree very well with the measured results, and the patterns of the unbalanced-
fed model are almost the same as those of the balanced-fed model. This is because a
folded loop antenna has the self-balance effect and the radiation from the GP is almost
suppressed. The difference in the maximum gain is below 1 dB as shown in Table 10.2.
10.3.4
Simulation for characteristics of a folded loop antenna in the vicinity
of human head and hand
In this section, the antenna performances in the vicinity of the human head and hand
will be investigated by means of simulation, in which the human head and hand are
simulated in consideration of the practical situation of an operator using a handset, and
equivalent phantom models are used for the veriﬁcation.

10.3 Example (balanced antennas for mobile handsets)
401
0 dB
(a) FDTD Method
(b) Finite Element Method
(c) Finite Integration Method
−2 dB
−4 dB
−6 dB
−8 dB
−10 dB
−12 dB
−14 dB
−16 dB
−18 dB
−20 dB
−22 dB
−24 dB
−26 dB
−28 dB
−30 dB
−32 dB
−34 dB
−36 dB
−38 dB
−40 dB
Jsurf[A/m]
1,0000e+001
9,0452e+000
8, 4422e+000
7, 8392e+000
7, 2362e+000
6, 6332e+000
6, 0302e+000
5, 4271e+000
4, 8241e+000
4, 2211e+000
3, 6181e+000
3, 0151e+000
2, 4121e+000
1, 8090e+000
1, 2060e+000
6, 0302e+000
0, 0000e+000
A/n
10
9.69
9.06
8.44
7.81
7.19
6.56
5.94
5.31
4.69
4.06
3.44
2.81
2.19
1.56
0.938
0.313
0
Figure 10.8 Current distribution on a ground plane simulated by each electromagnetic simulator
(unbalanced-fed model): (a) FDTD Method, (b) Finite Element Method, and (c) Finite
Integration Method.
10.3.4.1
Structure of human head and hand
Figure 10.12 illustrates a folded loop antenna in the vicinity of the human body, where
(a) is the spherical head model, and (b) are the spherical head and hand models. The
spherical head model has dielectric properties of relative permittivity of 43.37 and
conductivity of 1.204 S/m at 1.9 GHz. The diameter of the head is 200 mm and
the distance between the human head model and the antenna is 10 mm. The human
hand model has dielectric properties of relative permittivity of 54 and conductivity of
1.45 S/m at 1.9 GHz. There is 4 mm spacing between the inner surface of hand model

402
Electromagnetic simulation
Mea.
27563 cells
38873 cells
55411 cells
0
−5
−10
−15
Return loss (dB)
−20
−25
−30
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
Frequency (GHz)
2.0
2.1
0
−5
−10
−15
Return loss (dB)
−20
−25
−30
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
Frequency (GHz)
2.0
2.1
0
−5
−10
−15
Return loss (dB)
−20
−25
−30
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
Frequency (GHz)
(c) Finite Element Method
(d) Finite Integration Method
(a) Method of Moments
(b) FDTD Method
2.0
2.1
0
−5
−10
−15
Return loss (dB)
−20
−25
−30
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
Frequency (GHz)
2.0
2.1
Mea.
10 cells
15 cells
20 cells
30 cells
Mea.
10 cells
20 cells
30 cells
40 cells
Mea.
0.1-4 mm
0.1-2 mm
0.1-1 mm
Figure 10.9 Return-loss characteristics (unbalanced-fed model): (a) Method of Moments,
(b) FDTD Method (c) Finite Element Method, and (c) Finite Integration Method.
0
−5
−10
−15
Return loss (dB)
−20
−25
−30
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
Frequency (GHz)
2.0
2.1
0
−5
−10
−15
Return loss (dB)
−20
−25
−30
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
Frequency (GHz)
2.0
2.1
(a) Unbalanced-fed
(b) Balanced-fed
Mea.
MoM
FDTD
FEM
FIM
Mea.
MoM
FDTD
FEM
FIM
Figure 10.10 Return-loss characteristics: (a) unbalanced feed and (b) balanced feed.

10.3 Example (balanced antennas for mobile handsets)
403
Eθ (Mea.)
Eθ (MoM)
Eϕ (Mea.)
Eϕ (MoM)
Eθ (FDTD)
Eθ (FIM)
Eθ (FEM)
Eϕ (FDTD)
Eϕ (FIM)
Eϕ (FEM)
0°
5
0
−5
−10
−15
20
−15
−10
−5
5
0
30°
30°
60°
90°
120°
150°
180°
150°
120°
90°
60°
x
z
0°
5
0
−5
−10
−15
20
−15
−10
−5
5
0
30°
30°
60°
90°
120°
150°
180°
150°
120°
90°
60°
x
z
0°
5
0
−5
−10
−15
20
−15
−10
−5
5
0
30°
30°
60°
90°
120°
150°
180°
150°
120°
90°
60°
y
z
0°
5
0
−5
−10
−15
20
−15
−10
−5
5
0
30°
30°
60°
90°
120°
150°
180°
150°
120°
90°
60°
y
z
90°
5
0
−5
−10
−15
20
−15
−10
−5
5
0
120°
60°
30°
0°
330°
300°
270°
240°
210°
180°
150°
x
y
90°
5
0
−5
−10
−15
20
−15
−10
−5
5
0
120°
60°
30°
0°
330°
300°
270°
(a) Unbalanced-fed
(b) Balanced-fed
240°
210°
180°
150°
x
y
Figure 10.11 Radiation patterns in free space: (a) unbalanced feed and (b) balanced feed.

Table 10.2 Gain of a folded loop antenna (f0 = 1860 MHz)
Gain [dBi]
Method of Moments
1.43
FDTD Method
1.36
Unbalanced-fed
Finite Element Method
1.37
Finite Integration Method
2.2
Measured gain
1.02
Method of Moments
1.34
FDTD Method
1.76
Balanced-fed
Finite Element Method
2.05
Finite Integration Method
2.2
Measured gain
1.11
(a)
(b)
Head model (Sphere)
Feed point
Loop element
Ground plane
h
y
z
x
D
D
Head model (Sphere)
Hand model
l
y
z
x
D
Figure 10.12 Antenna in the vicinity of a human model: (a) antenna in the vicinity of a spherical
head model and (b) antenna in the vicinity of a spherical head model and hand model.

10.3 Example (balanced antennas for mobile handsets)
405
0 dB
(a) Unbalanced-fed
(b) Balanced-fed
-2 dB
-4 dB
-6 dB
-8 dB
-10 dB
-12 dB
-14 dB
-16 dB
-18 dB
-20 dB
-22 dB
-24 dB
-26 dB
-28 dB
-30 dB
-32 dB
-34 dB
-36 dB
-38 dB
-40 dB
Figure 10.13 Current distribution of a folded loop antenna in the vicinity of a spherical head
model (f0 = 1860 MHz): (a) unbalanced feed and (b) balanced feed.
and the boundary of the handset, because the antenna is assumed to be surrounded by a
housing for avoiding direct contact between the user’s hand and the interior elements.
In the MoM simulator, the number of cells per wavelength is 10 and the numbers of
total cells of unbalanced-fed and balanced-fed models are 2864 and 2918, respectively.
In the FDTD simulator, models are divided into non-uniform meshing of 0.5 to 4 mm
and the numbers of total cells of unbalanced-fed and balanced-fed models are 367
275 and 313 880, respectively. In the FEM simulator, the numbers of total cells of
unbalanced-fed and balanced-fed models are 18 345 and 12 253, respectively. In the
FIM simulator, the total number of cells of unbalanced-fed and balanced-fed models are
9 660 189.
Figure 10.13 shows the simulated current distribution on the GP in the vicinity of the
head model by using the MoM simulator, where (a) and (b) are the currents of unbalanced
and balanced-fed models. As in the case of free space, the current on the GP is reduced
even in the vicinity of the head model. Moreover, the result of an unbalanced-fed model
agrees very well with that of a balanced-fed model. This shows that the self-balance
effect is still maintained even though a folded loop is located in the vicinity of the human
head.
10.3.4.2
Analytical results
Figure 10.14 shows the radiation patterns in the vicinity of the head model, where (a)
and (b) are the radiation patterns of unbalanced and balanced-fed models. In the ﬁgure,
the difference of about 4 dB between the simulated and measured results is seen in the
vicinity of a head model, while they are almost the same in the free space. It is considered
that the calculated gains by each simulator include the different loss of the impedance
mismatch and are different from each other, because the radiation patterns by each
simulator are calculated at the center frequency of 1860 MHz. Furthermore, users need

406
Electromagnetic simulation
Table 10.3 Average gain of Eθ and Eφ components in the vicinity of a
head model
Head model
Eθ [dBi]
Eϕ [dBi]
with model : a
–1.00
–9.04
Unbalanced-fed
w/o model : b
–5.82
–17.81
Difference : c = b −a
–4.82
–8.41
with model : a
–1.11
–9.40
Balanced-fed
w/o model : b
–5.73
–18.53
Difference : c = b −a
–4.62
–9.13
Eθ (Mea.)
Eθ (MoM)
Eϕ (Mea.)
Eϕ (MoM)
(a) Unbalanced-fed
(b) Balanced-fed
Eθ (FDTD)
Eθ (FIM)
Eθ (FEM)
Eϕ (FDTD)
Eϕ (FIM)
Eϕ (FEM)
0°
5
0
−5
−10
−15
20
−15
−10
−5
5
0
30°
30°
60°
90°
120°
150°
180°
150°
120°
90°
60°
y
z
0°
5
0
−5
−10
−15
20
−15
−10
−5
5
0
30°
30°
60°
90°
120°
150°
180°
150°
120°
90°
60°
y
z
Figure 10.14 Radiation pattern in the vicinity of a spherical head model (f0 = 1860 MHz):
(a) unbalanced feed and (b) balanced feed.
to have more familiarity with each simulator in order to design the optimum geometrical
conﬁguration, and they must be acquainted with the application of the simulator. The
radiation toward the head is decreased while the gain toward +z direction becomes
higher. The same as in free space, the radiation pattern of the unbalanced-fed model is
almost the same as that of the balanced-fed model, and this shows that the self-balance
effect is still maintained even though a folded loop is located in the vicinity of the human
head. Table 10.3 shows the average gain of θ- and φ-components of the electrical ﬁeld

References
407
Eθ (Mea.)
Eθ (MoM)
Eϕ (Mea.)
Eϕ (MoM)
Eθ (FDTD)
Eθ (FIM)
Eθ (FEM)
Eϕ (FDTD)
Eϕ (FIM)
Eϕ (FEM)
0°
0
−5
−10
−15
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
30°
30°
60°
90°
120°
150°
180°
150°
120°
90°
60°
y
z
Figure 10.15 Radiation pattern of an unbalanced-fed model in the vicinity of head and hand
models (f0 = 1860 MHz).
in the vicinity of a head model. There is almost no difference between the results of
unbalanced and balanced-fed models.
Figure 10.15 shows the radiation pattern of a folded loop antenna in the vicinity of
head and hand models at 1860 MHz. By the presence of a hand model, the maximum
gain was reduced in the y–z plane.
References
[1] A. Vasylchenko, Y. Schols, W. De Raedt, and G. A. E. Vandenbosch, Quality Assessment of
Computational Techniques and Software Tools for Planar-Antenna Analysis, IEEE Antennas
and Propagation Magazine, vol. 51, February 2009, no. 1, pp. 23–38.
[2] M. Taguchi, On Electromagnetic Simulators for Antenna Analysis, Proceedings IEICE
General Conference, 1998, C1 TB-1–1, p. 736.
[3] K. Sato, K. Nishikawa, N. Suzuki, and A. Ogawa, Analysis of Antennas Mounted on Portable
Equipment Near Human Body, IEICE Transactions (Japan), vol. J79-B-II, November 1996,
no. 11, pp. 892–900.

408
Electromagnetic simulation
[4] K. Hirasawa and K. Fujimoto, Characteristics of Wire antenna on a Rectangular Conducting
Body, IECE Transactions (Japan), vol. J65-B, April 1982, pp. 382–389.
[5] K. Sato, K. Matsumoto, K. Fujimoto, and K. Hirasawa, Characteristics of a Planar Inverted-
F Antenna on a Rectangular Conducting Body, IECE Transactions (Japan), vol. J71-B,
November 1988, pp. 1237–1243.
[6] K. D. Katsibas, C. A. Balanis, P. A. Tirkas, and C. R. Birtcher, Folded Loop Antenna for
Mobile Hand-held Units, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 46, 1998,
no. 2, pp. 260–266.
[7] Y. Kim, H. Morishita, Y. Koyanagi, and K. Fujimoto, A Folded Loop Antenna System for
Handset Development and Based on the Advanced Design Concept, IEICE Transactions on
Communications, vol. E84-B, September 2001, no. 9, pp. 2468–2475.
[8] Zeland Software, Inc., IE3D User’s Manual, Release 8.0, Fremont, 2001.
[9] T. Uno, FDTD for Electromagnetic Field and Antenna Analyses, Corona Publishing Co.,
Ltd., 1998, p. 2.
[10] Zeland Software, Inc., FIDELITY User’s Manual, release 1.5.
[11] K. Fujimoto and J. R. James, Mobile Antenna Systems Handbook, Artech House, 1994.
[12] J. D. Kraus, Antennas, 2nd edn., McGraw-Hill, 1988.
[13] H. Morishita, Y. Kim, and K. Fujimoto, Design Concept of Antennas for Small Mobile
Terminals and the Future Perspective, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 44,
October 2002, no. 5, pp. 30–43.
[14] H. Morishita, H. Furuuchi, and K. Fujimoto, Performance of Balance-fed Antenna System
for Handsets in the Vicinity of a Human Head or Hand, IEE Proceedings: Microwaves,
Antennas and Propagation, vol. 149, April 2002, no. 2, pp. 85–91.
[15] Y. Kim, H. Furuuchi, H. Morishita, and K. Fujimoto, Characteristics of Balance-fed L-
type Loop Antenna System for Handsets in Vicinity of Human Head, Proceedings 2000
International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 3, August 2000, pp. 1203–
1206.
[16] H. Morishita, Y. Kim, and K. Fujimoto, Analysis of Handset Antennas in the Vicinity of
the Human body by the Electromagnetic Simulator, IEICE Transactions on Electronics,
vol. E84-C, July 2001, no. 7, pp. 937–947.
[17] T. Taga and K. Tsunekawa, Performance Analysis of a Built-in Planar Inverted F Antenna for
800 MHz Band Portable Radio Units, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
vol. SAC-5, June 1987, no. 5, pp. 921–929.
[18] K. Hirasawa and K. Fujimoto, Characteristics of Wire Antenna on a Rectangular Con-
ducting Body, IEICE Transactions on Communications (Japanese), vol. J65-B, April 1982,
pp. 382–389.
[19] K. Fujimoto, A. Henderson, K. Hirasawa, and J. R. James, Small Antennas, Research Studies
Press, UK, 1987.
[20] C. A. Balanis, Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design, 2nd edn., John Wiley and Sons, 1997.
[21] H. Uchida and Y. Mushiake, VHF-Antenna, Corona Publishing (in Japanese), 1961.
[22] R. C. Johnson, Antenna Engineering Handbook, 3rd edn., McGraw-Hill. Inc., 1961,
Chapter 4.
[23] Zeland Software, Inc., IE3D ver. 7.0: www.zeland.com/IE3D.htm
[24] Zeland Software, Inc., Fidelity ver. 3.0: www.zeland.com/Fidelity.htm
[25] Ansoft, HFSS 8.0, The Maxwell Online Help System, 2001.
[26] Computer Simulation Technology AG, CST Microwave Studio ver. 2006: www.cst.com
[27] Schmid & Partner Engineering AG, www.speag.com/

11
Glossary
11.1
Catalog of small antennas
Small antennas here are treated in a wider sense than generally used (which concerns
only ESA), because of its signiﬁcance in the antenna and communication community.
However, in consideration of the latest trends and requirements for small antennas, the
variety of wireless systems including wireless broadband systems and short range radio
systems, demands for a variety of antennas having physically constrained dimensions
as well as electrically small dimensions and enhanced functions have become urgent.
Thus, describing only ESA in the modern book is considered insufﬁcient, whereas intro-
duction of other types of antennas such as PCSA, FSA, and PSA should be preferred,
as they have been widely employed in recently deployed wireless systems. The book
describes principles of small sizing for antennas, design techniques, including miniatur-
ization, and many antenna examples. The latest design technologies include application
of metamaterials, EBG (Electromagnetic Band Gap), HIS (High Impedance Surface),
DGS (Defect Ground Surface), and so forth.
This chapter contains a catalog of antennas listed in earlier book chapters, providing
the original ﬁgure which can be referred by numbers used in the text and ﬁgures not
appeared in the text with number with A as Fig. Ax. (x: a serial number in the catalog.).
The main feature of the chapter is to provides readers with some useful information for
designing small antennas and assistance in selecting suitable antennas for systems.
The list gives brief view, main features and some examples of applications. In addition,
for the reader’s convenience, references and locations, indicating the section in the text
where readers can refer, are provided.
11.2
List of small antennas

Brief view
Antenna type
Main features
Applications
References
and location
in the text
Short dipole

2a ≤λ
2π
d ≪λ
Low radiation resistance, high capacitive
reactance, narrowband
Low radiation efﬁciency (with high loss
matching circuit) small, thin, lightweight,
low cost
Small mobile terminals (Handset)
RFID
[1–4]
Chapter 3
Figure 3.1
Monopole
(on the ground
plane)

a ≤λ
4π
Low radiation resistance, high capacitive
reactance, narrowband
Low radiation efﬁciency (with high loss
matching circuit) small, thin, lightweight,
low cost
Small mobile terminals (Handset)
RFID
[5, 6]*
*not
necessarily
ESA
Inverted-L (ILA)
(on the ground
plane)
L + h ≤1
4λ
Low-proﬁle, thin, lightweight, low cost
Low radiation resistance, high capacitive
reactance, vertical polarization (with low
h), horizontal polarization (possible with
higher h)
HF band communications
vehicles, ships
[7, 8]
Figure 1.6(c)
Inverted-F (IFA)
(on the ground
plane)

L + h ≤1
4λ
d ≪λ
Low-proﬁle, thin, lightweight, low cost
Easily matching to 50  (with adjustment of
h and d)
VHF/UHF band communications
vehicles
Small mobile terminals (Handset)
[7, 9]
Figure 1.6(d)
Small loop
(circular)
ka ≪1
Low radiation resistance, high inductive
reactance small, thin, lightweight, compact
Small portable equipment
NFC systems (including card type
RFID)
[10–12]
Figure 3.3
(rectangular)
Small, thin, lightweight, compact
Small portable equipment
NFC systems (including card type
RFID)
[13, 14]
Figure 3.5

Folded loop
a ≤1
4λ
(a type of FSA)
Wideband operation, multiband operation
variety of modiﬁed structures
Small mobile terminals (Handset)
[15–18]
8.1.2.1.2.2.2
Figure 8.44
Dipole type
Monopole type
Wideband, low-proﬁle, thin, lightweight
Small, compact, low-proﬁle, lightweight
Small mobile terminals, WiMAX
USB dongle
Small mobile terminals, WiMAX
USB dongle
[19, 20]
Zigzag structure
Slow wave structure
Small, compact, lightweight, thin, low cost,
self-resonance possible
Small mobile terminals
NFC system (including RFID)
[21–26]
Figure 6.1
Meander line
antenna (MLA)
Slow wave structure
Small, compact, lightweight, thin, low cost,
self-resonance possible
Small mobile terminals
NFC system (including RFID)
[27–31]
7.2.1.1
Figure 1.6(b)
Dipole type
The same radiation pattern as that of a
1/2-dipole
Small mobile terminals
[27, 32]
7.2.1.1.1.1.1
Monopole type
(on the ground
plane)
The same radiation property as that of a
monopole with the same height h, higher
radiation resistance than the same height
short monopole, self-resonance possible
Small mobile terminals
(Handsets)
[27, 33–36]
7.2.1.1.1.1.2
Figure 7.2
(cont.)

Brief view
Antenna type
Main features
Applications
References
and location
in the text
Dual-element MLA
(on the ground
plane)
Dual-band operation
Small mobile terminals
[37]
Figure 7.9
Normal mode helical
antenna (NMHA)

2a ≪λ
L = np < 1
4λ
Slow-wave structure, radiation normal to the
helix axis with the same pattern as a short
dipole of the same axial length,
Self-resonance possible with increase in n,
even though L ≪1
4λ, Higher efﬁciency
than that of a dipole with the same length
Small mobile terminals
(Handsets)
[38–41]
Figure 6.15
Dipole type
[42, 43]
Figure 7.57
Monopole type (on
the ground plane)
[44, 45]
Figure 7.70

Wired fractal
structure
Slow-wave structure, the same radiation
pattern as that of the same length short
dipole, higher radiation resistance than the
same length dipole, multiband operation,
depending on the whole length of the wire
Wideband wireless systems,
multiband wireless systems
[46]
Figure 6.2
Monopole type (on
the ground plane)
Figure 7.88
Planar antenna
(planar metal in
space or etched on
a dielectric
substrate)
Small, compact, lightweight, low cost
The space and the size of the planar patch
mainly determine the lower bound of the
impedance bandwidth
Wider bandwidth than wire radiator
Portable devices, including RFID
tags, mobile phones, sensors,
laptops, USB dongles, etc.
[47, 51]
Chapter 7
Dipole type (square,
triangular,
rectangular,
circular, elliptical,
trapezoidal, etc.
and their
variations)
Monopole type
(planar metal in
space, or etched on
a dielectric
substrate) (on a
ground plane)
(cont.)

Brief view
Antenna type
Main features
Applications
References
and location
in the text
With slotted and/or
notched planar
radiator of various
shapes, a stub
attached to the
planar radiator
Lowering resonance frequency by slot,
lowering the height by stub and notch
With stub/loop for
impedance
matching
Feed gap, feed structure and the bottom shape
of the radiator determine impedance
matching
Planar meander line
dipole
Meandered wire dipole with triangular,
rectangular, etc, shapes. Size reduction
compared to a dipole with the same
resonance frequency
RFID tags, mobile phone wireless
systems (WLAN, WPAN, etc.)
[52–57]
7.2.2
Figure 7.85
Ultra small planar
meander line dipole
Folded ultra small
planar meander
line antenna
Miniaturized size (possibly occupying area of
0.05λ × 0.05λ at UHF bands, with gain −8
dBi, efﬁciency −9 dB), Folded structure
increases radiation resistance and gain, use
of dielectric substrate (εr = 10) further
improves efﬁciency (up to −2.5 dB) and
gain (up to −3.6 dBi)
RFID tag (card type), small
wireless equipment
[58, 59]
7.2.1.1.1.1.5
Figure 7.30

Planar meander line
monopole
embedded on a thin
dielectric substrate
Planar densely wound meander line monopole
antenna, another meander line monopole
element wound in different direction on the
rear side for dual polarization, wideband
operation covering 400–700 MHz bands
Digital TV Broadcasting, Wideband
receiver
[60]
7.2.1.1.1.1.2
Figure 7.6
Meandered wire
dipole with
meandered wire
element
Reduced length by using meandered structure
on the meandered wire dipole elements
RFID tags, laptop, USB dongle, etc.
[61]
7.2.2.1.1
Antenna with
space-Filling
geometries
Peano curve
Hilbert curve
Increase in the antenna length within a small
area lowers resonance frequency, the
antenna length increases as the order of
iteration increases, increasing space-ﬁlling
density, and lowering the resonance
frequency, radiation properties are
essentially identical, independent of the
geometry, related to the occupying area
Design of small antenna and
frequency selective surface (FSS)
FSS can be applied to thin absorbers
and metamaterial bulk media
[62–66]
7.2.2
Figure 7.81
With Fractal
Geometry
[55]
7.2.2.1.3.2
Koch type
Increase in the wire length decreases radiation
resistance and efﬁciency, as well as the
resonance frequency, and increases Q
7.103
(cont.)

Brief view
Antenna type
Main features
Applications
References
and location
in the text
Minkowsky type
Figure 7.103
Sierpinsky type
Multiband operation, number of multiple
bands are adjusted by control of scale
factor to generate Sierpinsky geometry
Multiband systems
[67, 68]
7.2.2
7.2.2.1.3.3
Figure 7.106
Monopole type
with:
Hilbert curve
Figure 7.103
Meander line, Fractal
geometries, etc.
[69, 70]
7.2.2.1.3.2
Figure 7.103
PIFA with planar
Peano elements
Dual-band operation by using two different
Peano wire elements as horizontal element
in PIFA structure
Mobile phone, dual band
[71]
7.2.2.1.1.1
Figure 7.97

Spiral antenna
Equiangular spiral
r = r0eaϕ
⎛
⎜
⎝
r1 = r0eaϕ
r2 = r0ea(ϕ−δ)
r3 = r0ea(ϕ−π)
r4 = r0ea(ϕ−π−δ)
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎣
r : radius of spiral
r0 : initial radius (ϕ = 0)
ϕ : angle of rotation
a : rate of growth
δ : initial angle of r2
Wideband operation in terms of impedance as
well as radiation properties, bi-directional
radiation normal to the surface of spiral
with circular polarization
Satellite communications, GPS,
RFID tags, etc.
[72–75]
7.2.2.1.4.1
Figure 7.112
Archimedean spiral
r = r0 + aϕ
Dense winding of spiral arm in smaller space
than equiangular type, more useful in
practical applications. Loosely wound
spiral arm brings frequency-dependent
behavior
[76]
7.2.2.1.4.2
Figure 7.113
Miniaturized spiral
• with inductive
loading
a. meander line
b. zigzag line
Reduced size with integration of
inductive/capacitive elements or lumped
component on the spiral arms. Reduction
of the spiral structure with either dielectric
superstrate, substrate or both
[77]
7.2.2.1.4.6
[78]
7.2.2.1.4.6
• with capacitive
loading
a. dielectric
substrate
b. dielectric
superstrate
Cavity-backed spiral
Small and thin antenna structure,
unidirectional radiation
Vehicle GPS terminals
[79]
7.2.2.1.4.5
(cont.)

Brief view
Antenna type
Main features
Applications
References
and location
in the text
Square spiral
Simpler construction than round structure
[80]
7.2.2.1.4
Figure 7.133
Complementary
Structure
Monopole-slot
Small, compact, planar complementary,
monopole-slot antenna, wideband, ﬁnite
ground plane
RFID tags, USB dongle, etc.
[81–83]
6.2.4.1
7.2.4.1
L-shape monopole
and dual slot
Small, compact, planar complementary,
L-shaped monopole-dual slot antenna,
wide bandwidth, ﬁnite ground plane
[81–83]
7.2.4.1.1
T-shaped monopole
and dual slot
(H-shaped)
Small, compact, planar complementary,
T-shaped monopole and dual slot
[84]
7.2.4.1.2

Half-circle monopole
and dual slot
Electrically small (6×25 mm), compact,
complementary, half-circle dual slot
antenna, wide bandwidth (2.8∼10.7 GHz
for −10 dBi S11), gain 2∼5 dB over the
entire bandwidth
UWB systems
[85]
7.2.4.1.3
Figure 7.186
Self-complementary
spiral
Self-complementary
with a compound
space form
Frequency independent property with inﬁnite
structure. Finite bandwidth with truncation
of the platform, but still useful bandwidth
for practical applications
[85]
6.2.4.1
Figure 6.35
[85]
6.2.4.1
3D two-arm conical
sinuous antenna
Small dimensions (9 cm height and 5 cm
bottom diameter), wide bandwidth (9:1 for
VSWR < 5), covering ﬁve frequency
bands (3 to 17 GHz), gain 	∼5 dBic
UWB systems
[86]
7.2.4.1.4
Figure 7.190
(cont.)

Brief view
Antenna type
Main features
Applications
References
and location
in the text
Top-loaded Antenna
Circular disk
Electrically small size (height), uniform
current distribution on the monopole
element
[87, 88]
7.2.3.1.1
Figure 7.168
Wire-grid disk dipole,
monopole
Self-resonant, resonance frequency lowered
by increasing disk diameter, increasing
capacitance, a shunt stack point used for
matching
[74]
7.2.3.1.1
Figure 7.169
Spiral disk
Self-resonance, resonance frequency lowered
by varying spiral wire length, increasing
both capacitance and inductance
[75]
7.2.3.1.1
Figure 7.169
Disk-loaded helix
Self-resonance, resonance frequency lowered
by both top-loading and helical winding,
increasing capacitance and inductance
[74]
7.2.3.1.1
Figure 7.169

Spherical-cap
Self-resonance, resonance with spherical
top-loading and helical winding, Q =
1.5Qchu achievable
[91]
7.2.3.1.2
Figure 7.169
Crossbar loaded
monopole
Small size (height 0.13λ0: λ0 = 3 m), wide
bandwidth (110∼205 MHz and 420∼445
MHz for −10 dB return loss), adjustable
with the radius and length of the sleeve,
almost omnidirectional pattern
[91]
7.2.3.1.2
Figure 7.176
Single slot line loaded
with spiral
Double slot line
loaded with spiral
Miniaturized slot antenna, occupying area of
0.13λ0 × 0.15λ0 at 800 MHz band, narrow
bandwidth (0.9%), gain 0.8 dB
Nearly same occupying area as the
single-element antenna (0.165λ0 ×
0.157λ0), improved bandwidth (2.4%) and
gain (1.5 ∼1.7 dB) at 800 MHz band
[92]
7.2.3.1.3
Figure 7.179
[92]
7.2.3.1.3
Figure 7.179
Multi-arm spherical
helix antenna
Electrically small size, four-folded arm,
self-resonant with radius 4.2 cm, ka =
0.266 at 300 MHz, efﬁciency 97%, Q = 84
(≈1.5Qchu)
[93]
7.2.2.2.3.1,
7.2.2.2.3.2
Figure 7.155
(cont.)

Brief view
Antenna type
Main features
Applications
References
and location
in the text
Electrically small
spherical wire
dipole antenna
Almost isotropic radiation pattern, diameter
about 20 cm, resonance at 327 MHz, Q
about 12, close to the lower bound Qchu,
efﬁciency 93%
[94]
7.2.2.2.3.3
Figure 7.152
Spherical split ring
resonator (SSRR)
antenna
Electrically small size (radius 21cm,
resonance at 300 MHz), optimized with Q
≈3.5Qchu
[95]
7.2.2.2.3.4
Figure 7.160
Electrically small
complementary
pairs of thick
monopole antennas
Electrically small size (height λ/18,
(height/diameter) = 1), 3:1 VSWR
bandwidth, gain 5.75 dB, minimum
efﬁciency 25%
[96]
7.2.4.2.1
Figure 7.194
Combined electric
and magnetic type
planar antenna
Small size (25×20 cm), unidirectional
radiation over wide bandwidth, Combined
electrical radiator (two dipole arms) with
magnetic radiator (a loop cut on the ground
plane)
[97]
7.2.4.2.2
Figure 7.196

Dual-band and
F-shaped antenna
with inductive slot
Dual-band operation at 2.4 and 5.4 GHz, gain
1.5 dBi at 2.45 GHz and 4.9 dBi at 5.2
GHz, bandwidth 7.8% at 2.5 GHz and
11.4% at 5.37 GHz, a ﬁgure-eight pattern
in the E plane and a nearly omnidirectional
pattern in the H plane
[98]
7.2.4.3.1
Miniaturized
Composite
Antenna
Modiﬁed, cavity-
backed loop,
sectionalized into
six and looped with
spiral and
corrugated stub
Small dimensions (<λ0/10), low-proﬁle,
similar radiation as a short monopole,
constituted of sectionalized slot loop
embedded on a metallic cavity, loaded with
a spiral-like slot-line on the edge
[99]
7.2.4.3.2
Figure 7.204
Metamaterial
Integrated
Antenna
Mu-negative material
(MNG) loaded
antenna
Miniaturized circular patch antenna designed
with resonance mode depending on the
MNG material parameters
[100]
7.2.5.1.1
[100]
• Circular patch
antenna
7.2.5.1.1
[101]
7.2.5.1.1
Figure 7.210
(cont.)

Brief view
Antenna type
Main features
Applications
References
and location
in the text
• MNG material
constituted of
single ring array
Figure 7.212
• Elliptical patch
antenna loaded
with MNG material
Figure 7.214
Epsilon-negative
material (ENG)
loaded antenna
Monopole loaded
with a half-sphere
ENG material
Miniaturized monopole antenna; example:
ENG half-sphere radius of λ/18 and the
monopole length λ/50 at λ = 14.8 cm,
Q = 42 (about 1.5Qchu)
[102]
7.2.5.1.2
Figure 7.218
Loop antenna loaded
with an equivalent
MNG structure
placed on a ﬁnite
ground plane
Miniaturized loop antenna with ka = 0.11,
resonance at 300 MHz, narrow bandwidth
[103]
7.2.5.1.1.3
Figure 7.217
Rectangular loop
antenna loaded
with an equivalent
MNG structure
with inter-digital
capacitor
MNG structure is synthesized by either 3D
extended capacitor-loaded loop (CLL) or
2D planar CLL with inter-digital capacitor
or a lumped capacitor
[103]
7.2.5.1.1
Figure 7.217

Rectangular loop
antenna loaded
with equivalent
MNG structure
Matching (resonance) in space for small
antenna, using MNG structure
implemented by capacitor-loaded loop
(inter-digital capacitor can be used)
[103]
7.2.5.1.1
Figure 7.217
Monopole antenna
loaded with
equivalent ENG
structure of a
helical strip
Matching (resonance) in space for small
antenna, using ENG structure implemented
by cylindrical helix strip, greater
bandwidth than a small monopole with the
same length
[103]
7.2.5.1.2
Figure 7.226
Metamaterial
Integrated
Antenna II
Monopole antenna
loaded with
equivalent ENG
structure
incorporating
meander line
surface placed on a
ﬁnite ground plane
Matching (resonance) in space for small
antenna, using ENG structure implemented
by meander line surface having large
inductance
[103]
7.2.5.1.2
Figure 7.225
(cont.)

Brief view
Antenna type
Main features
Applications
References
and location
in the text
Backﬁre-to-endﬁre
fan beam CRLH
Leaky Wave
antenna
Antenna constituted of a 1D CRLH
metamaterial structure incorporating
series-resonant tank with inter-digital
capacitor and shunt anti-resonant tank with
stub inductor
[104]
7.2.5.2.1
Figure 7.227
Conical beam antenna
using 2D CRLH
LW antenna
Opening angle of conical beam varies with
frequency, following the dispersion relation
(β/ω), leading to beam scanning
[104]
7.2.5.2.1
Figure 7.227
3D CRLH (rotated
TL-matrix based)
material
[104]
7.2.5.2.1
Figure 7.227
CRLH ZOR mode
microstrip
resonator antennas
(three models for
different
frequencies)
With ZOR property, operating frequency not
depending on the size, but only on the
lumped LC values, leading to create ESA.
Increasing size increases gain with ﬁxed
frequency, high efﬁciency and high
directivity
[104]
7.2.5.2.2
Figure 7.230
A CRLH loop
resonant microstrip
antenna
A rectilinear CRLH structure with compactly
spaced stubs in a radial manner, shorted at
the center of the structure, Monopole-like
radiation with ZOR mode
[104]
Figure 7.231

Metamaterial
Integrated
Antenna III
Magnetic monopole
microstrip antenna
using CRLH ZOR
mode in a
mushroom
structure
Monopole behavior due to magnetic
current loop created around the
mushroom patch
[104]
Figure 7.232
Metamaterial applied
antenna
Compact (λ0/11) and low proﬁle
(λ0/28), consisting of two 1D
zero-degree phase shifting line
metamaterials arranged in a ring
structure for 1.7 GHz
[104]
Figure 7.233
NRI TL metamaterial
antenna composed
with two unit cells
Four microstrip ZOR mode NRI TL unit
cells with dimensions λ0/10 ×
λ0/10 × λ0/20 over a 0.45λ0 ground
plane, efﬁciency over 50%∼70% at
3.1 GHz
[105]
Figure 7.235
Dual monopole
loaded with NRI
TL metamaterial
Small size (22 mm×30 mm), broadband
(−10 dB BW from 3.14 GHz to 7.2
GHz), printed monopole loaded with
NRI TL unit cell, lowering the
operating frequency and extending
bandwidth
[106]
Figure 7.236
(cont.)

Brief view
Antenna type
Main features
Applications
References
and location
in the text
Two-arm TL
metamaterial
antenna loaded
with spiral
inductors
Wideband (100 MHz for −10 dB BW),
compact size (λ0/4 × λ0/7 × λ0/29) at
3 GHz band, consisting of two TL
metamaterial arms, each can operate at
different frequency
[107]
Figure 7.223
Tri-band monopole
antenna consisting
of cascaded RH/LH
TL metamaterial
Compact size (20×23.5×1.59 mm),
multimode (dipole mode at 2.4 GHz,
monopole mode at 5 GHz band and the 3rd
mode formed by an L-shaped slot on the
ground plane covering 3 GHz band),
efﬁciency 67% at 2.45 GHz, 86% at 3.5
GHz and 85% at 5.5 GHz
Wireless systems (Wi-Fi, WiMAX,
etc)
[108]
Figure 7.239
Microstrip antenna
partially ﬁlled with
CRLH cells
Miniturized by using mushroom HIS
structure of LH operation
Compact size (λ0/11), simple structure and
insensitive against ground plane size
[109]
[124]
Figure 7.242

Microstrip antenna
loaded with CRLH
TL metamaterial
structure
Composed with cascaded CRLH TL structure
in zero phase, bandwidth (−10 dB S11)
4.5% at 2 GHz band
[110]
[125]
Figure 7.243
Planar patch
antenna
E-shape patch (two
open-end parallel
slots on the patch)
Wideband operation, optimized by adjusting
slot length, width, and position. About
30% bandwidth at 1.9–2.4 GHz. Simple
structure, small size
Wireless communication systems
[111–113]
8.1.2.1.1
Figure 8.1
E-shape patch with
unequal arm slots
Modiﬁed from E-shape patch to generate
circular polarization with relatively
wideband axial ratio
GPS, RFID, WLAN, etc.
[114]
8.1.2.1.1.1.1
Figure 8.5
(cont.)

Brief view
Antenna type
Main features
Applications
References
and location
in the text
ψ-shape patch
Modiﬁed from E-shape patch to form
ψ-shape. Wider bandwidth than E-shape.
Over 50% bandwidth
Wideband wireless communication
systems
[115, 116]
8.1.2.1.1.1.2
Figure 8.9
H-shape patch
Circular polarization with wide bandwidth in
both axial ratio and impedance
[117–120]
8.1.2.1.1.1.3
Figure 8.11
U-slot patch
Wideband as well as multiband operation.
Impedance bandwidth in excess of 30%
[121–125]
8.1.2.1.1.1.3
Figure 8.29
Half-U-slot patch
(L-shape open-end
slot) on the patch
Reduced size U-slot patch, yet similar
impedance bandwidth as the full-U-slot
patch
[126]
8.1.2.1.1.2.2
Figure 8.29

I-shape slot patch
(Open-end straight
slot on the patch,
fed with a
microstrip line)
Wideband operation with the reduced size
monopole slot on the small ground plane
having about the size of a typical PC
wireless card
[127]
8.1.2.1.1.2.1
Figure 8.16
L-shape slot patch
(Open-end L-shape
slot on the patch
fed with a
microstrip line)
Greater size reduction than that of an I-shape
slot patch
[127]
8.1.2.1.1.2.1
Figure 8.17
T-shape patch
Wideband operation with reduced size
(height), providing more space on the
ground plane for electronics
[127]
8.1.2.1.1.2.1
Figure 8.18
(cont.)

Brief view
Antenna type
Main features
Applications
References
and location
in the text
Double-U-slot patch
Triple-band operation. Interaction of two
slots excites center frequency; the shorter
and longer slots excite higher and lower
frequencies, respectively
Multiband systems
[128]
8.1.2.1.1.2.2
Figure 8.31
U-slot patch with
truncated corner
Wider bandwidths for both impedance and
axial ratio than for patch without truncation
[128]
8.1.2.1.1.2.2
Figure 8.31
Unequal-arm U-slot
patch
Circular polarization with bandwidth
performance similar to a U-slot patch with
truncation
[129]
8.1.2.1.1.2.2
Figure 8.31

Square-slot patch
(wide slot on the
patch)
Wide bandwidth, 1:1.5 VSWR bandwidth of
1 GHz at 2 GHz, 0.5 GHz bandwidth for
2 dB gain
Wideband wireless systems
[130]
8.1.2.1.1.2.2
Figure 8.32
Rotated square-slot
patch
Bandwidth enhanced compared with
un-rotated square patch; 10 dB return loss
bandwidth 2.2 GHz at 4.5 GHz
Wideband wireless systems
[131]
8.1.2.1.1.2.2
Figure 8.34
Octagonal wide slot
with a square ring
resonator
Ultra-wide-band operation with band-notched
frequency, high, sharp band-rejection over
20 dB
UWB systems
[132]
8.1.2.1.2.3.4
λ/8 PIFA
Penta-band operation with two folded
radiating slots generating two λ/8 modes
to cover two lower bands, and two λ/4
modes to cover three higher bands
Mobile phone, GSM, UMTS, and
WLAN systems
[133]
8.1.2.1.2.1.1
Figure 8.35
(cont.)

Brief view
Antenna type
Main features
Applications
References
and location
in the text
Bent-monopole
antenna (BMA)
Penta-band operation with bent-monopole fed
by coaxial cable with a thin ground line.
Total monopole length determines the
lower bands, and the ground-line length
determines the higher bands
Mobile phones, CDMA, GSM,
DCS, PCS and WCDMA
[133]
8.1.2.1.2.1.1
Figure 8.37
A printed loop with
U-slot for
wideband tuning
One-wavelength loop with a middle line
provides four-frequency resonance.
Bandwidth of two resonant modes
increased by U-slot tuning element to cover
two other frequency bands, resulting in
hepta-band operation
Laptop computer, GSM/DCS/
PCS/UMTS/WLAN
[134]
8.1.2.1.2.1.2
Figure 8.39
A printed strip
monopole with
closely coupled
shorted strip
Eight-band operation covering three wide
lower bands (698–960 MHz) and ﬁve
higher bands (1719–2690 MHz)
LTE/GSM/UMTS Mobile phone
[135]
8.1.2.1.2.1.3
Figure 8.41
Basic planar square
monopole antenna
Wide impedance bandwidth, with the square
length about 0.21λ of the lower edge
frequency
Wideband wireless systems and
UWB systems
[136]
8.1.2.1.2.1.4
Figure 8.43

Square planar
monopole with a
symmetrical
beveling (trimming
at the bottom side)
Wider impedance bandwidth than that of a
square patch without trimming, the
bandwidth ratio increased from 2.4:1 to
6.6:1
Wideband data transfer and
communication systems, UWB
systems
[137, 138]
8.1.2.1.2.2.1
Figure 8.43
Square planar
monopole with
asymmetrical
beveling (trimming
at the bottom side)
More increase in impedance bandwidth than
a symmetrically trimmed case from 2% to
12%
Wideband data transfer and
communication systems, UWB
systems
[138]
8.1.2.1.2.2.1
Figure 8.43
Square planar
monopole with a
shorting post
Reduced lower-edge frequency, resulting in
reduction of the patch height
Wideband data transfer and
communication systems, UWB
systems
[138]
8.1.2.1.2.2.1
Figure 8.43
Planar dipoles
• Center-fed square
• Beveled center-fed
square
• Offset-fed square
• Center-fed square
with a shorting pin
Wide bandwidth operation, covering UWB
band (3.1–10.6 GHz), (a) has the narrowest
bandwidth, (c) has the widest. Gain
variation is largest in (a) for  < 60◦, but
smallest for  > 60◦
UWB systems
[139]
8.1.2.1.2.3.1
Figure 8.51
(cont.)

Brief view
Antenna type
Main features
Applications
References
and location
in the text
Planar ﬂare dipole
with spline-deﬁned
outer curve
Wideband operation with optimized shape,
delivering 5:1 (190–1000 MHz)
bandwidth, gain greater than 0 dBi, small
size (reduction from λ/2 dipole in excess
of 30%)
UWB systems
[140, 141]
8.1.2.1.2.3.2.2
Figure 8.55
CPW-fed square
monopole with
symmetrical
beveling
Wide bandwidth operation, covering UWB
band
UWB systems
[142]
8.1.2.1.2.3
Figure 8.55
Planar binomial
curved monopole
UWB operation. Impedance bandwidth
depends on the order of the binomial
function and the gap between the
monopole and the ground plane
UWB systems
[143, 144]
8.1.2.1.2.3.2.1
Figure 8.55
Staircase-proﬁle
printed monopole
Impedance bandwidth and angle range for
stable radiation can be designed by
selecting number of stairs. Narrow angle
range can be applied to speciﬁc UWB links
UWB systems
[145]
8.1.2.1.2.3
Figure 8.55

A printed beveled
planar monopole
(and a half of the
monopole)
UWB operation with reduced size. With
antenna structure half of the monopole
(40% reduction in size), bandwidth is 8.25
GHz (2.85–11.1 GHz) and gain from −5.6
to 2.3 dBi
UWB systems
[146]
8.1.2.1.2.3
Planar monopole with
variable frequency
band-notch
function
UWB operation with variable band-stop
frequency by varying parameters of
H-shaped conductor back plane
UWB systems,
high data-rate transfer and
communication systems
[147]
8.1.2.1.2.3.3.2
Elliptical-shape
planar monopole
(complementary
monopole)
Circular-shape planar
monopole
(complementary
monopole)
UWB operation
UWB operation
The same as above
[148, 149]
8.1.2.1.2.3.3.2
Figure 8.67
[148, 149]
8.1.2.1.2.3.3.2
Figure 8.67
Elliptical or Circular
slot with U-shape
tuning stub
UWB operation. Lower edge frequency
depends on U-shape tuning stub and shape
factor
The same as above
[150]
8.1.2.1.2.3.3.2
Figure 8.68
(cont.)

Brief view
Antenna type
Main features
Applications
References
and location
in the text
Beveled square planar
monopole with a
quasi-square slot
ring on the planar
surface
UWB operation with a band-notch at WLAN
band
The same as above
[151]
8.1.2.1.2.3.3.1
Figure 8.63
V-shape planar patch
with unequal arms
fed through a
triangle-PIFA
coupled with
V-shape patch
Wideband and multiband operation,
determined by the feed position. Operating
frequency depends on the length of the slot
UWB systems and multiband
wireless systems
[152]
8.1.2.1.2.3.4
Sectorial loop
composed of an
arch and two
sectors
Wideband operation with 8.5:1 frequency
range for VSWR ≤2.2. The size at the
lowest frequency is 0.39λ0
UWB systems
[153]
8.1.2.1.2.3.4.2
Figure 8.73
Printed rectangular
monopole with a
notch and a strip at
the upper side
corner
UWB operation with reduced ground plane
by cutting a notch from the radiator and
attaching a strip to the radiator; 3D
omnidirectional radiation
UWB systems
[154]
8.1.2.1.2.3.3.3
Figure 8.70

Integrated antenna
MSA comprised of
two transmission
lines and oscillator
circuit
MSA loaded with HF FET enhanced
radiation power, gain 10 dBi, EIRP 11.2
dBm, at 8.5 GHz
Active integrated antenna
[132]
8.2.1.2
Figure 8.74
PIFA integrated with
PIN diode and
varactor
Frequency reconﬁgurable, multiband
operation, four-band switching by PIN
diode
Wireless communication and
mobile phone systems (PCS,
WCDMA, WiMAX, WLAN,
etc.)
[133]
8.2.1.2
Figure 8.76
Cubic antenna loaded
with PIN diode
Pattern reconﬁgurable, pattern is varied by
on–off operation of slots on the cube
surfaces by PIN diode switching
Pattern-control antenna diversity
system
[134]
8.2.1.2
Figure 8.77
Antenna on HIS
(High Impedance
Surface)
Mushroom type
surface
Periodically arrayed mushroom-like elements
to compose HIS surface
Low-proﬁle antenna, surface-wave
suppression, reduction of
backward radiation,
mutual-coupling reduction
[135]
8.3.2
Figure 8.79
(cont.)

Brief view
Antenna type
Main features
Applications
References
and location
in the text
Corrugated surface
Periodically corrugated surface, wide
impedance bandwidth
The same as above, low-proﬁle
UWB antenna
[136]
8.3.2
Figure 8.81
Combination of
Jerusalem cross
and fractal patch
HIS surface to allow low-proﬁle antenna with
enhanced gain
Low-proﬁle antenna gain
enhancement
[137]
8.3.2
Figure 8.82
Antenna on
Electromagnetic
Bandgap (EBG)
A dipole on EBG
surface
Low-proﬁle and gain increase
Low-proﬁle antenna gain
enhancement
[138]
8.3.3.2
Figure 8.84
Sleeve dipole on EBG
surface
Low-proﬁle and bandwidth increase
Low-proﬁle antenna wide
return-loss bandwidth
[139]
8.3.3.3
Figure 8.87
Two MSAs separated
by EBG belt
Reduction of mutual coupling, allowing close
spacing between two antennas
Low-proﬁle antenna, mounting a
few antennas in a small limited
area, antenna array in a narrow
space, antenna in MIMO system
[140]
8.3.3.4
Figure 8.88

Antenna on a
Defected Ground
Surface (DGS)
Frequency band-stop performance and
slow-wave property, use of single unit,
limited number of units, or a periodic
repetition of units available
Antenna, ﬁlters, power ampliﬁer,
oscillator, etc.
[141]
8.3.4
DGS unit
Ring
Figure 8.90
Meander line
Figure 8.90
Square
Figure 8.90
Triangle
Figure 8.90
H-shape
Figure 8.90
U-shape
Figure 8.90
(cont.)

Brief view
Antenna type
Main features
Applications
References
and location
in the text
DGS unit (circles)
Suppressing interference, phase noise,
harmonics in active MSA
[142]
Figure 8.91
Disk monopole patch
with L-shape cut on
the ground plane
Multiband operation due to DGS, creating a
new current path and an additional
resonance, small sizing
Card-size module antenna in MIMO
systems, multiband antenna
[142]
Figure 8.93
Antenna with DBE
(Degenerated
Band Edge)
Microstrip DBE
antenna
Size reduction and yet wideband, sharp beam
Small antenna with wide bandwidth
array antenna with high gain
(narrow beam)
[181–186]
Figure 8.98

Array antenna
composed with MS
DBE elements
Array antenna with elements tightly arranged
(size reduction)
Small footprint array, sharp beam
array antenna
[181–186]
Figure 8.99
RFID antennas
Meander line dipole
with a small loop
Small planar printed structure, thin, compact
RFID tag
[144]
Figure 8.104
Meander line dipole
loaded with a bar
Small planar printed structure, thin, compact
RFID tag
[144, 145]
Figure 8.104
Doubly folded
L-shaped dipole
Mountable on the corner of a box
RFID ﬂexible tag
[144]
[194]
Figure 8.104
Dipole with double
T-match structure
and spiral folding
Multi-conductor dipole antenna with double
T-match structure and spiral folding
RFID tag
[145]
[147]
Figure 8.104
Folded shape
monopole antenna
Size reduction and bandwidth enhancement
with fork line, compact, thin structure
Mountable on a small handset, DVB
reception
[196]
Figure 8.105
(cont.)

Brief view
Antenna type
Main features
Applications
References
and location
in the text
Wired bow-tie dipole
antenna recessed in
a cavity
Mountable on a metal surface
RFID tag installation in a metal
container, vehicle, aircraft, etc.
[197]
Figure 8.106
Planar ﬂared dipole
loaded with an
RFID sensor chip
Mountable directly on materials as paper
block, plastic, wood, a bottle of a tap water,
a glass bottle, etc.
RFID tag, sensor tag
[198]
Figure 8.107
Conventional PIFA
with a square
conductor loaded
with an RFID chip
Thin, planar, small size (0.19λ×0.19λ)
RFID tag
[144, 152]
8.4.2
Figure 8.108
Two-layer double
PIFA fed by a small
rectangular loop
Thin, planar, small size (0.13λ×0.16λ)
RFID tag
[144, 153]
8.4.2
Figure 8.108

Coplanar IFA with an
additional
horizontal stub
Thin, planar, small size (0.09λ×0.18λ)
RFID tag
[144, 154]
8.4.2
Figure 8.108
Coplanar IFA with
multiple folded
elements
Thin, planar, small size (0.11λ×0.08λ)
RFID tag
[144, 155]
8.4.2
Figure 8.108
IFA loaded with a
Hilbert trace at the
end
Thin, planar, small size, operating frequency
and bandwidth adjustable by the length of
the Hilbert trace
RFID tag
[201]
8.4.2
Figure 8.109
Folded rectangular
patch antenna
loaded with
H-shape slot
Thin, planar, small size, comparable to a
credit card size
RFID tag, card type, with sensor
chip medical applications
[202]
8.4.2
Figure 8.110
Slot loaded patch
antenna
Series connected
OCSRR antenna
(OCSRR: Open
Complementary
Split Ring
Resonator)
Antenna composed of series OCSRR units,
compact, small size, OCSRR comprised
with a circular slot and a conductor loop
inside the slot, creating higher input
resistance and increase of bandwidth
RFID tag
[202]
Figure 8.113
(cont.)

Brief view
Antenna type
Main features
Applications
References
and location
in the text
L-shaped slot dipole,
loaded with a
meander line at the
end of the dipole
Thin, planar, small size
RFID tag, card type
[203]
8.4.2
Figure 8.114
Square patch antenna
loaded with
circular slots
Circular polarization
RFID tag
[204]
8.4.2
Figure 8.115
Coil antenna
Small coil antenna in
a radio-controlled
wristwatch
Very small coil antenna installed inside a
wristwatch
Radio-controlled wristwatch
[203]
8.4.2
Figure 8.101

Coil antenna
(laminated
amorphous metal
core)
Very small-size coil antenna for
radio-controlled wristwatch, to receive
standard time signal at LF band (40,
60 kHz)
Radio-controlled wristwatch
[203]
8.4.2
Figure 8.103
Loop antenna
Circular loop antenna
with two-line
feeding stub
Resonance frequency and impedance
adjustable by varying the feeding stub
RFID
[204]
8.4.2
Figure 8.116
Two-element defected
loop (three
cornered)
Directional performance by two elements,
applicable to handheld device
Handheld RFID reader
[205, 206]
8.4.2
Figure 8.117

448
Glossary
References
[1] R. W. P. King, Theory of Linear Antennas, Harvard University Press, 1956, pp. 180–192.
[2] W. L. Stutzman and G. A. Thiele, Antenna Theory and Design, 2nd edn., John Wiley and
Sons, 1998, 1.9 and 2.1.
[3] C. A. Balanis, Antenna Theory, Analysis, and Design, 2nd edn., John Wiley and Sons, 1997,
4.3.
[4] C. A. Balanis (ed.), Modern Antenna Handbook, John Wiley and Sons, 2008, 10.5.
[5] K. Fujimoto (ed.), Mobile Antenna Systems Handbook, 3rd edn., Artech House, 2008, 5.3.1.
[6] C. A. Balanis, Antenna Theory, Analysis, and Design, 2nd edn., John Wiley and Sons, 2008,
23.6.3.1 and 2.2.1.
[7] K. Fujimoto et al., Small Antennas, Research Studies Press, UK, 1986, 2.4.
[8] R. W. King and C. H. Harrison, Antennas and Waves, A Modern Approach, MIT Press,
1969, 6.12.
[9] R. W. King and C. H. Harrison, Antennas and Waves, A Modern Approach, MIT Press,
1969, 6.14.
[10] C. A. Balanis, Antenna Theory, Analysis, and Design, 2nd edn., John Wiley and Sons, 1997,
5.4.
[11] R. W. King and C. H. Harrison, Antennas and Waves, A Modern Approach, MIT Press,
1969, 9.2.
[12] W. L. Stutzman and G. A. Thiele, Antenna Theory and Design, 2nd edn., John Wiley and
Sons, 1998, 2.4.2.
[13] C. A. Balanis, Antenna Theory, Analysis, and Design, 2nd edn., John Wiley and Sons, 1997,
5.6.2.
[14] K. Fujimoto, et al., Small Antennas, Research Studies Press, UK, 1986, 2.3.1.
[15] H. Morishita et al., A Balance-Fed Loop Antenna System for Handset, IEICE Transactions
on Fundamentals of Electronics, Communications and Computer Sciences, vol. E82-A,
1999, no. 7, pp. 1138–1143.
[16] S. Hayashida, Analysis and Design of Folded Loop Antennas, Doctoral Dissertation,
National Defense Academy, Japan, 2006 (in Japanese).
[17] S. Hayashida, H. Morishita, and K. Fujimoto, A Wideband Folded Loop Antenna for
Handsets, IEICE, vol. J86-B, 2003, no. 9, pp. 1799–1805 (in Japanese).
[18] Y. Kim et al., A Folded Loop Antenna System for Handsets Developed and Based on the
Advanced Design Concept, IEICE Transactions on Communications, vol. E84-B, 2001,
no. 9, pp. 2468–2475.
[19] S. Hayashida, H. Morishita, and K. Fujimoto, Self-Balanced Wideband Folded Loop
Antenna, IEE Proceedings, Microwaves, Antennas & Propagation, vol. 153, 2006, no. 1,
pp. 7–12.
[20] S. Hayashida et al., Characteristics of Built-in Folded Monopole Antenna for Handsets,
IEICE Transactions on Communications, vol. E88-B, 2005, no. 6, pp. 2275–2283.
[21] H. Nakano, H. Taguchi, A. Yoshizawa, and J. Yamauchi, Shortening Ratios of Modi-
ﬁed Dipole Antennas, IEEE Transactions of Antennas and Propagation, vol. 32, 1984,
no. 4, pp. 385–386.
[22] P. E. Mayes, Balanced Backﬁre Zigzag Antennas, 1964 IEEE Int Conference Record, pt. 1,
pp. 158–165.
[23] S. H. Lee, Theory of Zigzag Antennas, Ph.D. Dissertation, Dept. of Electrical Engineering
University of California, Berkeley, 1968, pp. 20, 31–33.

References
449
[24] S. H. Lee and K. K. Mei, Analysis of Zigzag Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas
and Propagation, vol. 18, 1970, no. 6, pp. 760–764.
[25] H. Nakano, H. Tagami, A. Yoshizawa, and J. Yamauchi, Shortening Ratios of Modiﬁed
Dipole Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 32, 1984, no. 4,
pp. 385–386.
[26] K. Noguchi et al., Increasing the Bandwidth of Meander Line Antennas Consisting of Two
Strips, Transactions of IEICE, vol. JB2-B, 1999, no. 3, pp. 402–409.
[27] L. C. Godara (ed.), Handbook of Antennas in Wireless Communications, CRC Press, 2002,
Chapter 12.
[28] S. R. Best and D. L. Hanna, A Performance Comparison of Fundamental Small-Antenna
Designs, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 52, 2010, no. 1, pp. 47–70.
[29] C. A. Balanis (ed.), Modern Antenna Handbook, John Wiley and Sons, 2008, 10.6.1.
[30] H. Nakano, H. Tagami, A. Yoshizawa, and J. Yamauchi, Shortening Ratios of Modiﬁed
Dipole Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 32, 1984, no. 4,
pp. 385–386.
[31] S. R. Best and D. L. Hanna, A Performance Comparison of Fundamental Small-Antenna
Designs, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 52, 2010, no. 1, pp. 47–70.
[32] T. Endo, Y. Sunahara, and Y. Hoshihara, Resonance Frequency of Dielectric Loaded Normal
Mode Helical Antenna, IEICE Technical Report, vol. 95, 1995, no. 535, pp. 1–6 and L.
C. Godara (ed.), Handbook of Antennas in Wireless Communications, CRC Press, 2000,
12.2.2.2.
[33] K. Noguchi et al., Impedance Characteristics of a Meander Line Antenna Mounted on a
Conducting Plane, IEICE National Convention, B-1–106, 1999, p. 106.
[34] H. Choo and H. Ling, Design of Planar, Electrically Small Antennas with Inductively
Coupled Feed Using a Genetic Algorithm, IEEE APS International Symposium 2003, 22.1.
[35] C. W. P. Huang et al., FDTD Characterization on Meander Line Antennas for RF and Wire-
less Communications, Progress in Electromagnetics Research PIER, 24, 1991, pp. 185–199.
[36] K. Noguchi et al., Impedance Characteristics of a Small Meander Line Antenna, Transac-
tions of IEICE, vol. JB, BII, 1998, no. 2, pp. 183–184.
[37] K. Noguchi, et al., Increasing the Bandwidth of Meander Line Antennas Consisting of Two
Strips, Transactions of IEICE, vol. JB2-B, 1999, no. 3, pp. 402–409.
[38] C. A. Balanis (ed.), Modern Antenna Handbook, John Wiley and Sons, 2008, 9.3.2.
[39] W. L. Stutzman and G. A. Thiele, Antenna Theory and Design, 2nd edn., John Wiley and
Sons, 1998, 6.2.1.
[40] J. D. Kraus and R. J. Marhefka, Antennas, 3rd edn., McGraw-Hill, 2002, pp. 8–22.
[41] N. Inagaki, K. Tamura, and K. Fujimoto, Theoretical Investigation on the Resonance Length
of Normal Mode Helical Antennas, Technical Report of Nagoya Institute of Technology,
vol. 23, 1971, pp. 335–341.
[42] K. Fujimoto et al., Small Antennas, Research Studies Press, UK, 1987, pp. 59–75.
N. Inagaki, T. Marui, and K. Fujii, Newly Devised MoM Analysis and Design Data for
NMHA, Technical Report of IEICE, AP2007–194 (2008–03), pp. 123–128.
[43] C. A. Balanis (ed.), Modern Antenna Handbook, John Wiley and Sons, 2008, 9.3.2.
[44] C. A. Balanis (ed.), Modern Antenna Handbook, John Wiley and Sons, 2008, 10.6.1.
[45] H. Choo and H. Ling, Design of Planar, Electrically Small Antennas with Inductively
Coupled Feed Using a Genetic Algorithm, IEEE APS International Symposium 2003, 5.3.
[46] C. P. Baliada, J. Romeu, and A. Cardama, The Koch Monopole: A Small Fractal Antenna,
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 48, 2000, no. 11, pp. 1773–1781.

450
Glossary
[47] Z. N. Chen (ed.), Antennas for Portable Devices, 7.3.2 John Wiley and Sons, 2007, pp. 248–
258.
[48] D. Guha and Y. M. M. Antar, Microstrip and Printed Antennas, John Wiley and Sons, 2011.
[49] S. Honda et al., On a Broadband Disk Monopole Antenna, Technical Report of Television
Society Japan, ROFT 91–55 (1991–10), 1991.
[50] Z. N. Chen and M. Y. W. Chia, Impedance Characteristics of EMC Triangular Planar
Monopoles, Electronics Letters, vol. 37, 2001, no. 21, pp. 1271–1272.
[51] Z. N. Chen, Impedance Characteristics of Planar Bow-Tie Like Monopole Antennas, Elec-
tronics Letters, vol. 36, 2000, no. 13, pp. 1100–1101.
[52] D. H. Werner and S. Ganguly, An Overview of Fractal Antenna Engineering
Research, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 45, February 2003, no. 1,
pp. 39–40.
[53] J. R-Mohassel, A. Mehdipour, and H. Aliakbarian, New Schemes of Size Reduction in
Space Filling Resonant Dipole Antennas, 3rd European Conference on Antennas and
Propagation, vol. 23–27, 2009, pp. 2430–2432.
[54] J. L. Volakis, C-C Chen and K. Fujimoto, Small Antennas, McGraw-Hill, 2010, 3.2.4.
[55] N. Engheta and R. W. Ziolkowsky, Metamaterials-Physics and Engineering Explorations,
John Wiley and Sons, 2006.
[56] J. Zhu, A. Hoorfar, and N. Engheta, Peano Antennas, Antennas and Wireless Propagation
Letters, vol. 3, 2004, pp. 71–74.
[57] X. Chen, S. S-Naemi, and Y. Liu, A Down-Sized Hilbert Antenna for UHF Band, IEEE
International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation 2003, pp. 581–584.
[58] M. Takiguchi and Y. Yamada, Radiation and Ohmic Resistances in Very Small Meander
Line Antennas of Less than 0.1 Wavelength, Transactions of IEICE, vol. J87-B, 2004, no. 9,
pp. 1336–1346.
[59] Y. Yamada and N. Michishita, Efﬁciency Improvement of a Miniaturized Meander Line
Antenna by Loading a High εr Material, IEEE iWAT, 2005.
[60] F. Kuroki and H. Ohta, Miniaturized Cross Meander-Line Antenna Etched on Both Sides of
Dielectric Substrate, International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation (ISAP) 2006,
Singapore.
[61] J. L. Volakis, C-C Chen and K. Fujimoto, Small Antennas, McGraw-Hill, 2010,
p. 142.
[62] N. Engheta and R. W. Ziolkowsky, Metamaterials-Physics and Engineering Explorations,
John Wiley and Sons, 2006.
[63] J. Zhu, A. Hoorfar, and N. Engheta, Peano Antennas, Antennas and Wireless Propagation
Letters, vol. 3, 2004, pp. 71–74.
[64] X. Chen, S. S-Naemi, and Y. Liu, A Down-Sized Hilbert Antenna for UHF Band, IEEE
International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation, 2003, pp. 581–584.
[65] J. P. Gianvittorio and Y. Rahmat-Samii, Fractal Antenna: A Novel Antenna Miniaturization
Technique and Applications, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 44, 2002,
no. 1, pp. 20–36.
[66] S. R. Best, A Comparison of the Resonant Properties of Small Space-Filling Fractal Anten-
nas, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 2, 2003, pp. 197–200.
[67] C. P. Baliada, J. Romeu, and A. Cardama, The Koch Monopole: A Small Fractal Antenna,
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 48, 2000, no. 11, pp. 1773–1781.
[68] D. H. Werner and S. Ganguly, An Overview of Fractal Antenna Engineering Research,
IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 45, 2003, no. 1, pp. 38–57.

References
451
[69] J. P. Gianvittorio and Y. Rahmat-Samii, Fractal Antenna: A Novel Antenna Miniaturization
Technique and Applications, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 44, 2002,
no. 1, pp. 20–36.
[70] W. J. Krzysztoﬁk, Modiﬁed Sierpinsky Fractal Monopole for ISM-Bands Handset Applica-
tions, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 57, 2009, no. 3, pp. 606–615.
[71] H. Huang and A. Hoorfer, Miniaturization of Dual-Band Planar Inverted-F Antennas using
Peano-Curve Elements, International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation (ISAP)
2006, a292 r206.
[72] W. L Stutzman and G. A. Thiele, Antenna Theory and Design, 2nd edn., John Wiley and
Sons, pp. 252–258.
[73] M. McFadden and W. R. Scott, Analysis of the Equiangular Spiral Antenna on a Dielectric
Substrate, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 55, 2007, no.11, pp. 3163–
3171.
[74] H. Nakano et al., Equiangular Spiral Antenna Backed by a Shallow Cavity With Absorbing
Strips, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56, 2008, no. 8, pp. 2742–
2747.
[75] J. L. Volakis, C-C Chen and K. Fujimoto Small Antennas, McGraw-Hill, 2010,
Chapter 5.
[76] J. L. Volakis, C-C Chen and K. Fujimoto, Small Antennas, McGraw-Hill, 2010, 5.4.
[77] J. L. Volakis, C-C Chen and K. Fujimoto, Small Antennas, McGraw-Hill, 2010, 5.6.2.
[78] J. L. Volakis, C-C Chen and K. Fujimoto, Small Antennas, McGraw-Hill, 2010, 6.4.
[79] J. L. Volakis, N. W. Nurnberger, and D. S. Filipovic, A Broadband Cavity-Backed Slot Spiral
Antenna, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 43, 2001, no. 6, pp. 15–26.
[80] J. L. Volakis, C.-C. Chen and K. Fujimoto, Small Antennas, McGraw-Hill, 2010, 5.3 and J.
L. Volakis, N. W. Numberger, and D. S. Filipouic, A Broadband Cavity-Backed Slot Spiral
Antenna, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 43, 2001, no. 6, 5.3.
[81] H. Fujishima, Inverted-L Antenna with Self-Complementary Structure, Technical Report
of IEICE, A-P94-24, 1994, pp. 23–28.
[82] P. Xu, K. Fujimoto, and L. Shiming, Performance of Quasi-self-complementary Antenna,
IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society International Symposium, vol. 40, 2002, pp. 464–
467.
[83] P. Xu and K. Fujimoto, L-shaped Self-complementary Antenna, IEEE APS International
Symposium, vol. 3, 2003, pp. 95–98.
[84] R. Azadegan and K. Sarabandi, Bandwidth Enhancement of Miniaturized Slot Antennas
Using Folded, Complementary, and Self-Complementary Realization, IEEE Transactions
on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 55, 2007, no. 9, 2435–2444.
[85] Y. Mushiake, Self-Complementary Antennas, Springer Verlag, 1996.
[86] M. C. Buck and D. S. Filipovic, Two-Arm Sinuous Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Anten-
nas and Propagation, vol. 56, 2008, no. 5, pp. 1229–1235.
[87] C. W. Harrison, Monopole with Inductive Loading, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation, AP-11, 1963, pp. 394–400.
[88] T. L. Simpson, The Disk Loaded Monopole Antenna, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation vol. 52, 2008, no. 2, pp. 542–550.
[89] S. R. Best and D. L. Hanna, A Performance Comparison of Fundamental Small-Antenna
Designs, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 52, 2010, no. 1, pp. 47–70.
[90] C. W. Harrison, Monopole with Inductive Loading, IEEE Transaction on Antennas and
Propagation, AP-11, 1963, pp. 394–400.

452
Glossary
[91] L. J.-Ying and G. Y.-Beng, Characteristics of Broadband Top-Loaded Open-Sleeve
Monopole, IEEE APS International Symposium 2006, 157.7, pp. 635–638.
[92] K. Surabandi and R. Azadegan, Design of an Efﬁcient Miniaturized UHF Planar Antenna,
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 51, 2003, no. 6, pp. 1270–
1276.
[93] S. R. Best, Low Q Electrically Small Linear and Elliptical Polarized Spherical Dipole
Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 53, 2003, no. 3, pp. 1047–
1053.
[94] A. Mehdipour, H. Aliakbarian, and J. Rashed-Mohassel, A Novel Electrically Small Spher-
ical Wire Antenna With Almost Isotropic Radiation Pattern, IEEE Antennas and Wireless
Propagation Letters, vol. 7, 2009, pp. 396–399.
[95] O. S. Kim, Low-Q Electrically Small Spherical Magnetic Dipole Antennas, IEEE Transac-
tions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 7, pp. 2210–2217.
[96] K. G. Schroeder and K. M. S. Hoo, Electrically Small Complementary Pair (ESCP) with
Interelement Coupling, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, AP-24, 1976,
no. 4, pp. 411–418.
[97] D.-H. Kwon et al., Small Printed Combined Electric-Magnetic Type Ultrawideband Antenna
With Directive Radiation Characteristics, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 56, 2008, no. 1, pp. 237–241.
[98] X.-C. Lin and C.-C. Yu, A Dual-band Slot-Monopole Hybrid Antenna, IEEE Transactions
on Antenna and Propagation, vol. 56, 2008, no. 1, pp. 282–285.
[99] W. Hong and K. Sarabandi, Low Proﬁle Miniaturized Planar Antenna With Omnidirectional
Vertically Polarized Radiation, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 24,
1976, no. 4, pp. 411–418.
[100] F. Bilotti, A. Alu, and L. Vegni, Design of Miniaturized Metamaterial Patch Antennas With
µ–Negative Loading, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56, 2008,
no. 6, pp. 1640–1647.
[101] P. Y. Chen and A. Alu, Sub-Wavelength Elliptical Patch Antenna Loaded With µ–Negative
Metamaterials, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 9,
pp. 2909–2919.
[102] H. R. Stuart and A. Pidwerbetsky, Electrically Small Antenna Elements Using Negative
Permittivity Resonators, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 54, 2006,
no. 6, pp. 1644–1653.
[103] A. Erentok and R. W. Ziolkowsky, Metamaterial-Inspired Efﬁcient Electrically Small
Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56, 2008, no. 3, pp. 691–
707.
[104] C. Caloz, T. Itoh, and A. Rennings, CRLH Metamaterial Leaky-Wave and Resonant Anten-
nas, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 50, 2008, no. 5, pp. 26–39.
[105] M. A. Antoniades and G. V. Eleftheriades, A Folded-Monopole Model for Electrically
Small NRI-TL Metamaterial Antennas, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters,
vol. 7, 2008, pp. 425–428.
[106] M. Antoniades and G. V. Eleftheriades, A Broadband Dual-Mode Monopole Antenna Using
NRI-TL Metamaterial Loading, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 8,
2009, pp. 258–261.
[107] J. Zhu and G. V. Eleftheriades, A Compact Transmission-Line Metamaterial Antenna With
Extended Bandwidth, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 8, 2009,
pp. 295–298.

References
453
[108] J. Zhu, M. A. Antoniades, and G. V. Eleftheriades, A Compact Tri-band Monopole Antenna
With Single-Cell Metamaterial Loading, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 58, 2010, no. 4, pp. 1031–1038.
[109] P. J. Herritz-Martinez et al., Multifrequency and Dual-Mode Patch Antennas Filled With
Left-Handed Structures, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56, 2008,
no. 8, pp. 2527–2539.
[110] Y.-S. Wang, M.-Feng Hsu, and S.-J. Chung, A Compact Slot Antenna Utilizing a Right/Left-
Handed Transmission Line Feed, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56,
2008, no. 3, pp. 675–682.
[111] F. Yang, X.-X. Zhang, and Y. Rahmat-Samii, Wide-Band E-Shaped Patch Antennas for
Wireless Communications, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 49,
2001, no. 7, pp. 1094–1100.
[112] Y. Chen, S. Yang, and Z. Nie, Bandwidth Enhancement Method for Low Proﬁle E-Shaped
Microstrip Patch Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58,
2010, no. 7, pp. 2442–2447.
[113] A. Khidre, K. F. Lee, F. Yang, and A. Elsherbeni, Wideband Circularly Polarized E-Shaped
Patch Antenna for Wireless Applications, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine,
vol. 52, 2010, no. 5, pp. 219–229.
[114] A. Khidre, K. F. Lee, F. Yang, and A. Elsherbeni, Wideband Circularly Polarized E-Shaped
Patch Antenna for Wireless Applications, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine,
vol. 52, 2010, no. 5, pp. 219–229.
[115] S. K. Sharma and L. Shafai, Performance of a Novel ψ-shape Microstrip Patch Antenna
with Wide Bandwidth, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 8, 2009,
pp. 468–471.
[116] S. K. Sharma and L. Shafai, Investigation of a Novel ψ-shape Microstrip Patch Antenna
With Wide Impedance Bandwidth, IEEE APS International Symposium June 2007, Digest
vol. 45, pp. 881–884.
[117] K. L. Chung, A Wideband Circularly Polarized H-Shaped Patch Antenna, IEEE Transac-
tions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, pp. 3379–3383.
[118] K. F. Lee et al., The Versatile U-Slot Antenna, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine,
vol. 52, 2010, no. 1, pp. 71–88.
[119] S. Weigand et al., Analysis and Design of Broad-Band Single-Layer Rectangular U-Slot
Microstrip Patch Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 51,
2003, no. 3, pp. 457–468.
[120] K.-L. Wong, Compact and Broadband Microstrip Antennas, John Wiley and Sons, 2002,
p. 239.
[121] A. K. Shackelford, K. F. Lee, and K. M. Luk, Design of Small-Size Wide-Bandwidth
Microstrip-Patch Antennas, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 45, 2000,
no. 1, pp. 75–83.
[122] C. L. Mak, K. M. Luk, K. F. Lee, and Y. L. Chow, Experimental Study of a Microstrip
Patch Antenna with an L-shaped Probe, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 48, 2000, no. 5, pp. 777–783.
[123] R. Chair et al., Miniature Wide-Band Half U-Slot and Half E-Shaped Patch Antennas,
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 53, 2005, no. 8, pp. 2645–2652.
[124] C. L. Mak, R. Chair, K. F. Lee, K. M. Luk, and A. A. Kishk, Half-U-slot Patch Antenna
with Shorting Wall, International Symposium USNC/CNC/URSI National Radio Science
Meeting, vol. 2, 2003, pp. 876–879.

454
Glossary
[125] T. Huynh and K. F. Lee, Single-Layer Single-Patch Wideband Microstrip Antenna, Elec-
tronics Letters, vol. 31, 1997, no. 16, pp. 1310–1312.
[126] A. K. Shackelford, K. F. Lee, K. M. Luk, and R. Chair, U-Slot Patch Antenna with Shorting
Pin, Electronics Letters, vol. 37, 2001, no. 12, pp. 729–730.
[127] S. I. Latif, L. Shafai, and S. K. Sharma, Bandwidth Enhancement and Size Reduction of
Microstrip Slot Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 53, 2005,
no. 3, pp. 994–1003.
[128] K. F. Lee, S. L. Steven, and A. Kishk, Dual- and Multiband U-Slot Patch Antennas, IEEE
Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 2, 2008, p. 64.
[129] K. F. Tong and T. P. Wong, Circular Polarized U-Slot Antenna, IEEE Transactions on
Antennas and Propagation, vol. 55, 2007, no. 8, pp. 2382–2385.
[130] J.-Y. Sze and K.-L. Wong, Bandwidth Enhancement of a Microstrip-Line-Fed Printed
Wide-Slot Antenna, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 49, 2001, no. 7,
pp. 1020–1024.
[131] J.-Y. Jan and J.-W. Su, Bandwidth Enhancement of a Printed Wide-Slot Antenna With a
Rotated Square, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 53, 2005, no. 6,
pp. 2111–2114.
[132] S. R. Best, A Comparison of the Resonant Properties of Small Space-Filling Fractal Anten-
nas, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 2, 2003, pp. 197–200.
[133] C.-H. Chang and K.-L. Wong, Printed λ/8-PIFA for Penta-Band WWAN Operation in the
Mobile Phone, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 57, 2009, no. 5,
pp. 1373–1381.
[134] C.-M. Peng et al., Bandwidth Enhancement of Internal Antenna by Using Reactive Loading
for Penta-Band Mobile Handset Application, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propa-
gation, vol. 59, 2011, no. 5, pp. 1728–1733.
[135] C.-W. Chiu and Y.-J. Chi, Printed Loop Antenna With a U-Shaped Tuning Element
for Hepta-Band Laptop Applications, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 58, 2010, no. 11, pp. 3464–3470.
[136] F.-H.ChuandK.-LuWong,Planar Printed Strip Monopole With a Closely-Coupled Parasitic
Shorted Strip for Eight-Band LTE/GSM/UMTS Mobile Phone, IEEE Transactions on
Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 10, pp. 3426–3431.
[137] G. Dubost and S. Zisler, Antennas a Large Bande, Masson, 1976, pp. 128–129.
S. Honda et al., On a Broadband Disk Monopole Antenna, Technical Report of Television
Society Japan, ROFT 91–55 (1991–10) 1991.
[138] M. J. Ammann and Z. N. Chen, Wideband Monopole Antennas for Multi-Band Wireless
Systems, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 45, 2003, no. 2, pp. 146–150.
[139] X. H. Wu and Z. N. Chen, Comparison of Planar Dipoles in UWB Applications, IEEE
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 53, 2005, no. 6, pp. 1973–1983.
[140] S. Koulouridis and J. L. Volakis, A Novel Planar Conformal Antenna Designed With
Splines, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 8, 2009, pp. 34–36.
[141] S. Koulouridis and J. L. Volakis, Miniaturization of Flare Dipole via Shape Optimization
and Matching Circuits, IEEE APS International Symposium 2007, pp. 4785–4788.
[142] W. Dullaert and H. Rogier, Novel Compact Model for the Radiation Pattern of UWB Anten-
nas Using Vector Spherical and Slepian, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 58, 2010, no. 2, pp. 287–298.
[143] D. Valderas et al., UWB Staircase-Proﬁle Printed Monopole Design, IEEE Antennas and
Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 7, 2008, pp. 255–259.

References
455
[144] X.-L. Liang, et al., Printed Binomial-Curved Slot Antennas for Various Wideband
Applications, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 59, 2011, no. 4,
pp. 1058–1065.
[145] C.-W. Ling et al., Planar Binomial Curved Monopole Antennas for Ultra-wideband Commu-
nication, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 55, 2007, no. 9, pp. 2622–
2624.
[146] M. Sun, Y. P. Zhang, and Y. Lu, Miniaturization of Planar Monopole Antenna for Ultra-
wideband Radios, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 7,
pp. 2420–2425.
[147] R. Zaker and J. Nourinia, Novel Modiﬁed UWB Planar Monopole Antenna with Variable
Frequency Band-Notch Function, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 7,
2008, pp. 112–116.
[148] E. S. Angelopoulos et al., Circular and Elliptical CPE-Fed Slot and Microstrip-Fed Antennas
for Ultrawideband Applications, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 5,
2006, pp. 294–297.
[149] A. M. Abbosh and E. Bialkowsky, Design of Ultrawideband Planar Monopole Antenna
of Circular and Elliptical Shape, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 7,
2009, pp. 17–23.
[150] P. Li and X. Chen, Study of Printed Elliptical/Circular Slot Antennas for Ultrawide-
band Applications, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 4, 2006, no. 6.
pp. 1670–1675.
[151] E. A-Daviu et al., Modal Analysis and Design of Band-Notched UWB Planar Monopole
Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 5, pp. 1457–
1467.
[152] H. Elsadek and D. Nashaat, Multiband and UWB V-Shaped Antenna Conﬁguration for
Wireless Communications Applications, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters,
vol. 7, 2008, pp. 89–91.
[153] N. Behdad and K. Sarabandi, A Compact Antenna for Ultrawide-Band Applications, IEEE
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 53, 2005, no. 7, pp. 2185–2191.
[154] Z. N. Chen, T. S. P. See, and X. Qing, Small Printed Ultrawideband Antenna with Reduced
Ground Plane, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 55, 2007, no. 2,
pp. 383–388.
[155] K. Fujimoto, Integrated Antenna Systems, in K. Chang (ed.) Encyclopedia of RF and
Microwave Engineering, vol. 3, John Wiley and Sons, 2005, pp. 2113–2147.
A. Mortazawi, T. Itoh, and J. Harvey, Active Antennas and Quasi-Optical Arrays, IEEE
Press, 1999.
[156] A. Navarrow and J. K. Chang, Integrated Active Antennas and Spatial Power Combining,
John Wiley and Sons, 1996.
[157] K. Chang, R. A. York, P. S. Hall, and T. Itoh, Active Integrated Antennas, IEEE Transactions
on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 50, 2002, no. 3, pp. 937–943.
[158] C. H Mueller et al., Small-Size X-Band Active Integrated Antenna with Feedback Loop,
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56, 2008, no. 5, pp. 1236–1241.
[159] J.-H. Lim et al., A Reconﬁgurable PIFA Using a Switchable PIN-Diode and a Fine-Tuning
Varactor for USPCS/WCDMA/m-WiMAX/WLAN, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 7, pp. 2404–2411.
[160] G. Elli and S. Liw, Active Planar Inverted-F Antenna for Wireless Applications, IEEE
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 57, 2009, no. 10, pp. 2899–2906.

456
Glossary
[161] L. M. Feldner et al., Electrically Small Frequency-Agile PIFA-as-a Package for Portable
Wireless Devices, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 55, 2007, no. 11,
pp. 3310–3319.
[162] S.-L. S. Yang and A. A. Kishk, Frequency Reconﬁgurable U-Slot Microstrip Patch Antenna,
IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 7, 2008, pp. 127–129.
[163] J. Sarrazin, Y. Mahe, and S. Avrillon, Pattern Reconﬁgurable Cubic Antenna, IEEE Trans-
actions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 57, 2009, no. 2, pp. 310–317.
[164] D. Sievenpiper et al., High-Impedance Electromagnetic Surfaces with a Forbidden Fre-
quency Band, IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, vol. 47, 1999,
no. 11, pp. 2059–2074.
[165] S. Clavijo, R. E. Diaz, and W. E. Mckinzie, Design Methodology for Sievenpiper High-
Impedance Surfaces: an Artiﬁcial Magnetic Conductor for Positive Gain Electrically Small
Antennas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 51, 2003, no. 10, pp. 2678–
2690.
[166] Q. Wu, J. Geng, and D. Su, On the Performance of Printed Dipole Antenna With Novel Com-
posite Corrugated-Reﬂectors for Low-Proﬁle Ultrawideband Applications, IEEE Transac-
tions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 12, pp. 3829–3846.
[167] G. Gampala, R. Sammeta, and C. J. Reddy, A Thin Low-Proﬁle Antenna Using a Novel
High Impedance Ground Plane, Microwave Journal, July 2010, pp. 70–80.
[168] A. Suntives and R. Abhari, Design of a Compact Miniaturized Probe-Fed Patch Antennas
Using Electro-magnetic Bandgap Structure, IEEE APS International Symposium, 2010.
[169] Z. Li and Y. Rahmat-Samii, PBC, PMC, and PEC Ground Plane: A Case Study for Dipole
Antenna, IEEE APS International Symposium 2000, vol. 4, pp. 2258–2261.
[170] M. Z. Azad and M. Ali, Novel Wideband Directional Dipole Antenna on a Mushroom Like
EBG Structure, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56, 2008, no. 5,
pp. 1242–1250.
[171] F. Yang and Y. Rahmat Samii, Reﬂection Phase Characterizations of the EBG Ground
Plane for Low Proﬁle Wire Antenna Applications, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation, vol. 51, 2003, no. 10, pp. 2691–2703.
[172] S. R. Best and D. L. Hanna, Design of a Broadband Dipole in Proximity to an EBG Ground
Plane, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 50, 2008, no. 6, pp. 52–64.
[173] L. Akhoondzadeh-Asl et al., Wideband Dipoles on Electromagnetic Bandgap Ground Plane,
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 55, 2007, no. 9, pp. 2426–2434.
[174] F. Yang and Y. Rahmat-Samii, Microwave Antennas Integrated with Electromagnetic Band-
Gap (EBG) Structure; a Low Mutual Coupling Design for Array Applications, IEEE Trans-
actions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 51, 2003, no. 10, pp. 2936–2946.
[175] D. Guha, S. Biswas, and Y. M. M. Antar, Defected Ground Structure for Microstrip Anten-
nas, in D. Guha and Y. M. M. Antar (eds.) Microstrip and Printed Antennas, John Wiley
and Sons, 2011, Chapter 12.
[176] D. Guha et al., Concentric Ring-shaped Defected Ground Structures for Microstrip Appli-
cations, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 5, 2006, pp. 402–405.
[177] M. A. Antoniades and G. V. Eleftheriades, A Compact Multiband Monopole Antenna With
a Defected Ground Plane, IEEE Antenna and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 7, 2008,
pp. 652–655.
[178] D. Guha, M. Biswas, and Y. M. M. Antar, Microstrip Patch Antenna with Defected Ground
Structure for Cross Polarization Suppression, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation
Letters, vol. 4, 2005, pp. 455–458.

References
457
[179] Y. J. Sung, M. Kim, and Y. S. Kim, Harmonic Reduction with Defected Ground Structure
for a Microstrip Patch Antenna, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 2,
2003, pp. 111–113.
[180] H. B. El-Shaarawy et al., Novel Reconﬁgurable Defected Ground Structure Resonator on
Coplanar Waveguide, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010,
no. 11, pp. 3622–3628.
[181] J. L. Volakis et al., Antenna Miniaturization Using Magnetic Photonic and Degenerated
Band-Edge Crystals, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 48, 2008, no. 5,
pp. 12–27.
[182] J. L Volakis, C. Chen, and K. Fujimoto, Small Antennas: Miniaturization Technique &
Applications, McGraw-Hill, 2010, Chapter 7.
[183] S. Yarga, K. Sertel, and J. L. Volakis, Degenerate Band Edge Crystals for Directive Anten-
nas, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56, 2008, no. 1, pp. 119–126.
[184] S. Yarga, K. Sertel, and J. L. Volakis, A Directive Resonator Antenna Using Degenerate
Band Edge Crystals, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 57, 2009, no. 3,
pp. 799–803.
[185] S. Yarga, K. Sertel, and J. L. Volakis, Multilayer Directive Resonator Antenna Operating at
Degenerate Band Edge Modes, IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 8,
2009, pp. 287–290.
[186] G. Mumcu, K. Sertel, and J. L. Volakis, Miniature Antenna Using Printed Coupled Lines
Emulating Degenerate Band Edge Crystals, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propaga-
tion, vol. 57, 2009, no. 6, pp. 1618–1623.
[187] W. Choi et al., RFID Tag Antenna with a Meandered Dipole and Inductively Coupled Feed,
IEEE APS International Symposium 2006, pp. 1347–1350.
[188] G. Marrocco, The Art of UHF RFID Antenna Design: Impedance-Matching and Size-
Reduction Techniques, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 50, 2008, no. 1
pp. 66–79.
[189] A. Toccafondi and P. Braconi, Compact Load-Bars Meander Line Antenna for UHF RDID
Transponder, First European Conference on Antennas and Propagation, Nice, France,
2006, p. 804.
[190] S. A. Delichatsios et al., Albano Multidimensional UHD Passive RFID Tag Antenna Design,
International Journal of Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation Technology and Applications, 1.1
January 2006, pp. 24–40.
[191] H. Hirvonenen et al., Planar Inverted-F Antenna for Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation, Elec-
tronics Letters, vol. 40, 2004, no. 4, pp. 848–850.
[192] B. Yu et al., Balanced RFID Tag Antenna Mountable on Metallic Plates, IEEE APS Inter-
national Symposium 2006, pp. 3237–3240.
[193] C. H. Cheng and R. D. Murch, Asymmetric RFID Tag Antenna, IEEE APS International
Symposium 2006, digest, pp. 1363–1366.
[194] S. A. Delichatsios et al., Albano Multidimensional UHF Passive RFID Tag Antenna Design,
International Journal of Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation Technology and Applications, 1.1
January 2006, pp. 24–40.
[195] C. Cho, H. Cho, and I. Park, Design of Novel RFID Tag Antenna for Metallic Objects,
IEEE APS International Symposium 2006, pp. 3245–3248.
[196] C.-K. Hsu and S.-J. Chung, A Wideband DVB Forked Shape Monopole Antenna with Cou-
pling Effect for USB Dongle Application, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 58, 2010, no. 9, pp. 2029–3036.

458
Glossary
[197] D. Kim and J. Yeo, A Passive RFID Tag Antenna Installed in a Recessed Cavity in a
Metallic Platform, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 12,
pp. 3814–3820.
[198] T. Deleruyelle et al., An RFID Tag Antenna Tolerant to Mounted Materials, IEEE Antennas
and Propagation Magazine, vol. 52, 2010, no. 4, pp. 14–19.
[199] G. Marrocco, The Art of UHF RFID Antenna Design: Impedance-Matching and Size
Reduction Techniques, IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 50, 2008, no. 1,
pp. 66–70.
[200] J.-T. Huang, J.-H. Shiao, and J.-M. Wu, A Miniaturized Hilbert Inverted-F Antenna for
Wireless Sensor Network Applications, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 58, 2010, no. 9, pp. 3100–3103.
[201] C. Occhuzzi, S. Cippitelli, and G. Marrocco, Modeling, Design and Experimentation of
Wearable RFID Sensor Tag, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58,
2010, no. 8, pp. 2490–2498.
[202] J. Kim et al., Design of a Meandered Slot Antenna for UHF RFID Applications, IEEE APS
International Symposium 2010, 206.5.
[203] Z. N. C. Nasimuddin and X. Qing, Asymmetric-Circular Shaped Slotted Microstrip Anten-
nas for Circular Polarization and RFID Applications, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 12, pp. 3821–3828.
[204] B. D. Braaten, A Novel Compact UHF RFID Tag Antenna Designed With Series connected
Open Complementary Split Ring Resonator (OCSRR) Particles, IEEE Transactions on
Antennas and Propagation, vol. 58, 2010, no. 11, pp. 3728–3733.
[205] K. Abe, Analysis and Design of Very Small Antennas for Receiving Long Wave Signals,
Doctoral Dissertation, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2007.
[206] K. Abe and J. Takada, Performance Evaluation of a Very Small Magnetic Core Loop
Antenna for an LF Receiver, Proceedings of Asia-Paciﬁc Microwave Conference, 2006,
TH3C-4, pp. 935–938.
[207] H.-K. Ryu and J.-M. Woo, Small Circular Loop antenna for RFID Tag, International
Symposium on Antennas and Propagation, (ISAP) 2006, a341, r315.
[208] J. J. Yu and S. Lim, A Miniaturized Circularly Polarized Antenna for an Active 433.92 MHz
RFID Handheld Reader, IEEE APS International Symposium 2010, 206.1.

Index
active beam scanning 234
active circuitry 234
active CRLH LW antenna 234
leakage factor 234
active integrated antenna 6
Altshuler 78
antenna
array 79
biocompatible antenna 75
miniaturization 74
antenna conﬁguration 373
antenna efﬁciency 385
antenna performance enhancement/improvement
266
modiﬁcation of antenna geometry 267
number of current path increase 267
radiation mode increase 267
wideband and multiband performance
267
coupling between two antennas 267
antenna structure 371
Balanced 396
balanced-fed antenna 373, 375
balanced structure 393, 394
balun (Balanced-to-Unbalanced Transformer) 372,
394, 396
bandwidth 384
bandwidth enhancement 267, 337
dipole on EBG ground plane 337–338
EBG ground plane 337
sleeve dipole over the EBG 338
square patch dipole on EBG surface 338
bandwidth of antenna 14–15
deﬁnition 16
relation with Q 16
Balanis 56
beam forming 234
conical beam 234
electronic scanning 234
fan beam 234
pencil beam 234
varactor 234
Best 32
minimizing Q using spherical volume occupying
small dipole 32–33
treated Q and bandwidth in terms of antenna
impedance 33–34
BFMA (Built-in Folded Monopole Antenna) 304
see folded loop antenna
Bilotti 65
binomial curved patch antenna 311–312
antenna geometry 311
return loss bandwidth 312
BMA (metal-wire bent monopole antenna)
294
addition of a printed thin ground line 297
antenna geometry 294–296
balanced feed structure 297
experimental results 296–297
good impedance matching 296
CAD (Computer-aided design) 389
cage type antenna 1
ceramic chip antenna 21
Chu 25, 39
work 25–26, 140
G/Q 26
highest obtainable bandwidth 26
highest obtainable G/Q 26
limit obtainable Q 26
spherical function expansion 25
limitation 36, 140
chip antenna 73
circular disk monopole patch antenna 342
card-size module for MIMO 342
with L-slot as DGS 343–344
current distribution 343
L-slot creating additional resonance 341
ground plane size 342
coil antenna 349–350
amorphous metal material 349
radio watch/clock 349
wrist watch 349
Collin 28
combination of different type of antennas 58

460
Index
complementary
antenna 6
structure 58
composite antenna 6, 19
examples 60–61
ESA loop 60
composite structure 213
slot combined with monopole hybrid antenna
213–214
dual band operation 213
CPE-fed inductive slot 213
bifurcated L-shaped monopole 213
bifurcated I-shaped monopole 214
bifurcated F-shape monopole 103
spiral-slot loaded with inductive element
215
cavity-backed slot loop low-proﬁle antenna
215
cavity-backed composite slot antenna
(CBCSA) 215–216: omnidirectional pattern
215
conjugate structure 58, 209
combined electric-magnetic type antenna
210–213
combination of ER and MR 210
electric radiation source (ER) 210
ESCP 209
loop 210
magnetic radiation source (MR) 210
composed with conjugate components 60
compose with different type of antennas 60
complementary network 209
electrically small complementary paired antenna
(ESOP) 209–210
tapered slot antenna (TSA) 210
two thick short monopole 209
concept in designing antenna system 392
conjugate structure 58, 209
cost function 76
corrugation 47
coupling reduction 21
CRLH (Composite LH/RH) model 54
constituted with periodical connection of CL
circuits 67
resonance modes 67
ZOR mode 68
resonance frequency 69
dispersion characteristics 54
EBG 54
effective ξ and μ 55
SNG TL by CRLH 55
CRLH TL MM 218–219, 233–234
active beam scanning 1
active CRLH LW antenna 234
active circuitry integrated 234
backﬁre-to-endﬁre scanning 233
backﬁre radiation 233
balanced type CRLH TL 219
beam forming 234
circularly polarized antenna 219
conical beam 234
CRLH magnetic monopole patch 236
CRLH MM loaded slot antenna (compact size)
247
CRLH TL 247
zeroth-order structure 247
realized antenna 247
CRLH resonator 236
CRLH structure with combined TL of two RH
and one LH TL 245
CST (Computer Simulation Technology)
390
current distribution
uniform 284
small dipole 287
current ﬂow path length 51
current on the GP 393
cylinder shaped volume 24
cylindrical radiator 25
DBE (Degenerated Band Edge) 345
band edge frequency 345
DBE antenna with reduced size 346–347
dispersion diagram 346
4th order k-ω curve 346
group delay 345
loop consisting two unit cells 346
microstrip (MS) DBE antenna 346
miniaturization of antenna 345
positive or negative k 346
printed loop structure 345
Volakis (J.H.) 345
volumetric DBE material (crystal) 346
defected ground plane 241
coplanar wave-guide (CPW) fed monopole
antenna 242–243
defected ground plane structure 243
folded monopole mode 242
L-shaped slot 243
NRI TL MM-based Pi-unit cell 242
RH ground plane 242
tri-band performance 244
two arm folded monopole 242
unit cell EBG 242
deﬁnition of small antenna 8
design of antenna
to ﬁnd new technique to approach Chu limit
36
design of ESA 92
resonance frequency 92
slow wave structure 92
MLA 92
DGS (Defected Ground Surface) 332
application of DGS 339

Index
461
DGS structure 339
EBG structure 339
half-ring geometry 342
modiﬁcation of DGS 341
periodic conﬁguration 339
ring shaped DGS 1, 48
concentric-ring DGS 340–341
transmission characteristics 341
stop band property 339
various shapes and size of DGS
340
dielectric 6
sheet 47
differential-equation method 390
dipole 1, 4
directivity D 18
dipole antenna 12
HIS application 71–72
small electric dipole 17
small magnetic dipole 18
directionality
bi-directional 250
unidirectional 250
dispersion characteristics 54
DNG (Double Negative) material 218–219,
226
application of DNG 67, 231
application and implementation 67
CRLH TL MM 231
LW (Leaky Wave) antenna 231, 233
periodic CRLH material 231: 1D, 2D, 3D
structure; unit cell of 1D structure 231–232;
Bloch-Floquet theorem 232; equivalent
circuit 231–233
property and implemantation 67
zeroth-order mode 231
DNG (Double Negative)
application 67
application and implementation 67
property and implemantation 67
DNM (Double Negative material) 6
Drude dispersion relation 221
dual feeding
electronic scanning 234
endﬁre radiation 233
2D CRLH TL MM 219
fan beam 234
leakage factor 234
pencil beam 234
dual-mode monopole antenna 240
antenna act as a dipole 241
dual-mode operation 240
dual resonance 241
folded monopole structure 241
pi MM unit cell 241
two monopole patch 241
DTVB (Digital TV Broadcasting) 42
EBG (Electromagnetic Band Gap) 21, 72, 306
application of EBG 335
by CRLH 54
by mushroom type 72
application 72
coupling of two antennas 336
DGS structure modiﬁed from EBG structure 339
EBG structure 335
miniaturization 335–336
mushroom type EBG 335
mutual coupling reduction 338
EBG substrate 339
suppressing the surface wave propagation 338
reduction of patch area 335
sleeve dipole over the EBG 338
slow wave propagation 335
square EBG surface 338
effective aperture 23
electric/magnetic plane monopole 236
closed circuit loop conﬁguration 236
CRLH magnetic monopole patch 236
CRLH resonator 236
electric and magnetic monopole 236
electric monopole patch 236
mushroom patch 236
zeroth-order mode 236
electromagnetic simulator 389, 390, 397
electromagnetic simulation 348
energy reception by small dipole 19
ENG (Epsilon Negative) material 63, 220
Compact TL MM 228
ENG MM loaded semi-sphere 227
ENG MM of semi-sphere 226
examples of ENG MM 230: cylindrical helix;
cylindrical helix strip; planar meander line
folded spherical-dipole 226
microstrip TL with ﬁve spiral inductors
228–229
semi-spherical ENG MM 226: Chu’s limit 226;
spherical-capped dipole 227; spherical-helix
227
ENM (epsilon Negative Material) 6
environmental effect 20
ESA (Electrically Small Antenna) 8, 383, 384
ESA technique 54, 348
for radio watch/clock 349
ESA another deﬁnition 8
ESA two types 1
E-shaped microstrip (patch) antenna 267, 269,
272–274
current on the E-shaped patch 269
design of E-shaped patch antenna 269
design procedure 272
directiviy 269–270
elliptically/circularly polarized wave 270
examples 270
ground plane 269

462
Index
evaluation of antenna performance 348
example of simulation 391–392
excitation mode
increase of excitation modes 203
composing an antenna with TE and TM modes
203
a dipole with a loop 203
a monopole with dual slots 203
conjugate structure 1, 67
self-complementary structure 203–204: axially
symmetric structure 203; frequency
independent structure 204; half-inﬁnite PEC
203; inductive element with capacitive
element; electric source with magnetic
source; rotationally symmetric structure 203;
truncation 204
fan type antenna 1
fan-type monopole 1
Fano 16
Fante 28
generalized treatment to obtain Q 28
far-ﬁeld radiation pattern 384–385
FDTD (Finite difference time domain) 96, 390, 396,
397, 399, 400, 405
FEM (Finite element method) 390, 396, 397–398,
399, 400, 405
ferrite 6
ﬁber-optics 377–381
FIDELITY 390, 391
FIM (Finite integration method) 396, 400
FIT (Finite integration technique) 390
ﬁtness function 77, 79
ﬂare-dipole 308
optimizing ﬂare shape 309
planar wideband antenna 308–309
printed shape-optimized dipole 309
folded antenna 360–361
equivalent expression 360
balanced mode 360
balun 362
coaxial cable connection 361–363
self-balanced property 363
two mode expression 361
unbalanced mode 361
folded loop antenna 302, 394–395, 396, 401
body effect 302
half-wavelength folded dipole 302
balanced structure 304
comparison with PIFA and BFMA 304
current ﬂow 304: dipole structure and a
two-line transmission line 302
practical half- size folded-loop antenna
(BFMA) 304
resonance 303–304
self-balance property 304
folded type MLA 93, 97, 103, 108
admittance 99
balanced mode 99
unbalanced mode 99
current 97
balanced/unbalanced modes 97
design parameters 100–101
design of folded type MLA 101–103
folded structure 5, 97–99
impedance 99
balanced/unbalanced 99
radiation 99
practical model 103
Q 99, 100
reﬂection coefﬁcient 99
relative bandwidth 100
VSWR 99
Folts 29
prolate spheroid 29
Foster reactance theorem 17, 250
Fractal
comparison with other palnar space ﬁlling
monopole 153–155
Koch Fractal 141
Minkowsky 141
Fractal pattern 141
Fractal structure 141–142
Sierpinsky 141
Fractal shape 19, 44, 56, 77
advantages of wired slow wave structure 45
frequency selective surface (FSS) 333
Jerusalem cross 335
periodical array of cells 335
three-step frctal patch 335
FSA (Functionally small Antenna) 8, 21, 69
composite structure in FSA 70
integration 69
integration of function 69
concept of smallness in FSA 69
deﬁnition 9
full use of volume/space 21, 56
ﬁlling volume 140
Fractal pattern 141
Hilbert curve 141
Koch, Minkowsky, Sierpinsky 141
Peano curve 141
space ﬁlling curve 23, 141
spiral pattern 25, 142
FSA (Functionally Small Antenna) 142
ESA (Electrically Small Antenna) 142
two-dimensional (2D) structure 143
meander line pattern 143: rectangular pattern
143; sinusoidal pattern 143; triangular
pattern 143; variation of meander line 143;
planar meandered antenna 143; RFID tag
143

Index
463
meandered rectangular loop 143
Wheeler work see Wheeler work
fundamental limitation 23
Functionally Small Antenna 266
GA (Genetic algorithm) 96
gain 23
DCS (Digital Communication System)
337
dipole made of two metal strips 337
EBG structure 337
enhancement of gain 336
GSM (Global System for Mobile Communication
System) 337
PCS (Personal Communication System)
337
UMTS (Uni versal Mobile Telecommunication
System) 337
wideband dipole 336–337
WLAN (Wireless Local Network)
337
of small antenna 18
maximum with a given size antenna
57
genetic algorithm (GA) 74
application 74
technique 78
GP (Ground plane) 392
ground plane 41
ﬁnite size 71
size 20
Geyi 32
using complex power balance relation to obtain Q
32
Gustafson 35
gives new physical bound for antenna of arbitrary
shape 35
H.A. Wheeler 4, 24
helix 44, 77
Hansen 28
simpliﬁed Chu’s expression 28–29
improvement of bandwidth 56
reduction of Q 58
Hansen and Collin 34
New formula for calculating Q by treating
reactive power inside the sphere including
antenna 34–35
helical antenna (NMHA) 50
phase velocity 50
resonance frequency 51
helical structure to occupy a sphere 57
Hertz 1
HFSS 390, 391
high impedance surface (HIS) 142, 332
application of HIS 333
backward radiation 142
frequency selective surface (FSS) 333
front to back ratio 142
MIMO system 142
mushroom like HIS 333
mutual coupling reduction 142
design methodology 333: periodical array of
cells 335; Jerusalem cross 335; three-step
fractal patch 335
periodic structure 333
periodically corrugated reﬂectors 333
E-type corrugation surface 333
H-type corrugation surface 333
positive image 142
radiation in the backward direction 333
suppression of surface current 142
two-dimensional photonic crystal 333
Hilbert 141
Hilbert curve 141
Hilbert curve geometry 56
HIS (high Impedance Surface) 71
application to dipole 71–72
holey plate 47
horn 79
H-shaped microstrip antenna 275
bandwidth 275
bandwidth (3dB axial ratio) 277
CP (circular polarization) wave
275–277
human body 401–405
Image 21, 71
effect 20, 332
IAS (Integrated Antenna System)
70
IE3D 390–391
IFA (Inverted-F Antenna) 6
ILA(Inverted-L Antenna) 6
Immittance Domain 63
impedance matching 249
antenna matching (transmitter/receiver) 252,
348–349
application of NIC circuit 253
biasing NIC transistor 252
ﬂoating NIC 252
NIC application 252–253
power efﬁciency 253
application of active circuit 249
bi-directional 250
Foster-Reactance Theorem 250
linearity 250
in small antenna 18–19
MNG 250
negative circuit: advantage 251
negative reactance 249
negative reactance circuit 250

464
Index
impedance matching (cont.)
NIC (Negative Impedance Converter) 250, 251:
application 252–253; grounded NIC 250;
ﬂoating NIC 250, 251
NMG material 251
noise 250
Non-Foster Circuit 250
stable condition 249
stability 250: open circuit stable 250; short
circuit stable 250
T-shaped inductance circuit 251
uni-directional 250
increase in radiation modes 58
individual characteristic 397
inﬂuence of nearby material 21
input impedance 12
input resistance 371
integral-equation method 390
integration technique 6
applied to antenna 69–70
Integrated Antenna System (IAS) 266
integration of function into antenna 327
AIAS (Active Integrated Antenna System) 327
an oscillator-loaded microstrip antenna 327
transistor oscillator circuit 328
HF FET (High Frequency Field Effect
Transistor) 328
performance 328
reconﬁguration of pattern 331
integration of material into antenna systestem
206
Integration technique 266
investigation of fundamentals of small antenna
39
Itoh (Tatsuo) 53
J.D. Krous 23, 25
Kim 36
result determining Q for arbitrary value of ka 36
Kim and Breinburg 36
Q approaches Qchu spherical magnetic dipole
with pure solid magnetic core 36
King 26
fundamentals of linear antennas 26
electrical short antenna (ka< 0.5) 26
Impedance 26
Q and impedance 28
Koch Fractal 141
Koch monopole 144–145
left-handed (LH) media 54
phase velocity, backward radiation, negative k
(-k), Vp and Vg 53
property 53
length shortening ratio (LSR) 92–93
limitation 4
fundamental limitation 23
of small antenna 24, 39
long wave standard-time broadcasting 348, 349
loop
bandwidth and antenna Q 14
one turn loop of wide strip 25
rectangular 14
square 14
loop antenna 254–255, 393–394
low proﬁle 3, 5
antenna 71
design of antenna 71
structure 21
long coil on ferrite core 25
loop antenna with a U-shaped tuning element 297
antenna geometry 297
U-shaped tuning element 297
low-proﬁle structure 332
DGS (Defected Ground Surface) 332
Ground plane 332
high impedance surface (HIS) 332: EBG
property 332
image effect 332
mutual coupling of two closely mounted
antennas 332
PEC (Perfect Electric Conductor) ground plane
332
positive image of antenna 332
LW (leaky Wave) radiation 219, 231, 233
conventional LW antenna 233
CRLH TL MM 233–234
dispersion characteristics 233
frequency scanned LW antenna 219
guided (slow wave) region 233
radiation ( fast wave) region 233
radiation angle of main beam 233
McLean 29
corrected Chu’s expression 29
Q 32
Marconi 1
matching 17
at load terminal 65
circuit 80
impedance matching in small antenna 18–19
impedance matching factor 18
in near ﬁeld 20
principle 20
in PSA 74
in space 19, 64–65
polarization matching factor p 18
matching circuit 16
material loading 52
Mathaei 16
Maxwell’s equation 389, 390

Index
465
meander line 19, 56
antenna 48
type, element, equivalent expression 48
resonance frequency 49
efﬁciency 50
meandered shape 44
meandering structure 77
measured current distribution 399
Metamaterial (MM) 6, 19, 47
applications of MM 62, 63, 216
composite RH/LH transmission line (RLH TL)
217
CRLH TL MM 218–219
dispersion characteristics 218
DNG application 67
DNG (Double Negative) material 219
double negative media (DNM) 217
ENG (Epsilon Negative) material 220
LH MM 217
LW (Leaky Wave) radiation 219
MM ring antenna 237
ring antenna 237
MNG material 219
multiple resonance mode 218
negative ξ 1, 47, 52, 76
negative μ 47, 52
negative mu (MNG) material 219
negative mu property 219
negative permeability/permittiviti 216
negative resonance 218
plane wave propagation in isotropic and
homogeneous TL 53–54
positive resonance 218
negative ξ terminology 62–63
SNG, DNG, ENG, MNG 62
resonant particle MM 216
RH MM 217
RP MM 217
TL MM 218
split ring MM 216
transmission line to form artiﬁcial MM 53
transmission line (TL) MM 216
zeroth order mode 218
zeroth order resonance 218
MFsm (near-ﬁeld miniaturization factor)
171
microstrip 75, 76
array 79
microstrip antenna
E-shaped antenna 267
CP (circularly polarization) E-shaped patch
antenna 272
bandwidth enhanced 257
current on the E-shaped patch antenna
269
design of E-shaped patch antenna 269
design procedure 272
directivity 269–270
E-shaped patch antenna 269, 272–274
elliptically/circularly polarized wave
270
FET 257
ﬂoating negative inductance 257
H-shaped microstrip antenna 275
bandwidth 275
bandwidth (3dB axial ratio) 277
loop antenna with U-shaped tuning element
297
antenna geometry 297
U-shaped tuning element 297
microstrip patch antenna 284
patch antenna with U-slot 284: wide impedance
bandwidth 284; L-shaped prove 284
rectangular patch with square slot 290–292:
multiband operaion 290; square slot 293;
types of feeding 290
U-slot (patch) antenna 284: embedded on a
rectangular patch 290
geometry 284
negative capacitance circuit 257
rectangular MSA 257
reduced size U-slot antenna 284: design
parameters 284–285; L-prove feed 285–286;
shorting pin 287–288; shorting wall
286–287; slots/notches on the ground plane
277
U-slot on a rectangular patch 290
U-slot on a square patch 290: double U-slot
290; half U-slot (L-slot) 288–290; unequal
arm U-slot 290
various shapes of microstrip antenna
277
microstrip slot antenna 279–280
microstrip monopole slot antenna 279–280
L-slot antenna 280–281
open-end slot antenna 282–283
straight slot 280
T-slot 282
microwave (MW) antenna 72, 73
microwave studio 390, 391
millimeter wave (MMW)antenna 72, 73
M1MO (Multi Input Multi Output) 10
Minkowsky Fractal 141
planar Minkowsky Fractal monopole
152–153
planar Minkowsky loop 152
indentation width 153
MLA (Meander Line Antenna) 5, 76, 92,
127
comparison with NMHA 145–146
dipole type 93, 108
folded type 93, 97, 108 (see folded type MLA)

466
Index
MLA (Meander Line Antenna) (cont.)
folded back type 108
input impedance 93
loop structure for multiband 96
main feature 1, 92
monopole type 93 see monopole type MLA
optimized by NEC
NEC (Numerical Electromagnetic Code) 95,
127
phase velocity 93
rectangular conducting box (MLA mounted)
103
resonance frequency 49
impedance on Smith chart 103
tapered type 93, 96
MNG (mu negative) material 63, 219, 220
artiﬁcial MNG 220, 224
inter digital capacitance 224
capacitive loaded loop (CLL) 224:
semi-circular loop 224; semi-rectangular
loop 224
capacitive loaded loop 224
omega-shaped structure: BaFe material 219;
permaloy composite 219
MNG loaded circular patch antenna
220
multiple spiral ring resonator(MSRR)
221
patch antenna loaded with MNG MM
221–223
damping factor 221
Drude dispersion relation 221
magnetic plasma frequency 221
permeability 221
MSR (Multiple Sprit Ring) 221
return loss characteristics 221
CST Microwave Studio 223
elliptical patch antenna loaded with MNG 223:
elliptical shape parameter 223; ﬁlling ratio
223; antenna performance 223–224
MNM (Mu Negative Material) 6
mobile antenna 40
mobile communication 1
mobile handset 392
mobile terminal 376, 389
modiﬁcation of antenna geometry 51
MoM (Method of Moment) 79, 121, 313, 390, 396,
397, 398–399, 400, 405
monopole antenna 253
on the ﬁnite ground plane 253–254
NIC 253
small monopole on a ﬁnite ground plane using
NIC 254
transducer gain 254
monopole type MLA 3, 94–95, 118
practical model 116–117, 118
etched on both sides of dielectric substrate
116–117: gain 117; radiation pattern 117;
return loss characteristic 117; UHF band
terrestrial broadcasting 117
monopole type 118: Q 118; relative bandwidth
118
MSA (Microstrip Antenna) 5
MSR (Multiple Sprit Ring) 105
multiband operation 51
multiband antennas 293, see also
wideband/multiband performance
circular disk monopole patch antenna 342
antenna geometry 342
card-size module for MIMO 342
ground plane size 342
L-shaped slot 342
L-slot on the ground plane 343–344: current
distribution 343; L-slot 343; metal wire
bent-monopole antenna see BMA
modiﬁed PIFA 293
various printed patch antennas 293
printed λ/8 PIFA (penta-band) 294
multi-frequency and dual-mode antenna 244
antenna dimension 246
antenna resonant frequency 246–247
CRLH structure of mushroom type 244
dual frequency patch antenna with DCS
247
LH performance 244
CRLH structure with combined TL of two RH
and one LH TL 245
mode n = −1 246
mode n = 0 246
mode n = +1 246
multiple-folded monopole 238
antenna with four posts 240
antenna of N folded arms 240
four folded monopole 238–239
multiwire 1
mushroom patch 236
multi-frequency and dual-mode antenna 244
CRLH structure of mushroom type 244
mushroom structure
EBG 72
application 72
mutual coupling reduction 338
EBG substrate 339
cell size 339
suppression of surface wave propagation
338
negative permeability 219
ferrite material 219
negative mu (MNG) material 219
negative mu property 219
negative permeability/permittivity 216

Index
467
NFC (Near Field Communication) 3, 72
negative epsilon material 20
dense array of wires 52
negative mu material
sprit ring resonator 52
NIC (Negative Impedance Converter) 17, 65,
250
application to antenna matching 252–253
biasing NIC transistor 252
grounded NIC 250
ﬂoating NIC 250
matching of monopole antenna on the ﬁnite
ground plane 253–254
network 66
small monopole on a ﬁnite ground plane 254
transducer gain 254
NMHA (Normal Mode Helical Antenna) 5, 19, 25
Non-Foster circuit 17, 19, 66
Non-Foster matching network 254
Normal Mode Helical Antenna (NMHA) 120–121
analysis 121–122
analysis and design 123–125
comparison with MLA 145–146
discussion of small NMHA 127
meander line antenna 127
NEC 127
effective volume 130
effective height 130
Q 130: either TE/TM modes radiation 140;
both TE/TM mode radiation 140
radiation resistance 133
resonance frequency 130
spherical radius 130: resonance frequency 130
constitutive parameters 19
dipole type 121
Galerkin method 124: NEC 4, 1 127
radiation resistance 127
self-resonance 120
shortening factor 127
notch 134
N-PEC (Non-Perfect Conductor) 21
NRI (Negative Reﬂection Index) 63, 236
by SRR CRLH TL 67
NRI TL MM application 237
NRI TL MM-based Pi-unit cell 242: ring
antenna 237
objective function 83–84
optical system 373
optimization
multi-objective 79, 81
oscillator 375–376
patch antenna 75, 76, 79, 80, 81
pattern integral method 385
pattern reconﬁguration 331
pattern reconﬁgurable cubic antenna 329
angle of arrival 332
correlation coefﬁcient 332
cube dimension 329
Laplacian distribution 332
metallic cubic cavity 329
pattern diversity 332
pattern reconﬁgurable performance 329
PIN diode 329
radiation pattern 331
radiate in 4πsteradian 329
single feed cubic antenna 329
XPD 332
reconﬁgurable PIFA with integrated PIN-diode
and varactor 329
geometry of antenna 329
multiband operation 329
PCSA (Physically Small Antenna) 332
low proﬁle structure 332
permeability-permittivity chart 63
Peano curve geometry 56
Peano (G) 141
Peano curve 141
PIFA using Peano curve element 150
Peano and Hilbert curve elements 146–147
current distribution 149
induced current 146
polarization of incident wave 147
Peano curve structure 147
Hilbert curve structure 147
input impedance 149
resonance frequency 147
size comparison 149
periodical structure 21, 44
phase velocity 48, 51, 52
phone system 2
PCSA (Physically Constrained Small Antenna)
8
construction 70
deﬁnition 8–9
technique to produce 70
HIS for PCSA 71
-shaped microstrip antenna 274
S11 274
PIFA (Planar Inverted-F Antenna) 5, 20–21
inside a mobile terminal 20–21
using Peano curve element 150
application to GSM/PCS 150
modiﬁed PIFA 277–279, 293
planar dielectric surface 51
capacitive guide structure 51
corrugated surface 51
holey plate structure 51
inductive guide 51
planar dipole antenna 255–256
negative capacitance 255

468
Index
Planar Inverted-L Antenna (PILA) 277
planar printed strip monopole for eight band 299
gain 300
geometry 299–300
return loss 300
SAR (Speciﬁc Absorption Rate) 300–301
rectangular monopole patch with a notch and strip
322
antenna geometry 322–323
current distribution 323
return loss 323
polarization matching factor p 18
portable mobile terminal 372, 373
printed antenna 79
proximity effect 20
prolate spheoid
advantage and disadvantage 20
PSA (Physically Small Antenna) 8, 72, 347
electromagnetic simulation 348
ESA technique 348
evaluation of antenna performance 348
impedance matching of antenna 348–349
matching 74
radio watch/clock 348
realization 73–74
RFID (Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation) 350
short range communication 348
simple PSA 73–74
small magnetic core loop antenna 349
tiny chip antenna 73
wireless system 347
PSO (particle Swarm Optimization) 74, 79, 81, 313
Q 24
as circuit parameter 16
deﬁnition 9
for TE and TM modes 28
relation with bandwidth 16
Q-factor method 385–386
radian length 8
radiation efﬁciency 17, 23
radiation power factor (RPF) 24, 25
radiation reactance 12
radiation resistance 12
radio watch/clock 348, 349
coil antenna 349–350
amorphous metal material 349
long wave standard-time broadcasting 348, 349
small magnetic core-loop antenna 349
wrist watch 349
RBW (Relative Band Width) and Q 100
real binary 79
recent trend in small antenna 10
rectangular case 1
relative bandwidth (RBW) 15, 23
resonant antenna 234
dual band resonant antenna 235
multiband antenna 234
resonant modes 234
zeroth-order (n = 0) mode 234
CRLH structure of N unit cells 234
zeroth-order antenna 235
resonator 75
reverberation chamber 387–388
RFID (Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation) system 3,
42, 72, 350
active RFID 351
antenna types 42, 350–351
communication range 350
interrogator and transponder 350
medical application 356
passive and active types 350
RFID antennas 350
antenna type 350–351
circular loop antenna (CLA) 359
one-wavelength and a half wavelength CLA
359
doubly folded L-shaped dipole 351
dipole and monopole types 351
folded-shape monopole antenna 351–352
handheld RFID reader 359
inverted-F conﬁguration antenna 353
various modiﬁed IF conﬁgurations
353–354
miniaturized IFA with a Hilbert trace element
354–355: meander line structure 351
planar dipole antenna 352–353
slot type antenna 355
L-shaped slot dipole loaded with meander line
357
series-fed L-shaped patch 355: TAG-1
(prototype RFID tag) 356; TAG-2 (proto
type RFID tag) 356; textile technology 356
series OCSRR (Open Complementary Split
Ring Resonator) 356–357: four unit of
OCSRR 357
sensor chip: wearable UHF RFID sensor tag
355
square loop 359
directional pattern 359
handheld RFID reader 359
wired bow-tie dipole RFID tag antenna 352
ring antenna 237
MM ring antenna 237
NRI TL MM application 237
RLC circuit 15
Rothchild 28
Russel Elberhart 81
SAR (Speciﬁc Absorption Rate) 300–301
scale model 383

Index
469
self-complementary structure 59
construction 59
planar self-complementary antenna
59
self resonance 19
helilcal antenna 25
wire antenna (S-RWA) 78–79
simulation 41
electromagnetic simulation 41
FDTD 41
FEM 41
HFSS 41
IE3D 41
MoM 41
self-complementary antenna
half circular quasi self-complementary antenna
206–207
H-shaped quasi self-complementary antenna
205–206
L-shaped quasi self-complementary antenna
204–205
small ground plane: Sierpinsky Fractal
structure 155–156
Five-order Sierpinsky monopole 156–158
small monopole 156
Sierpinslky gasket 156
SEMCAD 41
powerful means to calculate antenna
performances 41
Short-range communication 348
size (ka) 23
slot 51
slots/notches 267, 277
use of slot/notch (slit) on planar antenna surface
277
slot/slit embedded on the patch antenna
316
stop band 316
various shapes of slots/slits 316
four mode current 316–318
slot/slit 134–135
bowtie 135
combined with notch 135
folded shape 134
L-shape 134
operation 134
resonance frequency 1, 134
slow wave (SW) 44, 92, 306
advantages of wired SW structure 45
two-dimensional structure 47
small antenna
complicated problem 40
dipole 57
current distribution: triangular 57
uniform 57–58
environmental condition 40
expression 1
material effect 41
measurement 371
realization 39
resonance frequency
lowering 44
practical design problem 40
fundamental limitation 23
how small can be achieved 23
design parameters 11
performance 12
principle of making antenna small
43
Q, impedance and bandwidth
23
Q and size 23
technique and methods for making antenna
small 44
small electric dipole 17
small magnetic dipole 18
small MLA of less than 0.1λ 105
basic structure 105
current distribution 108–109
dipole type 105–108
impedance 109–110
performances 105
width 105
length 105
number of turns 105
self-resonance condition 107
radiation efﬁciency 111
resistance
input resistance 107
loss resistance 107, 110–111
radiation resistance 111
step up ratio 110
trial antenna of less than 0.1λ 111–112
gain 112
impedance characteristics 112
radiation pattern 112
small MLA of less than 0.05λ
geometrical parameters and performances
112–114
impedance characteristics 115
practical model 116–117
radiation pattern 116
relative bandwidth 116
sandwiched type 112
trail model 114–116
VSWR 115
small mobile terminal 41
unit metal case 41
small wireless equipment 372
SNG (Single Negative) material
by CRLH TL 55
applications 64

470
Index
Space domain 63
space ﬁlling curve 141
features of 142
Fractal pattern 141
high impedance surface (HIS) 142
Hilbert curve 141
Peano curve 141
space matching 19, 64–65
space resonance/matching 220
spherical coil 25
spherical dipole antenna 183–184
electric spherical helix 1, 56
lower bound Q 184
multi-turn folded spherical helix
187
self resonance 187
four folded arm 187
radius of sphere 183
spherical electric helix 187
multi turn folded spherical helix 187
self-resonance 187
four folded arms 187
spherical magnetic (TE mode) dipole 187
complementary structure 187
spherical helix 180–181
Wheeler 180
wiring along the perimeter of sphere
181
Best 181
spherical split ring resonator (S-SRR) antenna 120,
191–192
spherical split ring (SRR) antenna 190,
192–193
proto typw SRR antenna 193
spherical wire antenna 184–186
folded loop mounted on a sphere 184
four arm 184
isotropic radiation pattern 1, 55
spiral 77
spiral antenna 158
antenna performances and design 161
active region 163
input impedance 161–163
FDTD simulation 161
gain 163
hemi-spherical helical (HSH) antenna
193
operating band 161
radiation pattern 164
self-complementary 161
time delay 164
truncation (outer, inner) 161, 164
variation of gain with substrate 163
Archimedean spiral antenna 158, 173–174
cavity-backed Archimedean spiral antenna
160
high contrast dielectric loading 173
square cavity 173
square spiral slot 173
Klopfenstein tape termination 173
termination 173
capacitance loaded spiral antenna 171
dielectric substrate/superstrate 171
MFsm (near-ﬁeld miniaturization factor)
171
comparison of gain for spiral structure 174
equiangular spiral antenna 158
arc-shaped absorber (A-ABS) 164
conical equiangular spiral antenna 159–160
equiangular spiral curve 158
radiation pattern 164
ring-shaped absorber (R-ABS) 164
two-arm equiangular spiral antenna 164
frequency independent characteristics 158
loaded with capacitance 171
dielectric substrate 171
MFsm (near-ﬁeld miniaturization factor) 171
loaded with inductance 174
planar meandering with rectangular or zigzag
174
3D coiling 174
miniaturization of spiral antenna 164–169
loading resistance or reactance 169
MFsm (near-ﬁeld miniaturization factor) 171
phase velocity on the spiral arm 164
spiral arm length 169
open circuited transmission line 196–199
input impedance 161–163
metal shell 197
planar Archimedean spiral antenna 160
planar equiangular spiral antenna 159
sinuous spiral antenna 208–209
a corn (3D structure) sinuous spiral antenna
208
planar two-arm seniuous spiral antenna 208
slot spiral antenna 169
examples 169–171: Archimedean spiral
antenna 169; balun 169; cavity 170;
impedance transformer 170; loading
resistance 170; termination 169
loading of resistance/reactance/material
169
cavity 169
coiling/meandering antenna structure 169
inﬁnite coaxial balun 169
thinning antenna structure 169
Volakis (J.H.) 169
wide bandwidth 169
Spline-shaped antenna 313
antenna geometry 313
group delay 314
optimization 314

Index
471
prototype antenna 314
S11 314
square Archimedean spiral antenna 160
absorber for wideband 164
cavity-backed Archimedean spiral antenna
160
unidirectional pattern 164
conducting shallow cavity 164
square patch dipole 307–308
S.R. Best
discussed impedance of small antenna 8
dine ES with ka less than 1, 8
S-shaped-slot patch antenna 277
stable condition 249
stability 250
open circuit stable 250
short circuit stable 250
Stuart 20, 65
Stuart and Yaghjian
effect of a thin shell of high μ magnetic material
on Q 36
study on electrically small spherical helix
Best 190
QLB (lower bound) 191
Q/QLB 191
folded semi-spherical monopole antenna
181–183
geometry of antenna 181
four arm folded spherical helix 181
thin wall hollow copper sphere 187
complementary structure 187
two-arm (double slot) folded slotted sphere
helix 187
multi-arm spherical helix (MSH) 188: TE10
MSH 190–191
Susman Fort 17, 66
Thal 34
calculation of Q including energy inside a sphere
occupying antenna 34
sphere with conducting wire on the surface
34
equivalent circuit for the antenna system 34
Thanderbosch 35
derived general and rigorous expression for the
reactive energy 35–36
Thiele (G.A.) 29
using superdirective ratio for obtaining Q
29–30
three dimensional (3D) structure 48, 174
cube 174
cylindrical helix 174
effective use of a volume 174
Koch dipole 176
Koch tree 174, 176
lower Q 174
Q comparison 176–177
quasi Fractal tree dipole 176
sphere 174
3D quasi Fractal tree dipole 176
3D spiral antenna 177–180
bio-medical technology 177
planar meander line 177
folded structure 177
optimized design 177
use of periphery of sphere 1, 99
top-loaded monopole 1
top-loading technique 193–195
cross-T-wire top-loaded monopole
200
effectiveness of top loading 64–65,
100
electrically small monopole 195
capacitive loading 195
inductive loading 195
wire of L-shape, T-shape, crossed
multi-element 195
slot-loaded with spiral 201–202
slot-loaded with spiral added parasitic elements
202
bandwidth increase 202
SEA1 and SEA2 (single element antenna)
202
DEA (double element antenna) 202
tri-band monopole antenna 241
defected ground plane 241
uniform current distribution 193, 195
dipole 195
wire-grid top-loaded helical dipole 195
spherical cap top-loaded helical dipole 195
short monopole 195
top-loaded antenna 193
Edison 193
Hertz 193: monopole 195; meandered wire
195; helical wire 195
monopole with planar disk 195–196
current on the monopole 196: impedance 196;
radiation power factor 196; bandwidth 196
thin circular plate 195
wire grid disk 195
wired spiral 195
wire grid spherical cap
Topology optimization 74, 80
transducer 63–64
antenna as transducer 63
treatment of small antenna 4
trough 47
UFDA (U-shaped Folded Dipole Antenna) 81,
82–83
unbalanced current 372
unbalanced-fed antenna 373, 374

472
Index
UWB (Ultra Wide Band) antenna 3, 72, 267, 304
circular/elliptical slot antenna 318
antenna geometry 318–319
design of modiﬁed antenna 319–320
experimental results 319
four types of antenna model 320–321:
bandwidth 322
ESA with wideband feature 306
various types of UWB antenna 307
dipole type of UWB antenna 307: square patch
dipole 307–308; ﬂare dipole with Spline
shape 308; optimizing ﬂare shape 309;
printed shape-optimized dipole 309
matching problem 72–73
modiﬁed shaped UWB antennas 325: pentagon
shape microstrip slot antenna 325; antenna
geometry 325; directional pattern 326;
impedance bandwidth 325–326; radiation
pattern; sectorial loop antenna (SLA) 326;
geometrical parameters 327
monopole UWB antenna 309: representative
antennas 310; binomial-curved patch
antenna 311–312; antenna geometry 311;
return loss 312
patch antenna with slot/slit 316: stop band 316;
various shapes of slot/slit 316; beveled
square patch with U-slot 316; four mode
current 316–318; circular/elliptical slot
antenna 318; antenna geometry 318–319;
design of modiﬁed antenna 319–320;
experimental results 319; four types of
antenna models 320–321; UWB
characteristics 321–322; bandwidth 322
rectangular monopole patch with notch/strip
322: antenna geometry 322–323; current
distributions 323; return loss 323
Spline shaped antenna 313: antenna geometry
313; group delay 314; optimization 314;
prototype antenna 314; USB (Universal
Serial Bus) dongle 314–315
UWB system 304–306
UWB characteristics 321–322
deﬁnition 304–306
DGS (Defected Ground Structure) application
306
modiﬁed version of EBG 306
slow wave effects 306
reduction of ground plane 306
time response 307
ﬂare dipole 308
mushroom like HIS 333
design methodology 333
reduction of ground plane size 306
sectorial loop antenna (SLA) 326
geometrical parameters 327
slot/slit embedded on the patch antenna 316
stop band 316
various shapes of slots/slits 316
four mode current 316–318
square patch dipole 307–308
time response 307
various types of UWB antenna 307
VHE pager 61
VHF-UHF 383
Volakis (J.H.) 80
Volumetric material optimization 74, 81
VSWR (Voltage Standing Wave Ratio) 15
waveguide structure 51
Wheeler 4, 39
wheeler cap 383
wheeler method 386–387
Wheeler work 138–140
C type 21
effective volume 139
L type 21
Q 139
C type (Qc) 138
L type (QL) 138
Lowest Q 140
radian sphere 139
radiation resistance 21
spherical coil 140
spherical helix 180
TE10 or TM10 mode 140
wideband 267
deﬁnition (−10dB reﬂection coefﬁcient) 267
deﬁnition (VSWR ≤2) 267
wideband antenna 267
implementation 267
planar wideband antenna 308–309
wideband/multiband performance 267
coupling between two resonators 267
use of slots/notches 267
metal-wire bent-monopole antenna (BMA)
294
addition of a printed thin ground line 297
antenna geometry 294–296
balanced feed structure 297
experimental results 296–297
good impedance matching 296
penta band 294
planar monopole antenna 301
disk-shaped planar monopole 301
square monopole 301–302
antenna proﬁles 302
printed monopole see planar printed strip
monopole
SAR (Speciﬁc Absorption Rate) 300–301
wireless systems 294
WWAN (Wireless Wide Area Network) 294

Index
473
WiMAX (Wireless Interoperability for Microwave
Access) 3, 81
WLAN (Wireless Local Network) 3
Yaghjian 36
general expression for the tower bound Q 36
zeroth-order mode 236
zeroth order resonance 218
zeroth-order antenna 235
interdigital capacitor 235
resonant CRLH antenna 235
stub inductor 235
zeoth-order CRLH resonance 235
zigzag
line 19, 44, 118
antenna 118
balanced log-periodic zigzag 118
current distribution 118
k-β diagram 118
slow wave structure 118
input impedance 118
uniform balanced zigzag 118
ZOR (Zeroth-Order Resonance)
modes 68
design of ESA 69


