
MODERN PIRACY

Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
American Families in Crisis, Jeffrey S. Turner
Animal Rights, Clifford J. Sherry
Climate Change, David L. Downie, Kate Brash, and Catherine
Vaughan
Corporate Crime, Richard D. Hartley
DNA Technology, David E. Newton
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Education in Crisis, Judith A. Gouwens
Environmental Justice, David E. Newton
Gangs, Karen L. Kinnear
Gay and Lesbian Rights, David E. Newton
Global Organized Crime, Mitchel P. Roth
Globalization, Justin Ervin and Zachary A. Smith
Identity Theft, Sandra K. Hoffman and Tracy G. McGinley
Lobbying in America, Ronald J. Hrebenar and Bryson B. Morgan
Modern Sports Ethics, Angela Lumpkin
Obesity, Judith Stern and Alexandra Kazaks
Renewable and Alternative Energy Resources, Zachary A. Smith and
Katrina D. Taylor
Same-Sex Marriage: A Reference Handbook, David E. Newton
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
Sexual Crime, Caryn E. Neumann
Sexual Health, David E. Newton
Substance Abuse, David E. Newton
U.S. Border Security, Judith A. Warner
U.S. National Security, Cynthia A. Watson
U.S. Trade Issues, Alfred E. Eckes, Jr.
Waste Management, Jacqueline Vaughn
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit
www.abc-clio.com.

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
ﬁnd the information they need to have a better understanding of
the social, political, environmental, and economic issues facing
the world today.

This page intentionally left blank 

MODERN PIRACY
A Reference Handbook
David F. Marley
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES

Copyright 2011 by ABC-CLIO, LLC
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Marley, David, 1950–
Modern piracy : a reference handbook / David F. Marley.
p. cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978–1–59884–433–7 (hard copy : alk. paper) — ISBN 978–1–
59884–434–4 (ebook)
1. Piracy—History—21st century. 2. Terrorism—History—21st century.
I. Title.
G535.M327
2011
364.1604—dc22
2010027190
ISBN: 978–1–59884–433–7
EISBN: 978–1–59884–434–4
15 14 13 12 11
1 2 3 4 5
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook.
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, LLC
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America

To the memory of another dear departed friend,
Adolfo Langenscheidt Field
lost too soon.

This page intentionally left blank 

Contents
Preface, xiii
1
Background and History, 1
Textbook Case: Piratical Seizure of a Supertanker (2008), 1
Historical Perspective, 5
Cradle of Piracy: The Caribbean (1500–1650), 6
Rise and Fall of the “Golden Age” (1650–1720), 7
Recent Development (1945–Present), 8
Modern Trends Contributing toward a Rebirth
of Piracy, 8
Summary, 33
2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 37
Problems, 37
Seven Underlying Preconditions, 38
Special Piratical Needs, 40
Four Recent Hot Spots, 42
Worst-Case Scenario: Piracy in a Void, 60
Extortion as Business, 60
Corruption and Dependence, 62
Entrenchment, 62
Controversies, 64
Differing U.S. and European Goals, 64
Underreporting, 66
Unwanted Piracy Trials, 68
Ignored Somali Complaints, 69
Expense, 72
Solutions, 72
Textbook Case: Strait of Malacca, 2005, 73
Six Basic Elements for Success, 76
ix

3
Special U.S. Issues, 81
U.S. Naval Focus during the War on Terror, 82
Coalition Maritime Contributions, 82
Combined Joint Task Force-Horn of Africa, 83
Invasion of Iraq, 84
Post-War Mission, 84
Ominous Piracy Surge Out of Somalia, 85
The Extortionate Business of Ransoms, 85
Textbook Case: Chance Rescue of a Dhow, January 2006, 87
Deliberate Targeting of Prizes, 88
U.S. Intervention, 91
Unfettered Somali Piracy (2007–Present), 92
America’s Redeﬁned Role (June 2007), 92
Cautionary Case: Golden Nori Rescue, 92
NATO, EU, and UN Commitments, 94
Defensive Measures, 101
Rarest of Encounters: The Maersk Alabama Incident, 105
Unusual Presence, 106
Pursuit, 107
Boarding, 107
Resistance, 108
Hostage Taking, 109
Standoff, 110
Rescue, 111
Current Status and Future Outlook, 112
Six Basic Elements, 113
U.S. Viewpoint, 114
4
Chronology, 117
5
Biographical Sketches, 139
Afweyne, 139
Bi’ir, Owkeh, 139
Boya or Boyah, 139
Dhegey, Mohamed Hidig, 140
Garad, Abdi, 140
Gortney, William Evans, 143
Hassan Hayir, Mohamed Abdi, 144
Hayeysi, Dahir Mohamed, 149
Hussein, Moktar Mohamed, 150
Ilkacase, Ahmed, 151
Kulan, Farah Hirsi, 152
x
Contents

Ludwig, Daniel Keith, 154
McLean, Malcolm or Malcolm Purcell, 156
Mohamed, Garad or Garaad Mohamud, 158
Murphy, Shane Michael, 159
Muse´, Abduwali Abdukhadir, 160
Phillips, Richard, 164
Shukri, Hasan, 167
Siad, Yusuf Mohamed, 168
6
Data and Documents, 171
Data, 172
Table 6.1: Global Shipping Totals, September 1939 and
June 1946, 172
Table 6.2: Disappearance of the U.S. Merchant Fleet,
1955–2005, 172
Table 6.3: Leading “Flag of Convenience” Nations, 2008, 173
Table 6.4: Distribution of the World’s Piratical Attacks,
2003–2009, 174
Table 6.5: Reduction in Piracy, Indonesia and Strait of
Malacca—Analysis, 174
Table 6.6: Persistent Piracy Problem in Nigeria—
Analysis, 175
Table 6.7: Piracy Boom, Somalia and the Gulf of
Aden—Analysis, 175
Documents, 176
Excerpts from the UN Convention on the Law of the
Sea, 176
Renewed U.S. Policy Against Piracy, June 2007, 180
UN Security Council Resolution 1816, Regarding Somali
Piracy, 183
EU Approval for Launching “Operation Atalanta,” 187
UN Assessment of Somali Piracy, November 2008, 199
UN Security Council Resolution 1846, Re: Piracy in
Somalia, 205
U.S.-Sponsored UN Security Council Resolution 1851, 210
7
Directory of Organizations, 217
Naval Forces, 217
U.S. Navy and Coalition Partners, 219
European and NATO Formations, 221
Somali Coastal Forces, 226
Regional Coordinating Hubs, 228
Contents
xi

International Monitoring Agencies, 230
Contact Group on Piracy Off the Coast of Somalia, 231
Somali Pirate Syndicates, 233
“National Volunteer Coast Guard,” 234
“Somali Marines,” 234
8
Resources, 239
General Studies and Overviews, 239
Background and History, 244
Maritime Transformation, 244
Container Ships, 245
Supertankers, 246
Santa Maria Hijacking (1961), 246
Achille Lauro Hijacking (1985), 247
Flags of Convenience, 248
Proliferation of Light Arms, 250
International Law, 251
Documents, 251
General Works, 252
Southeast Asia, 255
Somalia and Horn of Africa, 261
Nigeria, 267
Sirius Star Seizure (November 2008), 268
Maersk Alabama Incident (April 2009), 269
Glossary, 273
Index, 279
xii
Contents

Preface
Who are the real pirates? It’s not these young boys on the boats.
It’s the people behind them, with the money to buy the boats, and
the motors and the guns and the GPS devices.
—Andrew Mwangura, Secretary-General of the East African
Seafarers Association in Mombasa, Kenya, May 2009
Lit only by a blazing sunrise in early May 2009, nine poor young
men—each armed with a Kalashnikov riﬂe and a grenade—got into
a bare, wooden boat and pushed out into the Gulf of Aden from a
shabby village near Bosaso, the largest city and seaport in the
Puntland region of Somalia. Some time previously, they had been
contacted by a fellow Somali living abroad, who had provided
money for this primitive expedition. Over the next couple of days,
the youthful and inexperienced gunmen would wend their way
250 miles westward, hugging the coastline, before veering north
into the busy sea-lanes which funnel an unending stream of
merchantmen into the Red Sea. Amid gigantic supertankers and
container ships, these modern-day pirates had come to hunt a prize.
It seems impossible to believe that in our twenty-ﬁrst-century
world of ultramodern vessels gliding peacefully across the oceans,
guided by satellite imagery and steered by such sophisticated com-
puterized systems that only a handful of crewmen are required to
work even the largest ships, that such a throwback to earlier times
could somehow reemerge. Piracy had all but vanished from the
Seven Seas, a historical anachronism remembered mostly in
movies or novels, before inexplicably thrusting itself back into the
world’s headlines in our present day, as boatloads of rovers began
reappearing like phantoms, making high-proﬁle seizures and
wresting multimillion dollar ransoms from global corporations.
xiii

Our particular band of would-be pirates was intercepted at
sea by a patrol boat from neighboring Somaliland, one of the
new republics formed from the disintegration of greater Somalia,
which clubbed these nine novices into submission and carried
them into the port of Berbera to stand trial for piracy. A terse ver-
dict was quickly returned by May 10, 2009, all nine being
sentenced to 20 years imprisonment—yet hundreds more still
remained prowling the nearby waves, with thousands more will-
ing to take their place, despite all the perils of venturing out to sea
off the sun-baked Horn of Africa (Baldauf).
This book constitutes a description of the surprising resur-
gence of modern piracy, preceded by some explanation of various
historical factors which have helped to pave the way for its
return. Early-eighteenth-century cutthroats such as Blackbeard
and Captain Kidd are ﬂeetingly mentioned, while late-twentieth
century trouble-spots such as the South China Sea and Nigerian
waters are discussed at greater length—but the most comprehen-
sive analysis is saved for the two most pirate-plagued passage-
ways of the twenty-ﬁrst century: The Strait of Malacca and Horn
of Africa. Both are transited today by the largest volumes of com-
mercial trafﬁc in mankind’s recorded history, attracting criminal
elements from near and far.
And although the main focus of this book is the current state
of piracy, speciﬁcally between the victory achieved over South-
east Asian rovers in 2005–2006 and the recent boom in Somali
ransom seekers, its broader scope departs from the end of World
War II. Chapter 1 opens with an account of the startling capture
of the Saudi supertanker Sirius Star in 2008, so revealing as to
the vulnerable state of modern commercial-shipping that a huge,
$350 million behemoth could fall easy prey to eight teenage gun-
men in a pair of tiny boats. After a brief “Historical Perspective”
recalling highlights from the by-gone Golden Age of Piracy, a
detailed recitation follows of seven modern trends which have
contributed toward transforming all the world’s shipping-
industries since 1945 into a highly proﬁtable, yet perplexingly-
intertwined global enterprise, strong yet surprisingly exposed to
insigniﬁcant predators.
Chapter 2 reviews the “Problems, Controversies, and Solu-
tions” associated with modern piracy, opening with two addi-
tional factors which are required for any repeat piratical forays:
chokepoint hunting-grounds—for easily locating victims—plus
land sanctuaries to plunder or exploit any prizes at leisure. This
xiv
Preface

section is followed by detailed accounts of events deﬁning
piracy’s “Four Recent Hot Spots” between the 1990s to 2005: the
South China Sea, Nigeria, Strait of Malacca, and Horn of Africa.
Each suffered from a different set of circumstances, though,
affecting attempted solutions in each. “Controversies” include
strategic differences between U.S. and allied policies; doubts
occasioned by underreporting of pirate attacks by the shipping
industry, out of concern of exacerbating their insurance-
premiums; a nagging international indecisiveness about where
and how to hold piracy trials; etc. “Solutions” begin with a
description of the remarkably swift elimination of piracy in the
Strait of Malacca, principally motivated by a sudden spike in
regional insurance premiums during the summer of 2005.
Lessons learned are bundled together into the “Six Basic Elements
for Success” against modern piracy, a list of general requirements
for dealing with this issue.
Chapter 3 offers the “U.S. Perspective” on the global ﬁght
against piracy, especially in its present-day incarnation off
Somalia. The prior commitment of U.S. forces—as well as some
auxiliary allied squadrons—into this region as part of the post-9/11
offensive against terror and invasion of Iraq in early 2003, are
described under “U.S. Naval Focus,” which clearly established a
distinct American agenda before the unexpected surge of piracy
off Somalia. A detailed account is provided of the evolution of
determined new raiding-tactics out of this sole remaining
hot-spot, the last piratical holdouts remaining in the world today,
whose lawless strongholds will prove stubbornly hard to stamp
out. The number of such seizures escalated so rapidly as of 2007,
that it prompted a split away from America’s anti-extremist strat-
egy in favor of a new round of “NATO, EU, and UN Commitments”
by nations more deeply concerned about this threat to their com-
mercial lifelines. Both the U.S. Navy and Washington were relieved
to relinquish the lead in this new struggle. The extremely rare case
of the assault on the American-ﬂagged container ship Maersk
Alabama in April 2009 is studied in considerable detail, before this
chapter concludes with a summary of the latest solutions being
attempted off Somalia by U.S. and allied forces.
Chapter 4 provides a “Chronology” of events as general
background to the rebirth of piracy, starting with the adoption of
the United Nations “Convention on the Law of the Sea” in
December 1982. Chapter 5 offers “Biographical Sketches” of major
and minor participants, some of the latter chosen for their
Preface
xv

particular insight into this issue, such as teenage gunmen inter-
viewed in port or in captivity. Chapter 6 includes a variety of
tables under “Data,” the ﬁrst few describing the radical changes
in world shipping since World War II, the latter summarizing
the best statistical evidence available from the International Mari-
time Bureau’s Piracy Reporting Center in Kuala Lumpur, on
recent pirate attacks—although true ﬁgures are difﬁcult to deter-
mine, and may actually be considerably higher. The “Documents”
section reproduces only ofﬁcial documents related to piracy,
rather than sensationalized media reports, so as to offer a more
sober perspective on the complications and expenses entailed in
any large-scale antipiracy campaigns.
Chapter 7 contains descriptive listings of numerous “Organi-
zations” involved in current anti-piracy efforts, such as “Naval
Forces,” “Regional Coordinating Hubs,” “International Monitoring
Agencies,” and so on. Chapter 8 provides a select bibliographic
listing of some of the “Resources” consulted or quoted in this book,
while the brief Glossary explains the many acronyms and colorful
terms associated with modern piracy. Hopefully, this entire
work shall prove useful to students interested in such a volatile
and constantly shifting topic.
David F. Marley
April 2010
Windsor, Ontario, Canada
xvi
Preface

1
Background and History
There came into Calais ﬁve ships from New England full of stores
of masts, oak, timber and plank for that King’s service. I hope it
will be enquired into, and wicked men punished.
—the merchant sailor William Cowes, December 1718
Textbook Case: Piratical Seizure
of a Supertanker (2008)
Early on a beautiful Saturday morning, November 15, 2008, the
brand-new supertanker Sirius Star was running along easily,
520 miles southeast of the Kenyan coast. Launched only that pre-
vious March from the Daewoo shipyards at Okpo, South Korea,
this double-hulled behemoth measured 1,080 feet in length, was
almost 200 feet wide, and weighed 162,250 tons when empty—
but was furthermore carrying almost a full cargo of 300,000 addi-
tional tons of Saudi Arabian crude oil destined for the U.S. market,
valued at $100 million. Sirius Star’s route had been prudently
planned so as to avoid the troubled waters off the Horn of Africa,
instead circling wide out to sea to head directly down around
South Africa’s Cape of Good Hope, and eventually deliver its con-
signment into the Caribbean. Despite the vessel’s colossal size, its
sophisticated automation and computerized systems allowed it to
be sailed by only a tiny crew of six ofﬁcers of diverse nationalities,
plus 19 Filipino deckhands. Satellite communications provided
instant access to the latest navigational and weather updates, as
1

well as maintaining contact with the owners and other authorities
on land.
Yet in the growing light of that sunny Saturday morning, two
tiny dots could be seen closing in from astern. Sensing danger,
Sirius Star’s Polish Captain Marek Niski called for more speed
and ordered his deckhands to break out the ﬁre hoses, so as to con-
test any possible boarding attempt. Yet the ponderous supertanker
could not accelerate fast enough before two crude ﬁberglass speed-
boats caught up, bearing a total of eight men armed with AK-47
assault riﬂes and rocket-propelled grenade launchers. They ﬁred
a few rounds into the air, and rather than mount a futile and pos-
sibly bloody resistance, Niski instructed his deckhands to retire
below to safety, allowing the pursuers to toss a homemade rope
ladder with a grappling hook over the stern guardrail. The heavy-
ladened tanker’s freeboard rode only 12 feet above the waves
along this section of hull, so that the pirates were able to clamber
across this churning gap, and gain its deck by 8:55 a.m.
They seemed like apparitions from a bygone age. Lanky and
gaunt, these teenage gunmen wore a motley array of “trousers
and cheap shirts and sandals,” according to one eyewitness, “while
others were barefoot in sarongs” (Jamieson). The ﬁrst thing that
they demanded in broken English, were shoes for walking on the
tanker’s steel decks, as well as cigarettes, before proceeding up
the several decks to secure the bridge some seven minutes later.
After bringing Sirius Star to a complete halt, the pirates had
both their speedboats hoisted inboard, then veered around to
rejoin their “mother ship”—a slightly larger vessel waiting over
the horizon, manned by 10 more colleagues—by 3:00 p.m. that
same Saturday afternoon. The reunited pirate band then pillaged
the huge supertanker of small items while steaming toward the
Somali coast, where they would be reinforced two days later near
shore by 25 more armed pirates. The prize was eventually
ordered to drop anchor a few miles offshore, inside El Gaan
anchorage, the seaport for Harardheere (a shabby, sun-baked
town some 12 miles inland from the ocean, also variously spelled
as Harardera, Xarardheere, etc.). The captive tanker crew noticed
how all the pirates frequently chewed on bright-green leaves of
the addictive plant khat, growing agitated whenever their supply
ran low, and would also have goats brought from shore to be
slaughtered on deck for their meals (Cramb, Jamieson).
Yet these teenage gunmen were merely frontmen for a much
larger, shadowy organization with enough resources to relieve
2
Background and History

these guards on a regular basis, ample supplies to endure a long
wait, plus familiarity with international affairs. By Tuesday,
November 18, 2008, this mysterious group’s backers had made
their ﬁrst contact with the supertanker’s worried proprietors—
Vela International Marine, a subsidiary based in the United Arab
Emirates of the Saudi Arabian state oil company Aramco—to
demand a hefty ransom for the ship’s release. Next day, an alleged
pirate leader named Farah Abd Jameh even provided an audio
tape to Al-Jazeera network, declaring that this cash was to be deliv-
ered aboard Sirius Star itself, where it could be counted by
machines capable of detecting any counterfeits. And the pirates
remained so cooly conﬁdent of their invulnerability to arrest, either
by local authorities or from any sudden strike by foreign navies,
that still another spokesman—Mohamed Said—boldly announced
during an Agence France-Presse interview on November 20, 2008,
that a ransom of $25 million had been demanded, adding:
We do not want long-term discussions to resolve the
matter. The Saudis have ten days to comply, otherwise
we will take action that could be disastrous. (Leach)
Within Somalia itself, the beleaguered Transitional Federal
Government was powerless to intervene, controlling a mere strip
of the national capital Mogadishu.
Only the militant fundamentalist Islamic movement known
as Al-Shabaab or “The Youth,” headquartered yet farther to the
south, spoke out publicly against this seizure—piracy having long
been declared haram or “religiously forbidden” according to
Islamic teachings, most especially of a coreligionist vessel. “Saudi
is a Muslim country, and it is a very big crime to hold Muslim
property,” an Al-Shabaab commander named Sheik Abdullahi
Osman told the Bloomberg News Service in a telephone interview
from Harardheere:
I warned again and again, those who hold the ship must
free it unconditionally, or armed conﬂict should be the
solution. If they don’t free the ship, we will rescue it by
force. (Karon)
Yet despite allegedly sending ﬁve armored vehicles loaded
with ﬁghters into Harardheere, the militants could effect nothing
more.
Textbook Case: Piratical Seizure of a Supertanker (2008)
3

Abroad, Western observers were both surprised by this sud-
den extension of Somalia’s piratical forays—having successfully
struck so far away from their coast—as well as concerned by the
lucrative prize which had been deliberately targeted. “It does sug-
gest that they are increasing their capacity to stay out at sea for a
much longer period of time,” commented Cyrus Mody, a manager
at the International Maritime Bureau’s global piracy-monitoring
agency. “They can just sit and wait until a vessel comes along”
(Wadhams). Only a few days earlier, a force of British Royal
Marines had stormed a captive Yemeni-ﬂagged ﬁshing dhow
much nearer to Somalia, which another group of pirates had been
using as their covert “mother-ship” in an unsuccessful bid to attack
a passing Danish container ship. Eight of these pirates had been
arrested and turned over to the authorities in neighboring Kenya
to stand trial, yet—despite this naval success—other bands were
evidently becoming capable of venturing ever farther out from
Somalia, exponentially increasing the expanse of Indian Ocean,
which would have to be patrolled by a relatively few American
and allied warships.
“Our presence in the region is helping deter and disrupt
criminal attacks off the Somali coast,” noted Vice Admiral William
E. Gortney, commander of the U.S. Fifth Fleet and the Combined
Maritime Forces from various allied nations, “but the situation
with the Sirius Star clearly indicates the pirates’ ability to adapt
their tactics and methods of attack” (ibid.). The American Admiral
wished for greater cooperation from international shipping-ﬁrms
in adopting more self-defense measures, but who because of their
huge volumes of global merchant trafﬁc, remained seemingly
unfazed by the insigniﬁcant losses due to isolated pirate attacks
thus far—a complacency which Gortney felt would encourage
better-organized Somali syndicates to begin hunting more lucra-
tive tankers and larger cargo-vessels, in hopes of bagging even
heftier ransoms. Other commentators lamented the restrictive
“rules of engagement” imposed on patrolling warships, as well
as the legal indecision prevailing among diverse Western
governments, who often differed as to exactly how to dispose of
any captive pirates.
Unwilling to countenance a rescue-attempt so close to the
Somali mainland, it would take more than ﬁve weeks of clandes-
tine negotiations between the Saudis and Sirius Star’s pirate
captors, before a bargain was ﬁnally struck to ransom the super-
tanker, and details for actual delivery of this payment could be
4
Background and History

worked out. At 6:30 a.m. on January 9, 2009, its captive crew were
paraded on deck, for a small twin-engine plane to ﬂy overhead an
hour-and-a-half later, verifying that all were unharmed. Half the
estimated $3 million ransom was then dropped by parachute into
the adjacent waters, for the pirates to retrieve. The second half of
this total amount was subsequently dropped when the plane
returned at 2:10 p.m. that same afternoon, so that after one last
round of thefts throughout the tanker, 17 pirates quit the vessel
by 4:30 p.m.—although one of their boats capsized near shore
and ﬁve of them drowned. (The body of one pirate was said to
have washed ashore later, reputedly still with $153,000 in cash in
a plastic bag.) The remaining eighteen captors ﬁnally quit Sirius
Star at 5:34 a.m. next morning, at which point the relieved crew
quickly got up steam and hurried out to sea an hour later, speed-
ing away toward Fujairah in the United Arab Emirates to recuper-
ate from their 57-day ordeal.
Historical Perspective
The motivation and tactics of this ragtag band of Somali maraud-
ers were little changed from those of their piratical forebearers,
who had roamed the high seas centuries earlier. Ignoring all
peacetime conventions or accepted custom, they had attacked a
vulnerable civilian vessel in international waters for personal
gain, with minimal risk of meeting any serious opposition. Their
crude vessels and weaponry—30-foot ﬁberglass speedboats and
handheld light arms, insigniﬁcant when arrayed against those of
even a tiny modern warship—had nonetheless been handled with
sufﬁcient menace to surprise and intimidate the unarmed tanker
crew, after which eagerness for booty had galvanized the gunmen
into clambering across the dangerous gap to board this huge ship
while it was still moving rapidly across the ocean swells. The
captors had then retreated to an unpoliced safe haven near shore,
where pliant local ofﬁcials had allowed their covert backers to
extort as much proﬁt as possible from their high-value prize,
before all melted back into civilian life. Such a brazen high-seas
seizure and its subsequent exploitation would have seemed quite
familiar to the likes of Captain Kidd or Blackbeard.
Yet for all the familiarity of such actions, the modern world
into which these rovers had intruded was supposedly far different
from that long-lost era. Twenty-ﬁrst century maritime trafﬁc is
Historical Perspective
5

much more highly evolved—technologically sophisticated,
globally monitored, to say nothing of vastly larger in volume and
scope than ever before in human history—all factors which would
seem to have relegated piracy to a historical anachronism. And
indeed, criminality on the high seas had in fact been declining
steadily, almost to the vanishing point during this past century,
except for a few isolated pockets of sporadic violence.
Cradle of Piracy: The Caribbean (1500–1650)
What is today remembered as the “Golden Age of Piracy” of the
late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, had like today’s
personﬁcation, also grown out of a period of great maritime
expansion. Spain’s desire to monopolize its chance discovery of
the Americas, had soon been contested by other West European
seafarers trailing across the Atlantic in the Spaniards’ wake. The
desire by these latecomers to at least be allowed to tap some exotic
New World produce, which commanded fantastic prices back in
Europe, had been denied by the Spanish authorities, who stead-
fastly refused to grant any licenses to foreigners and regarded any
such unauthorized visitors as lawless poachers, subject to dire
punishments.
But the vastness of the West Indies and its sparse Spanish
population had provided many open anchorages to receive such
interlopers, who were furthermore often discreetly welcomed by
local residents, starved for European imports. Temporary shore
camps therefore began to spring up, usually occupied for only a
season or two by crews from resting ships or squadrons—although
as such repeat visits multiplied, more permanent bases came to be
created along remote stretches of coastline, where commercially
minded traders then began to barter for native goods, and even
harvest their own cash crops, such as tobacco or sugar.
As the volume of this unauthorized trafﬁc to the New World
boomed, Madrid could only dispute such trespassing with occa-
sional naval sweeps, so that these foreign settlements grew in num-
ber, spread inland, and became more ﬁrmly entrenched. Ofﬁcial
hostility against their very presence hardened into Spanish Crown
policy, yet the waning economic and military power of Spain meant
that its leaders could no longer successfully contest such violations.
By the mid-seventeenth century, most private West Indian settle-
ments could resist the enfeebled Spanish assaults, and colonists
routinely retaliated with local counteroffensives of their own.
6
Background and History

Rise and Fall of the “Golden Age”
(1650–1720)
The best means available to such pioneer settlers to combat
Spanish-American rivals was the ancient European expedient
of commissioning private vessels to act as unpaid privateers,
their crews reinforced from mixed groups of local mercenaries—
unemployed Dutch, English, or French men-at-arms, runaway
slaves, sometimes even a few Spaniards—who were willing to
serve for booty alone, under almost any ﬂag. The prizes which
these rovers brought back into port furthermore provided a wel-
come boon to the economies of these ﬂedgling outposts.
During the second half of the seventeenth century, such free-
booters grew so powerful and bold that even well after any
European-sanctioned hostilities had ceased, they continued to
gather at remote tropical anchorages and launch their own ren-
egade raids. Exhausting most rich targets in the Caribbean within
the next few decades, they eventually struck across the Isthmus of
Panama during the 1680s to prey upon hapless Spaniards in the
Paciﬁc. When King William’s War ensued from 1689 to 1697, some
ventured even further, sliding across the Atlantic to then prowl
down beyond the slave stations of West Africa, rounding the Cape
of Good Hope to Madagascar, then on to terrorize neutral
merchant shipping in the Red Sea and off the coasts of India.
This lawless privateer heyday was at last checked during the
early eighteenth century, when the gradual emergence of
plantation-based economies throughout the West Indies—vast
Crown-backed enterprises, on whose transatlantic exports many
home countries would increasingly come to depend—required
stable maritime trafﬁc in order to continue ﬂourishing, undis-
turbed by any renegade elements. Huge sums were already being
invested into transporting such produce to market, as well as
importing ever more slaves to plant and harvest new crops, all of
which required safe sea lanes and no unauthorized hostilities.
Random depredations by rogue Captains had therefore become
unwelcome, as they created needless losses and uncertainty.
Privateers were furthermore no longer necessary to help defend
Caribbean colonies against foreign attacks during wartime, having
been supplanted by permanent colonial squadrons and fortiﬁed
royal garrisons throughout the islands.
As a result, those die-hard renegades who refused to give up
roving once general peace was restored in 1713, soon became
Historical Perspective
7

outlawed as pirates and were hunted down by the Royal Navy or
licensed bounty-hunters. And unlike previous such crackdowns,
the broadening Crown rule overseas meant that freebooters now
found fewer and fewer sanctuaries open to them to lay low for a
spell, or foreign ﬂags under which they might serve. English courts
had long since dismissed all such fugitive felons as hostis humani
generis—“enemies of all mankind”—thus unprotected as the
King’s subjects, and so liable to summary execution by any nation
which chanced to apprehend them upon the high seas (The King
v. Marsh, 81 Eng. Rep. 23, 23, K.B. 1615). Even the fearsome and
brutish Blackbeard, who at the peak of his powers in 1717 had
commanded a ﬂotilla of several hundred cutthroats, was reduced
within a year to slipping into North Carolina’s ramshackle frontier
capital of Bath—under cover of darkness, accompanied by only 20
followers—to buy a pardon from its obliging Governor Charles
Eden, and vainly try to blend back into civilian life.
Recent Development (1945–Present)
Two-and-a-quarter centuries later, the conclusion to World War II
would usher in yet another era of unprecedented maritime
expansion. The enormous losses inﬂicted on global merchant-
ﬂeets by six years of unrestricted naval warfare would be fol-
lowed by a period of massive reconstruction and incredible
expansion, during which trafﬁc volumes rebounded on a much
vaster scale than ever before dreamed of—with new generations
of huge vessels steaming the oceans, ultra-efﬁcient cargo-
handling capacities emptying and reloading them with relentless
speed in purpose-designed seaports, and other reﬁnements
which were to exponentially augment and streamline the global
transportation of goods and produce.
Modern Trends Contributing toward
a Rebirth of Piracy
Yet ironically, several of these very innovations that were to so sig-
niﬁcantly improve human commerce, also unwittingly led to an
unexpected resurgence of criminality at sea. And while certain
steps in this evolutionary process might have been better directed,
most simply lay beyond the control of either the developers
8
Background and History

themselves, or any leading world governments. The seven recent
trends that have jointly abetted a revival of piracy today, are:
1. the virtual disappearance of the United States and
Western merchant ﬂeets;
2. the launching of much larger ships, to be manned by
much smaller crews;
3. the expansion of many national jurisdictions into adjacent
territorial waters;
4. a continuing irresolution over pirate trials under
international law;
5. a shift of large-scale commercial trafﬁc into Asian waters;
6. the widespread resort to “ﬂags of convenience” by global
shipping ﬁrms;
7. and the proliferation of potent military light arms in civilian
hands.
The end result of this evolution would be much larger and
wealthier vessels, yet thinly manned with mixed foreign crews,
moving steadily under a variety of ﬂags through ever more
crowded chokepoints, temptingly exposed to capture by a few
heavily armed teenage gunmen from among the poorest peoples
on Earth. The numbers of such felons, whom by chance, are
caught by overstretched naval patrols, are too few to deter imita-
tors, and must furthermore be passed along for prosecution
elsewhere.
The seizure of the Sirius Star, described at the beginning of this
chapter, is an example of the thicket of legal complications which
can accompany any such incident, even involving only a single
vessel: for it was a supertanker ﬂying a Liberian ﬂag, registered as
operated by a company based in the United Arab Emirates, yet
actually owned (along with its cargo) by a Saudi corporation. Sirius
Star’s Captain and one ofﬁcer were Polish, two others British—
both of these being member nations of the European Union—while
the remaining pair of ofﬁcers were a Croat and a Saudi, plus 19
deckhands from the Phillipines. After its capture by a handful of
pirates, this huge prize had then been sailed through Kenyan
waters to a lawless stretch of Somali coastline, well beyond the
jurisdiction of its hapless national government beleaguered in
Mogadishu—yet who would nonetheless have to give at least
nominal authorization for any foreign naval pursuit or interven-
tion close to shore. Finally, its ransom had been negotiated through
Recent Development (1945–Present)
9

middlemen suspected of criminal ties extending as far throughout
the Middle East as Cairo and Beirut.
Decline of the U.S. Merchant Marine
International maritime commerce had been far different when
World War II had erupted back in September 1939, most of the
then-small oceangoing freighter ﬂeets—almost 30 percent—being
owned by either Great Britain or one of its imperial partners, such
as Canada or Australia, and plied largely in Atlantic waters. The
United States had owned slightly less than half this total amount,
yet a combination of enormous American wartime output and its
relative safety from the catastrophic losses endured by other
nations more directly embroiled in the six years of ﬁghting, meant
that the United States would emerge as the leading merchant-
shipping power once peace was restored in August 1945.
When movement back toward a peacetime footing resumed,
Washington wished to shed the expense of so many extra vessels
that it had acquired as part of its war effort. Further spurred by a
sincere desire to assist the recovery of war-ravaged economies all
around the globe, the U.S. government generously offered to make
such surplus vessels available on very easy terms to American and
allied citizens alike, through the Merchant Ship Sales Act of
March 1946 (Marx). This proved to be a very successful plan, as
many as 5,000 vessels of all types eventually being disposed of—
Liberty and Victory cargo ships, tankers, coastal or other special-
ized vessels, even passenger liners—whose acquisition laid the
foundation for a notable revival and explosive growth in many
other countries’ merchant ﬂeets (Greenman).
Already by the end of 1948, the U.S. Maritime Commission
had disposed of more than 2,000 surplus ships, and placed many
of the rest into the National Defense Reserve Fleet against future
need. Although American merchant-ﬂeet records for that year
would still list 3,644 ships as remaining active, this number would
continue to plummet as owners also increasingly turned to the
expedient of “re-ﬂagging” their freighters to other countries as a
means of achieving signiﬁcant tax-breaks, freedom to employ less
costly non-unionized foreign crewmen, plus less restrictive opera-
tional regulations. Between 1946 and 1950 alone, about one million
tons of American shipping were transferred to foreign ﬂags, and
the number of merchantmen ﬂying the Stars and Stripes at sea
dwindled away (Greenwald).
10
Background and History

Furthermore, as this ﬁrst generation of wartime freighters and
tankers—many hastily assembled and mass-produced, unin-
tended for long-term service—began to wear out, they would be
replaced by foreign-built and -operated vessels. Today, the actual
number of American oceangoing merchantmen (not including
Great Lake carriers) is believed to be 46 or less in total and consist
mainly of older ships, with little life left in them. America in the
twenty-ﬁrst century carries little of its own commerce, relying
instead on foreign carriers. Consequently, when the ﬁrst outbursts
of global piracy began to reappear, there were virtually no U.S.-
ﬂagged ships left traveling through those distant waters, and thus
little initial urgency for Washington to become involved.
Table 6.1 in the Data and Documents chapter highlights the
impact of World War II on global shipping trends, while Table 6.2
examines the steady disappearance of the U.S. merchant ﬂeet from
the mid-1950s onward.
Bigger Vessels, Smaller Crews
Not only have American merchantmen been supplanted on the
high seas, but the new generations of oceangoing vessels being
launched in modern yards are much larger, yet manned by greatly
reduced crews—rendering such richly ladened behemoths easy
prey for even tiny boatloads of armed gunmen. Typically, cargo
ships at the end of World War II displaced between 9,000–
15,000 tons, and were equipped with a maze of booms and other
mechanized gear to hoist goods in and out of their holds. Crews
consisted of a few dozen skilled seamen, not merely to work the
vessel at sea, but more importantly to operate the motorized
winches, derricks, and lines necessary in harbor to swing in and
out an endless stream of piecemeal items—known as “break-
bulk” cargo, where each piece had to be loaded and unloaded
individually.
In major seaports, stevedores along these piers also used fork-
lifts, cranes, trucks, even conveyor belts to speed up this process, as
any lengthy layover could prove costly to the shipper. Yet since the
standard wooden pallets of that time measured only four-by-four
feet, any loading or unloading procedure was bound to be pro-
tracted. Merchantmen would continue to grow modestly in size
during the immediate postwar decade, into the mid-1950s, yet the
antiquated cargo-handling limitations in every port made any
further escalation in size pointless. It therefore remained for a few
innovators to resolve the problem caused by such bottlenecks, their
Recent Development (1945–Present)
11

efforts eventually producing a radical overhaul of the entire pro-
cess, so as to more efﬁciently streamline deliveries.
Container Ships
Ironically, it was to be a North Carolina trucking entrepreneur
named Malcolm P. McLean, unfamiliar with the sea, who was to
be in the very forefront of the development of a more practicable
scheme. Impressed by a concept that he had ﬁrst seen used during
the 1930s by Seatrain Lines out of New Jersey—in which as many
as 100 fully-loaded railway cars would be shunted onto their
four-decker ships, sailed to another port, then shunted off again
upon arrival—McLean in 1955 bought the Pan-Atlantic Steamship
Company of Mobile, Alabama, with the idea of creating his own
“trailer-ships”: vessels which instead of carrying railway cars,
could receive trailers detached from semitrucks, so as to be driven
out of their holds by different truck cabs once they reached their
destination. This method of transporting goods directly atop
rolling stock would soon become dubbed as “roll-on/roll-off” or
RO/RO.
When his original idea was deemed too wasteful of cargo space,
though, McLean reﬁned his concept further—to instead include the
hoisting of specially reinforced, 35-foot long, stackable containers off
a truck’s trailer and onto a ship’s deck, so that only these piled boxes
need be transported at sea, and lifted off onto other trailers once they
arrived—such vessels consequently becoming known as container
ships or “box” ships. By January 1956, McLean had purchased two
or three World War II-vintage tankers and begun transforming them
into his envisioned design by the erection of wooden spar-decking
several feet above their actual weather decks (a technique known
as “Mechano” decking, a common wartime practice for carrying
oversized cargos, such as aircraft).
His ﬁrst extemporized container ship—the 10,500-ton SS
Ideal X—would set sail from Port Newark in New Jersey on April 26,
1956, bearing 58 trailer boxes in addition to its regular liquid-
tank cargo for a six-day run to Houston, Texas. The savings gained
through adopting this method were immediately obvious: at
that time, hand-loading a ship cost $5.86 a ton, compared to only
16 cents a ton per container. Other shipping ﬁrms soon began
experimenting with McLean’s concept, some by merely lashing a
few extra containers atop their freighters’ decks for a particular
passage. Loading and unloading nonetheless remained quite
difﬁcult and slow in most harbors, especially because of a lack of
12
Background and History

standardized containers throughout the industry. It would not be
until 1961 that 20- and 40-foot metal shipping units would be
widely agreed upon—chosen to conform with most existing high-
way limits, as well as rail, bridge, and tunnel dimensions—and
being designated as TEUs or “Trailer Equivalent Units.” By then,
McLean’s container ship operation had become quite proﬁtable,
so that he kept adding routes and buying bigger vessels.
But it was to be during the Vietnam War of the late 1960s and
early 1970s that his methods truly came to excel. In order to deliver
the vast amounts of supplies needed to sustain a large-scale U.S.
expedition in distant Asia, the Military Sea Transportation Service
(today known as the Military Sealift Command) signed an agree-
ment on March 29, 1967 with McLean’s company, Sea-Land
Service, Inc. This lucrative contract contained provisions not only
for the transportation of containers into Vietnamese ports, but deep
inland as well, to the forwardmost American depots—an arrange-
ment which allowed Sea-Land complete control and limitless
support in its efforts to move this vital stream of supplies.
Shipments would be made through new, custom-built harbor
facilities and transport-hubs, while Sea-Land’s oversight of its
containers meant that boxes could be more effectively employed,
in repeat usage both ways. Over the next half-dozen years, using
only seven container ships (plus another four, feeding replenish-
ments into way stations on Okinawa and the Philippines),
McLean’s company accounted for 10 percent of all cargo shipped
into Vietnam during the U.S. involvement, reaping bountiful prof-
its. And by the end of America’s commitment to that campaign in
1973, 80 percent of all material entering Southeast Asia was being
brought in by container ship.
McLean had proﬁted personally from this success by selling
his company in May 1969 to the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
for $530 million in cash and stocks, receiving $160 million as his
own share, plus a seat on Reynolds’s board. Inspired by his good
fortune, other global shipping ﬁrms began fully embracing his
concepts. For example, the United States Lines of New York had
placed its ﬁrst orders for purpose-built container ships in 1968,
the ﬁrst pair of its new so-called American Lancer series still retain-
ing the old onboard combination of cargo- and container-handling
apparatus—yet the last eight would be built totally devoid of any
traditional hoists, booms, or winches, intended to rely solely on
shore-side cranes. This sparse design allowed for the maximum
deck-space to be made available for transportation of 1,178 TEUs
Recent Development (1945–Present)
13

apiece, and with a sea speed of 22 knots, the eight ships of this
stripped-down class allowed United States Lines to replace 24 of
its older ships yet still turn a handsome proﬁt.
More competitors began emulating McLean’s practices, so
that container ships boomed in numbers, size, and capacity. This
third-generation of vessels primarily sought to maximize the
amount of containers that each could carry, soon growing to the
very size-limits of the Panama Canal itself, a set of dimensions
known as “Panama maximum” or “Panamax.” Late in 1978,
McLean—who had resigned from Reynolds’ board to buy up his
old rival, United States Lines—further accelerated this size escala-
tion by placing an order with the Daewoo Shipyards in South
Korea for a dozen massive 57,000-ton container ships, each meas-
uring almost 1,000 feet in length and 106 feet in width, and capable
of bearing more than 4,250 TEUs apiece. These 12 giant “Econ-
ships” were to be propelled by slower-speed diesel engines at a
fuel-saving 16–18 knots, and manned by only 21 crewmen. They
entered into service one after another, departing eastward from
New York at one-week intervals, each taking 84 days to circle the
globe before returning into their home-port to initiate another
circumnavigation (Cudahy, pp. 152–153).
However, competition from other container ship ﬁrms had by
now grown so intense, that McLean’s globe-circling ﬂeet proved
to be a commercial failure. Fuel-efﬁcient, but slow and unreliable,
United States Lines went bankrupt by 1987, and McLean was
driven almost entirely out of the business which he had helped
revolutionize. His trend was now ﬁrmly entrenched, though:
Rival companies continued launching ships that even went
beyond many physical and geographic limitations, such as when
American President Lines began construction during the late
1980s of their C-10 and C-11 classes, massive vessels whose beam
exceeded the width of the Panama Canal locks, thus introducing
the ﬁrst “post-Panamax” generation of container ships to the
world. These were soon eclipsed by even bigger megaships:
Maersk Lines launching its 6,000-TEU Regina Maersk in 1994,
quickly followed by its the new G-class—exempliﬁed by the
7,000-TEU Gudrun Maersk—then the 8,000-TEU Sorø Maersk by
1999, with plans for future ships capable of carrying up to 10,000
TEUs or more.
McLean’s pioneering efforts at containerization and inter-
modalism had radically altered the worldwide movement of
cargo. By 2008, global merchant ﬂeets included 3,375 container
14
Background and History

ships, with a total carrying-capacity of 7.2 million TEUs. They had
multiplied to such an extent, as to be subdivided into four special-
ized categories:
•
“feeder” ships, those carrying less than 1,000 TEUs
apiece, designed to shuttle containers to and from smaller
ports into major seaports;
•
“handy-size” medium vessels, carriers capable of bearing
1,000-3,000 TEUs apiece on regional runs;
•
“Panamax” ships, long-range seagoing vessels capable of
bearing up to 4,000 TEUs per voyage;
•
and “post-Panamax” giants, running the major ocean
routes with many thousands of TEUs at a time.
The growth of world trade thanks to container ships has been
undeniable. For example:
— in 1983, total U.S. foreign ocean-born commerce was
measured at 694.4 million metric tons;
— 10 years later, this ﬁgure had increased to 884.4 million
metric tons;
— 10 years after that, it had magniﬁed to 1,167.9 million
metric tons, nearly doubling in volume in just two
decades (Mercogliano, p. 11).
Escalation of this magnitude could only have been achieved
through containerization.
During the 1950s, a typical freighter could handle some
10,000 tons of cargo, taking nearly two weeks to load or unload—
yet by 2004, the port of Los Angeles-Long Beach alone was receiv-
ing 8.6 million containers annually, a ﬁgure representing over
23,000 containers a day, each TEU being capable of holding up to
20 tons of cargo (ibid.). And world container trafﬁc still continues
to rise today, augmenting by another 13.4 percent during 2006 to
reach 440 million TEUs. Early the following year, it was further
noted that while the average age of all merchantmen in service
had fallen slightly to 12 years old, the youngest class of shipping
still remained container ships, at an average of only nine years
(Jane’s Overview, 2008).
Most unexpectedly, though, one of the downsides of this
emergence and domination of commercial trafﬁc by superefﬁcient,
minimally manned merchantmen, would be the numerous rich
Recent Development (1945–Present)
15

targets roaming the world’s sea lanes, relatively easy prey for even
tiny bands of armed pirates.
Supertankers
Just as freighters have evolved over the past few decades into
much larger, yet more vulnerable vessels, the same would occur
with the development of tankers into modern supertankers. The
average oil tanker at the end of World War II measured some
525–550 feet in length, and displaced between 10,000–16,000 tons.
Like freighters, their upper works were also clustered with
pumps, booms, winches, and other equipment for loading and
discharging their bulk cargoes, and their crews included numer-
ous specialized workers. The ﬁrst new tankers built during the
immediate postwar era would retain these features, and most
continued to be designed so as to pass through the narrow water-
ways of the Suez Canal—which was already becoming a busy and
important route. By 1955, tankers loaded with Mideastern petro-
leum products constituted fully half of its annual trafﬁc, and their
cargoes represented two-thirds of Europe’s total consumption.
Yet ironically, when the Canal was temporarily closed for
six months as a result of ﬁghting during the Suez Crisis of late
October 1956, tankers had to be diverted the long way around
South Africa’s Cape of Good Hope—and notwithstanding the
greater distance involved, owners soon discovered the economical
beneﬁts of transporting large volumes of crude on a few big ves-
sels, rather than the numerous small ones which had previously
been their practice. The American shipping magnate Daniel K.
Ludwig had already begun building larger bulk carriers, having
leased the enormous Japanese naval shipyard at Kure as long
ago as 1950 to lay down bigger hulls. Less than two years after
the Suez Crisis, his corporation—National Bulk Carriers, Inc.—
would launch the huge Universe Apollo in 1958, a tanker measuring
950 feet in length and 135 feet in width, displacing almost
105,000 tons when fully loaded. It was to be followed two years
later by its sister ship Universe Daphne, both vessels barely meeting
the maximum dimensions of what the 90-year-old Suez Canal
could accommodate: ships 151 feet in width, and running 62 feet
deep when fully loaded at 150,000 tons (ﬁgures commonly
referred to throughout the industry as “Suezmax”).
Over the next couple of decades, Ludwig would compete in a
building-race with Greek rivals such as Aristotle Onassis, launch-
ing six mammoth 335,000-ton ultra-large crude carriers, or ULCCs,
16
Background and History

to transport oil from the Persian Gulf to Ireland. By the mid-1970s,
he owned 5–6 million in deadweight tonnage, spread among
50-odd tankers and bulk carriers operated by his Universe Tank-
ships subsidiary. As a further cost-saving measure, most of these
modern new vessels—devoid of any deck equipment and manned
by only minimal crews—were registered under Liberian or
Panamanian ﬂags of convenience. The success of his enterprises
not only provided Ludwig with huge amounts of collateral and
cash for other giant ventures, it had made him one of the richest
men in America, and spawned a host of commercial imitators.
Indeed by 1980, Ludwig ranked only third in global tonnage,
having been overtaken by the Chinese shipowners Y. K. Pao and
C. Y. Tung (Shields).
The boom in supertanker construction proved irreversible.
The largest one ever built had been launched at Sumitomo’s
Oppama shipyard in Japan in 1979, being named the Seawise
Giant: It measured over 1,500 feet in length, drew almost 81 feet
of water, and had a maximum capacity of 565,000 deadweight
tons, being too large to pass through the English Channel.
Because of their immense size, such vessels could not even enter
most ports fully loaded. Instead, they had to take on loads from
offshore platforms and single-point moorings, then pumping
them off at the other end of their journey onto smaller feeder tank-
ers at designated lightering points. In order to maximize proﬁt-
ability, these bulk-carriers’ ocean routes were generally very
long, requiring them to stay at sea for 70 days at a time or beyond.
Even so, transportation costs on such huge volumes worked out
to only two or three cents per gallon. Smaller tankers in the
10,000–80,000 ton-range were used to carry the more expensive
and volatile products, such as gasoline, from reﬁneries directly
to regional markets, and became known as “product carriers.”
As of 2007, the Central Intelligence Agency estimated that
there were 4,295 oil tankers operating worldwide, Panama having
the largest number listed in its registry, at 528—most being
foreign-owned vessels merely ﬂying its ﬂag. Liberia also listed
464 such vessels; Singapore had 355; the Marshall Islands, 234;
and the Bahamas, 209. By comparison, major powers such as
China only listed 252; Russia had 250; the United States, 59; and
the United Kingdom, a mere 27, despite tapping major oilﬁelds
in its adjacent North Sea waters. These huge, rich, yet scantily
manned vessels would prove tempting targets for a new genera-
tion of seaborne criminals.
Recent Development (1945–Present)
17

Expansion of Territorial Waters
A third twentieth-century trend that would unwittingly abet a
resurgence of piracy during our modern day would be a manifold
expansion of territorial-water claims by most world governments.
Since the early eighteenth century, European nations had generally
recognized a jurisdiction of only one league or three nautical
miles—the farthest distance that any artillery piece of that era
could ﬁre a shot, as in a theory ﬁrst propounded by the Dutch jurist
Cornelius van Bijnkershoek in his 1703 treatise De Dominio Maris
or “On the Sovereignty of the Sea.” This so-called “cannon-shot
rule” meant that only that expanse of ocean which lay within three
miles of a nation’s shores could be considered as falling within its
jurisdiction, allowing its government the right to police, regulate,
and adjudicate all activities thereon, as well as proprietary rights
to any natural resources beneath its waves. Foreigners could be
excluded from their exploitation, so that trawlers wishing to cull
ﬁsh or sea mammals near shore would have to secure permission
from the host nation, as would warships conducting nearby mili-
tary exercises. Peaceful visiting vessels—such as merchantmen
approaching to trade—were entitled to “innocent passage”
through this three-mile zone, but naturally had to abide by any
local laws and customs once within territorial waters. The remain-
ing vast expanses of open ocean, known collectively as “the high
seas,” were regarded as being common to all nations, freely avail-
able for navigation, ﬁshing, or any other lawful pursuit.
The newly-independent United States ofﬁcially established
its own three-mile territorial limit as of 1793, but during the great
technological and industrial innovations of the twentieth century,
many nations began disputing such a small ancient measure, and
some unilaterally extended their claims to as much as 12 nautical
miles—a distance not initially recognized by most maritime
powers. Then at the end of World War II, the victorious U.S.
government—at least partly at the behest of its domestic oil
company interests—introduced a new variant: Wishing to retain
control over the valuable offshore resources lying just beyond its
three-mile limit in the shallow Gulf of Mexico and other adjacent
waters, President Harry S. Truman issued a proclamation in late
September 1945 which declared that his administration regarded
“the subsoil and seabed of the continental shelf beneath the high
seas, but contiguous to the coasts of the United States, as apper-
taining to the United States, subject to its jurisdiction and control”
(U.S. Presidential Proclamation 2667, September 28, 1945).
18
Background and History

While theoretically still recognizing only a three-mile limit as
the international standard, this claim by the American
government to an additional 750,000 square miles of territorial
waters, was promptly imitated by other nations. Argentina
asserted a similar claim in October 1946 to its own stretch of
continental shelf, while the following year Chile and Peru both
extended their sovereignty claims 200 nautical miles out to sea—
followed by Ecuador in 1950—so as to restrict access by foreign
trawlers into their traditional Humboldt Current ﬁshing grounds,
whose stocks were becoming depleted by modern ﬁshing ﬂeets. In
1958, the government of Guatemala—angered by repeated poach-
ing in its territorial waters by Mexican ﬁshing boats—threatened
to ﬁre upon any such trespassers from its military aircraft, declar-
ing that such violations constituted outright “piracy.”
With ever more nations emerging during the aftermath of
World War II, many being impoverished Third-World govern-
ments anxious to tap or protect their natural resources as a source
of income, more than 40 countries had expanded their territorial
claims by the 1970s to at least 12 nautical miles. Many would go
well beyond this distance, often in incremental cycles: for example,
the African nation of Gabon ﬁrst claimed a jurisdiction of 25 miles
nautical miles, then 30, then 100, before ﬁnally settling on 170 naut-
ical miles; Somalia went from six to 12 nautical miles, before ﬁnally
adopting 200 nautical miles; etc. (Rembe, p. 92).
As claims, counterclaims, and conﬂicting interests mounted,
the United Nations convened its third Conference on the Law of
the Sea in 1982, attempting to ﬁnd common ground on several key
issues. Eventually, over the next half-dozen years, 130 member-
states would ratify the resultant “Convention on the Law of the
Sea” or UNCLOS, which—among many other things—included a
recognition of a 12-mile limit as a generally acceptable standard,
although only 104 countries actually claimed such a distance by
1988. The United States even voted against this convention, because
of a variety of other complaints, but President Ronald Reagan
tacitly recognized the suggested limit by issuing Executive Procla-
mation 5928 that same year, which ofﬁcially increased American
territorial waters from three to 12 nautical miles—a ﬁgure which
also applied to Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the U.S.
Virgin Islands, and the Northern Mariana Islands (54 Fed. Reg. 777).
The Reagan administration nonetheless refused to accept
many of the economic arguments advanced by other nations in
favor of their expansions, instead justifying America’s extension
Recent Development (1945–Present)
19

on grounds of national security, speciﬁcally to hinder Soviet spy
vessels from operating so close to the U.S. coastline. Piracy was a
minimal concern for all parties involved in this UN conference
during the 1980s, having faded to historic lows. But when piratical
attacks were to resurge two decades later, the few warships
assigned to patrol international waters would ﬁnd their boundaries
signiﬁcantly restricted, especially near the busiest trafﬁc channels.
The concept of “the high seas” had contracted signiﬁcantly
in scope.
Sea Robbery
Expanding national boundaries further entailed another speciﬁc
complication, the blurring of distinctions between piracy and sea
robbery, a long-used legal charge to prosecute attacks against com-
mercial vessels in ports or near shore. According to international
law, such attacks did not constitute true acts of piracy, but rather
criminal assaults in territorial waters, similar to armed robberies
suffered by truck drivers moving about a port area, and so should
be dealt with by the local police. Modern variants of such attacks
have also included deception, in which criminals have identiﬁed
themselves to anchored vessels over VHF radio as ofﬁcial
visitors, such as customs-inspectors or the national coast guard.
One clearcut example of a sea robbery occurred to the car ferry
Mexico I, as it was returning from the Caribbean resort island of
Cozumel toward Playa del Carmen on the mainland, with 253
passengers on the night of May 31, 1999. Suddenly, a half-dozen
hooded men began brandishing a grenade and ﬁring assault riﬂes
into the air, their intent being to rob an armored car that was travel-
ing aboard the vessel. Two of its security guards were thrown over-
board, one of whom subsequently drowned, before the robbers
sped off in a small boat. Given this lurid encounter on the waves,
local newspapers branded it an “act of piracy” yet it was merely a
felony and so delegated to the police.
But as national boundaries were extended far beyond the his-
torical three-mile limit, it would prove impossible for police juris-
dictions to keep pace. A legal no-man’s-land would develop, with
many larger vessels being anchored too far from shore to receive
protection, yet not far enough out to receive assistance from any
Coast Guard patrols. Container ships visiting such crime-prone
ports as Santos in Brazil or Lagos in Nigeria, would often anchor
20 miles out while awaiting a berth, yet nonetheless be boarded at
night by boatloads of thieves.
20
Background and History

Irresolution in International Law
Piracy was still considered a relatively minor issue when hundreds
of national delegations had attended the ﬁrst United Nations
Conference on the Law of the Sea in 1958 at Geneva, Switzerland,
their primary interest being focused instead on economic matters
such as ownership of offshore resources or ﬁshing banks. Even
Western nations had not been unduly concerned by the few instan-
ces of piracy occurring at that time, historically dismissing it as a
crime which fell under what was then known as “universal juris-
diction”—meaning that any such outlaws, whatever their national-
ity, could be summarily tried and punished by any government
that captured them, because of the indiscriminate nature of their
depredations on the high seas. Even a precise deﬁnition of the
crime itself had never been clearly codiﬁed: for example, whether
an intent to rob (in Latin, animus furandi) was a necessary element
for leveling such a charge. Even such an abbreviated deﬁnition of
piracy as “any armed violence at sea which is not a lawful act of
war,” would be questioned by partisans of insurgent privateers or
revolutionary ﬁghters—pointing out that personal gain was not
their objective, rather a national cause.
Legal distinctions such as these had never really been at issue
in past centuries, when only Britain’s Royal Navy and a handful of
other Western sea powers had been in a position to detain suspected
pirates on the open ocean. But the post-World War II era not only
saw an end to the last vestiges of colonial rule and a reduction in
blue-water navies, but many of the newly emergent nations would
begin staking claims to their own expanding territorial waters, and
patrolling them with small warships or police-craft. The legal status
of merchantmen transiting through ever more crowded sea lanes
would also become increasingly complex, as ownership of many
of these vessels and their cargoes were divided among several dif-
ferent nationalities, while the freighters and tankers themselves
would soon be operated under a shifting array of ﬂags of conven-
ience, manned by hired crews drawn from diverse countries.
The resultant “Convention on the High Seas” issued by this
ﬁrst 1958 conference in Geneva, contained only eight brief articles
related to piracy, further leaving their actual interpretation and
application to legal experts in each signatory nation. Basic tenets
still remained undeﬁned, moreover, such as:
•
How was the issue of universal jurisdiction to be
understood?
Recent Development (1945–Present)
21

•
Could piracy only be committed on the high seas, or
could piratical acts also be perpetrated in territorial
waters or in ports?
•
Was piracy limited to private motivations, such as per-
sonal gain or revenge, thus exempting politically driven
renegades targeting civilians for a public cause?
With almost no pirates troubling the world’s sea lanes at that
time, and more pressing national concerns demanding each dele-
gate’s attention, such issues were not addressed. And when a
high-proﬁle case was to occur less than three years afterward, it
was to be decided by political rather than legal arguments.
Santa Maria Hijacking (1961)
At 1:45 a.m. on the morning of January 22, 1961, the bridge of the
20,900-ton, 609-foot Portuguese luxury liner Santa Maria was
stormed by a party of armed men, a few hours after it had cleared
the Dutch-West Indian island of Curac¸ao on a Caribbean cruise.
Two-dozen of the 600 passengers were not actually innocent civil-
ians, but rebel gunmen who had come aboard in disguise under
ex-Portuguese Army Captain Henrique Carlos Malta Galva˜o, an
escapee from the repressive 35-year-old regime of the dictator,
Dr. Anto´nio de Oliveira Salazar. A decade earlier, while serving
as the elected Angolan Deputy to the Portuguese National
Assembly, Galva˜o had presented a conﬁdential report on the ter-
rible labor practices in that impoverished African colony. Its rec-
ommendations had been ignored, though, and he himself
arrested and sentenced to a lengthy prison term as a dissident
when he persisted.
Having escaped in January 1959 into the Argentine Embassy
in Lisbon, Galva˜o made his way to Venezuela, where he planned
this hijacking—grandly codenamed Operation “Dulcinea”—as a
call for Portugal’s insurrection. Santa Maria’s Third Mate having
been killed and several crewmen wounded during this assault,
Galva˜o paused that following evening of January 23, 1961 off
Castries, the capital of the British West Indian island of Saint Lucia,
to allow a lifeboat to be rowed inshore by loyal hands, while his
captive liner then sped away over the horizon. Informed by these
survivors of the violent seizure of Santa Maria, the British author-
ities immediately dispatched the frigate HMS Rothesay in pursuit
from Barbados, while the American destroyers Wilson and Damato
and a pair of aircraft also sortied from Puerto Rico (Zeiger).
22
Background and History

Upon learning of this rebel outrage, the Salazar regime in
Lisbon had in turn immediately contacted Washington and London,
requesting help as a NATO ally in the hunt and retrieval of the liner
from Galva˜o’s criminal “act of piracy.” But on Tuesday, January 24,
1961, the rebel commander began a series of radio interviews with
news organizations, explaining that he and his followers—who con-
sisted of 13 Portuguese citizens, ten Spaniards, and a Venezuelan—
were acting on behalf of “the international junta of liberals” pre-
sided over by General Humberto da Silva Delgado, exiled in Brazil
after being fraudulently defeated in Portugal’s recent presidential
election. No passengers had or would be harmed, Galva˜o informed
the reporters, and many (including 36 Americans) were allowed to
radio reassurances to their families.
Then on Wednesday, January 25, 1961, the Danish freighter
Viveke Gulwa spotted the ﬂeeing liner far out in the Atlantic, run-
ning in bad weather 900 miles east of Trinidad. A U.S. Neptune
P2V search plane arrived overhead by that same evening, estab-
lishing radio contact with Galva˜o. He declared that he was steering
for Angola, with the apparent intent of pausing off Fernando Po´
island to raise a host of native volunteers, then press on to topple
the Portuguese colonial administration in the capital of Luanda,
replacing it with Delgado’s “National Independence Movement.”
Santa Maria’s passengers were being well-treated, Galva˜o reiter-
ated, and could be freely discharged in a neutral harbor at the
earliest possible convenience. He furthermore agreed to meet with
any American or Western naval ofﬁcers (ibid.).
Because of these circumstances, world opinion began to
swing behind the rebel leader. Ofﬁcials in both Washington and
London no longer viewed his seizure as a piratical act, and the
British withdrew altogether from the pursuit, unwilling to help
the fascistic regime in Portugal. The U.S. Navy was directed by
the adminstration of President John F. Kennedy to discreetly
facilitate a peaceful resolution to the crisis, rather than an inter-
ception at sea, a decision which sparked angry protests from Lis-
bon against both Washington and London, for having failed to
live up to their NATO obligations. Pro-Salazar newspapers in
Portugal attempted to win back global support by writing that
the hijacking was a crime against “the moral and judicial rules
of the civilized world,” carried out by “criminals who publish
pamphlets showing Communist intentions” (ibid.).
Yet it was nonetheless agreed to allow Galva˜o to divert into a
neutral Brazilian port, and discharge his captive passengers.
Recent Development (1945–Present)
23

American Rear Admiral Allen Smith, Commander of the Caribbean
Sea Frontier, had the unenviable task of ﬂying into Recife to arrange
the actual handover, plus the surrender of the liner. Awelter of com-
plications ensued. Brazil’s outgoing conservative administration
was hostile to the notion of a rebel visit, although it was about to
be succeeded in ofﬁce within the next few days by the more liberal
President-elect, Janio Quadros. Dozens of diplomats pressed con-
ﬂicting demands upon Smith on behalf of their home governments;
swarms of eager reporters hastened out in ﬂimsy boats to greet
Santa Maria as it entered territorial waters; and living conditions
deteriorated aboard the liner as the ﬁnal surrender terms were
slowly negotiated (ibid.).
Eventually, the new administration of Janio Quadros assumed
ofﬁce, and in a chaotic scene at Recife’s dockside on February 2,
1961, Santa Maria’s unhappy passengers and 350 captive crewmen
were disgorged in a tumultous throng, after which Galva˜o surren-
dered to the Brazilian authorities and was granted political asylum.
In its aftermath, Western legal scholars were to remain troubled by
the evident ineffectiveness of international law in handling such a
blatant case of piracy.
Achille Lauro Hijacking (1985)
Two-dozen years later, yet another high-proﬁle incident would
once more reveal the weak inﬂuence of international antipiracy
statutes. On October 7, 1985, a crewman aboard the Italian liner
Achille Lauro—while steaming peacefully from Alexandria toward
Port Said in Egypt on a cruise—surprised four members of a faction
of the Palestinian Liberation Organization known as the Palestin-
ian Liberation Front, or PLF, who had boarded in Genoa by posing
as tourists. This premature discovery meant that the heavily-armed
quartet moved immediately to hijack the vessel, separating out 100
passengers to act as hostages. The gunmen then ordered Achille
Lauro to sail for Tartus in Syria, while threatening by radio to start
killing captives unless Israel released 50 Palestinian prisoners.
Rebuffed by the Israeli authorities and refused entry into
Tartus, the gunmen next afternoon shot 69-year-old Leon
Klinghoffer—an American Jew who was partly paralyzed and
conﬁned to a wheelchair—then threw his body overboard, before
reversing course for Port Said. Unaware of this murder, the
Egyptian government sought to resolve the standoff next day by
granting the hijackers safe passage to Tunisia, in exchange for free-
ing the liner and its passengers. Once Klinghoffer’s death was
24
Background and History

revealed, though, the administration of U.S. President Ronald
Reagan characterized the gunmen’s seizure of the Achille Lauro
and murder of an American citizen as wanton criminal acts, with
the Department of Justice securing arrest warrants which charged
the hijackers with hostage-taking, conspiracy, and “piracy on the
high seas” (Halberstam, p. 270).
U.S. F-14 naval ﬁghters intercepted the Egyptian airliner
which was transporting the gunmen toward safety, along with a
regular complement of civilian passengers, as it was ﬂying over
the Mediterranean on October 10, 1985, forcing it to land at NATO’s
“Sigonella” Naval Air Station in Sicily. Over American objections,
however, the four hijackers were then taken into custody by the
Italian authorities, eventually being tried in that country, two
receiving lengthy prison terms. The Egypt Air plane had mean-
while been cleared to resume its interrupted ﬂight to Tunisia, with
some of the hijackers’ suspected accomplices still on board, and
Cairo demanded a formal apology from Washington for this mid-
air interception. A great deal of public opinion, especially in the
Arab and non-aligned world, refused to regard the hijacking as a
piratical act.
Continuing Confusion
The intervening quarter-century would see no real progress on
clearly deﬁning piracy, much less of devising a universally-
recognized legal mechanism for trying such perpetrators. Many
emergent nations would oscillate between a reluctance to lay
piracy charges against their own citizens for seaborne crimes,
while seeking heavy-handed remedies against regional rivals, such
as trespassing ﬁshermen. Many new national courts were also
unauthorized or lacked the body of law to apply international
statutes during their proceedings. Governments nonetheless jeal-
ously upheld all prerogatives within their territorial waters, while
describing any coastal opponents or subversives as “pirates,” as a
means of stigmatizing and pursuing them as criminals.
One such variant occurred when ofﬁcials in Manila announced
on May 1, 1986 that during the previous 16 months, “pirates and
Moslem rebels” had hijacked as many as 530 motorboats in the
Southern Philippines, mostly small craft used to carry passengers
and light cargo in interisland trafﬁc—although doubts would
linger as to the actual identity of all these perpetrators, some
believed to have been rogue elements of the military. And during
the violent separatist insurgency which troubled Sri Lanka in the
Recent Development (1945–Present)
25

late 1990s, its majority government often charged ﬁghters of the
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eeelam or LTTE as pirates.
The end result would be that when a wave of true global
piracy revived during the early part of the twenty-ﬁrst century,
no internationally recognized set of legal standards existed
among the many nations drawn into this crisis, so as to deal easily
and uniformly with the problem. Even the dozen or so navies
actively pursuing pirates, were fragmented by a variety of legal
limitations.
Trafﬁc-Shift into Asian Waters
A ﬁfth factor unwittingly contributing toward the rebirth of
piracy, was the spectacular boom in trade out of Asia. While a
positive development in and of itself, this economic upsurge since
World War II would also funnel huge volumes of rich trafﬁc
through remote and unpatrolled waterways, past once-lawless
shorelines still blighted by poverty. By the late 1990s, more than
half the world’s merchant-tonnage was already streaming every
year through the Straits of Malacca, Sunda, or Lombok—a tre-
mendous and vulnerable ﬂow of shipping whose losses could
affect the economic well-being of Southeast Asia, the Far East,
Europe, even the United States. (For example, seaports along
America’s West Coast had accounted for only 24 percent of this
country’s total seaborne trade in 1980, compared to 42 percent
by 1997; during this same interlude, East Coast ports had seen
their volumes decline slightly from 41 to 38 percent, while Gulf
Coast ports had dropped most precipitously of all, from 33 to
18 percent. The longer Paciﬁc routes into the West Coast were also
proving to be the most cost-efﬁcient.)
As a result of such unbridled growth, four of world’s ﬁve
busiest seaports by 1998—in terms of “through-put” tonnage, as it
is known—were all in Asia: Rotterdam still being the biggest at
315 million metric tons a year, yet followed by Singapore at 241 mil-
lion; Shanghai at 164 million; Nagoya at 134 million; and Hong
Kong at 128 million. In terms of modern container trafﬁc, Singa-
pore was already handling 15.1 million TEUs a year, followed
closely by Hong Kong at 14.9 million, while Taiwan’s Kaohsiung
was processing 6.3 million. Although only 25 percent of China’s
trafﬁc was containerized at that time, it was nonetheless already
the world’s largest manufacturer of dry-freight containers, and its
port facilities were being rapidly upgraded.
26
Background and History

Such immense trade volumes had naturally fueled a commen-
surate rise in Asian merchant ﬂeets as well, which by 1995 consti-
tuted 34 percent of total world tonnage—and 72 percent of all
new construction that following year was to be built in Asia, with
Japanese yards receiving 35 percent of world orders for new ships
in 1996, followed by South Korea at 30 percent, and seven percent
distributed among several lesser builders. Insatiable demand for
raw materials in Japan and the rapidly expanding industries of
Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan, and South Korea, meant that vast
amounts had to be continuously imported through the narrow
and perilous Strait of Malacca, crude oil being the single largest
cargo in terms of sheer bulk tonnage. By the mid-1990s, tanker traf-
ﬁc through the Strait was already more than three times that of the
Suez Canal, and well over ﬁve times that of the Panama Canal.
Over 1,100 fully laden supertankers were passing through it east-
bound every year, many so huge as to have only a few scant feet
of clearance, and bearing an average of 9.5 million barrels of oil
every day, worth in the tens of millions of dollars.
Manufactured goods were also being exported through the
Strait of Malacca in the opposite direction, smaller in volume yet
higher in value, a stream of tempting consumer products that still
continues to escalate today. Such a parade of wealthy prizes would
provide easy pickings for tiny gangs of renegades, without even a
token defense by the home-bound Japanese and Chinese Navies.
Widespread Resort to “Flags of Convenience”
Another trend unexpectedly facilitating a resurgence of modern
piracy, was the cost-cutting expedient adopted by many ship own-
ers, of registering their vessels under cheap “ﬂags of convenience.”
Simply put, this meant listing or transferring a ship’s title to
another willing country, which—being only interested in collecting
some easy money as registration fees—would accept most any
application, while requiring minimal operational standards.
Annual tonnage fees would be far lower, taxes on any company
proﬁts or dividends virtually nonexistent, so that savings could
amount to millions of dollars a year, even for a single large
merchantman. Ownership did not necessarily even have to be
disclosed, as shares could be held in “bearer form” without
revealing the true identity of an owner.
The ﬁrst nation to offer such an “open registry” for
international shippers was Panama, whose laws had been
amended immediately after World War I to permit foreign-vessel
Recent Development (1945–Present)
27

registrations starting in 1919, with no taxes and nonexistent labor
standards being offered as inducements for applicants. Relatively
few ships had been reﬂagged at ﬁrst, until Standard Oil of New
Jersey (ESSO) transferred several tankers to the Panamanian ﬂag
in 1935, achieving such quick savings and improved proﬁt mar-
gins that other multinational ﬁrms soon began to follow suit. U.S.
authorities remained unconcerned by these ﬁrst few instances of
reﬂagging, though, erroneously assuming that such vessels still
remained under the legal control of their American owners, and
thus could be recalled for service during times of war.
Abuses and other deﬁciencies in the Panamanian registry
had then led former U.S. Secretary of State Edward R. Stennius,
Jr.—in his capacity as America’s United Nations representative,
spearheading post-World War II relief-efforts in Africa—to sug-
gest that Liberia open its own competing registry in 1948, as a
means of gaining some foreign revenue. Its regulating “Liberian
Maritime Code” was actually drafted by tanker owners and
approved by all major oil-shipping concerns—in particular ESSO
ofﬁcials—so that it naturally favored corporate interests. Provi-
sions proved so enticing that by 1967, Liberia had surpassed the
United Kingdom as the world’s largest merchant-ship register.
(Today, paperwork for most Liberian listings is still handled by a
private company based in Virginia.)
Already by 1998, more than half—51.3 percent—of the world’s
total merchant tonnage was registered under ﬂags of convenience
(Alderton and Winchester), a ﬁgure which grew to over 53 percent
within the next three years and continues to rise today. In recent
times, even less-demanding registries have been opened by at
least a dozen other money-strapped countries. The initial pioneers
in this ﬁeld, Panama and Liberia, had at least required that ship
owners maintain some kind of ofﬁce or presence in their chosen
ﬂag-state; these new registers have proven even more perfunctory
in their requirements. For example, Cambodia’s registry (actually
based in the seaport of Singapore) will accept applications on a
24-hour-a-day basis from any person or company claiming to own
a ship, and—based solely upon faxed or e-mailed documentation—
can process a request within one hour. Such lax and hasty over-
sight has naturally lent itself to abuses.
For example, on November 17, 2002 the Malaysian-owned,
Panamanian-ﬂagged cargo vessel Natris was hijacked while
departing a shipyard on Batam, and disappeared. Next year, it
was reregistered with the Merchant Marine Registry of Belize as
28
Background and History

the Paulijing, being granted a provisional registration based on fal-
siﬁed records stating that its previous name had been the “Victo-
ria.” According to notarized documents which accompanied this
application, the ship had been deleted from the Sierra Leone regis-
try and sold to its new owner for a mere $10,000. Paulijing went on
to trade under its new identity for more than two years, before the
Malaysian Marine Police ﬁnally identiﬁed and detained it in
August 2005. The International Maritime Bureau or IMB chastised
the Belize register for failing to run even the most rudimentary
background check on this stolen vessel, to little avail. Organized
pirate gangs still continue to beneﬁt today from such laxity, espe-
cially in Asia, where it is easy for them to reregister hijacked
vessels—merely by repainting a few features and presenting false
documentation. The renamed vessel can then either be sold to a
third party, or used by the crime-syndicate as a “phantom ship”
(Tanter, “Roots”).
The ﬂag-of-convenience system also entailed serious short-
comings for crewmen. Management is, of course, exempt from
paying the higher wages customary in industrialized nations.
Canada’s Prime Minister Paul Martin, who had been owner of the
Canada Steamship Lines in his private capacity before entering
politics, was embarrassed when a television expose´ revealed how
the Canadian crew aboard one his vessels had been replaced by a
Filipino crew, after it was reﬂagged in 1988: The Canadian crew
had earned $11.68 an hour, while the Filipino workers were to be
paid only $1.74 an hour. Like many other owners, Martin argued
that shipping ﬁrms had no choice but to resort to such measures,
in order to remain competitive in the international market.
The most recently-created registers are even less concerned
about seafarers’ welfare, training, or pay. Since some of these ﬂag
states have not ratiﬁed international agreements regarding mini-
mum wages, their registers will obviously not intercede on behalf
of any employees. As a result, seamen from Third-World countries
are sometimes paid substandard wages and may even experience
difﬁculty in collecting their meager due. In 2004, for example, the
International Transport-Workers’ Federation, or ITF, was asked to
help two Burmese seafarers working aboard the Panamanian-
ﬂagged Lung Yuin, who had received a mere $300 for two years’
work. It is feared that such low wages among seafarers, port ofﬁ-
cials, and dock workers might also lead some individuals into
accepting bribes from criminal organizations, in exchange for
information about a vessel’s cargo, departure-time, route, etc.
Recent Development (1945–Present)
29

Lax scrutiny of important professional documents, such as
training certiﬁcates, can also pose safety problems. Excessive
cost-cutting by ship owners and managers can moreover reduce
crew numbers aboard some merchant vessels to such low levels,
that the few overworked seamen become worn out by fatigue
and stress. One such junior ofﬁcer blearily recorded:
12–15 hour days, never had six hours continuous sleep,
87-hour week for three months. Regularly made errors
in passage-planning and execution. Did not dare to sit
down on watch. (Tantner, “Roots”)
Lastly, poor pay also attracts less well-trained and more
unreliable seafarers, with no allegiance to an employer. One such
irresponsible crew was manning the freighter Clown in 2000,
when they decided to make an unauthorized stop one evening
on an island near Batam, notorious for its inexpensive prostitutes,
drugs, and gambling. Unfortunately for the carousing crew, their
anchored vessel was hijacked that same night by pirates. While
it was later established that they had not colluded with these
thieves, all crew members nonetheless lost their jobs because of
making this unscheduled stopover.
See Table 6.3 in the Data and Documents chapter for detailed
statistical information regarding the number of vessels registered
under ﬂags of convenience.
Proliferation of Military Light-Weaponry
The seventh and ﬁnal factor spurring a resurgence of piracy
in its modern guise, would be the proliferation of military light
weaponry into virtually every troubled corner of the world. Tech-
nical innovations achieved during and since World War II had
resulted in mass production of new generations of formidable
small arms, originally intended for use by trained soldiers on a
battleﬁeld. Such weapons augmented individual ﬁrepower sev-
eral times over, and within a few decades would pass beyond
the control of any recognizable military establishment. Starting
during the covert rivalry of the Cold War, both Eastern Bloc
nations and their Western foes had begun funneling such arma-
ments to their supporters in Third-World nations, a trafﬁc which
has only ﬂourished further since the end of this competition with
the collapse of the old Soviet Union.
30
Background and History

AK-47 Assault Riﬂes
Doubtless the most famous of these formidable new ﬁrearms
would be the AK-47. The idea for such an assault-riﬂe had been
conceived in October 1941 by a 21-year-old Soviet tank com-
mander, Sergeant Mikhail Timofeyevich Kalashnikov, while he
lay recuperating in hospital after being wounded in his left
shoulder during the Battle of Bryansk, southwest of Moscow.
While retiring rearward to seek medical aid, most of his injured
companions had been murdered by German troops armed with
machine guns, so that even before being discharged from the hos-
pital as an invalid, Kalashnikov had already begun dreaming of
designing a weapon which would help turn the tide and throw
back these cruel invaders.
He had started by tinkering with existing submachine guns, and
two years later entered a competition, whose speciﬁc requirement
was to create a ﬁrearm capable of functioning in the muddy, wet,
and frozen conditions of the Soviet frontline. Kalashnikov submitted
a carbine design that lost, yet when the Red Army held another
similar competition for assault riﬂes in 1946, a revamped gas-
operated model of his carbine was selected as one of three ﬁnalists.
After each of these guns had undergone its initial round of tests,
one of Kalashnikov’s assigned assistants—Aleksandr Zaytsev—
suggested a major redesign late that same year of 1946, to further
improve their entry’s reliability. Kalashnikov reluctantly agreed,
and their improved model was chosen as the winning design next
year, proving to be a weapon of brilliant promise, economical yet
simple. Designated the Avtomat Kalashnikova obraztsa 1947 goda, or
“Kalashnikov’s automatic riﬂe model year 1947,” the AK-47—after
more than another 100 further modiﬁcations—was ﬁnally adopted
as the Soviet Army’s new assault riﬂe as of 1949. However, produc-
tion difﬁculties and a shroud of secrecy prevented the issue of any
large numbers until 1956, after which a reﬁned version known as
the AKM, or “AK Modernized,” was introduced three years later,
which went on to be manufactured in mass quantities and remains
the most common variant known today. (Technically, only very early
models were true AK-47s, while the many later derivatives of the
AKM are usually referred to simply as “Kalashnikovs.”)
The main advantages of this powerful new assault-riﬂe were:
•
its straightforward design, having only sixteen moving
parts;
•
its inexpensive manufacture;
Recent Development (1945–Present)
31

•
its easy operation and maintenance;
•
and a ruggedness which would become truly legendary.
The Soviet government granted licenses to its Warsaw Pact
allies to manufacture this weapon in their own factories, as well
as to the People’s Republic of China, so that all Communist forces
would enjoy the same standard armament. Eventually, its use
would spread to over 55 national armies, as well as dozens of
paramilitary groups.
Tens of thousands were furthermore sent clandestinely to
bolster leftist regimes in the Third World, as well as to arm guer-
rilla factions ﬁghting to topple non-Communist governments. It
was in many of these latter arenas—the steamy jungles of South-
east Asia or Latin America, the stark dusty plains of Africa—that
the Kalashnikov truly came into its own. Tales were told of its
fearsome ﬁrepower, toughness, and reliability, all seemingly
based on fact. The Kalashnikov’s large gas piston, ample clearan-
ces between moving parts, and tapered cartridge-case allowed
the weapon to be ﬁred, even with large amounts of extraneous
matter fouling its interior. For example: “American Gis in Viet-
nam reported that AKs buried in rice paddies for six months or
more, unearthed ﬁlthy and rusted shut, ﬁred perfectly after kick-
ing the action-bolt with the heel of a boot” (Kahaner, p. 3).
During the 1980s, the Soviet Union became the principal
arms-dealer to countries embargoed by the United States, includ-
ing many Middle Eastern nations such as Syria, Libya, and Iran.
After the fall of the Soviet Union, AK-47s were sold both openly
and on the black market to any group with cash, including drug
cartels and dictatorial states, and became abundantly available
in strife-torn areas of the Third World. Today, after six decades
in use, the AK-47 and its numerous variants are still the most
widely-used assault riﬂes in the world; in fact, more have been
produced than all other assault riﬂes combined, while nearly
one million unlicensed copies are manufactured every year.
Chinese versions are prevalent among the pirate-gangs of
Asia, and Kalashnikovs have also made widespread inroads
throughout Africa, proving so robust that they have even become
relatively cheap—used models selling in Somalia, Rwanda,
Mozambique, Congo, and Ethiopia for between $30–$125 or even
lower. Moise´s Naı´m observed that in a small town in Kenya in
1986, an AK-47 cost ﬁfteen cows—but that by 2005, its price was
down to four cows, because the local supply was so saturated.
32
Background and History

(Nyuydine) In many places on the continent, the AK-47 is jokingly
referred to as the “African credit card,” in the advertised sense of
“don’t leave home without it” (Choong).
Rocket-Propelled Grenades
Another similar Soviet-era battleﬁeld weapon—intended for a sin-
gle operator, yet awesomely destructive—whose use would
spread throughout the world’s hot spots, is the slender, shoulder-
ﬁred, Rocket-Propelled Grenade launcher, abbreviated as an
RPG-7. Originally introduced into the Red Army in 1961 as an
infantryman’s handheld anti-tank weapon, it too was soon being
licensed and mass-produced abroad in Warsaw Pact nations, as
well as in Communist China. Its relatively compact size, economi-
cal manufacture, and potent punch meant that the RPG-7 would
transcend its original military purpose of penetrating heavily-
armored tanks, and instead become another popular choice among
civilian guerrilla movements such as the Irish Republican Army
and Palestinian Liberation Organization.
Like the AK-47 assault-riﬂe, the rocket-propelled grenade-
launcher would provide pirates with sufﬁcient handheld ﬁre-
power to threaten even large merchantmen with serious damage,
especially if any combustible materials were aboard. Simple to
use and abundantly available, such weapons would allow even
tiny boatloads of teenage gunmen to overawe and capture gigantic
supertankers.
Summary
There is no question that the world’s seaborne trade has never
been so vast, so extensive, and so successful. Twenty-ﬁrst century
maritime trafﬁc constitutes a highly evolved and ultra-efﬁcient
delivery system, both technologically sophisticated and globally
monitored—all factors which would seem to have relegated
piracy to a historical anachronism. And indeed, criminality on
the high seas had already been declining almost to the vanishing
point, before this recent resurgence of violence. Yet ironically,
some of the very innovations and improvements that have con-
tributed so signiﬁcantly to this exponential growth in our sea-
borne commerce, have also contained a few inbuilt seeds of
future trouble. For today’s lengthy sea lanes are teeming with:
— rich prizes, yet manned by the fewest possible number of
— low-paid, hired hands from diverse nationalities,
Recent Development (1945–Present)
33

— sailing under an impotent ﬂag of convenience,
— beholden to economic interests split among different
countries,
— unprotected by any home navies,
— expensively vulnerable to light weapons’ ﬁre, and
— beyond rescue if carried into any nation’s territorial
waters.
Sources
Alderton, Tony, and Winchester, Nik J. “Regulation, Representation, and
the Flag Market.” Journal for Maritime Research [UK], September 2002.
Choong, William. “Today’s WMD of Choice—the AK-47.” The Straits
Times [Singapore], December 25, 2008.
Cramb, Auslan. “Sailor Tells of the Moment Pirates Captured the Sirius
Star.” The Daily Telegraph [UK], January 29, 2009, Telegraph.co.uk
Cudahy, Brian J. Box Boats: How Container Ships Changed the World. New
York: Fordham University Press, 2006.
Dubner, Barry H. The Law of International Sea Piracy. The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff, 1980.
Fenwick, C. G. “Piracy in the Caribbean.” American Journal of International
Law 55, Number 4 (October 1961), pp. 426–428.
Greenman, David. “Freedom Freighters.” Ships Monthly [UK], June 1976.
Greenwald, Richard A.; Gibson, Andrew; and Donovan, Arthur. The
Abandoned Ocean: A History of United States Maritime Policy. Columbia:
University of South Carolina Press, 2000.
Halberstam, Malvina. “Terrorism on the High Seas: The Achille Lauro,
Piracy, and the IMO Convention on Maritime Safety.” The American
Journal of International Law 82, Number 2 (April 1988), pp. 269–310.
Jamieson, Alastair. “Briton Captured by Somali Pirates on Sirius Star Tells
of Fears.” The Sunday Telegraph [UK] January 25, 2009, Telegraph.co.uk
Jane’s Overview 2008: Growth of Merchant Shipping. London: Jane’s
Information Group, 2008.
Kahaner, Larry. AK-47: The Weapon That Changed the Face of War. Hoboken,
New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
Karon, Tony. “Battling the Somali Pirates: The Return of the Islamists.”
Time Magazine, November 25, 2008.
Killicoat, Phillip. Weaponomics: The Global Market for Assault Riﬂes.
Washington, D.C.: World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4202,
34
Background and History

published in April 2007 as “Post-Conﬂict Transitions Working
Paper No. 10.”
“Lawless Tradition of Piracy off the Coast of Somalia.” The Guardian
[UK], November 18, 2008.
Leach, Ben. “Somali Pirates Who Hijacked Supertanker Sirius Star
‘Demand Ransom of $25 Million.’ ” The Daily Telegraph [UK],
November 20, 2008, Telegraph.co.uk.
Marx, Daniel, Jr. “The Merchant Ship Sales Act of 1946.” The Journal of
Business of the University of Chicago 21, Number 1 (January 1948), pp. 12–28.
McKesson, Chris B. Alternative Powering for Merchant Ships: Task 1—Current
and Forecast Powering Needs. Long Beach: California State University “Center
for the Commercial Deployment of Transportation Technologies,” 2000.
Mercogliano, Salvatore R. “The Container Revolution.” Sea History 114
(Spring 2006), pp. 8–11.
Nyuydine, Ngalim E. “Outdated Laws as Impetus for Illicit Proliferation
of Small Arms and Light Weapons in Cameroon.”
Raby, David. “Transatlantic Intrigues: Humberto Delgado, Henrique
Galva˜o, and the Portuguese Exiles in Brazil and Morocco, 1961–62.”
Portuguese Journal of Social Science 3, Number 3 (December 2004).
Rembe, Nasila S. Africa and the International Law of the Sea: A Study of the
Contribution of the African States to the Third United Nations Conference on
the Law of the Sea. Germantown, Maryland: Sijthoff & Noordhoof, 1980.
Roberts, Lesley. “Hostage’s Secret Pictures of £2 Million Ransom-Drop on
Ship Hijacked by Pirates.” Sunday Mail [UK], February 1, 2009,
dailyrecord.co.uk.
Shields, Jerry. The Invisible Billionaire: Daniel Ludwig. Boston: Houghton
Mifﬂin, 1986.
Stanley, William R. “Serving Aboard the World’s Largest Flag-of-
Convenience Fleet: Some Geographical Implications Concerning Crew’s
Nationality.” GeoJournal [The Netherlands] 7, Number 3 (May 1983),
pp. 261–269.
Tanter, Richard. “The Roots of Piracy in Southeast Asia.” Nautilus
Institute: Austral Peace and Security Network [Australia], Austral Policy
Forum Paper Number 07–18A, October 22, 2007.
Wadhams, Nick. “As Somali Pirates Get Bolder, Policing Them Gets
Tougher.” Time Magazine, November 19, 2008.
West’s Encyclopedia of American Law. Farmington Hills, Michigan: The
Gale Group, second edition, 2008.
Zeiger, Henry A. The Seizing of the Santa Maria. New York: Popular
Library, 1961.
Sources
35

This page intentionally left blank 

2
Problems, Controversies,
and Solutions
I saw the ﬂash of ﬁve to ten shots. Straight away, I knew it must be
pirates.
—Captain Sellathurai Mahalingam of the UN-chartered aid ship
Semlow, off Somalia in June 2005
Problems
Maritime trafﬁc today is at an all-time high. Historically, cargo has
always been easier to move by water than over land, and the vol-
ume of global commerce has soared exponentially since the end
of World War II. Even during this—our modern age—90 percent
of all commercial goods and raw materials are still conveyed
aboard ships, at some stage during their progression toward
market.
Yet ironically, the centuries-old problem of piracy—which had
virtually ceased to exist everywhere on our planet as recently as
1990—has also rebounded during these past two decades, while
peaceful seaborne trade was attaining such unprecedented expan-
sion and growth. And in a curious sidelight, some of the very inno-
vations which have contributed so signiﬁcantly to the evolution of
this ultra-efﬁcient new delivery system, also contained certain
inbuilt seeds for future trouble—ﬂaws which, when combined
together, have inadvertently facilitated a reappearance of preda-
tors amid today’s busy sea lanes. As has been noted elsewhere,
37

“the problems and loopholes in the regulation and control of the
maritime industry are conducive to the operations of pirates”
(Tanter, “Roots”).
Seven Underlying Preconditions
The seven undercurrents and trends in the world’s shipping
industry, which have unexpectedly contributed to a resurgence
of our uniquely modern brand of piracy, can be summarized as
follows:
1. The almost total disappearance of U.S. and Western merchant
ﬂeets from the high seas as a result of severe cost-cutting
measures embraced by most shipping ﬁrms. In order to
reduce taxes, salaries, and operating expenses as much as
possible, owners long ago began transferring their ships
on paper to more accommodating regimes, so that very
few large merchantmen still ﬂy the American or West
European ﬂags today. Their absence from the world’s
oceans has also diminished any interest which major sea
powers might have had in maintaining far-ﬂung patrols,
to help defend their nation’s vessels against piracy.
2. The construction of much larger merchantmen, manned by
much smaller crews—another economizing strategy
adopted by most company directors and managers, yet
which has also ﬁlled the oceans with rich and thinly
manned behemoths, easy to be captured by even the tini-
est band of armed pirates.
3. A vast expansion of territorial waters claimed by most govern-
ments, as well as additional outlying stretches recognized
as “contiguous zones” or “exclusive economic zones.”
This practice was vigorously pursued by most nations
during a worldwide drive in the mid-twentieth century, to
secure as much as possible of their offshore natural
resources—yet which also contracted the parts of open
sea where naval warships might intervene against pirates.
Such limitations today are specially enforced near the
most heavily transited international waterways, where
marauders frequently lie in wait in small shore boats to
prey upon passing ocean vessels.
4. A persistent irresolution in framing a suitable piracy charge
under international law, with the few general guidelines
38
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

once observed by Western maritime-powers now codiﬁed
by the United Nations—yet still subject to interpretation
and application by every signatory government. Not even
all allied navies participating in the current antipiracy
efforts off the Horn of Africa, can agree upon a single
common legal standard. This issue is further clouded by
the multiple nationalities involved in virtually every major
piratical incident, from ship owners scattered in diverse
capitals overseas; the role played by a particular ﬂag state;
actions taken by management subcontractors, who actually
operate most vessels; the polyglot mixture of crewmem-
bers and their diplomatic representation; the interests of
various multinational insurance brokerages; etc.
5. The shift of large-scale commercial trafﬁc to Asian waters,
resulting in ever more supertankers, container ships, and
trawlers crowding through narrow chokepoints beside
impoverished and often lawless shorelines, with no naval
support from their home governments. The swelling
number of Asian ﬁshing boats poaching in Somalia’s
unguarded ﬁshing banks has also provided the motiva-
tion for that nation’s piratical forays.
6. A widespread adoption of ﬂags of convenience by global ship-
ping ﬁrms, which—among several other drawbacks—
have left many large ocean-going vessels staffed by only
the lowest-paid seamen available, who cannot be
expected to help defend their ship during a time of emer-
gency. Indeed, a few ill-paid seafarers have even been
suspected of colluding with criminal gangs ashore, help-
ing arrange robberies.
7. The proliferation of potent military light weaponry in civilian
hands, furnishing enough ﬁrepower for even a handful of
ragtag teenage gunmen in a ﬂimsy speedboat to halt and
overawe resistance aboard the largest oceangoing ships.
An unforeseen result of all these combined shortcomings, has
been a parade of rich, scantly manned prizes moving through
tight chokepoints, temptingly within reach of seafarers from some
of the poorest and most lawless nations on Earth. In such places,
there is no government for foreign representatives to mount an
appeal, while the few foreign naval patrols must remain far out
at sea. Prizes can be detained offshore almost indeﬁnitely, with
little hope of rescue.
Problems
39

Special Piratical Needs
In addition to the seven factors listed above, all pirates—whether
ancient or modern—required two additional elements in order to
truly ﬂourish: chokepoint hunting-grounds and sanctuaries
ashore. Given the proﬁt-driven motivation behind most of their
criminal activities, rovers typically venture out to sea only on
hit-and-run raids, choosing busy nearby sea lanes so as to
increase their chances of locating a victim, after which they
require a safe haven into which to return, so as to plunder or
exploit their prize without being disturbed. Today’s pirates are
little different from their forbearers in these regards.
Chokepoint Hunting Grounds
Almost all narrow waterways have experienced periods of piracy
during their history. The Strait of Messina and other Mediterranean
chokepoints were prowled by marauders since the earliest days of
the Roman Republic, while the English Channel was scoured by
lawless brigands throughout medieval times. Sixteenth-century
Elizabethan sea dogs hovered in Caribbean narrows such as the
Windward Passage and Straits of Florida, which were still being
hunted 150 years later by renegade freebooters such as Blackbeard.
The dread Barbary corsairs preyed upon ships transiting through
the Strait of Gibraltar for several centuries, plundering cargoes
and enslaving crews, before ﬁnally being subdued by a military
conquest during the early decades of the nineteenth century. And
modern piracy has revived in a very similar fashion, by resurging
around two vulnerable passages: the Strait of Malacca and Horn
of Africa.
Strait of Malacca
This strategic waterway is some 500 miles long, yet relatively
narrow: scarcely more than a mile-and-a-half wide at its narrowest
point, in the Phillips Channel of the Singapore Strait. The only sea
route through an extensive geographic barrier comprised of the
Malay Peninsula and a sprawling mass of islands, it is lined by
countless inlets and bays, ideally suited for piracy. And since this
strait has served for many centuries as the sole link between
the Indian Ocean and South China Sea, commercially connecting
the Far East to the Arabian Peninsula and Africa, it has never
lacked for merchant trafﬁc funneling through its waters.
40
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

A treatise recorded as long ago as the fourteenth century by
the Chinese writer Long Ya Men, described the dangers lurking
within this “Dragon Teeth Strait.” Junks carrying bulk-cargos
from east to west, he noted, would be allowed to pass through
peacefully, exiting into the Indian Ocean to trade on its far shores.
Yet upon their return passage, rich and heavy with their accrued
proﬁts and bartered goods:
some two or three hundred pirate praus will put out to
attack them. Sometimes [the junks] are fortunate enough
to escape with a favorable wind; otherwise the crews are
butchered, and the merchandise made off with in quick
time. (Freeman, p. 175)
And even today, there are still attacks being made against
modern merchantmen passing through these same waters, an
eternal hunting-ground for pirates.
Horn of Africa
For as many centuries, coastal trafﬁc from India, Arabia, and
Africa has likewise had to funnel into the Gulf of Aden, so as to
gain the Red Sea and tap into the distant Mediterranean trade.
At the bottom of this Gulf, a twenty-mile-wide entrance into the
Red Sea is still known today as Bab el-Mandeb or the “Gate of
Tears,” because of its difﬁcult navigation. Its strong currents and
countercurrents had often frustrated seafarers during the days of
sail, the narrow strait itself being bisected by an island into a shal-
low, two-mile eastern channel characterized by a surface current
ﬂowing into the Red Sea, while a deeper and 16-mile western
channel has a strong undercurrent outwards.
In addition to its marine difﬁculties, this chokepoint bound by
the Horn of Africa has often been a haunt for pirates as well.
During the late-seventeenth century, its rich and vulnerable mer-
chant trafﬁc even attracted rogue privateers from as far away as
New England. Among the ﬁrst to lay in wait was Thomas Tew of
Newport, Rhode Island, who in the autumn of 1693 intercepted a
wealthy Indian prize and returned home next spring—having
logged more than 22,000 miles on an epic 15-month cruise—with
an exotic plunder of gold, silver, jewelry, elephants’ tusks, ivory,
spices, and silk valued at more than £100,000. This dazzling success
spawned a host of eager imitators known as the “Red-Sea men,”
including Captain William Kidd of New York City, who all hunted
Problems
41

much the same waters in the Gulf of Aden frequented by today’s
Somali pirates.
Land Sanctuaries
Once having secured a valuable prize, all pirates—both ancient and
modern—need a safe harbor to plunder or exploit its contents, as
well as a welcoming haven ashore to enjoy its proceeds and melt
back into civilian life, without fear of arrest. Thomas Tew ﬁrst car-
ried his rich Indian prize more than 3,000 miles south into the law-
less anchorage on St. Mary’s, a slender island off the Madagascar
coast, arriving there by October 19, 1693 (O.S.) to begin dividing
the spoils with his crew, far from the scene of their crime and
careening his own brigantine Amity. He subsequently burned the
Indian hulk and sailed Amity home to Rhode Island next spring,
rejoining civilian existence as a newly-rich man a half-world away.
Still earlier, Caribbean pirates had rested in Samana´ Bay on
Hispaniola, or amid the maze of sparsely populated islands off
Southern Cuba, to dispose of their most blatantly ill-acquired
goods before returning into the Crown-administered ports of
French Tortuga or English Jamaica. Later renegades such as
Blackbeard and Captain Benjamin Hornigold brieﬂy converted
unclaimed Nassau in the Bahamas into a veritable pirate-base,
before London sent out a tough new governor to restore royal
rule. Even during the early nineteenth century, the Laﬁtte broth-
ers were still carrying prizes into Barataria, it being a open secret
that they pillaged and auctioned off stolen cargoes there, just
beyond the immediate gaze of pliant nearby authorities.
In today’s world, with all its modern satellite surveillance, it
is much more difﬁcult to hide a large ship. Some pirates in the
South China Sea occasionally do so by re-registering a hijacked
vessel under a false name, a temporary expedient. But the only
places where contemporary pirates can openly anchor a huge
prize offshore, for weeks and months on end, are certain stretches
of stark coastline off central Somalia.
Four Recent Hot Spots
Although isolated piratical incidents can erupt almost anywhere,
most recent occurrences have been reported as being concen-
trated in four main zones:
1. the South China Sea,
2. Nigeria,
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

3. the Strait of Malacca,
4. and the Horn of Africa.
All four have experienced a manifold increase in ship trafﬁc
during these past few decades, as well as extended their maritime
jurisdictions, yet struggled to provide adequate security in a
timely fashion.
Perilous South China Sea
The ancient and closed society of seafarers plying the south coast
of China and neighboring Indochina is difﬁcult for outsiders to
penetrate. Even the central Communist authorities in distant
Beijing could exert only a limited control over these waters, and
reliable information on piratical activities in this shadowy world
was almost impossible to obtain until recently. An occasional
report might emerge, such as the account of the Petchompoo,
which after reporting its position on August 26, 1991 as being
180 miles east of the Vietnamese capital of Ho Chi Minh City,
went silent and never reappeared, the fate of its crew and $4 mil-
lion onboard remaining a mystery to this day.
As the Cold War drew to a close and China began its gradual
tilt toward capitalism during the 1990s, piratical depredations
apparently multiplied as well in the triangular area that borders
Hong Kong, China’s Hainan Island, and Luzon in the Philippines,
expanding beyond the outer fringes of these boundaries to
become more widely known. A series of very brazen attacks even
occurred, either carried out by rogue elements of the Chinese
Navy or pirate masqueraders:
May 15, 1995: Twenty uniformed men from a Chinese naval
patrol vessel, armed with AK-47s, board a Taiwanese ship
off Subic Bay in the Philippines, steering this prize outside
territorial waters to plunder its cargo.
June 23, 1995: North of Redang Island, off the east coast of
Malaysia, twelve men wearing Chinese Army uniforms
board the Panamanian-ﬂagged cargo ship Hye Mieko, which
has departed Singapore two days previously with
$2 million worth of cigarettes and photographic equipment
as its cargo. By June 25th, the ship is sighted under escort
by a Chinese patrol boat, 140 nautical miles southeast of Ho
Chi Minh City. Its captors sail it on into the Chinese port of
Problems
43

Shanwei, where it is eventually released—empty—along
with its crew members by July 23rd.
January 22, 1996: Early this morning, a Philippine Navy
gunboat spots two suspicious vessels twelve miles off
Capones Island, so ﬁres a warning shot for them to heave to.
One craft ﬂees, but the other tries to ram the gunboat,
so that a chase and 90-minute gun battle ensues off Luzon
Island, until the Philippine vessel’s guns jam and its fuel
runs low.
The intruder vessel is described as a People’s Republic
of China patrol-vessel with the bow number 04420, ﬂying a
Red Star ﬂag and with military men onboard. However, the
Philippine Navy Chief, Vice Admiral Pio Carranza, believes
that the intruders are most likely Chinese pirates in disguise.
January 27, 1996: At daybreak about 40 miles southwest of
Maobitou in the Taiwan Strait, the 5,000-ton, Panamanian-
ﬂagged, Taiwanese container-ship Hangjung No. 9—bound
from Indonesia toward Kaohsiung with a cargo of low
ﬂash-point ethanol—is followed for three hours by a green-
colored, iron-hulled boat bearing a mainland Chinese ﬂag
and bow number F-4404.
Around 9:30 a.m., this pursuer closes to within 20–30
yards and opens ﬁre, striking the freighter several times
with machine-gun and automatic-riﬂe rounds. The
Taiwanese Captain reports seeing at least four men in
military uniforms onboard his assailant, who send across
men armed with handguns to ransack the Master’s and
Radio Ofﬁcer’s safes, stealing about $10,000 in cash and
property. The two ships accidentally collide after about
10 minutes, prompting the boarders to depart and their boat
to leave the scene.
February 10, 1996: A Philippine naval patrol spots a
Chinese vessel about ﬁve miles from the entrance into Subic
Bay, trying to warn it off with shots ﬁred into the air and
radio-contact. The intruder responds by trying to ram the
patrol-craft and ﬁring riﬂes back in its attempts to escape,
before being cornered by three Philippine Navy ships. The
twenty surrendered pirates prove to be Chinese, although
General Arturo T. Enrile—Chief of the Philippine Armed
Forces—is convinced that the Beijing government has no
knowledge of their activities.
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

The evident lack of ofﬁcial oversight and resultant lawlessness
in the South China Sea, would result in a unique regional phe-
nomenon associated only with Asian piracy: phantom ships.
Criminal gangs such as the secretive triads especially favored this
tactic, which involved arranging for the hijacking of a small-to-
medium-sized merchantman, which could then be repainted and
given a new identity, by reregistering it under a false name so as
to use it in further felonies, such as smuggling. No other part of
the world experienced the rash of such incidents as the South
China Sea, the following being but a few examples:
September 13, 1995: The Cypriot-ﬂagged cargo ship Anna
Sierra is stormed 70 nautical miles southeast of Bangkok, by
25–30 pirates armed with machine guns and wearing
masks. Its Master and 22 crewmembers are handcuffed in
pairs in the engine room for two days, before being set
adrift in dinghies, later being rescued by a Vietnamese
ﬁshing boat. Upon quitting their freighter, the crew notice
that their captors are altering its name, as well as repainting
hatch covers and other visible points. It is sailed into the
southern Chinese port of Beihai by September 20th as the
Honduran-ﬂagged Artic Sea.
November 22, 1996: Near Horsburgh Lighthouse east of
Singapore, the Malaysian gas oil tanker Suci is boarded by
six armed pirates, 15 of its seventeen crewmen being
blindfolded and set adrift in a lifeboat, to be rescued later
by a ﬁshing vessel. The two crewmembers retained aboard
the hijacked Suci are released unharmed by January 14,
1997, reporting that their tanker still has approximately
3,000 metric tons of gas oil onboard, its name having been
painted over and replaced with Glory II, registered in San
Lorenzo, Honduras—allowing the pirated tanker to
continue operating with a new complement of 19 crewmen.
December 26, 1998: The 3,113-ton cargo ship Hong Peng
disappears after departing from Hong Kong toward
Taichung on the island of Taiwan, with a cargo of clay and
a crew of twenty on board. When it fails to arrive, the
International Maritime Bureau or IMB offers a reward of
$50,000 for information leading to the location and recovery
of this vessel. In view of the hijacking and murder of the
crew of the Cheung Son, this disappearance of another small
Problems
45

ship with a similarly low-value cargo raises fears that yet
another crew may have been murdered, and their vessel
retained as a phantom ship.
May 25, 1999: After sailing from Tuticorin in India on
May 25th with a cargo of bagged salt, the 2,818-ton
Malaysian-ﬂagged cargo ship Sik Yang fails to arrive at its
destination of Malacca six days later as scheduled. It is
initially feared that it has been hijacked by pirates and
retained as a phantom vessel, the fate of its 15 crewmen
being unknown. However, it is subsequently reported on
June 30, 1999 that the Sik Yang may have been captured by
guerrillas from the Sri Lankan rebel group, the Tamil Tigers.
June 8, 1999: While steaming from Singapore toward
Songkhla with a cargo of 2,060 tons of gas oil, the 1,247-ton
Thai-ﬂagged tanker Siam Xanxai is boarded near midnight by
pirates off the Malaysian island of Pulau Tioman. Fifteen of
16 crewmen are held in their cabins for two days, then cast
adrift in a faulty motorboat. Only a Thai oiler is kept aboard,
allegedly because he knows how to operate the ship’s valves.
After drifting for 14 hours, the castaways are rescued by
a passing ship, and subsequently learn that Siam Xanxai has
been renamed Auo Me 2, before being detained for
smuggling on July 18th in southern China’s Guangdong
Province.
July 22, 1999: The 2,581-ton, Panamanian-registered cargo
ship Kenduri is reported as missing, having sailed from
Bangkok via Ko Sichang on June 16th with 3,200 tons of
steel destined for Vietnam. Having failed to reach its
discharge port, and with a transit route that runs through
waters known as hunting-grounds for several Chinese
pirate gangs, the Kenduri is feared hijacked and retained as
a phantom ship.
Although such dire perils have apparently receded during
more recent times, as China continues to open up to the outside
world and drive toward modernization, reliable information on
the actual degree of current piratical and criminal activities still
remains ﬁtful and spotty. Nevertheless, it has been noted how
the revival of global piracy “reached a peak between 1999 and
2003, because of the activity of pirates in the South China Sea
and Malacca Strait” (Piracy Off the Coast of Somalia, p. 13).
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Nigeria’s Beleaguered Oil Route
Violent incidents off Nigeria are regularly featured among the
world’s leading piracy statistics, yet since virtually all occur well
within its territorial waters or inland rivers, they do not constitute
true piratical acts but rather felonious assaults and robberies. No
foreign naval patrols will ever redress this problem, but rather
local prosecutions and social intervention by Nigeria’s govern-
ment itself.
Since the discovery of oil in the Niger Delta during the late
1950s, the reﬁning and export of petroleum has become the biggest
industry, employer, and moneymaker for this large West African
country—the most populous nation on the entire African continent,
with an estimated 155 million inhabitants. Originally, what is today
Nigeria consisted of dozens of disperse semi-autonomous states
and ethnic communities, which became amalgamated into a single
colony by its British administrators in 1914. As a result, at least 40
distinct ethnic groups still reside today within the Niger Delta
alone, speaking about 250 individual dialects.
Shortly after gaining its independence from Great Britain in
October 1960, Nigeria became a republic, but regional and ethnic
tensions soon erupted into conﬂict, plunging the nation into a
cruel civil war. The Ibo or Igbo peoples of its oil-rich Delta region
attempted to secede from the federal state, only to be crushed by
1970, many survivors being left marginalized and harboring bit-
ter animosity against the victorious central government in the dis-
tant capital of Lagos, dominated by Yorubas. Such resentment
simmered and began to deepen further after the Nigerian oil
industry was nationalized next year, while a simultaneous boom
in international petroleum prices that same decade meant that
huge amounts of money were soon ﬂowing into the nation—
much being misspent on patronage and other corrupt practices.
By 1979, the Delta was producing 82 percent of all of Nigeria’s
federal government revenues, yet few beneﬁts accrued among
its impoverished inhabitants.
Demands for greater local shares soon began to be heard,
which were eventually joined by a growing concern over the envi-
ronmental damage being caused to the Delta’s rivers and lands by
the ever-sprawling and spewing oil installations. National
exports of such traditional cash crops as cocoa, rubber, and cotton
meanwhile declined, to the point where Nigeria was reduced to
importing foodstuffs, leaving many of its inhabitants struggling
against poverty and want, amid ofﬁcial indifference. Unrest
Problems
47

therefore escalated in the Delta, until vessels traveling in and out
of its oil-ﬁelds began to be targeted, as in the following typical
examples:
April 24, 1996: Seven Nigerians armed with guns and long
knives board a vessel which is heading downriver toward
the open sea from the inland port of Warri. Its Master
sounds an emergency-alarm, and all external doors are
locked. After stealing six mooring-ropes, a winch-drum,
and six life-rings, the thieves jump into the water and are
picked up by an accomplice in a speedboat.
August 27, 1997: While outward bound from Warri, the
2,514-ton, Liberian-ﬂagged cargo ship Frischland is attacked
in Chanomi Creek at 12:10 p.m. by seven armed men in a
speedboat. They pursue until the ship is near Bedford Point,
then use hooked poles to clamber aboard. Brandishing
guns, clubs, and knives, they subdue the crew and force the
Master to open his safe, emptying it of cash while other
thieves ransack the crew’s cabins, taking whatever
valuables they can ﬁnd. The pilot and two bridge hands are
beaten by a pair of pirates, who remain there throughout
this incident, so that the ship sails for about 20 minutes with
its helm unattended. Eventually, the looters spot a nearby
police boat and ﬂee at 12:30 p.m., with this patrol in hot
pursuit.
March 28, 1999: As it nears the pilot station at Escravos Bar
off Saples at 2:00 a.m., the Panamanian-registered cargo
ship Fione is boarded in the darkness from a speedboat by
six masked men armed with axes, hammers, and machine
guns. Master and crew are gathered on the bridge, and
when these attackers learn that no money is aboard, they
beat their prisoners, as well as smashing navigation and
radio equipment. One crewman suffers a skull fracture, the
Captain injuries to an arm, by being hit with a hammer
while trying to protect the instruments.
Armed guards are subsequently hired to escort Fione to
its berth, and are also aboard during its outward transit.
April 22, 1999: A standby tug at the Forcado Oil Terminal is
attacked by an armed gang but rescued by Nigerian
military forces. Nevertheless, all loading is temporarily
suspended out of fear of reprisal, as Nigeria’s oil terminals
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

and production ﬁelds “have experienced signiﬁcant
violence during the past year from local tribes and
townspeople seeking greater share in proceeds.”
April 29, 1999: After running aground off Madangho in the
Escravos River, the 497-ton Nigerian-ﬂagged tanker
Stronghand is boarded and stripped by local youths, while
three captive crewmembers are not released until a ransom
is paid by the vessel’s owners.
July 11, 1999: While navigating the Escravos River, the
3,172-ton Lithuanian-ﬂagged reefer ship Vega is approached
at 9:30 a.m. by a speedboat, whose occupants—clad in
military uniforms—order it to halt. On advice from his
onboard pilot, Vega’s Master refuses to comply, but his
vessel is then pursued and raked by more than ﬁfty rounds
of heavy-caliber machine-gun ﬁre, before these aggressors
give up their chase.
July 28, 1999: The ﬁshing boat Dolphine 4 is stormed by
youths off Pennington Island, its Captain and crew
assaulted while the boat is looted of sundry goods and
communication equipment, being left so vandalized that it
has to be towed into port next day. At least six other ﬁshing
boats have recently endured similar attacks, echoing tribal
unrest ashore.
October 14, 1999: The St. Vincent-ﬂagged tug-supply boat
Damas Victory is seized on the Bonny River, for failing to
display the “permit sticker” demanded by local youth gangs.
October 23, 1999: As part of a series of tribal protests, a
Belize-ﬂagged vessel with an all-Nigerian crew owned by
the Tidewater Oil Company is brieﬂy detained in the Bonny
River by an armed youth gang, along with the Explorer
Seahorse several days later.
Then on November 1st, another Tidewater merchant
vessel is seized and a U.S. citizen kidnapped, along with a
Polish engineer, and 12 Nigerians. This ship and its
hostages are released two days later, after a court injunction
has been obtained.
November 15, 1999: The Shell Petroleum Development
Company boat MM22, while transporting guards up the
Bonny River toward the Cawthorne Channel Float Station,
is intercepted by six armed youths in a speedboat, members
Problems
49

of a tribal group seeking to compel Shell to hire 200 more
local workers. MM22’s passengers and crew are held for
“interrogation” before being released.
As foreign complaints mounted, the central government in
Lagos responded by deploying Nigerian Army units into the
region, as well as Mobile Police or “MoPol” paramilitary units—
so quick to resort to their weaponry, that they were nicknamed
the “Kill-and-Go” Police. Yet the presence of these outside forces
merely aggravated the problem, breeding more resistance from
increasingly better-armed groups such as the “Movement for the
Emancipation of the Niger Delta.” And the fact that the Nigerian
Navy was wholly unprepared for any signiﬁcant deployment
meant that river-dangers would continue.
The Strait of Malacca Gauntlet
As with most other major sea passages around the world, piracy
had declined dramatically by the early-twentieth century in this
long and narrow channel, although occasional threats to transit-
ing ships were never entirely eradicated. A few attacks were
organized by secretive Chinese crime syndicates known as the tri-
ads during the 1930s, oftentimes targeting speciﬁc vessels as they
steamed between Shanghai and Singapore.
A few more depredations recurred after World War II, but the
scholar Carolin Liss has argued that it was to be the postwar mod-
ernization of Asia’s ﬁshing industries which unwittingly revived
the problem of piracy. Sophisticated new technologies and equip-
ment became widely available as of the 1950s, allowing ﬁshermen
to net much larger catches and tap stocks that had previously lain
beyond their reach—but such large-scale sweeps also depleted
many traditional ﬁshing grounds, reducing the volume of catches
within a decade. And overﬁshing was not the only problem: The
destruction of many shoreline estuaries, wetlands, and reefs
through industrialization and urban sprawl, as well as spreading
ill effects from pollution, also diminished stocks further.
Consequently, some coastal communities were plunged into
poverty, especially those whose ﬁshermen only owned small
boats, incapable of seeking out more distant banks. And even
those trawlers which could go in search of less-exploited waters,
often encountered complications brought on by expanding
national claims. Formerly open ocean stretches might now be
deemed part of another country’s jurisdiction, with exclusive
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

rights over its natural resources, however tenuous the legitimacy
of such a claim. Fishermen driven by a decline of their own stocks
into a nearby, yet ill-deﬁned jurisdiction, might be subjected to
violence as trespassers by local ﬁshermen, or arrest as criminals
by disputatious regional authorities. A study has estimated that
between 1970 and 2000, ﬁsheries depreciated by over 40 percent
within the Strait of Malacca, its northern portion being particu-
larly affected; some Malaysian ﬁshermen therefore began illegally
working adjacent Indonesian waters, which were believed to be
better ﬁshing grounds (Tanter, “Roots”).
If caught by an Indonesian patrol, such Malaysian poachers
might have their boat towed into port and detained for months,
until a substantial ﬁne was paid for its release along with the
crew. Many therefore began offering to pay the “ﬁne” directly to
pliant members of the Navy or Marine Police at sea, after which
they could continue ﬁshing. But when trawlers then began rou-
tinely carrying extra cash to bribe such corrupt ofﬁcials, they
proved even more tempting targets for other types of attack.
Malaysian politicians openly worried about the potential harm
from such poaching in foreign waters, as when Deputy Home
Minister Datuk Chor Chee Heung stated in 2002: “We are asking
our ﬁshermen not to encroach into Indonesian waters, as they will
not only face pirates, but also cause misunderstandings with the
Indonesian Navy” (ibid.).
Less well-positioned ﬁshermen, desperate to supplement
their meager and dwindling livelihoods, resorted to even more
criminal acts. As an example, Liss mentioned the impoverished
ﬁshermen from Kampung Hitam, on Pulau Babi Island in the Riau
Archipelago. The waters around their island had become so pol-
luted and overﬁshed that catches could no longer sustain their
families, while their boats were too small to reach and work more
distant banks. As a result, some turned to outright piracy, launch-
ing opportunistic strikes against any passing trawlers, yachts, or
even small-to-medium-sized merchantmen. Similar loosely organ-
ized pirate bands also began stealing out from other indigent
islands such as Belakang Padang and the Jemaja group, while even
unemployed taxi-boat drivers were known to have become
involved occasionally in nocturnal raids, when they could not ﬁnd
sufﬁcient passengers during the day to make a living.
Most of these assaults were nervous hit-and-run affairs, tak-
ing whatever could immediately be grabbed, then ﬂeeing. Soon,
a rash of such low-grade raids began to be reported:
Problems
51

January 29, 1985: Near Singapore, six men clamber aboard
the American tanker Falcon Countess, despite the fact that it
is running along at 13.5 knots. Its Master is forced at
knifepoint to open his safe, $19,471 in cash being stolen,
plus several personal items.
October 25, 1985: Without warning near the island of Noord
Natuna Eil or Kepulauan Natuna Besar, pirates open ﬁre at
8:00 a.m. with automatic riﬂes on the Greek tanker
Marianna, while it inbound toward Singapore. Its Master
increases speed to 17 knots and so prevents these attackers
from boarding, but a subsequent inspection reveals the
tanker has been riddled by over 100 bullet holes.
January 7, 1986: At 3:20 a.m., a small craft stops a mile
ahead of the approaching President Johnson, turning its
searchlight onto the ship’s bridge. Its watch ofﬁcer alters
course, yet the unknown boat deliberately runs into
Johnson’s path again, shining its searchlight along the port
side while attempting to close. Returning onto his original
heading, the ofﬁcer then sights another boat without lights,
trying to approach Johnson on its starboard side. Neither
craft can match the ship’s speed of 23 knots, so soon fall
behind.
June 15, 1986: While steaming 13 miles off Horsburgh
Lighthouse, at the eastern entrance into Singapore Bay, the
Australian container shipAnro Australia is boarded by pirates,
its Master being robbed of $3,000 and personal items.
February 1987: The Soviet vessel Slutsk is boarded off
Singapore by pirates using rope ladders, yet who are beaten
back and ﬂee aboard a motorboat, having seriously stabbed
one crewman in a shoulder.
April 1, 1987: Five pirates armed with knives board the Igloo
Moss from a small fast boat, while this liquid propane-gas
carrier is passing Horsburgh Lighthouse, inward bound
from Thailand. Some crewmembers are robbed.
Late April 1987: The Yugoslav vessel Durmitor is robbed by
pirates off the coast of Singapore.
May 1, 1987: In the Phillips Channel, six pirates armed with
knives and a pistol board the 24,090-ton, Panamanian-
registered chemical carrier Molley Laura, manned by
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

23 South Koreans. The Chief Mate is seized, the safe
opened, and crew quarters ransacked—$16,000 in cash and
other valuables being stolen, although no injuries inﬂicted.
The Yugoslav vessel Krk is also boarded this same day
near Singapore by pirates armed with knives and machetes,
who likewise steal money and valuables.
May 3, 1987: Early on this Sunday morning near Singapore,
a band of pirates in high-powered canoes come alongside
the Philippine bulk carrier Lydia 5, using ropes with
grappling hooks to swarm aboard. Brandishing guns and
knives, they steal $7,000 in cash, plus other personal
valuables.
August 6, 1987: The Panamanian-registered tanker Orion
Trader is boarded by pirates armed with swords. Cash and
valuables worth $2,000 are stolen, but no injuries reported,
before the pirates ﬂee in a small boat.
August 30, 1987: While steaming at 16 knots this night with
its decks well lit, President Madison is stealthily boarded
15 miles east of Singapore’s pilot boarding station by ﬁve
pirates armed with machetes. They come aboard over the
stern, binding and gagging the Chief Engineer in his
stateroom, then robbing him of money and personal effects.
He eventually frees himself and notiﬁes the Master, but the
pirates have by then disappeared.
April 27, 1988: At dawn between Bangka Island and
Sumatra, the 5,300-ton, Bahamian-registered container ship
Klang Reefer is boarded by four pirates. The Master’s cabin
is looted of personal belongings, electrical equipment, and a
ﬂare pistol, totaling about $15,000 in value.
May 13, 1988: Once again in the Bangka Strait, four pirates
board the container ship Swan Reefer, robbing it of electrical
equipment, as well as ransacking several commercial
containers on deck.
July 2, 1988: While steaming past Horsburgh Lighthouse at
15 knots, Iver Chaser is boarded stealthily at night by four
pirates from a fast boat, who have tossed a line undetected
over its stern railings. They surprise the Master in his
stateroom, leaving him bound and gagged when they
depart with some valuables and drugs.
Problems
53

As the volume and value of commercial trafﬁc through the
Strait began to escalate most dramatically during the 1990s, more
professional crimes would also begin to occur on its waters, some
even being organized by syndicates from distant parts of Asia, such
as the Japanese Yakuza or mainland Chinese triads. The economic,
political, and social changes injected into the entire region with the
end of the Cold War were to be accompanied by a resurgence in
organized crime. In particular, the opening of China and its gradual
tilt towards capitalism; the 1997 Asian ﬁnancial crisis; plus the
emergence of major ﬁnancial centers at Singapore and Hong Kong,
all contributed toward a covert spread of renewed criminality.
Given their involvement elsewhere in Asia in illegal activities
such as smuggling, it is believed that Chinese triads soon began
introducing their own methods into the busy Strait region. An indi-
vidual triad might contact a local crime-associate or gang, arrang-
ing for low-ranking members or other recruits to carry out a
designated attack. Medium-sized vessels were most often targeted,
being retained for use as “phantom-ships” in further criminal
enterprises. Such seizures were well-organized, with advance plan-
ning and ample funding for expenses. In August 1999, a certain
“Mr. Wong”—believed to be head of operations in Indonesia for a
triad operating out of Hong Kong, Malaysia, and the Philippines—
was arrested and tried for allegedly having masterminded more
than twenty such hijackings in the Strait.
The tanker Selayang almost shared this same fate, when it
was seized by 19 pirates on June 20, 2001. However, since it had
a tracking device onboard, the Indonesian authorities were able
to free this vessel and arrest some of its captors a week later near
Balikpapan—yet the plot had been so carefully devised, that the
perpetrators could only say they had been hired to make the
attack by a certain “Mr. Ching,” whom they had never met and
therefore could not identify (ibid.).
Unemployed and desperate ﬁshermen continued to furnish
easy recruits for such organized crime strikes. A buoy-tender ship
was assaulted that same June 2001 near Indonesia’s Karimun
Island, part of Riau Province southeast of Singapore, although
this attack was beaten back and crewmembers managed to cap-
ture one of the pirates, as his colleagues ﬂed. This prisoner
revealed that eight out of the 13 assailants involved were ﬁsher-
men from Karimun, whose banks had been almost totally
destroyed by illegal bomb and cyanide ﬁshing, while other sour-
ces of income were impossible to ﬁnd on their island. The
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

shadowy masterminds behind this attack were apparently based
on Indonesia’s Batam Island, having merely hired some of these
struggling ﬁshermen to carry out the attack.
In addition to such criminal enterprises, rebels of the Gerakan
Aceh Merdeka (GAM) or “Free Aceh Movement” are also believed
to have conducted some piratical attacks in the northern stretches
of the Malacca Straits, in order to ﬁnance their struggle against the
Indonesian government. For example, GAM has been blamed for
seizures of the Malaysian Penrider in August 2003 and Indonesian
Tri Samudra in March 2005, during which hostages were seized
and ransoms extorted. GAM is furthermore believed responsible
for assaults against ﬁshing boats, speciﬁcally targeting Indone-
sian trawlers, thereby amassing a ﬂeet of stolen ﬁshing vessels,
which—being slimmer and faster than Malaysian boats—are
ideally suited for more strikes. GAM’s leadership, until recently
exiled in Sweden, has vehemently denied these charges and
accused the Indonesian military of attempting to smear their
group.
The Horn of Africa and Disintegration of Somalia
Compared to other troubled waters, such as the South China Sea
or Strait of Malacca, the Gulf of Aden did not suffer from
ingrained piracy as the twentieth century drew to a close—only
sporadic incidents off poor and fragmented Somalia, the country
whose eastern tip represents the “Horn of Africa.” Prior to its col-
onization by Great Britain and Italy during the latter part of the
nineteenth century, Somalia had never been a single uniﬁed
nation. Rather, because of its arid landscape, only a few scattered
concentrations of inhabitants had ever developed along its shore-
line, most residents preferring to live in tribal groupings around
fertile pockets in its interior.
In ancient times, its ports had served as lonely way stations
for traders importing Indian spices, which were then transported
up the Red Sea by Arab merchants for resale. Somalia’s modern
pirates hail from this long tradition of seafaring clans, who in
addition to ﬁshing and trading, were also known to occasionally
prey on passing ships from their small towns, concealed all up
and down the country’s long and ﬂat coastline. They often sup-
plemented their meagre living through smuggling, or trade in
stolen goods, and even taking hostages—who were sometimes
sold into slavery. In the recent past, most piracy was centered on
the coastal towns of Harardheere and Hobyo in Central Somalia,
Problems
55

targeting the Mogadishu port area farther to the southwest
(“Lawless Tradition”).
The opening of the Suez Canal during the latter half of nine-
teenth century led to a great new ﬂow in the world’s maritime
trafﬁc, so that major European powers soon began claiming coal-
ing stations and other strategic facilities along the Horn of Africa.
As only a few thousand impoverished inhabitants actually lived
there in scattered tribal pockets, under the nominal rule of distant
sultans, British interests acquired concessions from these absentee
rulers to a stretch along the inner span of Red Sea shoreline—
known today as “Somaliland”—while Italy, eager to establish its
own colonial empire in Africa, gained title over various parts of
southeastern Somalia during the 1880s. Rome encouraged its citi-
zens to emigrate out to this territory, and on April 5, 1908, formally
united its patchwork of diverse private concessions into a single
colony, called Somalia Italiana. When the Dervish state furthermore
collapsed during the 1920s, Mussolini’s Fascist government took
over Somalia’s north-eastern sultanates as well.
Colonial rule was ended during the aftermath of World War II,
and Mohamed Siad Barre seized power in 1969 as Somalia’s auto-
cratic President. By late 1990, his repressive regime was in serious
trouble, controlling little more than a few pockets of the increas-
ingly fractured nation. Rebel factions led by the warlord Mohamed
Farrah Aidid attacked the outskirts of its capital Mogadishu, driv-
ing Barre from ofﬁce by the evening of January 26, 1991, who then
ﬂed to his power base among the Marehan clan in the southwestern
Gedo region to continue ﬁghting. Ali Mahdi Muhammad, a promi-
nent businessman of the Hawiye Abgaal clan, succeeded as
president, but could not exert any political or military authority in
the country, so that Somalia disintegrated into hostile clan enclaves,
frequently realigning as they clashed repeatedly against one
another.
Unnoticed amid this power vacuum of the early 1990s, lowly
ﬁsheries along the coastline became wholly neglected. Foreign
trawlers therefore began edging ever closer inshore to make their
catches, soon depleting the traditional grounds worked by local
ﬁshermen. Regional Somali authorities proved either indifferent
or powerless to help, so that confrontations ensued at sea. Boat-
loads of poorly armed Somali ﬁshermen began seizing a few
trawlers, conﬁscating their catches and imposing hefty “ﬁnes” as
self-proclaimed coast guards. However, the Chinese, Taiwanese,
and South Korean trawler ﬂeets were not easily deterred, instead
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

contacting warlords ashore so as to hire their gunmen for protec-
tion, and better arming their own ﬁshing-vessels. Confrontations
became more aggressive, yet the poor Somalis were no match
against these interlopers, therefore began turning indiscriminately
upon any vessel which chanced to pass (Report S/2006/229, p. 25).
A series of assaults began to be reported out of this low-grade
“war zone” in Somalia’s waters:
April 5, 1995: A small vessel ﬁres a mortar round at the
racing yacht Longo Barda, and some pirates prepare to come
board. They ﬂee when the frigate Fredericton and a container
vessel approach to the rescue.
April 22, 1995: East of Suqutra Island, the vessel Radnor is
approached by two motorboats, whose occupants open ﬁre
with machine guns and light artillery. The ship increases
speed to 12 knots and is able to evade its attackers.
April 28, 1995: Near Cape Guardafui, the vessel Ming Bright
comes under light artillery ﬁre from a motorboat,
outrunning its attackers.
May 3, 1995: At 1:10 p.m., about 100 nautical miles west of
Suqutra Island, a small boat ﬁres upon the vessel Liliana
Dimitrova, one crewman being wounded during this attack.
October 23, 1995: During this night, a speedboat mounting
a heavy machine gun ﬁres upon a vessel anchored at
El-Maan port, about 20 miles northeast of Mogadishu,
compelling it to retreat out to sea.
February 1, 1996: Near Mogadishu, eight gunmen in
speedboats seize the Kenyan-registered ship Clove,
reputedly demanding as much as $100 million in ransom
for its release. They allegedly identify themselves as “Coast
Guard” personnel upon boarding the ship, and contact the
vessel’s owner, who was shipping consumer goods from
Mombassa toward Kismaayo with a crew of 20.
March 7, 1997: The 3,016-ton tanker Helena is approached by
two ﬁshing vessels, one of which ﬁres a riﬂe grenade that
falls short. They signal the tanker to stop, but Helena
increases speed and outruns their pursuit.
May 20, 1996: While on standby sixteen nautical miles off
the Arab Bank Sandbar, in international waters near
Problems
57

Djibouti, the 2,050-ton Russian salvage tug SB-408 is
approached by two patrol boats manned by Somali
militiamen in civilian dress, toting automatic weapons. The
tug’s Master and Third Ofﬁcer are forced at gunpoint onto
one of these launches, while the twenty crewmembers
aboard the tug are escorted toward the Horn of Africa. En
route, the captors pillage SB-408 of money and supplies for
their boats, this 12-hour ordeal ﬁnally ending when the
Master agrees to surrender about $8,000 in cash, ten tons of
diesel fuel, two drums of lubrication oil, and about $2,000
worth of stores and provisions.
September 27, 1998: The 299-ton, Djibouti-ﬂagged freighter
Nourstar is hijacked from the port of Bosaso by seven men,
who shoot a crewman while forcing their way aboard. Half
the crew is then released at Ras Hafoon near Socotra,
reporting that heavy guns have been installed aboard their
freighter to prey upon smaller ships and dhows, both off
Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden. Eventually, Nourstar is
released, and arrives back at Djibouti by December 14th.
December 24, 1998: The Belize-ﬂagged coastal trader Sea
Johanna is hijacked off southern Somalia, being held about
70 miles northeast of Lamu Island, near the border with
Kenya, while 15 members of its predominantly Pakistani
crew are kept ashore as hostages. The owners report that this
attack has been carried out by the Jaamatul Ihtizam group,
which is demanding a large ransom. The abandoned vessel is
recovered adrift by the Kenyan Navy on March 27–28, 1999,
its owner still trying to raise $60,000 to free the crew—who
are eventually released on May 11th by their captors, having
apparently grown tired of awaiting payment.
March 14, 1999: At 2:00 p.m., while passing within 25 miles
of Somalia’s eastern coast, the 5,916-ton, Belize-ﬂagged
cargo ship Salwah sights four approaching craft, so alters
course. They nonetheless close in and open ﬁre by 2:43 p.m.,
compelling Salwah to heave-to by 3:10 p.m., now 33 miles
offshore. Seventeen armed pirates come aboard, soon
followed by another 10, who secure Salwah’s 19 Ukrainian
crewmembers and demand an undisclosed ransom for their
release.
Next day, a Taiwanese trawler is also seized near Eli
Town.
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

March 16, 1999: The Greek-ﬂagged tanker World Kinship is
approached by three vessels while steaming past eastern
Somalia, being hailed by radio to halt and prepare to be
boarded. Gunmen at the same time open ﬁre on the ship,
which increases speed and escapes with only a few bullet
holes.
April 5, 1999: At 9:00 a.m., pirates pretending to be ﬁshermen
approach a ship running 20–25 miles off the Somali coast,
opening ﬁre with machine guns and attempting to board,
although impeded by its high freeboard. After a pursuit of
30 minutes, they give up their chase.
April 11, 1999: The Antigua-ﬂagged container ship Karin S
is intercepted off Somalia’s east coast by two boats, six or
seven armed men waving their weapons as a signal for it to
stop. When the ship’s Master alters course farther out to
seaward, they open ﬁre with light weaponry and pursue,
yet give up their chase only three minutes later.
Such recklessness by armed bands of rovers—some claiming
that they were acting as “coast guards,” charged by regional
chieftains with protecting dwindling local resources—led to a
reputation for lawlessness in Somalia’s territorial waters, where
the strong simply preyed upon the weak.
Yet attacks were mostly conﬁned to within 50 nautical miles
of its coast, because the basic means available for pirates to ven-
ture out to sea were 20- to 30-foot skiffs, open and merely pow-
ered by outboard motors, whose range was limited by the small
amount of fuel that they could carry. Such craft were usually
manufactured of ﬁberglass in Yemeni boatyards, and sold to
coastal traders or ﬁshermen for $2,500–$3,500 apiece. They typi-
cally have high freeboards, and were usually powered by an 85-
horsepower Yamaha outboard motor, although skiffs with twin
150-horsepower models could speed in short bursts of 30 knots
across relatively calm seas, with four people aboard. Given that
these craft were so light and exposed, though, no one dared sortie
out onto the ocean waves during the summer monsoon seasons,
which occur between late April and early September, interrup-
ting or at least diminishing all maritime activities off Somalia—
including piracy.
These seagoing gunmen also obtained most of their hand-
held weaponry out of Yemen, or from around Somalia’s national
Problems
59

capital of Mogadishu. Typically, a weapons-dealer or middleman
would receive a deposit from a hawala broker on behalf of a dis-
tant group of pirates, and the weapons would then be delivered
by vehicle, at which point the balance would be paid.
Worst-Case Scenario: Piracy in a Void
Statistically, present-day piracy hit its peak worldwide between
1999 and 2003, because of a rash of criminality in the busy
sea lanes of the South China Sea and Strait of Malacca. However,
thanks to coordinated efforts by local and regional govern-
ments, plus timely international assistance, this brief upsurge
would virtually disappear within a single year in the Strait of
Malacca and around Singapore, while being greatly decreased
by a general crackdown in the South China Sea (Piracy Off the
Coast of Somalia, p. 13).
Somali piracy, by way of contrast, was seemingly insigniﬁ-
cant during that same period, because its lawless rovers only
had small boats with which to opportunistically strike close
inshore, so that transiting merchantmen simply remained in the
safer trafﬁc-lanes farther out at sea—giving the false impression
that such unbridled outbursts in its lonely coastal stretches only
posed a minor threat to commercial shipping. But criminality
would take such deep root in that uncontrolled environment, that
it would then turn into a much more intractable problem,
“because Somalia is a failed state where anarchy has prevailed
for most of the past two decades” (Karon).
Extortion as Business
Speciﬁcally, the desperate poverty and utter lack of any secure pros-
pects would lead a penniless ex-civil servant named Mohamed
Abdi Hassan Hayir, more commonly known as Afweyne or “Big
Mouth,” to deliberately try to organize these random attacks
against chance targets offshore, into a moneymaking business
venture. In 2003, he would raise some capital and travel northeast
into Puntland, to recruit veteran pirates to act as instructors. Notori-
ous rovers such as Garad Mohamed, Farah Hirsi Kulan “Boya”, and
Farah Abdullahi would be lured south by Hassan’s inducements, to
serve both as active commanders offshore, as well as indoctrinating
his local followers.
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Afweyne would soon manage to create a structured pirate
organization, whose sole purpose was to waylay foreign vessels
and hold them for ransom. The very remoteness of his base at
Harardheere—a forlorn and sun-bleached port in the Mudug
region, on the Central Somali coast—proved ideal as a base of
operations, being scarcely accessible to the rest of the fragmented
country by road and so completely beyond any hint of govern-
mental authority. In such a neglected backwater, Hassan’s
ill-gotten proﬁts could more effectively inﬂuence its few unpaid
ofﬁcials to ignore prizes anchored offshore, plus constitute a dom-
inant portion of the local economy, through generous payments to
his suppliers.
These organizational practices would spread northeastward
when his hired mercenaries, hardened marauders such as Garad
Mohamed and Boya, returned to their own lawless home port of
Eyl and began applying them there. Soon, other imitators would
also appear, especially as ransoms grew in size and volume, pro-
ducing tempting streams of cash in such poor and backward
regions. The number of reported captures off Somalia would con-
sequently jump from two in 2004, to 35 by 2005, prompting wor-
ried foreign shipping ﬁrms to begin shifting their routes a
couple of hundred miles farther out to sea, in the vain hope of
moving beyond range of ever more avaricious pirates.
By April 2008, even the conservative British weekly The
Economist would be editorializing about the palpable shift in
piratical activities on the high seas:
Somalia’s coastal waters are proving increasingly peril-
ous for mariners. Some 31 attacks on ships were
reported in 2007, compared with just two in 2004,
according to the International Maritime Bureau. Pirates
operating around the lawless African country are more
likely to use weapons than in the past; a Spanish ﬁshing
vessel was attacked at the weekend using grenade-
launchers. It is now considered so risky, that this week
France and America announced a draft UN Security
Council resolution, allowing foreign governments to
pursue and arrest pirates in territorial waters. Nigeria’s
oil wealth is also attracting more brigands to its seas.
Ships navigating through traditional piracy hot spots,
such as the Malacca Strait and the vast coastal waters of
Indonesia, have suffered fewer attacks since 2004.
Worst-Case Scenario: Piracy in a Void
61

Corruption and Dependence
Bribery and lavish spending by pirates and their ﬁnancial backers
would come to entrench the business among otherwise hopeless
communities. Underemployed ﬁshermen who agreed to pilot gun-
men out to sea in pirate skiffs, would be paid far more than they
could ever earn from their depleted ﬁshing stocks. One convicted
pirate would declare that a teenage gunman could earn anywhere
from $6,000 to $10,000 from a million-dollar ship ransom, roughly
equivalent to two or three years’ salary from working as an armed
guard at a Western humanitarian agency, and much better than any
local business could ever pay. He would also explain that the nor-
mal division of ransom payments was 20 percent to the bosses of
the pirate enterprise; 20 percent invested in guns, fuel, provisions,
and other materials for future missions; 30 percent split up among
the gunmen themselves; and 30 percent distributed as bribes
among local government ofﬁcials.
This blood money would ooze into the economy in many
innocuous ways. “We give them supplies, medicines, food, fuel,
and clothes when they go to sea to stalk ships, and they pay us
after they obtain the ransom,” one trader in Puntland’s main sea-
port of Bosaso would declare in October 2008 (“Somali Piracy”).
Residents in the inland city of Garowe would report a boom in
lavish wedding parties. A resident of Bossaso, a woman named
Asha Elmi, would describe with a mixture of envy and amuse-
ment the transformation that her neighbor had undergone:
He used to be a poor ﬁsherman a year ago, but now he is
rich. He bought three beautiful houses in the same
neighborhood. He had a wife, but married a second
one recently. There were maybe 150 cars in the wedding
[procession].
Proceeds from ransom payments would also ﬁnance an
extensive network of coastal watchers and port informants, many
in neighboring countries, who would pass along information
about ship departures and routes.
Entrenchment
Somali piracy, like that in the Strait of Malacca, originated from a
disputatious depletion of its ﬁshing industry, and came to be
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

dominated by money-seeking criminal syndicates. But whereas
government rule in Singapore, Malaysia, and Indonesia would
remain strong and intact, needing only the spur of economic neces-
sity to mount an effective antipiracy campaign which stamped out
their problem within a year, Somalia remains divided and ungov-
ernable to this day, its pirate organizations functioning and
covertly inﬂuential in its political life. A March 2009 report by
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon would identify the two pri-
mary networks still operating freely out of their bases around Eyl
and Harardheere, with smaller bands slipping out of the ports of
Bossaso, Qandala, Caluula, Bargaal, Hobyo, Mogadishu, and
Garad. The Secretary-General would further note that some of
these larger pirate groups “rival established Somali authorities in
terms of their military capabilities and resource bases” (Ploch, p. 7).
The millions of dollars pumped into the depressed econo-
mies of these remote regions from extorted ransom payments
would make any outside dictates banning piracy meaningless,
unless accompanied by a signiﬁcant inducement. An American
reporter would note in November 2008:
Establishing order on shore, however, remains the key to
stamping out the problem, for the simple reason that
keeping a dozen or more vessels from the navies of the
United States and its allies engaged in escort missions
for all commercial shipping in the area, is too costly to
sustain over the long term. As long as the pirates remain
unmolested on shore and ﬂush with cash—Kenya last
week suggested that the pirates have extorted as much
as $150 million in ransom payments over the past year—
they will ﬁnd ways around the protection offered by
sophisticated warships. (Karon)
Except for a brief six-month interlude between June to
December 2006, when the fundamentalist Islamic Courts Union
or ICU would crack down on piracy in areas under their control,
including Harardheere, no government in Mogadishu would be
able to challenge the grip of piracy. Some analysts would come
to believe that the Islamists represented the best hope for
restraining future depredations, although both they and the Tran-
sitional Federal Government remain riven by internal power
struggles, complicating the task of forging a remedy, either inter-
nally or internationally.
Worst-Case Scenario: Piracy in a Void
63

Controversies
Although it has long been accepted as a general duty of all
nations to cooperate in the repression of piracy, not every country
sees the issue in exactly the same way or even applies the charge
in a universal manner. One contentious difference in recent deca-
des has been the view that to commit an act of piracy, it must be
done for private ends—such as seizing a civilian ship for plunder
on the high seas—while the same act committed for purely politi-
cal motives, as in the case of insurgents not recognized as belliger-
ents by their home governments, is not deemed piratical.
And although technically by committing such an act, pirates
may lose the protection of the nation whose ﬂag they are other-
wise entitled to ﬂy, many governments are still loathe to surren-
der their jurisdiction to another. Pirates may be captured on the
high seas, or outside the territory of any state, under international
law; yet they are to be tried and punished under the criminal law
of the state holding them, in local courts, not under international
law in an international tribunal. Pirates therefore constitute some-
what unique defendants in a courtroom, in that they are arguably
a hybrid between a criminal and a combatant—neither true civil-
ians, nor true belligerents. It is not even entirely clear whether
they are protected by international humanitarian law—such as
the Geneva Convention—or by country-speciﬁc protections for
the criminally accused, such as the U.S. Bill of Rights.
Such discrepancies are only a few of the issues which hamper
the prosecution of modern pirates. Moreover, while the handful of
major Western maritime powers have a long history and have
developed their own bodies of law for this crime, numerous
Third-World nations—many of whom were former European
colonies—are loathe to apply these same standards in their courts.
Differing U.S. and European Goals
One underlying distraction in the world’s struggle against piracy,
has been the larger strategic objective being pursued by the U.S.
government, which does not entirely coincide with those of other
nations. After September 11, 2001, the administration of Pres.
George W. Bush moved to take its “war on terror” overseas, being
seconded by a host of allied nations. Some hesitated to support
the invasion of Iraq in March 2003, yet still remained committed
to assisting with counterterrorist operations.
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

After almost ﬁve years of this single-minded drive, a Somali
religious faction known as the Islamic Courts Union or ICU
defeated various bickering warlords and fought its way into
the battered capital of Mogadishu by June 5, 2006. Ofﬁcials in
Washington were concerned by reputed links between certain
fundamentalist elements within the ICU and the international
pariah network of al-Qaeda, it being asserted that some ICU
extremists were even sheltering three leaders involved in past ter-
rorist attacks, including the bombings of the U.S. Embassies in
Kenya and Tanzania in 1998.
Covert American support was therefore directed to fund a
counterinsurgency against Somalia’s new Islamist rulers, led by
a group of displaced Mogadishu warlords, who banded into the
so-called “Alliance for the Restoration of Peace and Counter-
Terrorism.” With the assistance of Ethiopian troops, they defeated
and drove the ICU from ofﬁce by late December 2006, and a U.S.
airstrike by an AC-130 gunship was carried out next month
against certain al-Qaeda members embedded with ICU forces in
southern Somalia, near Ras Kamboni. The aircraft carrier USS
Dwight D. Eisenhower and other American naval forces were posi-
tioned off the coast to provide support, and prevent any al-Qaeda
members from escaping by sea.
However, regional and European governments had noted
how during its brief term in ofﬁce, the ICU had effectively cur-
tailed Somali piracy: within a few weeks of seizing the capital,
their militiamen had pushed 300 miles northeastward, sweeping
uncontested into the major pirate-lairs of Hobyo and Harardhere
by mid-August 2006, proclaiming and enforcing a halt to all
future sorties—the Islamists abhorring piracy on religious
grounds, especially condemning the allure of its ill-gotten
material wealth. True followers were even told not to participate
in or support such criminality, some leaders going so far as to
say that any marriage to a pirate was null and void in the eyes
of strict Sharia law (Piracy Off the Somali Coast, pp. 15–18).
The ICU had also succeeded in reopening Mogadishu’s air-
port and seaport to international trafﬁc, for the ﬁrst time in more
than a decade, and may well have intended to repress piracy so
as to help nurture Somalia’s maritime trade back to life, and
revive its prostrate national economy. With only ten pirate attacks
reported during the ICU’s six months in ofﬁce, some European
and regional analysts believed—and still insist—that the Islamists
remain the best bet for restraining Somali piracy, which has since
Controversies
65

soared back into a dizzying wave of attacks. The Transitional
Federal Government installed at Mogadishu with American sup-
port remains powerless and disinterested in even addressing the
problem.
Consequently, what for Washington had been simply the
removal of a remote government with extremist sympathizers,
constituted a lost opportunity for European and regional allies
to reduce the spreading plague of Somali piracy, which more
directly threatened their own commercial sea trafﬁc, insurance
rates, oil supplies, etc. Eventually, they would organize their
own independent campaign to tackle this problem, in which
America collaborated.
Underreporting
Another difﬁculty hampering any study of piracy, is the well-
known propensity among maritime companies to under-report
attacks. For example, Young and Valencia have pointed out
that for a commercial shipper to ofﬁcially report an incident of
suspected piracy, “the ship may be idled for days, and at opera-
tional costs of about $25,000 per day,” this constitutes a powerful
disincentive—especially if the object is to merely record a failed
pursuit or otherwise insigniﬁcant act. Both authors furthermore
add that too-frequent reporting of attacks “may damage the own-
ers’ reputation as a commercial shipper,” leading to increased
insurance premiums and thus heightened costs which have to be
passed on to customers, when weighed against those of rival
ﬁrms who only report the most egregious offenses. And thirdly,
the very broad deﬁnition of piracy as applied by monitoring-
agencies such as the International Maritime Bureau (IMB)—
“everything from petty theft in port to hijacking” by armed gunmen
at sea—can also give a false impression of the severity of the situa-
tion when converted into tables of dry statistics, where everything
is lumped together under a single heading, without being weighted
by categories (Young and Valencia).
The British Defense Intelligence Service (DIS) has estimated
that the actual number of piracy cases world-wide could be as
much as 2,000 percent higher, on an annual basis, while the Aus-
tralian Defence Intelligence Organization or DIO places the ﬁgure
at around a minimum of 20 to 70 percent. Incidents involving
ﬁshermen and recreational boaters seem to be especially under-
counted, while if losses from an assault do not cross a certain
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

monetary threshold for insurance action, most will go unre-
ported, except in cases of damage to a foreign interest. And in
his excellent study on Somali piracy, Hansen has also pointed
out how few of the international trawlers would report on attacks
they had endured in Somalia’s waters, for fear of embarrassing or
exposing their owners to liability, by revealing how often they
had poached illegally among that prostrate country’s unprotected
banks (Hansen, p. 10).
Thus for a variety of reasons, large international shipping
ﬁrms who suffered the capture of a single vessel, might often pre-
fer to simply and discreetly:
pay a ransom. Yet the threat of falling prey to pirates has
not deterred shipping companies. Though some have
changed their routes to avoid the Gulf of Aden, with
the global economic downturn threatening to drive
down demand for their services, they appear willing to
risk the occasional ransom-payment in order to stay in
business. Nor are they transferring the cost to customers.
Tony Mason, secretary-general of the London-based
International Chamber of Shipping, says the pirate
attacks have not pushed shipping rates signiﬁcantly
higher. (Wadhams)
The upshot of this pernicious practice of underreporting, is
that any true assessment of the extent of the problem posed by
modern piracy remains ill-deﬁned, as does the judgment as
whether any real progress is being achieved in any particular
zone. For example, the Strait of Malacca was deemed so risky
and dangerous a passageway by the Joint War Committee (JWC)
of Lloyd’s Market Association in June 2005, that it branded the
Strait an area “highly prone to piracy, war strikes, terrorism, and
related perils for ocean shipping,” so that insurance premiums
were immediately raised by as much as 30 percent for the thou-
sands of ships transiting through its narrow waters. This enor-
mous economic burden imposed upon one of the busiest
waterways in the world, promptly galvanized a concerted polic-
ing effort by all three nations adjoining the Strait, resulting in
such a dramatic decrease in reported pirate attacks, that the Joint
War Committee removed Malacca’s name from its danger list that
very next August 2006. But it is impossible to know with certainty
how much of this improvement was attributable to better security
Controversies
67

measures, and how much simply to a stricter screening of reports.
Inroads had been made, piracy had been reduced, but by how
much, and how permanently?
Unwanted Piracy Trials
When ﬁve Somali pirates captured by a Dutch naval patrol were
ﬂown to The Netherlands to face trial in May 2009, media inter-
views indicated that “some of the suspects were enjoying their stay
in Dutch prison cells, and were considering eventually claiming
asylum.” When this comment was relayed to Foreign Minister
Maxime Verhagen, he groaned that he wished the defendants
had been taken elsewhere to be tried—such as Kenya—revealing
a common reluctance among many nations, against the expense
and unforeseen difﬁculties involved in prosecuting foreign prison-
ers over such immense distances, when witnesses and even arrest-
ing ofﬁcers could not be readily summoned (Westcott).
Likewise, the prosecution of Abduwali Abdukhadir Muse´—
the single surviving Somali pirate brought to New York City to
stand trial for the Maersk Alabama incident—is certain to prove
protracted, with a cost running well into the millions of dollars.
And with the number of suspected pirates now being snared by
United States and allied naval patrols rising into the hundreds,
the cost of ﬂying out all such defendants to face trial overseas
would soon prove prohibitive and so is being resisted and cir-
cumvented by most governments.
Many detainees intercepted off the Horn of Africa are conse-
quently being handed over to authorities in nearby Bosaso, the
biggest seaport and most populous city in Somalia’s semi-
autonomous northeastern State of Puntland. As long as such pris-
oners do not hail from that particular region, they are tried without
compunction, allowing the Puntland ofﬁcials to claim an active
role in the world’s ongoing campaign against piracy. The same is
occurring in the neighboring State of Somaliland, which faces out
onto the Gulf of Aden. Yet other captives are being handed over
to the Kenyan government to stand trial, which receives some
ﬁnancial support for these efforts, under an agreement signed with
the European Union on March 6, 2009.
However, European diplomats are expected to be present in
Kenyan courts on the trial dates to ensure that any prisoners
handed over under this arrangement receive fair treatment—a
clause which has caused further unexpected complications, as
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

one Somali suspect delivered up by a German warship has
already ﬁled a lawsuit in Berlin, for what he alleges has been
inhumane treatment since being handed over to the Kenyan
authorities. Moreover, that country’s court system is inefﬁcient
and overstretched. As of June 2009, it was believed that only 10
of the 111 pirates handed over had actually been fully processed.
Western jurists worry about the legality and long-term conse-
quences of simply “dumping” suspected pirates into a third
country, while naval ofﬁcers sometimes grow discouraged at
making so many of these inconsequential yet potentially-
frustrating arrests at sea, so instead simply prefer letting some
intercepted pirates go, after ﬁrst conﬁscating their weapons—
known as the “catch-and-release” method. With the campaign
against piracy off the Horn of Africa still raging, this unresolved
issue will only grow into more of a burden for the nations
involved.
Ignored Somali Complaints
“Illegal ﬁshing-ships, they are the real pirates,” the veteran chief-
tain Garad Mohamed angrily rebuked a Canadian reporter in
April 2009. He himself had begun his career as a lowly ﬁsherman
from the port of Eyl, he insisted, watching as its meager offshore
stocks were stripped bare by foreign trawlers during the
mid-1990s, and so had become a teenage gunman—with the sole
objective of defending his livelihood and that of his fellow ﬁsher-
men against poachers, he concluded rather piously (Bahadur,
“Pirate King”).
However self-serving, this belief among many Somalis that
such illegal sweeps through Somalia’s exposed shoreline ﬁshing-
grounds by foreign trawlers, can justify retaliatory strikes against
any passing foreign vessel—even hundreds of miles farther out at
sea—is often quoted in defense of the present-day wave of pirati-
cal seizures. “All we do is ask ransoms for the ships we hijack,” a
pirate named Jama Ahmed tried to explain to another reporter at
Harardheere in October 2008, “because we believe a ransom rep-
resents a legal tax, that a government may have taken.”
While it is obvious that the money being criminally extorted
today has nothing to do with defending Somalia’s territorial
waters, or restoring its lost ﬁshing industry, the matter nonethe-
less bears on an eventual repression of piracy. Simply put,
improvements would offer an alternate source of income to the
Controversies
69

many jobless or underemployed Somali ﬁshermen, rather than
piloting skiffs out to sea for pirate gunmen to use in their assaults
and hijackings. The issues of illegal foreign ﬁshing and much
more harmful toxic-waste dumping will have to be addressed at
some point, however difﬁcult and costly their resolutions may
prove to be.
Overﬁshing
In the years immediately following the collapse of Somalia’s cen-
tral government early in 1991, foreign vessels—notably
Chinese, Taiwanese, and South Korean trawlers—began taking
advantage of this absence of any national authority, to edge closer
into its previously-restricted territorial waters and work the shore-
side banks traditionally reserved for small-time local ﬁshermen,
often with steel-pronged dragnets and other illegal equipment
that stripped these stocks bare. Angry Somali ﬁshermen, their
meager livelihoods under threat and without any regional
government support, resorted to armed violence by 1994, banding
together and capturing several foreign ﬁshing vessels, keeping
their catches and ransoming the crews.
But undaunted, the foreign ﬁshing ﬂeets countered by
arranging for “protection” from local warlords ashore, so that
armed guards and anti-aircraft guns soon became regular ﬁxtures
aboard trespassing trawlers. The makeshift bands of Somali
ﬁshermen were no match for such formidable targets, therefore
began turning upon any passing commercial vessel, which
proved much easier prey. Efforts by the regional government of
Puntland to create a proper Somali Coast Guard as of 1999, only
worsened the ﬁshermen’s plight. The few craft ever deployed on
patrol duty were often diverted to serve as private guard boats
for foreign trawlers who had purchased “ﬁshing licences” and
curried other favors from corrupt government ofﬁcials. More seri-
ous confrontations ensued, such as when the local leader Boyah
and his followers seized several ﬁshing-vessels in 2001 that had
been “licensed” by Pres. Abdullahi Yusuf, and as such were being
escorted by the regional coast-guard craft.
The various half-baked ofﬁcial efforts at creating a Coast
Guard inevitably ended in dismal failure, anyway, with the disso-
lution of the contracting company and dismissal of its employees,
who not only retained much of their equipment but then
ironically—having been left unpaid and unemployed—provided
easy recruits for future pirate bands. The issue of defending and
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

restoring Somalia’s ﬁshing grounds remains unresolved today,
with locals wary of any outside offers of help, and the distant
government unable to exert any inﬂuence in such piracy hotbeds.
Toxic Dumping
Another pernicious practice, and an often-repeated justiﬁcation
by Somali pirates for their depredations, has been the callous dis-
posal of dangerous wastes in their waters by foreign vessels. Such
dumping does seem to have proliferated after the collapse of its
central government during the early 1990s, when Somalia’s long
and vulnerable shoreline became a favorite disposal area for
unwanted toxic materials. When a massive tsunami struck the
region in December 2004, the huge waves that battered northern
Somalia for days on end dredged up tons of nuclear and toxic
wastes, which in turn prompted the European Green Party to
investigate these allegations. They were soon able to present
before the European Parliament in Strasbourg, copies of contracts
signed between two companies—the Italian-Swiss ﬁrm Achair
Partners and the Italian waste brokerage Progresso—and
representatives of various pliant Somali warlords who had
agreed to accept 10 million tons of toxic waste in exchange for a
payment of $80 million.
According to an assessment subsequently compiled by the
United Nations Environment Program (UNEP): “European com-
panies found it to be very cheap to get rid of the waste, costing
as little as $2.50 a ton, where waste-disposal costs in Europe are
something like $1,000 a ton.” The exact extent of such illegal sea-
borne dumping proved difﬁcult to gauge, yet it was established
that there were far higher than normal cases of respiratory infec-
tions, mouth ulcers and bleeding, abdominal hemorrhages, and
unusual skin eruptions among many inhabitants of the coastal
areas around the northeastern towns of Hobyo and Benadir, fac-
ing out onto the Indian Ocean—diseases consistent with radiation
sickness. UNEP concluded that the situation along that particular
stretch of coastline posed a serious environmental hazard, not
only to Somalia, but to the entire East African region.
Somalis complain that dozens of foreign warships have been
deployed into the theater to combat piracy, yet no international
efforts have been made to restrict or even acknowledge the prob-
lem of toxic dumping, which still continues today and only stokes
local resentment and hostility.
Controversies
71

Expense
Lastly, a signiﬁcant yet often-unspoken problem associated with
modern antipiracy efforts has to do with their signiﬁcant cost.
Many governments may speak of the need to take action, yet the
direct expense associated with deploying a single frigate into the
Horn of Africa amounts to about $1.3 million a month. For navies
on a peacetime footing, the expense of ramping up and dispatch-
ing a warship can be even higher than for those already engaged
on active duty. The European Union, for example, in its ﬁrst-
ever overseas commitment, budgeted 450 million euros in 2009
to ﬁnance and sustain a year’s campaign by its Operation “Ata-
lanta,” an amount that is certain to be exceeded.
Even for the U.S. Navy, with its established shore bases and
numerous warships already deployed into those same waters as
part of its Fifth Fleet, ongoing costs are an important considera-
tion. In particular, the extended tours by such large warships as
amphibious-assault ships and guided-missile destroyers in sup-
port of the occupation of Iraq will hopefully soon be drawn down.
The reluctance by Washington to have these frontline, expensive
battle vessels diverted into a protracted antipiracy effort, extend-
ing their presence for a mission where they would be excessively
oversized and unsuitably overarmed, has resulted in European
navies assuming the burden for these operations.
Yet costs of this magnitude will bring into question any sus-
tained naval commitment, especially if there is no discernible
decline in pirate attacks.
Solutions
Most of the underlying preconditions that facilitated the resur-
gence of modern piracy remain without remedy. It would be vir-
tually impossible to turn back the hands of Time and:
— reconstitute the American and Western merchant ﬂeets,
— reduce the size of vessels, while manning them with
larger crews,
— roll back the expanded territorial waters of almost 200
nations,
— expect or desire any reduction in the volumes of Asian
trafﬁc,
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

— eliminate the many ﬂaws inherent in the “ﬂag of conven-
ience” system,
— or realistically hope for any contraction in available mili-
tary weaponry.
It might be possible to devise an internationally-acceptable
piracy charge that more nations would recognize and apply, and
it certainly should be a reasonable goal to deny land sanctuaries
to modern criminals—most especially the brazen practice of
anchoring pirate prizes directly off the Somali coast, while
extorting their ransoms.
International support and regional cooperation are necessary
ingredients for beating piracy, the latter proving most effective
when motivated by self-interest and including a voice for disaf-
fected parties. Increased naval patrols can only provide a short-
term and impermanent reduction in assaults, as virtually every
expert agrees that in the long run, piracy will be—and always
has been—defeated on land, not at sea.
Textbook Case: Strait of Malacca, 2005
The world’s most recent success in the struggle against piracy was
gained in this crowded strategic waterway. Between 2000 and
2005, there were a total of 2,224 attacks reported worldwide,
almost half—1,055—taking place in Southeast Asian waters.
Many of these occurred among the unending columns of
merchantmen patiently moving through this 500-mile-long,
20-mile-wide Strait so narrow along certain stretches that vessels
could not even deviate from their heading to avoid clearly visible
pirate boats as they approached. And this great volume of com-
mercial trafﬁc still continues to soar today: annual numbers of
transiting ships rising from more than 50,000 in 2003 to 70,000-
plus only ﬁve years later and are projected to double to 141,000
by 2020. This ceaseless stream of shipping is already carrying
roughly 40 percent of all world cargo, and more than half of all
oil and liqueﬁed natural gas.
In the three years between 2003 and 2006 alone, oil shipments
through the Strait increased from 10 million to an estimated
15 million barrels a day, feeding the insatiable demands of China,
Japan, and South Korea. Present oil ﬂows through the Strait are
three times greater than those of the Suez Canal and 15 times
greater than the Panama Canal. Major client nations in the Far
Solutions
73

East such as Japan and China had quietly complained in recent
times about size restrictions imposed by the Strait’s 82-foot shal-
lowest depth so that larger and more economical supertankers
cannot be used for transport that exceed these “Malaccamax”
dimensions. Consequently, proposals for possibly building a
pipeline, or even digging a canal as an alternate route across the
Malay Peninsula, have been raised occasionally by these coun-
tries as a cost-saving measure. Persistent piratical strikes against
transiting ships, some deliberately targeted by criminal gangs
operating ashore, had also been a continual source of irritation.
Crisis
Because of the pernicious nature of such attacks, the Joint War
Committee or JWC of Lloyd’s Market Association suddenly
included the Strait of Malacca on its listing of danger zones as of
June 20, 2005, branding it a passage “highly prone to piracy, war
strikes, terrorism, and related perils for ocean shipping.” This
declaration quickly shot up insurance premiums by as much as
30 percent for the masses of vessels already heading toward the
Strait, so that safer but more distant alternate routes soon began
to look more economically attractive. Faced with a potential loss
of hundreds of millions of dollars in revenue, the three states that
share control over this waterway—Singapore, Malaysia, and
Indonesia—were galvanized into addressing and rapidly resolv-
ing their problem of piracy.
Singapore had already invested signiﬁcantly in its naval
forces and Coast Guard so that its relatively small expanse of
territorial waters retained a reputation for safety, an important
consideration for what had become the world’s largest transship-
ment hub (its modern port facilities handling more than 29 million
containers by 2008). Malaysia had also substantially upgraded its
maritime agencies, although their operations remained riddled
with corruption. Local ﬁshermen had complained that Malaysian
Marine Police ofﬁcers regularly harassed them, demanding
money or ﬁsh while senior ofﬁcials moreover acknowledged that
numerous pirate victims did not even bother reporting attacks, as
they were “afraid of acts of revenge because they believe, or
know, that law-enforcement agencies are themselves involved in
illegal activities” (Tanter, “Roots”).
Similar shortcomings existed among the Indonesian Navy
and police, which had the world’s largest archipelago to patrol.
Each government therefore moved quickly to rectify its own
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

problems so as to make any cooperation between all three that
much more effective. In November 2005, a new “Malaysian
Maritime Enforcement Agency” or MMEAwas created, the equiva-
lent of a Coast Guard, while the Indonesian Navy also achieved
remarkable improvements, despite limited resources. Its theater of
operations was contracted when the Indonesian government struck
a peace deal with the rebel group GAM that same year of 2005,
helping reduce regional violence and thus freeing up more vessels
for policing the Strait. Lingering jurisdictional issues between all
three nations were also resolved so that pirates could no longer
enjoy the advantage of raiding in neighboring zones, then ﬂeeing
back across the boundary into their territorial waters, beyond pur-
suit. And timely American assistance also provided the necessary
technology for this newfound joint resolve to work.
Effective U.S. Assistance
It had always been a long-standing American foreign-policy
objective to secure sea-lines of communication in Southeast Asia
so as to ensure orderly trafﬁc, commercial freedom of navigation,
and stability in the South China Sea. In addition, as part of its
“Global War on Terrorism” after the events of September 11,
2001, the administration of President George W. Bush had begun
providing ﬁnancial assistance and training to strengthen the
capacities of police and armed forces in various countries. Start-
ing as of 2006, this ongoing “Global Train and Equip” Program
would add a further $80 million in funding and equipment,
which allowed Indonesia to create 12 new coastal surveillance
stations—including ﬁve along the Strait of Malacca—plus nine
new Malaysian radar stations along the Sabah coast, which
together greatly enhanced surveillance and made interdiction
swifter and more effective, so that new patrol crafts were soon
running down pirate boats wherever they chose to ﬂee.
[See Table 6.5 in Chapter 6, for more detailed statistical infor-
mation on the reduction of piracy in the Strait of Malacca and
Indonesian waters during this period.]
Beyond its obvious efﬁcacy and immediate impact in helping
curtail pirate attacks, foreign observers commended this U.S. assis-
tance for having been “implemented in a sensitive, subtle fashion”
(Tanter, “Roots”). Japan and India had been involved in providing
much of the actual equipment, conducting antipiracy training exer-
cises and other forms of technical assistance to the three frontline
states.
Solutions
75

Resolution
Within a year, such a dramatic decline was achieved in the number
of pirate attacks being reported out of the Strait, that Lloyd’s
removed Malacca’s name from their danger list by August 11,
2006. Yet even with this crisis seemingly resolved, all three nations
maintained their energetic new antipiracy policy, reducing assaults
still further over the next few years, almost to the vanishing point.
Major client nations in Asia noted this success and acknowl-
edged the expense entailed in sustaining this level of security in
the Strait into the future, as well as the necessary navigational
aids and pollution-prevention—which together might cost as
much as $300 million a year by 2020. Japan’s Nippon Foundation
has therefore recommended that all ships transiting through the
Strait voluntarily contribute one cent per deadweight ton of
cargo, a fee which would generate about $40 million annually
toward offsetting such expenses. Another option would be to
ask shipping companies that to make contributions as a form of
corporate social responsibility, but both ideas have been resisted.
Six Basic Elements for Success
The spectacularly swift turnaround achieved during 2005–2006 in
the Strait of Malacca demonstrated how effectively modern
piracy can be contained by a concerted, multiprong effort. The
lessons derived from this success underscore six basic elements
required in all such victorious antipiracy campaigns—whether
in the past, present, or future:
Accurate Intelligence
No campaign can succeed without ﬁrst determining the roles of
most major parties involved, especially leading groups of perpe-
trators, ﬁnanciers, collaborators, sympathizers, etc. Not that every
individual need be identiﬁed fully for an overall effort to succeed;
for example, the shadowy triad organizers who once launched
repeated
strikes
in
the
Strait
still
remain
anonymous
today, although their criminal enterprise has been successfully
dismantled. Nevertheless, the general structure and workings of
any pirate network should at least be understood, its bases and
methods of operation revealed, ﬁnances and disposal of booty
probed so as to exert pressure upon its weakest points.
In other recent instances, reliable information on piratical
activities was difﬁcult to obtain out of the South China Sea during
76
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

the late 1990s, making any resolution unattainable; yet partici-
pants in Nigeria’s currently ongoing piracy problem are broadly
known throughout the troubled Niger Delta, although the moti-
vations behind their depredations have still not been directly
addressed by the national authorities, so that such difﬁculties will
fester. Lairs and tactics employed by pirate bands around the
Strait of Malacca quickly became apparent to their police pur-
suers, accelerating their defeat; but while abundant information
is available today on the tactics and methods employed by Somali
pirates—who brazenly anchor their prizes within plain sight off
its barren coastline for weeks on end, while negotiating multimil-
lion dollar ransoms—there are no local authorities available who
are willing to put a stop to this criminality.
International Commitment
Since piracy is by deﬁnition a crime which can only be perpe-
trated in international waters, beyond any country’s jurisdiction,
it is best solved through a joint international commitment. Nor
does such an effort necessarily require a major deployment of
naval squadrons; for as has been noted above, America’s low-
cost ﬁnancing of a few strategic surveillance bases and coastal
outposts proved decisive in defeating piracy in the Strait of Mal-
acca, providing existing patrol forces from neighboring countries
with the necessary means to locate and run down their quarry,
thus ﬁnishing the job themselves without any outside assistance.
International commitment furthermore works best when it is
generally welcome in a region; appeals to the self-interest of at least
some of the local parties involved; and doesn’t drag on too long.
Regional Cooperation
This element is an essential, and in the case of the Strait of Mal-
acca campaign, a crucial factor in the defeat of piracy. Prior to that
campaign, local pirates would deliberately strike out of their
shore bases across international boundaries so as to escape any
pursuit by running back into their territorial waters with their
plunder. Patrol boats from the victimized nation would have to
break off their pursuit, while police boats in the pirates’s nation
remained unaware that any crime had even been committed. A
reciprocal agreement between Singapore, Malaysia, and Indone-
sia, which permitted coordinated pursuits by all naval and police
units throughout the Strait, proved a decisive factor in ending this
practice.
Solutions
77

A similar approach is being attempted by European navies in
Somalia, as deals have been struck with its autonomous States of
Somaliland and Puntland—which face out onto the busy shipping
lanes of the Gulf of Aden—to assist in the detention and prosecu-
tion of any pirates. A notable decline in attacks has resulted in that
waterway, although pirates from distant Central Somalia have
instead shifted to operations farther out into the Indian Ocean
expanses.
Local Involvement
The last phase of an antipiracy campaign usually includes some
element addressing local conditions or grievances as a means of
ensuring that such criminality will not return. Yet piracy was
defeated in the Strait of Malacca without any signiﬁcant assistance
to the impoverished Malaysian or Indonesian ﬁshermen who
turned to this crime, while any relief for their desperately-poor
counterparts in Central Somalia is a long way off.
Denial of Prey
Just like robbers on land, pirates primarily seek to proﬁt from
their criminality at sea, not engage in pointless armed clashes.
The handheld weaponry which they typically brandish during a
pursuit is intended to frighten and subdue their victims, not pose
a serious military threat.
Naval professionals have long deplored the weakened state
of most modern merchantmen, as even huge vessels carrying
immensely valuable cargo through known danger zones will
often only be lightly manned and lacking in any rudimentary
defensive procedures. Such easy prizes can be denied to pirates
by such simple and relatively cost-effective measures as organiz-
ing into convoys; transiting through high-risk areas in rough
weather or darkened at night; refusing to reduce speed for pirate
boarders; limiting access-points into a ship’s interior; fortifying
and provisioning an internal “safe room” so as to await rescue;
stringing razor-wire coils along low-freeboard railings; minimize
communications; keep ﬁre hoses pressurized for instant dis-
charge; etc.
Legal Recourses
Still an unresolved issue, given that most major maritime powers
are reluctant to shoulder the expense and unexpected complica-
tions of ﬂying suspected pirates out of a region to stand trial in
78
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

their own courts, while many Third-World nations are loathe to
be involved in such prosecutions on behalf of wealthier
governments.
In the case of the antipiracy efforts in the Strait of Malacca,
such defendants were arraigned in local courts. As for the more
complicated circumstances off Somalia, the European Union tem-
porarily circumvented this issue by signing an agreement with
the Kenyan government on March 6, 2009, whereby suspected
pirates could be landed in that East African nation to face trial in
Kenyan courts under the international statutes of the UN’s “Con-
vention on the Law of the Sea.” Similar, less-formal deals were
also struck with authorities in Somaliland and Puntland, which
may not withstand long-term scrutiny.
Sources
Bahadur, Jay. “The Pirate King of Somalia.” Globe & Mail [Canada],
April 26, 2009.
Freeman, Donald B. The Straits of Malacca: Gateway or Gauntlet? Montreal:
McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2003.
Karon, Tony. “Battling the Somali Pirates: The Return of the Islamists.”
Time Magazine, November 25, 2008.
“Lawless Tradition of Piracy Off the Coast of Somalia.” The Guardian
[UK], November 18, 2008.
“Peril on the High Seas.” The Economist: Premium Content Online [UK],
April 23, 2008.
Piracy Off the Somali Coast: Workshop Commissioned by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations to Somalia,
Ambassador Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah. Nairobi, Kenya, November 2008.
Ploch, Lauren, et alia. Piracy Off the Horn of Africa. Washington, D.C.:
“Congressional Research Service” Report for Congress, September 28,
2009.
Report S/2006/229 of the U.N. Monitoring Group on Somalia, Submitted to the
Security Council on May 4, 2006. New York: United Nations Security
Council, 2006.
“Somali Piracy: ’We’re Defending Our Waters.’ ” Mail & Guardian Online
[UK], October 14, 2008.
Tanter, Richard. “The Challenges of Piracy in Southeast Asia and the Role
of Australia.” Nautilus Institute: Austral Peace and Security Network
Sources
79

[Australia], Austral Policy Forum Paper Number 07-19A, October 25,
2007.
Tanter, Richard. “The Roots of Piracy in Southeast Asia.” Nautilus
Institute: Austral Peace and Security Network [Australia], Austral Policy
Forum Paper Number 07-18A, October 22, 2007.
Wadhams, Nick. “As Somali Pirates Get Bolder, Policing Them Gets
Tougher.” Time Magazine, November 19, 2008.
Westcott, Kathryn. “Pirates in the Dock.” BBC News [UK], May 21, 2009.
Young, Adam J., and Valencia, Mark J. “Conﬂation of Piracy and
Terrorism in Southeast Asia: Rectitude and Utility.” Contemporary
Southeast Asia [Singapore] 25, Issue 2 (August 2003), pp. 269–284.
80
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

3
Special U.S. Issues
Ultimately, piracy is a problem that starts ashore, and requires an
international solution ashore. We made this clear at the offset of
our efforts. We cannot guarantee safety in this vast region.
—Vice Admiral William E. Gortney, U.S. Naval Forces
Central Command, before the House Armed Services Committee,
March 5, 2009
No vital aspect of America’s overseas trade, nor the nation’s
broader economic well-being, had been affected by the recent
resurgence of piracy in distant Asia or off the Horn of Africa. Few
U.S.-ﬂagged merchantmen transited those waters, and the ﬂow of
commerce reaching U.S. ports had scarcely registered a ﬂicker.
Insurance premiums remained the same, costs unwavering, the
importation of goods and oil unimpeded. Humanitarian concern
was naturally felt for piratical victims, while Washington was
worried about any potential damage to frail economies, which
might spiral into bigger regional problems. One timely response
had been the targeted assistance extended to Malaysia and Indo-
nesia during 2005–2006, which had allowed their own local forces
to reverse piratical gains, crowned by a swift restoration of secu-
rity to an immense ﬂow of multinational trafﬁc, without any overt
U.S. commitment or major expense.
Yet the U.S. government also remained wary of assuming
responsibility for more difﬁcult and costly problems created by
others, such as the overﬁshing by Asian trawler ﬂeets or disposal
of toxic wastes by European dumpers, which had so devastated
Somali ﬁshing grounds as to send hundreds of its despairing
81

ﬁshermen out to sea as pirates. And the administration of
President George W. Bush had its own separate, single-minded
agenda, which initially did not include any antipiracy component.
U.S. Naval Focus during the War on Terror
In the immediate aftermath to the terrorist strikes of September 11,
2001 which had so shocked New York City, the capital, and the
entire nation, U.S. and allied forces quickly launched President
Bush’s riposte by occupying Afghanistan, decimating the guilty
al-Qaeda organization and driving out its Taliban hosts. The sec-
ond phase of this “Global War on Terror” had then seen a sweeping
counteroffensive throughout the Near and Far East, codenamed
Operation “Enduring Freedom,” before a third phase shifted into
the Horn of Africa theater as of early 2002.
Thirty years previously, while the Arab island-emirate or
kingdom of Bahrain had still been in the process of gaining its
independence from British colonial rule, the U.S. Navy had leased
part of a former Royal Navy base on the outskirts of its capital city
of Manama. Only a token U.S. “Administrative Support Unit”
had ever occupied this outpost until July 1995, when mounting
regional tensions had led to its upgrade into the headquarters
for the U.S. Naval Forces Central Command and its adjunct
squadrons out at sea, the newly-reactivated U.S. Fifth Fleet.
From this strategic vantage-point deep within the Persian
Gulf, Central Command would come to direct over the ensuing
years regional operations by its warships, which were rotated in
and out according to need from the U.S. Paciﬁc and Atlantic Fleets.
The mission statement indicated that this presence was intended to
“help ensure peace and stability, and protect America’s vital inter-
ests,” on what would eventually become a 7.5-million square-mile
theater of operations encompassing the Red Sea, Arabian Sea, Gulf
of Oman, parts of the Indian Ocean, as well as the coast of East
Africa as far south as Kenya (COMUSNAVCENT “Command,”
“History,” etc.).
Coalition Maritime Contributions
A signiﬁcant element of this third phase in the global offensive
against terror were the warships from more than a dozen allied
nations, which soon began reaching the Indian Ocean as well, to
82
Special U.S. Issues

bolster the U.S. Fifth Fleet, which was also being ramped up. So
many coalition warships had joined by February 2002 that a sepa-
rate “Combined Maritime Forces” division was created within the
structure of Central Command, comprised of vessels from Aus-
tralia, Canada, France, Germany, The Netherlands, Italy, Pakistan,
New Zealand, Spain, Turkey, and the United Kingdom.
Assigned to patrols against suspected terrorist trafﬁc, these
coalition vessels—along with a few detached U.S. warships—
were formed into a multinational squadron initially dubbed
“Combined Task Force-150” or CTF-150, its leadership being exer-
cised by diverse nationalities in turn: German Adm. Gottfried
Hoch being appointed CTF-150’s ﬁrst commander as of May 5,
2002, then succeeded a few months later by Spanish Rear Admiral
Juan Moreno, etc. Yet the duties of both this new task force and
the U.S. Fifth Fleet, did not directly entail pursuit of pirates.
Combined Joint Task Force-Horn of Africa
Toward the end of that same year of 2002, it was decided to estab-
lish a new fortiﬁed U.S. land base in Djibouti, a strategically-
placed former French colony at the mouth of the Red Sea
overlooking the Gulf of Aden. From this stronghold, U.S. Marines
and Special Forces were to carry the ﬁght inland against Islamic
extremists, who were believed to be recruiting and training more
followers throughout the desert expanses of northeastern Africa.
A lease was signed by October 2002 for an abandoned Foreign
Legion compound—long ago named for General Emile-Rene´
Lemonnier—which lay just southwest of Djibouti’s Ambouli
International Airport, and which was to serve as the advance
headquarters for the fast-strike Combined Joint Task Force-Horn
of Africa to use in their “demining, humanitarian, and counter-
terrorism” efforts.
The ﬁrst Marine staff arrived off the coast of Djibouti next
month aboard the USS Mount Whitney, ﬁnding the remnants of
Camp Lemonier so uninhabitable that it had to be cleared ﬁrst
and then entirely rebuilt by U.S. Army Engineers. Work proceeded
over the next ﬁve months while the invasion of Iraq was going
forward. The completed 88-acre compound was turned over to
Combined Joint Task Force-Horn of Africa personnel by May 6,
2003, capable of housing up to 2,000 servicemen and eventually
expanded into 500 acres to further accommodate Marine helicop-
ters, Navy P-3 reconnaissance planes, U.S. Air Force HC-130, and
U.S. Naval Focus during the War on Terror
83

heavy C-17 transports, U.S. Army Field Artillery units, plus naval
Seabees. As part of its overall “Trans-Saharan Counter-Terrorism
Initiative,” this base also provided training in counterinsurgency
tactics for select regional forces, as well as humanitarian assistance
in the form of free medical clinics and school constructions.
As of December 2002, this foothold in Djibouti had been rein-
forced offshore by the allied Combined Task Force-150, which
was to act as naval support group for this deployment. Again,
the primary mission of these warships was to monitor, inspect,
board, and stop “suspected shipments from entering the Horn of
Africa region,” not conduct antipiracy sweeps.
Invasion of Iraq
While Camp Lemonier was still being constructed in early 2003, the
U.S. Fifth Fleet had been built up into a massive force with the
addition of ﬁve aircraft carriers, a half-dozen huge amphib-
ious assault ships, plus numerous lesser warships in anticipation
of the war against Iraq. Aerial bombardment of Baghdad started
on March 20, 2003, and twin fast-moving armored columns quickly
brought about the downfall of the Saddam Hussein regime
by April 9th, with an end to all conventional ﬁghting six days
afterward.
Post-War Mission
Soon after the war had concluded, the large extra number of
U.S. Navy battle-groups and major warships deployed into the
Arabian Sea and Indian Ocean to support this campaign quickly
began to be drawn down. Meanwhile, lighter U.S. and allied war-
ships were moved in closer to Iraq so as to protect its offshore oil
installations, patrol its porous borders, and escort convoys bring-
ing in the vast amount of supplies required by the occupation
forces. But as Iraq’s internal security then began to spin out of con-
trol, this unexpected shift in circumstances meant that a visible
naval presence would have to be sustained in this theater, much
longer than anticipated, to help maintain watch against foreign
ﬁghters and bomb makers slipping in from hostile neighboring
states.
It should be noted that none of these U.S. or coalition warships
had been speciﬁcally tasked with combating piracy. Occasionally,
some might be diverted on a rescue mission for a limited time,
84
Special U.S. Issues

and within an adjacent zone, while any would naturally steam to
the assistance of any nearby merchantman under attack. But the
United States would not formally assign any naval assets—
at all—solely to the task of antipiracy operations in the Horn of
Africa region, until 2008 (Ploch, p. 4). Not that there was any
pressing need for such a commitment during the immediate post-
war phase, when such assaults were very few in number in those
waters. However, depredations were about to dramatically mush-
room hundreds of miles farther south, off the central Somali coast,
with a purpose and brazenness that caught many by surprise.
Ominous Piracy Surge Out of Somalia
The lawlessness gripping this prostrate, fragmented, and impov-
erished nation—wracked by civil wars and strife for the past
15 years—was universally known by 2005. Most regional vessels
passed by cautiously, well away from its extensive coastline, and
keeping a wary eye for any self-proclaimed “coast guards” or des-
peradoes who might venture offshore in small boats. Yet coastal
trafﬁc was so sparse and low-value in this region that outright
pirate attacks had become relatively rare—only three captures
being reported out of Somali waters during 2003, and two in 2004.
The Extortionate Business of Ransoms
However, a penniless ex-civil servant named Mohamed Abdi
Hassan Hayir, more commonly called Afweyne or “Big Mouth,”
was about to transform the forlorn and sun-bleached town of
Harardheere, a neglected port on the central Somali coast, into a
major pirate lair. Determined to unify the random attacks being
sporadically launched against chance targets offshore into a prof-
itable business, he had raised some capital in 2003 and traveled
into Puntland, to recruit veteran pirates as instructors. Notorious
rovers such as Garad Mohamed, Farah Hirsi “Boyah” Kulan,
and Farah Abdullahi had been lured south by Hassan’s induce-
ments to serve him both as active captains offshore, as well as
indoctrinating his own local followers.
Afweyne soon managed to create a structured pirate organi-
zation, whose sole purpose was to waylay foreign vessels and
patiently hold them for ransom with proper logistical support
ashore so as to await eventual payment. Harardheere’s very
Ominous Piracy Surge Out of Somalia
85

remoteness proved ideal as a base of operations, being scarcely
accessible to the rest of the country by road, and so beyond all
effective central authority. A backwater, it had also been spared
much of the bitter civil wars raging elsewhere in Somalia, which
meant that no pressing demands would be made on Hassan’s
ﬂedgling organization to share its proﬁts with any large feuding
factions or clans. Instead, his proceeds—after bribes to a few local
ofﬁcials to ignore prizes being anchored offshore, plus payments
to local suppliers—left ample funds to be re-invested into more
sorties, as well as in procuring better equipment and recruits.
See Table 6.7 in Chapter 6, for a more detailed statistical
breakdown on the upsurge in reported pirate attacks in Somali
waters and the adjoining Gulf of Aden during this period.
Foreign observers soon noted how Afweyne’s new southern
marauders enjoyed better boats, armaments, even satellite phones
and Global Positioning Systems to locate their targets. The ruth-
lessness of his criminal enterprise was exempliﬁed by the
hijacking of the UN-chartered aid ship Semlow on the evening of
June 27, 2005 by 15 of his young gunmen aboard three ﬁberglass
speedboats equipped with powerful outboard motors. This eld-
erly, 920-ton Kenyan freighter had been plodding past northward
about 30 miles offshore, bearing 850 tons of German- and
Japanese-donated rice for the World Food Program or WFP to be
distributed at Bosaso among survivors of a recent tsunami, when
it was taken. Despite the public outcry, international condemna-
tion, and suspension of all humanitarian shipments into starving
Somalia as a result, Afweyne stubbornly held his prize at anchor
for three months off Ceel Huur, 70 miles from Harardheere, until
a reduced ransom of $135,000 was paid.
His organizational practices would spread north when such
hired mercenaries as Garad Mohamed and Boyah returned to their
lawless home port of Eyl, applying them to their own independent
operations. Other imitators would also appear, especially as the
ransoms increased in volume, producing tempting streams of cash
into such poor and backward areas. The number of reported cap-
tures off Somalia jumped from two in 2004, to 35 by 2005, prompt-
ing worried foreign shipping-ﬁrms to shift their routes a couple of
hundred miles out to sea, beyond the range of most pirate shore
boats. This uptick was also noted by international observers, even
attracting the attention of U.S. Navy ofﬁcers patrolling much far-
ther north in the Arabian Sea, as well as at the regional U.S. foot-
hold in Djibouti. However, Washington’s primary focus still
86
Special U.S. Issues

remained its ﬁght against terrorism and Islamic extremism, not an
antipiracy campaign.
Textbook Case: Chance Rescue
of a Dhow, January 2006
By January 16, 2006, the small Indian dhow Saﬁna Al Bisarat had
already run about 200 miles northeastward out of Kismaayo,
bound toward Dubai in the United Arab Emirates to deliver a
cargo of charcoal, when it was suddenly attacked by three small
speedboats carrying 10 men brandishing AK-47s, RPG launchers,
and pistols. They pulled alongside the dhow and used ladders to
quickly swarm aboard, supposedly identifying themselves as the
“Somali Marines.” Al Bisarat’s Captain and 15 crewmembers
were corralled on its forecastle under threats of physical violence
while the pirate leader used the dhow’s own radio to contact
his headquarters ashore requesting further instructions (Report
S/2006/229).
The three speedboats were then secured astern of the
hijacked vessel and taken under tow, three pirates remaining
aboard one of these boats, which contained their extra weapons,
fuel, and provisions. The captive Indian captain was ordered to
alter course farther out to sea, moving 200 miles out into the busy
international shipping lanes where the pirates intended to use Al
Bisarat as an inconspicuous “mother ship” to attack passing
merchantmen. Over the next three days, they would make three
such unsuccessful attempts, their ﬁnal attack occurring on Janu-
ary 19, 2006, when they ﬁred numerous rounds and rocket-
propelled grenades at the Bahamian-registered bulk carrier Delta
Ranger. This vessel reported its narrow escape by radio to the
International Maritime Bureau in Kuala Lumpur, which in turn
relayed this information to the U.S. naval authorities in Bahrain.
As the 380-man, 9,200-ton guided-missile destroyer USS
Winston S. Churchill happened to be on patrol “against al-Qaeda
elements” only about 100 miles away from the spot of this latest
attack, its commander was diverted on the morning of
January 20th to go in search of the pirate mother ship. Churchill
located the suspect vessel that same afternoon, tracking its move-
ments throughout that moonless night. The noise of its helicopter
engine caused the pirates to panic at dawn, immediately ordering
the dhow steered west toward the distant Somali coast, in hopes
of reaching its territorial waters. Yet Churchill easily shadowed
Ominous Piracy Surge Out of Somalia
87

the small vessel, coming menacingly up over the horizon with the
sunrise on January 21, 2006. By 8:00 a.m., the 16 captive Indian
crewmen could be plainly seen huddled on its forecastle, holding
up a piece of plywood with these spray-painted words: “SIR
PLEASE HELP US” (Raffaelle).
The U.S. warship thereupon attempted to raise the dhow by
both ship-to-ship radio and over loudspeaker, directing that its
crew be released aboard the two small boats which could be seen
trailing astern (the third pirate craft having parted company
during the night). The gunmen ignored these instructions and
pressed westward so that—with Somali territorial waters now only
four hours ahead—Churchill closed in and at a range of 500 yards,
ﬁred a burst of 25mm shells across Al Bisarat’s bow at 11:30 a.m.
The dhow stopped, yet its captors still refused to cooperate.
Churchill threatened to open ﬁre once more at 1:00 p.m., then
loosed off another burst at 2:20 p.m., which ﬁnally convinced the
pirates to reply by radio and begin releasing their captives a half-
hour later. Armed U.S. Navy personnel then went aboard Al Bisarat
and secured its 10 pirate captors, who had tossed most of their
weapons overboard during the pursuit, although an AK-47 was
subsequently found hidden in its wheelhouse.
Late that same afternoon of January 21, 2006, the ﬂagship for
Churchill’s strike group—the 40,000-ton amphibious assault ship
USS Nassau—joined both vessels, securing the pirates in its brig.
The two U.S. warships thereupon resumed their antiterrorist
patrols, while U.S. Central Command in Bahrain was consulted
as to the prisoners’ fate. It was decided to hand them over to the
authorities in Kenya to stand trial for piracy, which was eventually
done a month later at Mombassa, on February 25, 2006. Eventu-
ally, all 10 were sentenced to seven years in prison.
Deliberate Targeting of Prizes
Yet while U.S. and allied naval forces would continue to concen-
trate on defending the contentious waters off distant Iraq, as well
as containing any spread of Islamic extremism throughout the
region, the business of proﬁt-motivated seizures took root unchal-
lenged along the barren stretches of central Somalia, accompanied
by a palpable increase in the sophistication and organization of
some of these piratical strikes, which—in the words of a UN intel-
ligence report compiled in May 2006—left the commercial-shipping
88
Special U.S. Issues

world “reeling with concern” (Report S/2006/229, p. 25). The
opportunistic and scattered attacks once launched close inshore
by roving boatloads of local clansmen were being superseded by
directed ventures, backed by:
•
land-based headquarters to plan, direct, and control any
distant vessel seizures by radio
•
informal yet effective information-relaying networks,
often embedded throughout neighboring countries, to
advise on any rich merchant-ship departures and their
intended routes
•
sufﬁcient funds to ensure that these new pirate bands
could put out to sea manned by competent sailors and
reliable gunmen, all adequately armed and provisioned,
many additionally equipped with satellite phones and
GPS systems.
The UN monitoring group noted that such new expeditions
usually consisted of about 10 pirates, some seamen and the
remainder gunmen, distributed aboard two speedboats and a
provisions-boat. They would often target a harmless-looking
dhow, trawler, or coastal trader close inshore, to use as a mother
ship for venturing farther out, into the international shipping
lanes. There, they would employ their captive vessel’s radar “to
monitor ship movements up to 60 miles away,” while lying in
wait for a choice victim (ibid., p. 26).
The disciplined focus and deliberate targeting by such strike
groups, also meant that coastal traders could often purchase an
exemption from attack. The UN report described maritime trafﬁc
at other Somali seaports such as Berbera, Bosaso, El Ma’an, Kis-
maayo, and Marka as “thriving,” noting that:
Cargo ships laden with all types of foodstuffs, clothing,
hardware items, oils and lubricants, fuel, building mate-
rials, and electronic goods, arrive regularly at Somali
seaports. Somali businessmen have links with traders
in South America, China, India, the Far East, the Middle
East, Mediterranean countries, and East and southern
African countries. (ibid., p. 22)
Advance payments—euphemistically known as “safety fees,”
ranging from $50,000 per ship on upwards—plus other bribes
Ominous Piracy Surge Out of Somalia
89

once in port to local syndicates controlling the tugs, cranes, steve-
dores, etc., ensured a welcome reception. El Ma’an, for example,
was estimated to be receiving 30 merchantmen a month, and
processing a total of two million metric tons of goods a year. Some
unscrupulous local strongmen and ofﬁcials even continued to sell
ﬁshing permits to foreign trawlers, at prices ranging from $80,000
a year and up. “Some permits are typed out on the previous gov-
ernment’s letterhead, while others bear the personal seals of war-
lords” (ibid., p. 24).
Islamic Clampdown, Summer 2006
Surprisingly, the growing number of hijackings was abruptly
curtailed by the sudden rise to power of a religious faction called
the Islamic Courts Union (ICU), whose militiamen defeated vari-
ous bickering warlords and fought their way into the capital
Mogadishu by June 5, 2006. That same summer, ICU forces
expanded beyond its district, pushing 300 miles northeastward
to sweep uncontested into the remote pirate port-towns of
Hobyo and Harardheere by mid-August 2006. Being long
opposed to piracy on religious grounds, dismissing it as an
unworthy path to unseemly wealth, the ICU ordered a halt to
all such sorties, in addition to imposing other restrictions in
accordance with strict Sharia law. The tiny local skiffs at these
ports were mostly laid up at that time anyway, because the
summer monsoon season is when high winds and seas typically
rise along the East African coast, rendering any lengthy ventures
out to sea dangerous from late April through early September
(Piracy Off the Somali Coast, p. 15).
But few forays were attempted when that autumn came,
while the ICU had also succeeded in reopening Mogadishu’s air-
port and seaport that same year to international trafﬁc, for the
ﬁrst time more than a decade. It may well have been that the fun-
damentalists genuinely intended to repress piracy throughout
southern Somalia so as to help nurture the shattered region’s
maritime trade and economy back to life. Such religious leaders
had long condemned the allure of piracy’s ill-gotten wealth,
advising their followers not to participate or support it, some
even going so far as to assert that marriage to a pirate was null
and void in the eyes of the law (ibid., p. 18).
The statistical downturn in reported pirate strikes out of
Somalia is evident upon examining Table 6.7 in Chapter 6, under
the year 2006.
90
Special U.S. Issues

When an intrepid British reporter visited the notorious sea-
port of Eyl three years afterward—with two captive merchant-
men plainly visible offshore, prizes awaiting ransoms—a crowd
nonetheless quickly gathered and one woman informed him:
We are all against the pirates here. They have brought
bad culture here. They come here with their shiny cars,
collect their money, and leave. We worry that our chil-
dren will be attracted to crime. We are very fearful of
the pirates, and of the international community. We hear
reports that the West will launch air-strikes against our
town. (Harding)
U.S. Intervention
However, U.S. operatives at Djibouti and ofﬁcials of the Bush
administration in Washington were more concerned by reputed
links between certain extremist elements within the ICU and
the international pariah network of al-Qaeda, in particular the
belief that three leaders involved in past terrorist attacks—
including the bombings of the U.S. Embassies in Kenya and
Tanzania in 1998—were being given shelter by certain ICU
fundamentalists.
Covert U.S. support was therefore directed to help fund a
counterinsurgency against Somalia’s new Islamist rulers, led by a
group of displaced and disaffected Mogadishu warlords, who
banded into the so-called “Alliance for the Restoration of Peace
and Counter-Terrorism.” With the backing of Ethiopian troops,
they defeated and drove the ICU from ofﬁce by late December 2006,
after which a U.S. airstrike with an AC-130 gunship was conducted
that following month against al-Qaeda members embedded with
ICU forces in southern Somalia, near Ras Kamboni. The aircraft
carrier USS Dwight D. Eisenhower and other U.S. naval forces were
even positioned off the coast to provide support, and prevent any
al-Qaeda members from escaping by sea.
Yet regional and European governments noted how during
its brief term in ofﬁce, the ICU had effectively reduced Somali
piracy—which once they were gone, revived and exploded into
an unbridled wave of attacks. With only 10 pirate attacks reported
in Somali waters during the ICU’s six months in ofﬁce, some ana-
lysts believed—and still insist—that the Islamists remain the best
bet for restraining piracy off the Horn of Africa.
Ominous Piracy Surge Out of Somalia
91

Unfettered Somali Piracy (2007–Present)
Following the expulsion of the ICU, the number of piratical
depredations soon regained momentum, and strikes began to
expand outward on a much more far-ranging scale than before.
Attacks would no longer be conﬁned to within 50 nautical miles
of Somalia’s coast, as many pirates began employing their small,
fast skiffs to instead hijack innocuous coasters or trawlers as they
plodded past near shore, and compelled their crews to tow them
far out into the main shipping lanes. With these new tactics,
attempts on merchantmen would escalate not only far out into
the Indian Ocean, but also well into the Gulf of Aden, even as
far as the mouth of the Red Sea.
America’s Redefined Role (June 2007)
In response to allied and regional complaints, plus some criticism
for its removal of the only Somali government apparently capable
of restraining such piratical forays, the Bush administration issued
a new policy statement in mid-June 2007, agreeing to address and
treat security concerns off the Horn of Africa as a separate issue to
its ongoing “War on Terror.” After ﬁve-and-a-half years of coalition
support for this U.S.-led offensive, Washington was willing to assist
its partners against this spreading problem, which represented
much more of a direct threat to their commercial and economic
well-being.
Not that the redeployment of all allied warships in the “Com-
bined Maritime Forces” division would have sufﬁced for such an
immense task, as—even including U.S. assets—they were far too
few in number to patrol any signiﬁcant portion of such a vast
arena. Although the coalition naval-contribution was drawn from
sixteen different nations, the actual number of warships that they
could muster in this distant theater at any given time varied from
only between six to 10 vessels. Such slender strength could never
possibly cover a sea expanse stretching over a couple of thousand
miles from the Straits of Hormuz as far south as Kenya, nor
would warships necessarily provide the best and sole solution.
Cautionary Case: Golden Nori Rescue
Some drawbacks to the U.S. Navy’s participation in antipiracy
patrols were soon to be revealed. Early on a Sunday morning,
92
Special U.S. Issues

October 28, 2007, the 280-man, 9,000-ton destroyer USS Porter—
on routine patrol as part of the multinational Combined Task
Force-150, although still ofﬁcially part of the antiterrorist Opera-
tion “Enduring Freedom-Horn of Africa”—picked up a distress
call from an unknown tanker in the Gulf of Aden, saying that it
was being boarded from two pirate skiffs. The warship immedi-
ately steamed toward this signal’s coordinates, which had origi-
nated some 80 nautical miles northwest of Caluula on the
Somali coast. The captive vessel proved to be the 11,700-ton,
Japanese-owned, Panamanian-ﬂagged Golden Nori, which had
been seized by pirates led by the notorious Farah Hirsi Kulan, bet-
ter known as “Boyah,” who was already sailing his prize toward
Somalia’s 12-mile limit, intending to round the Horn of Africa
and anchor it several hundred miles farther south so as to extort
a ransom from near his stronghold of Eyl.
But when Porter overtook this ﬂeeing vessel in international
waters that same Sunday afternoon, its gunners quickly
destroyed the pair of skiffs being towed astern with a few bursts
of 25mm rounds, isolating Boyah and his pirates on board. Wash-
ington then used its contacts with the tottering Transitional
National Government in distant Mogadishu to secure authoriza-
tion for the U.S. destroyer Arleigh Burke and other warships to join
this pursuit into Somalia’s territorial waters so that Boyah could
not shake off the foreign squadron. Only the fact that Golden
Nori’s 23-man crew was being held hostage and that the tanker
was loaded with 40,000 tons of volatile chemicals—including
extremely-ﬂammable benzene—prevented an immediate assault.
However, a two-month standoff thereupon ensued, with two
U.S. and a German warship maintaining watch over this cornered
prize. Its Japanese owners ﬁnally started negotiations for their
tanker’s release in November 2007, after which Boyah managed
to inch Golden Nori by December 4th into the harbor at Bosaso,
Puntland’s biggest port and most populous city. A ransom of
$1.5 million was allegedly paid eight days later to free both ship
and crew, at which point Boyah and his pirates escaped ashore.
In order to maximize the beneﬁts from this lengthy intervention,
the U.S. and allied warships furthermore exerted pressure on the
captors of four other anchored merchantmen in that area, securing
their release and producing a brief downturn in local hijackings.
Yet although this rescue of Golden Nori and four other prizes
was hailed as a victory over piracy, naval professionals realized
that such lopsided encounters were hardly cost-effective. As an
Unfettered Somali Piracy (2007–Present)
93

analyst from the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments
in Washington would comment during its aftermath: “Essentially,
you don’t want to use a billion-dollar DDG [guided-missile
destroyer] to suppress pirates. That’s a mission for a much
smaller ship.” He went on to note that although the U.S. Navy still
had numerous vessels posted to the Horn of Africa region, “These
are ships designed for high-end war ﬁghting, not chasing
pirates.” Most U.S. warships remaining in that theater had origi-
nally been dispatched to ﬁght a conventional war, equipped to
do battle against modern aircraft, naval opponents, or missile
strikes.
By way of contrast, Somali pirates ventured out to sea in
bare, 30-foot, open skiffs with high freeboards, powered by out-
board motors. Such craft were usually manufactured of ﬁberglass
in Yemeni boatyards, and sold to coastal traders or ﬁshermen for
$2,500–$3,500 apiece. The most highly-regarded outboard motors
for powering such craft were twin 150-horsepower Yamaha mod-
els, which allowed a skiff to attain speeds of 30 knots in relatively
calm seas, with four people jostling onboard. Most of the pirates’
handheld weaponry also originated out of Yemen, although a sig-
niﬁcant proportion came from Mogadishu. Typically, arms deal-
ers or middlemen would receive a deposit on behalf of a group
of pirates through a hawala broker, and a batch of weapons would
then be driven into Puntland, where the balance would be paid
upon delivery (Piracy Off the Coast of Somalia, p. 14).
NATO, EU, and UN Commitments
By the spring of 2008, the explosion of piratical sorties emanating
out of such notorious lairs as Eyl, Hobyo, and Haradheere, would
begin
to
reach
alarming
proportions
and
encompass
ever-wider tracts of ocean, with ships seemingly being attacked
anywhere pirates chose to strike. Already stretched too thin, U.S.
Naval Forces Central Command had in early January 2008
detached a few coalition warships from its multinational Com-
bined Task Force-150 to make random “Visit, Board, Search, and
Seizure” inspections on dhows and oil tankers circulating near
the Somali coast, a measure which had produced little beneﬁt.
As the toll of losses mounted, an international outcry arose—
especially out of Europe—against this mushrooming rash of
assaults, which not only threatened its commercial sea lines but
were being launched with a purposefulness and brazenness that
94
Special U.S. Issues

had caught many by surprise, and portended serious trouble for
the foreseeable future.
When the French government was compelled to pay a $2 mil-
lion ransom for the release of its luxury cruise ship Le Ponant
in mid-April 2008, sharpshooters were sent aboard helicopters
in pursuit of these Somali pirates as they escaped ashore, six
being captured after a brief shootout and ﬂown away to stand
trial in Paris. The conservative British journal The Economist edi-
torialized less than two weeks later in its April 23, 2008 issue,
that “Sonalia’s coastal waters are proving increasingly perilous
for mariners,” and joined the rising call from many quarters for
vigorous counter-measures. A UN assessment later this same
year would concur that “marine travel anywhere near the stretch
of Somalia known as Puntland, has become the most dangerous
waters in the world for merchantmen” (Piracy Off the Coast of
Somalia, p. 14).
See Table 6.7 in Chapter 6, for a more detailed statistical break-
down on the surge in reported pirate attacks in Somali waters and
adjoining Gulf of Aden during this period.
Because of the virtual eradication of piracy in the Strait of
Malacca, the Horn of Africa had now become the major global
hot spot, with reported attacks off its shores almost tripling in a
single year between 2007 and 2008, rising from 44 to 111—this
latter ﬁgure representing almost 40 percent of 2008’s world total.
After witnessing the onslaught of attacks during that spring, the
regional Commander of U.S. Naval Central Command in Bahrain
attempted to prepare for a second round of pirate strikes once the
summer monsoon season ended by establishing a “Maritime Secu-
rity Patrol Area” in the region as of August 22, 2008. This was to be
a movable trafﬁc-lane running through the Gulf of Aden, which
could be regularly monitored and patrolled by U.S. and Combined
Maritime Forces’ warships and aircraft so as to afford some mea-
sure of protection for merchantmen who chose to transit along this
route, until a more long-term solution could be instituted. Yet ini-
tial results did not seem promising, as “preliminary data indicates
that the pirate success rate for hijacking is only slightly lower
inside the MSPA, than outside” (Countering Piracy).
However, both Washington and U.S. Navy ofﬁcials in the
region were reluctant to divert any more of their strength
1,200 miles southwest from their advance-support roles near the
Persian Gulf, especially to initiate a protracted new campaign
against Somali pirates. In any event, the large U.S. warships
Unfettered Somali Piracy (2007–Present)
95

would be wasted in pursuit of tiny skiffs, while the vast majority
of victimized vessels were European, Asian, or African. With the
Bush administration already into its last months in ofﬁce, and a
drawdown out of Iraq seeming ever more likely, U.S. interests
would not be served by remaining for a thankless task of combat-
ing piracy. Instead, the U.S. government would assist the efforts
of its allies, who were more directly affected by its consequences.
NATO “Operation Allied Provider”
As Somali pirates resumed their depredations with implacable
vigor that same autumn of 2008, the international community
at last began moving—with Washington’s full approval and
support—to assume a more direct responsibility and involvement
in combating the problem off the Horn of Africa, coordinating all
their efforts through the United Nations. First to commit a force
would be the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), whose
Council agreed in late October 2008 to a special request from the
UN Secretary-General to dispatch more warships to temporarily
supplement the few naval vessels already escorting chartered
merchantmen through those pirate-infested waters, delivering
World Food Program humanitarian shipments into starving pock-
ets of Somalia. The UN was worried by the soaring number of
pirate interceptions being made, publicly alluding to the “more
than 80 such attacks so far this year, including 32 hijackings, com-
pared with 31 attacks in 2007, according to the London-based
International Maritime Bureau” (UN News Centre press release,
November 11, 2008).
Consequently, “Standing NATO Maritime Group 2” was
hastened out to assist the ongoing efforts of the lone Dutch frig-
ate HNLMS De Ruyter. By October 28, 2008, Standing NATO
Maritime Group 2’s Greek frigate HS Themistokles was guiding
its ﬁrst chartered freighter into the anchorage at Merka, 60 miles
southwest of Mogadishu, and would soon be joined by the rest
of this force: the Royal Navy’s HMS Cumberland; the Turkish frig-
ate TGC Gokova; and the Italian Navy destroyer ITS Luigi Durand
de la Penne, serving as Standing NATO Maritime Group 2’s
ﬂagship under Rear Admiral Giovanni Gumiero. This ﬁrst
deployment to the Horn of Africa, codenamed Operation “Allied
Provider,” was to serve as a temporary protection force until
December 2008, when NATO handed over responsibility for the
WFP’s extra protection to the European Union’s Operation
“Atalanta.”
96
Special U.S. Issues

EU “Operation Atalanta”
In Brussels, the European Union’s foreign ministers also agreed
on November 10, 2008 to dispatch ﬁve to seven frigates, with the
requisite number of support aircraft, into the Horn of Africa
region within one month to protect merchant-shipping in addi-
tion to escorting WFP food-relief into Somalia (UN News Centre
press release, November 11, 2008). Codenamed Operation
“Atalanta,” this expedition represented an unprecedented step,
the ﬁrst independent naval campaign ever launched by the
EU—a ﬁnancial, political, and cultural confederation—under the
framework of its “European Security and Defense Policy.”
The speciﬁc mandate for this squadron’s operations was
broader than NATO’s initial deployment, specifying that it was
to contribute toward:
•
protection of vessels of the World Food Program, while
delivering food-aid to displaced persons in Somalia;
•
aiding vulnerable vessels sailing in the Gulf of Aden and
off the Somali coast;
•
employing all necessary measures—including the use of
force—to “deter, prevent, and intervene in order to bring
to an end acts of piracy and armed robbery which may be
committed” in those waters.
As authorization, these actions were to be undertaken in
compliance with Resolutions 1814, 1816, 1838, and 1846, all
adopted that same year of 2008 by the United Nations Security
Council.
This force, better known by its acronym of EUNavFor, would
also establish the “Maritime Security Centre (Horn of Africa)” or
MSC-HOA, an information hub for gathering and disseminating
news on piratical activity in the Gulf of Aden, as well as tracking
movements of merchantmen transiting through those troubled
waters.
UN Intelligence Gathering
The United Nations was simultaneously hosting a gathering in
mid-November 2008 in Nairobi, Kenya, of an “International
Expert Group on Piracy off the Somali coast,” to gather the most
current and accurate information available to help “develop a
coordinated response to the challenge of maritime piracy along
the Somali coast.” This assembly included veteran Somali hands,
Unfettered Somali Piracy (2007–Present)
97

naval and police ofﬁcers, relief organizations, legal scholars, secu-
rity specialists, etc., who together offered considerable insight
into the actual workings of Somalia’s shadowy pirate groups,
most of which information has subsequently proven to be quite
accurate.
Creation of Combined Task Force-151
In support of the growing responsibility being shouldered by
allied nations in their separate campaign against Somali piracy,
Vice Admiral William E. Gortney, commander of U.S. Naval
Forces Central Command and the U.S. Fifth Fleet, announced the
formation on January 8, 2009 of a new coalition detachment—
Combined Task Force-151—which had been split off from the
already existing CTF-150, this new formation being crafted speciﬁ-
cally to conduct counter-piracy operations. According to the origi-
nal mandate which had sent coalition warships into the Indian
Ocean theater as part of Operation “Enduring Freedom,” the
U.S.-led antiterrorist offensive, these vessels had been assigned to
perform “Maritime Security” duties, which included the deter-
rence of destabilizing activities such as drug-smuggling or
weapons-trafﬁcking—yet did not encompass hunting pirates.
“Some navies in our coalition did not have the authority to
conduct counter-piracy missions,” Gortney explained. “The
establishment of CTF-151 will allow those nations to operate
under the auspices of CTF-150, while allowing other nations to
join CTF-151 [and] support our [mutual] goal of deterring, dis-
rupting, and eventually bringing to justice the maritime criminals
involved in piracy events.” The few U.S. Navy warships assigned
to this newly created Combined Task Force-151, would be the ﬁrst
U.S. naval assets actually tasked with conducting antipiracy
sweeps off the Horn of Africa region (Ploch, p. 4). Four days later,
on January 12, 2009, CTF-151 was further cleared to operate under
the UN Security Consul resolution mandate, although still under
U.S. command.
UN “Contact Group on Piracy”
At the United Nations headquarters in New York City on
January 14, 2009, in compliance with Security Council Resolution
1851, a “Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia” was cre-
ated “to facilitate discussion and coordination of actions among
states and organizations, to suppress piracy off the coast of Soma-
lia.” Representatives from key nations such as Djibouti, Oman,
98
Special U.S. Issues

Saudi Arabia, Somalia’s Transitional Federal Government, the
United Arab Emirates, the United States, and Yemen were all
included, as well as the African Union, European Union, and
NATO. This mandate urged all to act jointly against piracy, which:
disrupts critical humanitarian-aid deliveries to Somalia;
increases shipping insurance-premiums along one of
the world’s most traveled routes to near-prohibitive lev-
els; damages littoral economies by forcing the diversion
of vessels around the Cape of Good Hope; and raises
the prospect of an environmental disaster as ships fall
prey to hostile intent. Piracy is a symptom of a wider
lack of security and rule of law in Somalia, and contin-
ues to constitute a threat to regional stability. As impor-
tant, piracy is symptomatic of the overall situation in
Somalia, including the prevalence of illegal ﬁshing and
toxic-waste dumping off the coast of Somalia, which
adversely affects the Somali economy and marine
environment.
The Group was intended to serve as a clearinghouse for
policy decisions, concentrating on six main areas:
•
improving operational and information support to coun-
terpiracy operations,
•
establishing a counterpiracy coordination mechanism,
•
strengthening judicial frameworks for arrest, prosecution,
and detention of pirates,
•
strengthening commercial shipping self-awareness and
other capabilities,
•
pursuing improved diplomatic and public information
efforts,
•
and tracking ﬁnancial ﬂows related to piracy.
Kenyan and Somali Prosecutions
Soon after beginning to make their ﬁrst captures of Somali pirates
and ﬂying them home to stand trial, various European govern-
ments became aware of the expense and unforeseen legal compli-
cations in conducting such long-distance cases. As reluctance to
host such trials spread, some naval patrols in that distant theater
even resorted to letting a few intercepted pirates go, after simply
conﬁscating their weapons—known as the “catch-and-release”
Unfettered Somali Piracy (2007–Present)
99

method—rather than make insigniﬁcant yet potentially frustrat-
ing arrests.
In order to circumvent this problem, the European Union
signed an agreement with the Kenyan government in Nairobi on
March 6, 2009, whereby suspected pirates could be landed directly
in that East African nation to face trial under the international stat-
utes of the UN’s “Convention on the Law of the Sea.” Similar, less-
formal deals were also struck with authorities in such semi-
autonomous Somali states as Somaliland and Puntland, who—so
long as the disembarked prisoners did not hail from that particu-
lar region—would condemn them without compunction,
allowing both governments to claim an active role in the ongoing
global campaign against piracy.
Western jurists worried about the legality of “dumping” such
prisoners in a third country, yet it persists in practice.
NATO “Operation Allied Protector”
A second NATO effort was organized in March 2009, when its
Standing NATO Maritime Group 1 was ordered to the theater as
part of Operation “Allied Protector,” with an openly declared
mission to “deter, defend against, and disrupt pirate activities.”
This Group had originally been scheduled to perform such anti-
piracy duties only temporarily, while in transit through the Horn
of Africa region en route to a goodwill tour of Southeast Asia, as
well as during its return passage back through those same waters
toward Europe in June 2009.
However, NATO ofﬁcials instead cancelled Standing NATO
Maritime Group 1’s planned visits to Singapore and Australia in
April 2009 so as to perform one uninterrupted anti-piracy tour
after starting its ﬁrst patrols in late March 2009. This squadron
consisted of the Portuguese ﬂagship NRP Corte Real, Canada’s
HMCS Winnipeg, the Dutch HNLMS Zeven Provincie¨n, the Spanish
warship SPS Blas de Lezo, and USS Halyburton, who would all
remain on that station until June 20, 2009.
NATO “Operation Ocean Shield”
On August 17, 2009, NATO announced its third “contribution to
international efforts to combat piracy off the Horn of Africa,”
once its Council had ﬁnalized approval for such a mission under
the codename of Operation “Ocean Shield,” to be conducted by
the alliance’s currently-constituted Standing NATO Maritime
Group 2—this time around comprised of the Royal Navy frigate
100
Special U.S. Issues

HMS Cornwall as ﬂagship; the Greek frigate HS Navarinon; the
Italian frigate ITS Libeccio; the Turkish frigate TCG Gediz; and the
American destroyer USS Laboon.
A speciﬁc new component of this particular effort was to be
building up contacts and better relationships with regional gov-
ernments so that they too might begin developing their own local
counterpiracy contributions. For example, SNMG’s ﬂagship Corn-
wall would welcome aboard Somali maritime ofﬁcials from the
troubled State of Puntland, as well as visit the port of Bosaso in
the country’s northern province of Bari, for consultations with ofﬁ-
cials responsible for port security and maritime transportation.
Other International Contributions
Inspired by the multinational effort being gathered under UN
auspices to address the problem of piracy off the heavily transited
Horn of Africa, nations which seldom or never had participated
in joint naval exercises in the past, yet whose merchantmen had
been victimized—such as Russia, India, Japan, China, and South
Korea—would dispatch individual warships to help bolster this
campaign.
The end result would be an array of NATO, EU, regional, and
other multinational naval forces conducting patrols near Somalia,
in coordination with a U.S.-led task force.
Defensive Measures
U.S. naval ofﬁcers had often deplored the lax security observed
aboard many modern commercial ships traveling near the Horn
of Africa, rendering even the largest and wealthiest vessel easy
prey for a handful of pirates. As long ago as November 2008, Vice
Admiral William E. Gortney—commander of the U.S. Fifth Fleet
and coalition Combined Maritime Forces operating in the Indian
Ocean—had complained of this shortsightedness, in a public
statement which urged shipping ﬁrms to take basic measures to
better protect their vessels, noting that 10 of the most recent
15 ships attacked in the Gulf of Aden, had not even been traveling
within the patrolled corridor recommended by the UN’s
International Maritime Organization, and carried no kind of on-
board security. “Companies don’t think twice about using secu-
rity guards to protect their valuable facilities ashore,” Gortney
added. “Protecting valuable ships and their crews at sea is no dif-
ferent” (Wadhams).
Unfettered Somali Piracy (2007–Present)
101

Patrolled Convoy Routes
The deployment of additional foreign warships into those
waters, while wholly insufﬁcient to sweep any signiﬁcant portion
of open ocean at least allowed for more effective monitoring of a
narrow passage through the troubled Gulf of Aden. Dubbed the
“International Recommended Transit Corridor,” its use was prom-
ulgated in cooperation with the EU and UKMTO on February 1,
2009 and recommended to all transiting merchantmen by the
U.S. Navy, allied forces, regional governments, and civilian
shipping agencies. It parallels the Yemeni coastline, lying roughly
between 12° North, 58° East, and 10° South, extending between
the U.S. base in Djibouti and U.S. naval forces in the Arabian
Sea. Westbound merchantmen are directed to tend toward the ship-
ping channel on its northern side, eastbound ships toward its
southern side.
In addition to the aerial and naval patrols, which regularly
prowled this Corridor, convoys were also organized for slower
moving vessels so that they might run through the Gulf of Aden
with a naval warship nearby. Three types of such groupings were
organized, depending on need:
•
a Group Transit, usually merchantmen of similar speed,
who would run through within sight of each other so as to
summon help if one should be attacked;
•
an Escorted Group Transit, a disparate group of freighters
clustered near a warship;
•
or a National Convoy, a group of vessels from a single
country, often with their own accompanying warship.
Better-Defended Merchantmen
As the tempo of piratical attacks continued to soar off Somalia
during early 2009, U.S. Admiral Bill Gortney would be moved to
observe: “The most effective measures we’ve seen to defeat
piracy, are non-kinetic and defensive in nature.” Not surprisingly
for the professional seamen involved, such as this veteran U.S.
ofﬁcer, boarding any large ship running on the high seas from a
small skiff was no easy feat. With a few simple, extra steps that
should meet with approval from even the most parsimonious
shipping-ﬁrm, many modern vessels could be rendered a lot less
vulnerable to assault. Even the notorious pirate chieftain Boyah
himself guessed in April 2009, that only “20 to 30 per cent of
attempted hijackings succeed” (Bahadur, “I’m Not”).
102
Special U.S. Issues

Various concerned maritime associations had already com-
piled and circulated their own internal lists of suggestions, when
the Commercial Crime Services division of the International
Chamber of Commerce in London gathered up input from more
than a dozen such groups, and published an industry-wide
manual entitled “Best Management Practices to Deter Piracy.”
This information included materials previously published in the
International Maritime Organization’s Circular MSC.1/Circ.1334,
as well as manuals from other organizations. All recommended
certain common measures which merchant Captains might adopt
before transiting through such perilous waters as the Gulf of Aden
or Horn of Africa region, and which are summarized here below:
Prior to Departure
1. Register for access to restricted sections of the MSC-HOA
Web site, so as to review the most current intelligence on
pirate sightings and receive regular updates, plus special
warnings or other advice.
2. Inform UKMTO Dubai, MARLO Bahrain, and MSC-HOA,
either online or via e-mail or fax, of one’s intended course,
by ﬁling a “Vessel Movement Registration”
several days prior to actually entering into the
endangered waterway.
3. Review ship contingency plans and procedures, con-
ducting periodic drills to familiarize crewmembers with
alarm bells, etc.
4. Prepare a reinforced “safe room” deep within the ship,
without portholes and away from all external bulkheads
so as to be able to retreat inside and await rescue, in
case of being boarded.
5. Ensure that all doors, portholes, and vents that provide
access into the interior of a ship from above, can be
securely locked from the inside.
6. For a fairly low-speed vessel, consider delaying passage
through more dangerous stretches of the Gulf of Aden so
as to instead travel as part of a Group Transit, Escorted
Group Transit, or National Convoy grouping.
7. However, if a vessel’s sea-speed is more than eighteen
knots, it is not recommended joining a slow and strag-
gling convoy, but rather to run through the peril-zone
alone.
Unfettered Somali Piracy (2007–Present)
103

8. Install whatever self-defense measures may be on board,
such as razor-wire coils along low-freeboard railings, etc.
9. Consider traveling in rough weather, as wind-strengths
over eighteen knots and waves higher than six feet will
deter most pirate boats.
10. Plan on running through the most high-risk areas at night,
if at all possible.
While Transiting through Dangerous Passages
11. Minimize all external communications via cell or satellite
phones, radios, handsets, etc., as these might reveal a
ship’s position.
12. Rearrange watches so that extra lookouts are made available.
13. Restrict the amount of crew-work on deck, especially at
night so as to avoid being surprised by pirates at an
untimely moment.
14. Ensure that all access to and from the decks into the
accommodations and internal work-areas, be reduced to
a single point of entry, although without obstructing any
necessary emergency exits.
15. Keep all overside ladders and lines securely fastened up
on deck.
16. Transmit updates of ship progress every noon to UKMTO
Dubai, and even more frequently while running past
danger zones.
17. Keep essential emergency radio frequencies, phone num-
bers, and pre-arranged distress signals ready for instant
use, such as permanently displayed beside the ship’s
communications panel.
18. Perhaps switch off the ship’s Automatic Identiﬁcation
System.
19. Avoid straying into Yemeni territorial waters, where U.S.
and allied warships cannot enter to effect a rescue.
20. Keep redundant auxiliary machinery, such as ship genera-
tors and steering motors, primed for instant use.
21. In danger zones, keep ﬁre-hoses pressurized and ready
for immediate discharge, particularly those near a ship’s
most vulnerable points.
22. Keep the ship dark at night, running along with only
navigation-lights illuminated.
23. Provide lookouts with night-vision optics, if possible.
104
Special U.S. Issues

24. Immediately report any sightings of suspected pirate
“mother ships” to UKMTO Dubai and the IMB PRC.
25. Maintain special vigilance astern, in particular at dawn and
dusk, when most pirate attacks occur from that quarter.
If Attacked
26. Immediately upon detecting an approaching pirate craft,
advise the UKMTO and MSC-HOA listening posts,
which are manned round the clock.
27. Reactivate the ship’s AIS, if this system has been switched
off.
28. Make distress calls on Navy-monitored VHF channels
16 or 8, as well as via Digital Selective Calling system
and Inmarsat-C, or by cell phone directly to UKMTO.
29. If possible, increase speed and perhaps begin small zig-
zags (although this latter tactic can reduce distance
covered over the water).
30. If an attack occurs at night, illuminate all deck-lighting so
as to attract attention from any nearby vessels.
31. Immediately gather all off-duty hands within the safe-room.
32. If ﬁred upon, maintain full sea-speed so that the pirates
must risk boarding the rapidly moving vessel.
33. As boarders come aboard, stop the main engine, and all
remaining personnel should retreat inside the safe-room.
(Best Management Practices)
Applied together, such measures could prove surprisingly
effective in averting many attacks, and some of these tactics were
also employed to good effect by the crew of the U.S. container ship
Maersk Alabama, in resisting the attempted seizure of their vessel.
Rarest of Encounters: The Maersk
Alabama Incident
Given the historic changes which had transpired over the past
several decades in the world’s shipping industry, such as:
— a drastic contraction of the U.S. Merchant Marine,
— the manning of commercial vessels with minimal, low-
cost crews,
Rarest of Encounters: The Maersk Alabama Incident
105

— the expansion of Asian and Third-World ﬂeets,
— and the widespread adoption of “ﬂags of convenience,”
it was truly remarkable to ﬁnd an ﬁnd an American-ﬂagged
merchantman running out of the Gulf of Aden during the spring
of 2009. This was the 17,500-ton, 500-foot container ship Maersk
Alabama, which was making its regular run southward from
Salalah in Oman, down the troubled East African coast toward
Mombassa, Kenya.
Unusual Presence
Originally a Taiwanese-built ship launched in 1998 as the Alva
Maersk for the Danish conglomerate A. P. Moller-Maersk Group—
the largest shipping-ﬁrm in the world—this smallish container
ship had been re-ﬂagged as an American vessel in 2004 so as to
take advantage of Department of Defense contracts being issued
in support of the occupation of Iraq. As these contracts gave pref-
erence to U.S.-owned ships with American crews, operating
under the Maritime Security Program, ownership had been trans-
ferred by the corporation on paper to its subsidiary Maersk Line,
Limited, of Norfolk, Virginia, and twenty American ofﬁcers and
seamen had been ﬂown out to replace the previous crew and
operate this vessel in the Indian Ocean.
Although no longer under Pentagon contract during this par-
ticular run down toward Mombassa in early April 2009, Maersk
Alabama nonetheless remained under U.S. government charter,
having been hired to carry 8,150 metric tons of United States
Agency for International Development or USAID humanitarian
cargo, which—again according to the U.S. Congress’s Cargo
Preference Act of 1954, as well as the 1985 amendment to the Mer-
chant Marine Act—required that 75 percent of all such shipments
be transported aboard American-ﬂagged carriers. More than
5,000 metric tons of UN World Food Program provisions had also
been loaded onboard the Alabama, yet the ship was riding rather
high in the water, being only partially full.
With the northeastern monsoon season now at an end, tiny
pirate craft were once more reemerging, in ever greater numbers
and farther out to sea, as the spring weather cleared along the
Somali coast. Multiple warnings about attempted and actual
attacks were already being issued by both the United Kingdom
Maritime Trade Organization, a joint military command
106
Special U.S. Issues

coordinating anti-piracy efforts around the Horn of Africa, as well
as private security ﬁrms such as the Virginia-based SecureWest
out of Norfolk, which were all recommending that transiting
merchantmen try to keep at least 600 nautical miles offshore.
Maersk Alabama nevertheless continued on its original head-
ing, roughly half that distance from Somalia, despite reports arriv-
ing daily of other vessels being seized along this same route. Capt.
Richard Phillips would later say that he hoped the speed and high
freeboard of his ship would spare it from outright capture,
although he had already informed his crew to be prepared for just
such an attempt, as it was only “a matter of when, not if’’ (Kahn).
Pursuit
At mid-afternoon on Tuesday, April 7, 2009, the container ship
was spotted by a pirate mother ship, which launched three skiffs
in pursuit. A couple soon gave up in the rough seas, although
the third hung on grimly until within a mile, before ﬁnally turning
back as well, and disappearing into the churning wake. Around
3:45 a.m. on Wednesday morning, April 8, 2009, another mother
ship was spotted on Alabama’s 24-mile radar, which hailed them
over VHF radio: “Stop ship. Stop ship. This is Somali pirate”
(Murphy).
Phillips increased speed to 18 knots and slightly altered
course so that this second contact soon faded from the scope as
well. Yet at 6:48 a.m., a new contact was faintly detected, only
three-and-a-half miles away. Amid the growing light and over a
perfectly smooth sea, a tiny ﬁbreglass skiff could be seen boring
in at 26 knots, with four armed gunmen aboard. Alabama’s Chief
Mate Shane Murphy ﬁred two red ﬂares in the direction of this
approaching craft yet was otherwise powerless to slow its
advance.
Boarding
By 7:13 a.m. on that Wednesday morning, April 8, 2009, the pirates
had come along Alabama’s port side, tossing grappling hooks over
its midship railings so that a pair of gunmen could start clamber-
ing up its sheer plates while the other two ﬁred warning shots into
the air. Most of the crew were immediately ordered below decks
so as to be safe from any chance rounds. It took several minutes
for the ﬁrst two pirates to gain the main deck, and they then had
Rarest of Encounters: The Maersk Alabama Incident
107

to shoot their way past a locked mesh-cage door over the ladder-
well, as well as other locks on the outer ladders, before eventually
gaining the bridge and capturing Captain Phillips, Third Mate
Colin Wright, the ship’s Bangladeshi-American helmsman Abu
Tasir Mohammed “Zahid” Reza, and Seaman Cliff Lacon.
However, control of the ship had been taken over by Chief
Engineer Mike Perry from down below in the engine room so that
Alabama could no longer be steered from the bridge. As one pirate
gunman returned amidships with a pair of prisoners at 8:30 a.m.,
to have them rig the rope “pilot ladder” so that their two com-
rades might climb up and join them, First Engineer Matt Fisher
down in the engine room swung Alabama’s rudder around
violently from side to side so that the skiff was unexpectedly
swamped and then capsized, leaving all four pirates stranded
on board. Immediately thereafter, Perry shut down every system
so that the entire vessel “went black” and was left adrift in hissing
silence.
Resistance
Fourteen of the U.S. seamen below decks had been directed by
Perry into a locked “strong room,” which had been fortiﬁed
earlier in the ship’s stern, while he joined Alabama’s second-in-
command, Chief Mate Murphy, in covertly observing the pirate
quartet from atop one of the towering deck-cranes before both
ofﬁcers returned below. Despite having seized the bridge and a
few prisoners, as well as looting the ship’s safe and cabins, the
boarders could not control their huge prize and were fearful of
descending into its dark hold. The captive Third Mate was
released to order the crew up on deck, yet he naturally disap-
peared. Then one of the pirates—later identiﬁed as Abduwali
Abdukhadir Muse´—was persuaded by the helmsman “Zahid”
Reza, a fellow Muslim and a resident of West Hartford, Connecti-
cut, to go below together.
Muse´ ﬁrst handed his pistol to a colleague, apparently
because the Somalis were concerned about losing a weapon to
an ambush in the darkness. And indeed, the tiny pirate was sud-
denly jumped in a passageway by Chief Engineer Perry—a very
ﬁt man in his 60s—who stabbed and subdued him along with
Reza’s help. By 9:00 a.m., the wounded Muse´ had been tied up
with wire restraints, gagged, and bundled into one of the safe-
rooms (Casella).
108
Special U.S. Issues

The remaining three armed pirates up above became very
agitated when their comrade failed to reappear, threatening to
shoot Captain Phillips, yet such menaces could not force anyone
to emerge, while the Somalis remained even more fearful than
before of venturing below. Meanwhile, the elusive Chief Mate
Murphy managed to slide some drinks and a medical kit down
to the men sweltering inside the unventilated safe-room, before
sneaking up four decks into the Captain’s ransacked cabin to
retrieve a VHF radio and a cell phone, then returning into his
hidden vantage-point atop the crane to use these to begin making
a series of distress calls by 1:00 p.m.—which the pirates on the
bridge could plainly overhear yet not prevent.
Having lost their skiff and one gang member, as well as being
unable to control the huge drifting ship, Captain Phillips talked
this trio by 4:00 p.m. into retreating back out to sea aboard Alaba-
ma’s 18-foot rescue boat so as to at least regain their mother ship
with what booty they had pilfered. After informing his hidden
crewmen by radio, Phillips descended into this open boat with
his three captors, allowing Murphy and Perry to reoccupy the
bridge and main deck. The U.S. seamen also agreed to winch
down some food, water, and diesel to supply the pirates bobbing
on the waves below, an electrician named John White later declar-
ing: “They couldn’t get off the ship without our help” (Bone).
Hostage Taking
But the pirates then stalled the rescue boat’s engine so that the big-
ger 28-foot, bright-orange, enclosed lifeboat had be lowered
instead and motored across to them. These protracted operations
did not conclude until 7:00 p.m. that same Wednesday, April 8,
2009, at which point it only remained for the pirates to free Captain
Phillips in exchange for their captive comrade so that the Somalis
might make away together into the night, leaving Alabama’s com-
plement intact. However, Chief Mate Shane Murphy would later
describe how this trade went awry, for as the injured Muse´ clam-
bered down a rope ladder, Murphy called to Phillips to start climb-
ing back up:
He just stood there looking up at us, the pirates pointing
guns at him. “Captain,” I shouted, “get on the ladder!”
“I’m just going to show them how to drive the
boat,” Captain Phillips said. The door closed, and then,
Rarest of Encounters: The Maersk Alabama Incident
109

the Captain told me later, the pirates drew down on him.
(Murphy)
Since Muse´ had been reunited with his colleagues, the pirate band
failed to honor the bargain, and instead puttered off slowly into
the evening with their hostage.
Since Alabama’s engines and systems had been brought fully
back on line, the container ship was easily able to follow this
low-powered craft, illuminating it with a searchlight. Murphy,
now in command of Alabama, even arranged for a ﬁghter-jet from
an approaching coalition warship to buzz the lumbering lifeboat
at low altitude, as a warning that naval reinforcements were close
at hand. Yet as darkness fell at 9:00 p.m., a good deal of Somali
VHF chatter could also be heard on the radio as other pirates tried
to steer their prizes to their comrades’ assistance, who were using
their own satellite-phone to request help. Around 1:00 a.m. on
April 9, 2009, Phillips radioed back to Murphy, saying that his
captors would shut down the lifeboat’s engine for the night, if
Alabama did the same, which was agreed upon.
Standoff
Shortly thereafter, the 270-man, 9,200-ton guided-missile
destroyer USS Bainbridge of Cmdr. Francis X. Castellano appeared
out of the night, having raced more than 300 miles in twelve
hours from the Gulf of Aden to the rescue, closely followed by
other American warships. Commander Castellano transferred a
guard detail of 18 armed U.S. Navy sailors aboard Alabama, and
the container ship was directed to proceed with its interrupted
voyage toward Mombassa under Murphy, arriving there
uneventfully by 8:30 p.m. that Saturday evening.
Meanwhile, the pirates’ land-based commander, the notori-
ous Abdi Garad, was glibly informing an Agence France-Presse
reporter by telephone from the lawless port of Eyl on Thursday
morning, April 9, 2009, that: “We are planning to reinforce our
colleagues, who told us that a Navy ship was closing in on them”
(“U.S. Navy”). Despite the vast disparity in ﬁrepower, as well as a
P-3 Orion surveillance plane circling lazily overhead, the four
pirates somehow still hoped to link up with other cohorts at sea
who were holding a variety of Russian, German, and Filipino hos-
tages aboard numerous other merchant prizes off Somalia. Yet it
was clearly suicidal for them to brave the massing U.S. forces, so
110
Special U.S. Issues

that pirate threats soon dwindled away to nothing. SEAL sharp-
shooters were in the meantime parachuted into the sea unseen
one night, to be taken aboard Bainbridge and concealed in position
for a possible shootout.
On April 10, 2009, Phillips attempted to escape from the life-
boat by suddenly leaping into the sea, only to be recaptured and
tethered by his captors. The pirates also threw away a phone
and two-way radio previously dropped to them by the U.S. Navy,
apparently fearful that the Americans were somehow manipulat-
ing this equipment to relay instructions to their hostage. Other
warships, including the 225-man, 4,100-ton guided-missile frigate
USS Halyburton and 1,100-man, 41,500-ton amphibious assault
ship USS Boxer, hastened onto the scene. Negotiations were
resumed between the pirates and the Captain of the Bainbridge,
who was being advised by FBI hostage negotiators, while the cor-
nered Somalis continued communicating in vain with other pirate
vessels by satellite phone.
Rescue
On Sunday morning, April 12, 2009, the wounded pirate Muse´
asked to come aboard Bainbridge for medical treatment, reportedly
telling its U.S. ofﬁcers that his three companions were prepared to
kill their hostage, if they were not all granted safe passage out of
this predicament. The rising seas were meanwhile carrying the
lifeboat inexorably closer to Somalia’s territorial waters, and as
the weather began to deteriorate further, U.S. Navy negotiators
offered to steady the rolling lifeboat by towing it along behind
Bainbridge. A 200-foot line was therefore reeled out and attached
to it, but—unnoticed amid the heavy wave-action—it was then
very slowly inched back in, until the lifeboat was only trailing
75 feet astern of the warship.
As evening fell that Easter Sunday, SEAL snipers watching
through night-vision riﬂe scopes from their positions of conceal-
ment along Bainbridge’s fantail, saw a pair of pirates poke their heads
out of the lifeboat hatch at 7:19 p.m., apparently getting some fresh
air. The third, visible through a window, was pointing his AK-47 at
Phillips’s back, as the Captain moved to one side of the boat to
relieve himself over its side. Commander Castellano of the Bain-
bridge gave the order, and each sharpshooter took a single shot, kill-
ing all three pirates simultaneously. When a rescue party hastened
aboard the lifeboat, they found Phillips still tethered to its interior.
Rarest of Encounters: The Maersk Alabama Incident
111

The Captain and crew of the Alabama were to return home to
a euphoric heroes’ welcome, while the lone surviving pirate was
ﬂown into New York City eight days later, to be paraded past
news-cameras and charged in court with 10 counts related to
piracy, carrying the death-penalty. In the interim, his Somali chief-
tain Garad had threatened to exact revenge, some of his minions
apparently chasing and ﬁring at another U.S. freighter, the Liberty
Sun, on the evening of April 14, 2009. However, this merchantman
easily outran its pursuers and next dawn, French Marines
swooped in aboard a helicopter from the 3,000-ton frigate Nivoˆse
of the EU’s Operation “Atalanta,” snapping up all eleven pirates
and their “mother ship” to stand trial in Kenya.
Current Status and Future Outlook
Although no other American merchantman would be captured
that year, this was chieﬂy due to a lack of U.S.-ﬂagged ships
throughout that region, as 2009 otherwise proved to be a record
year for piracy. As early as September 14, 2009, the U.S. State
Department was announcing that at least 156 attacks had already
been recorded off the Horn of Africa since January, including
33 successful hijackings. Attacks remained concentrated in the
Gulf of Aden between Yemen and the north coast of Somalia, as
well as along its eastern coastline, while the UN Secretary-
General had further warned in July 2009 that because of the
enhanced foreign naval presence in the Gulf, pirates were opting
for more daring strikes, prowling “further seawards, towards
the Seychelles, and using more sophisticated weaponry.”
Ransoms paid to such proﬁt-driven pirates and their backers
were estimated to have totaled at least $30 million in 2008, while
some Kenyan ofﬁcials suggested that the ﬁgure may have actually
been as high as $150 million (Karon). This was a powerful induce-
ment in such an impoverished nation, fueling the escalating num-
ber of forays in 2009. The International Maritime Bureau’s “Piracy
Reporting Centre” in Kuala Lumpur announced in January 2010,
that it had recorded 406 incidents of piracy or armed sea robbery
during that preceding year: 153 vessels having been boarded,
49 hijacked, 84 weathering attacks, and 120 vessels ﬁred upon
(compared to only 46 ships ﬁred upon in all of 2008).
The total number of incidents speciﬁcally attributed to
Somali pirates stood at 217, with 47 vessels hijacked and
112
Special U.S. Issues

867 crewmembers taken hostage—more than half the world’s
totals for 2009. The ominous shift in their area of operations was
conﬁrmed, for while most attacks had previously been clustered
in the Gulf of Aden, more merchantmen were now being targe-
ted far away from the eastern shores of Somalia. In fact, since
October 2009 alone, the IMB declared, thirteen incidents—
including four ship hijackings—had occurred well beyond the
recommended commercial safety line of 60° East, roughly 1,000
nautical miles out into the Indian Ocean.
Six Basic Elements
The reason for this piratical shift was apparent, as the more robust
NATO, EU, and CTF-151 presence guarding the Gulf of Aden
sea lanes, was making piratical raids more difﬁcult in that busy
corridor so that more distant yet softer areas were being tried.
The joint new allied deployments in and around the Gulf had also
been accompanied by more concerted contacts ashore, achieving
some of the six basic goals required for a successful antipiracy
effort:
(1) Accurate intelligence, which had allowed foreign services
to acquire a clearer understanding of pirate operations,
sometimes to the extent of being able to monitor certain
notorious bases and tracking covert departures;
(2) International commitment, including participation by
every major maritime power, plus logistical and
surveillance support from already existing U.S. assets;
(3) Regional cooperation, which included willing partners in
such fringe Somali states as Somaliland and Puntland, who
were eager to prosecute captured pirates from outside their
jurisdiction, in return for material assistance from the
alliance;
(4) Local involvement, the only weak link in the allied
operation, as the most pirate-prone districts of central
Somalia still remained closed to outside inﬂuences, serving
as havens for hijacked merchantmen;
(5) Denial of prey, which had been achieved through better
security measures aboard many large transiting
merchantmen, as well as better adherence by commercial
shipping to patrolled passages;
Current Status and Future Outlook
113

(6) Legal recourses, as several deals had quietly been struck
by European representatives to deposit any captured pirates
to stand trial in Kenya, Somaliland, or Puntland, where they
would receive discouragingly harsh sentences without the
expense and trouble of a distant Western prosecution.
By April 2010, the International Maritime Bureau was able to
announce a signiﬁcant decline in reported pirate attacks during
the ﬁrst quarter of this year, a worldwide total of 67 incidents hav-
ing been logged from January to March 2010, compared to 102
during the same period during the previous year. A “dramatic
decline” was highlighted in attacks in the Gulf of Aden and its
adjacent seas, only 17 incidents having been recorded, in contrast
to the 41 during the ﬁrst three months of 2009.
U.S. Viewpoint
Yet despite such positive signs, the struggle against Somali piracy
is far from over. The expense of sustaining so many warships on
patrol will soon prove vexing, while many legal issues still
remain unresolved. For example, a lawsuit has been ﬁled in Berlin
on behalf of a Somali suspect delivered up to the Kenyan author-
ities by a German warship, suing for the inhumane treatment
which he has received since being handed over. And moreover,
the core issue of grinding poverty, devastated local resources,
and absence of any responsible government in central Somalia,
will continue to send desperate rovers out to sea. “Most experts
believe that the reestablishment of government authority in
Somalia, is the only guarantee that piracy will not persist or
reemerge as a threat” (Ploch, p. i).
Little has changed since Bile Mohamoud Qabowsade, an
adviser to the President of Puntland, explained that pirates had
even built up considerable political inﬂuence, as being one of the
few local sources of wealth:
Many people like the pirates, for their pockets. They
have money, and give to their relatives and friends. That
money goes through many hands, which in return gives
them support among the community. (“Somali Piracy”)
In some parts, pirate ransoms still remain welcome. News that
some cash bags have been brought ashore, often under cover of
114
Special U.S. Issues

darkness, spreads quickly throughout neighboring towns and
villages.
Next day, the pirates will take over a large restaurant or
expensive hotel, where they invariably start their celebration by
chewing the best khat. A procession of well-wishers then starts
to arrive: Friends and relatives, as well as local traders and elders
owed money for their assistance or supply of provisions during
the operation. “You see many people coming into the hotel visit-
ing them, they are busy paying money to the visitors for a whole
day, and they spend half of their time talking on their expensive
cell phones. They look like big company bosses,” observed Ali Haji
Yusuf, a local hotel owner in Garowe (ibid.).
As U.S. forces draw out of Iraq and reduce their footprint in
this volatile region, no new involvement in a protracted and
potentially costly campaign against pirates would be welcome.
Sources
Bahadur, Jay. “ I’m Not a Pirate, I’m the Saviour of the Sea.” The Times
Online [UK], April 16, 2009.
Best Management Practices to Deter Piracy in the Gulf of Aden and Off the
Coast of Somalia. London: Commercial Crime Services division of the
International Chamber of Commerce, 2009.
Bone, James. “Maersk Alabama Crew Return to U.S. to Tell of Somali Pirate
Ordeal.” The Times Online [UK], April 18, 2009.
COMUSNAVCENT “Command” and “History,” www.cusnc.navy.mil,
ofﬁcial U.S. Navy Web site GILS#002176.
Curran, John. “Mutiny: Crew Blames Richard Phillips, Maersk Alabama
Captain, for Ignoring Pirate Warnings.” Hufﬁngton Post Online,
December 2, 2009.
“Don’t Give Up the Ship!: Quick Thinking and a Boatload of Know-how
Saves the Maersk Alabama.” Marine Ofﬁcer (Summer 2009), 18 pp.
Harding, Andrew. “Postcard from Somali Pirate Capital.” BBC News,
June 16, 2009.
International Crisis Group. Somalia: The Problem with Puntland. Africa
Brieﬁng No. 64, August 12, 2009.
Kahn, Joseph P. “Uncharted Waters.” Boston Globe Online, August 29, 2009.
Karon, Tony. “Battling the Somali Pirates: The Return of the Islamists.”
Time Magazine, November 25, 2008.
Sources
115

Murphy, Shane, as told to Sean Flynn. “ I’m Your Worst F**king
Nightmare.” GQ Online, November 18, 2009.
Piracy Off the Somali Coast: Workshop Commissioned by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations to Somalia,
Ambassador Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah. Nairobi, Kenya, November 2008.
Ploch, Lauren, et alia. Piracy Off the Horn of Africa. Washington, D.C.:
“Congressional Research Service” Report for Congress, September 28,
2009.
Raffaelle, Paul. “The Pirate Hunters.” Smithsonian Magazine, August 2007.
Report S/2006/229 of the U.N. Monitoring Group on Somalia, Submitted to the
Security Council on May 4, 2006. New York: United Nations Security
Council, 2006.
“Somali Piracy: ‘We’re Defending Our Waters.’ ” Mail & Guardian Online
[UK], October 14, 2008.
“US Navy Closes Grip on Somali Pirates.” Agence France-Presse, April 8,
2009.
116
Special U.S. Issues

4
Chronology
We are not pirates. We are gentlemen, defending our shores
against foreign ﬁshermen. It did become a business, but it was
forced upon us, because we were attacked. We have bills to pay
and families to care for.
—Jamal Akhmed, condemned to a life sentence at Bosaso,
June 2009
The following listing intersperses some major milestones associated with
the evolution of modern piracy, with a selection of some of the more
representative or unusual depredations committed in recent years upon
the high seas. The sheer number of attacks which have been reported,
amid such a broad variety of geographic settings and circumstances,
make any coherent compilation impossible. Piracy remains as chaotic
and opportunistic today, as in bygone eras.
December
10, 1982
After nine years of negotiations and drafting, the
United Nations’s “Convention on the Law of the Sea”
is ﬁnally passed and signed in Jamaica’s Montego
Bay. However, it will not actually come into effect until
November 16, 1994, a year after the 60th-member
nation has signed on and agreed to its terms.
October 7,
1985
While steaming peacefully from Alexandria toward
Port Said in Egypt, the Italian liner Achille Lauro is
hijacked by four members of a faction known as the
Palestinian Liberation Front. Diverting the vessel
toward Tartus in Syria, they threaten to start killing
117

October 7,
1985
(cont.)
captives unless Israel releases 50 prisoners. Rebuffed,
the gunmen next afternoon shoot Leon Klinghoffer,
an elderly American Jew conﬁned to a wheelchair,
then throw his body overboard before reversing
course for Port Said.
Unaware of this murder, the Egyptian government
ends the hostage standoff on October 9th by granting
the hijackers safe passage toward Tunisia. Instead,
U.S. naval ﬁghters intercept the Egyptian airliner
over the Mediterranean, forcing it to land at a NATO
base in Sicily. The four Palestinians are separated
from among the passengers and—over American
objections—put on trial by the Italian authorities,
while Cairo angrily protests to Washington about
the mid-air interception.
This high-proﬁle incident reveals unresolved differ-
ences, the U.S. government accusing the hijackers of
piracy, although a great deal of public opinion does
not concur, especially in the Arab and nonaligned
world.
May–
June 1988
Because of repeated reports that armed piratical
attacks have occurred in the East China Sea, speciﬁ-
cally off the coast of Zhejiang Province during which
many ﬁshing vessels have been plundered of their
catches, ﬁshermen assaulted and kidnapped, vessels
blown up, and threats used to force sales at reduced
prices, Chinese ofﬁcials announce the arrest of six
pirate ships based out of Fujian Province.
January 1,
1989
U.S. mariners are warned to be alert for the possibil-
ity of vessels being boarded and hijacked by armed
pirates while transiting through or anchored in the
waters of Southeast Asia.
February7,
1990
On the global stage, the Cold War begins to end when
an exhausted Soviet Union simply implodes from
stagnation, its once all-powerful Central Committee
agreeing to relinquish political power, after which
East and West Germany move toward reuniﬁcation
118
Chronology

and other Warsaw Pact satellites peacefully regain
their independence. The United States is left as the
lone superpower in the world.
August 8,
1990
The U.S. government warns its mariners to exercise
caution while sailing near the coast of Liberia, as
rebel ships might attempt to board merchantmen.
Information received indicates that these rebels will
be ﬂying two ﬂags: The national colors, plus the ﬂag
of the National Patriotic Front of Liberia, being red
with a black scorpion displayed.
November
11, 1990
While under way at about 2:00 a.m. in Singapore’s
Phillip Channel, the American-ﬂagged, 80,000-ton
tanker Ocean City is boarded by four robbers armed
with long knives. A crewman confronts them near
the Master’s stateroom and ofﬁce, only to be bound
and gagged. The pirates then steal the ship’s safe
and other personal items before escaping, this inci-
dent being reported by VHF radio to the harbor
police.
January 26,
1991
Unnoticed amid the great realignment shaking world
politics, President Mohamed Siad Barre is driven
from power in Somalia’s capital of Mogadishu by
rebel factions. He nonetheless ﬂees to his power base
to ﬁght on from among the Marehan clan in the
southwestern Gedo region so that this impoverished
nation quickly fragments into hostile enclaves contin-
uously at odds with one another for the next two
decades.
December
25, 1991
The Soviet Union dissolves, and the world begins
moving into the post-Cold War Era.
November
3, 1993
Reports indicate that within the past week in the Bay
of Bengal, pirates have attacked about 50 ﬁshing ves-
sels, looting their catches and throwing some 20
crewmembers into the sea.
November
16, 1994
The United Nations’s “Convention on the Law of the
Sea” legally comes into effect, its 320 articles deﬁning
Chronology
119

November
16, 1994
(cont.)
many boundaries and issues related to commercial
exploitation of natural resources. However, its eight
articles related to piracy will only be spottily enforced.
August
10, 1995
At 7:30 p.m., while under way about 40 nautical miles
southeast of Hong Kong, a lookout aboard the
American-ﬂagged container ship President Harrison
sights an approaching speedboat, so that the ship
takes evasive action and outmaneuvers its pursuer.
December
6, 1995
An unknown vessel ﬁres twice upon the U.S.-ﬂagged
yacht Kelly Marie, while it is lying at anchor overnight
off the Hanish Islands in the southern Red Sea, which
are being disputed between Yemen and Eritrea.
April 10,
1996
According to news reports from Jakarta, the Indone-
sian Navy has sent eight warships and a helicopter to
the Natuna Islands after unidentiﬁed gunmen shot
and killed the captain of a private boat in that area.
They add that ﬁshermen have refused to venture into
those waters since assailants in a speedboat shot Cap-
tain Saryadi with automatic riﬂes on April 6th, ﬂeeing
without taking anything from his boat. Colonel L.
Soetanto of the Indonesian Navy is quoted as saying
the shooting will be difﬁcult to investigate, because it
occurred near the waters of Vietnam, the Philippines,
and Malaysia, all of which are infested with pirates.
November
4, 1997
This morning in the Singapore straits area of the
Straits of Malacca, the 43,398-ton Danish-ﬂagged
tanker Northsea Bellows—en route from the Arabian
Gulf toward Japan—is stealthily boarded by three
intruders who are discovered onboard and leap over-
board after doing some minor damage to the ship’s
accommodation and two doors.
November
8, 1997
The Australian-ﬂagged yacht Poloﬂat is ﬁred upon by
pirates while on the Red Sea off Eritrea, close to the
Zubayr Islands, suffering damage to its sails but no
injuries to any personnel. The yacht’s skipper
defends himself with homemade Molotov cocktails
until the attackers desisted.
120
Chronology

November
18, 1997
As the tanker Atlanta 95 is steaming early this morn-
ing through the Indonesian strait named Selat Riau,
en route to the Arafura Sea to serve as a bunkering
station for ﬁshing vessels, it is boarded by armed
pirates. The crew is locked in their cabins, and the ves-
sel steered into the Gulf of Thailand, some captives
being ordered to assist in the engine room. Upon
arriving, the tanker’s entire cargo of marine oil is
transferred to another vessel on December 1st, after
which the prize gets under way again and steams in
the vicinity of the Tow Islands for several days.
The tanker is ﬁnally abandoned by the pirates at
19:20 p.m. on December 7th, after which its crew
force their way out of their locked cabins and regain
control. Before departing, the pirates destroy all
charts and damage the radio sets, so that the vessel
limps into Singapore by December 10th with the aid
of a spare VHF, and an old chart from the Master’s
cabin. During its captivity, Atlanta 95’s name has also
been painted over by the pirates, and its funnel
altered with black paint.
October
10–11,
1998
The local cruise boat Ma Foroe is boarded during the
night by ﬁve men armed with knives from a small boat
in Port Moresby Harbor, Papua New Guinea, its 150
passengers being threatened, punched, and struck with
bottles while being robbed of money and valuables.
October
27, 1998
While steaming along at 3:20 a.m. in a rainstorm
north of the Sunda Strait, the Danish-ﬂagged cargo
ship Thor Marie is boarded between Indonesia’s Beli-
tung and Bangka Islands by ﬁve persons armed with
knives and a pistol. The chief mate having just com-
pleted a security inspection and searchlight sweep,
the door of the starboard bridge wing is unlocked,
where the intruders suddenly appear. They force the
chief mate to call the captain to the bridge, on the pre-
text of a navigation problem. He has his hands tied
and is forced back to his cabin, where he is compelled
to open the safe, which contains only medicine and
papers. The captain is therefore forced to turn over
Chronology
121

October
27, 1998
(cont.)
his personal cash, a suitcase, the photocopy machine,
a video recorder, two cartons of cigarettes, a camera,
and his watch. He is left tied up on deck behind the
funnel, while the thieves escape in a boat, the entire
incident having lasted about 20 minutes.
November
9, 1998
While departing about three miles from the port
entrance buoys of Soyo, Angola, the Cypriot-ﬂagged
cargo ship Innes is confronted by a barrier of ﬁshing
boats connected by a line, which is being towed into
position in the channel ahead in an apparent attempt
to stop the vessel and board it. The exiting ship
maneuvers around this obstacle and escapes out to
sea, while calls to port control go unanswered.
November
26, 1998
Ten days after the Panamanian-ﬂagged bulk carrier
Cheung Son has cleared Shanghai on a voyage with a
cargo of furnace slag destined for Port Kelang,
Malaysia, the International Maritime Bureau issues
an alert for this overdue vessel. It is eventually
learned that the ship has been hijacked by pirates,
the Public Security Bureau of China announcing the
arrest on January 13, 1999 of a gang implicated in
the murder of all its 23 Chinese crewmembers.
Having earlier in the week identiﬁed three of six
bodies—found bound, gagged, and weighted in ﬁsh-
ermen’s nets off Shantou, China—as being those of
the Cheung Son crew, the authorities press capital
charges. The arrested men reportedly admit to having
seized the ship for $11,000 apiece and are found to
have photos showing a celebratory party on board.
December
28, 1998
While underway at 20:15 p.m. off Belitung Island in
the North Java Sea, en route toward Singapore, the
Maltese-ﬂagged bulk carrier Patroclus is approached
by a speedboat with 10 people on board. Three
pirates board using lines and grappling hooks, before
the attack is repelled by the crew.
January
15, 1999
The Singapore-ﬂagged container vessel Vira Bhum is
boarded at 2:00 a.m. while underway in the South
122
Chronology

Java Sea off the southeastern tip of Sumatra, by ﬁve
pirates armed with knives and wearing masks. The
vessel had departed Panjang, Indonesia earlier that
day and was en route to Singapore. The pirates
entered the bridge, tied up the duty ofﬁcer, and a sea-
man, then went to the master’s cabin to seize $2,348
and other valuables. The master was held hostage
while the chief ofﬁcer, second engineer, fourth engi-
neer and cadet were robbed of cash and valuables
worth $2,500. Two walkie-talkies and two binoculars
were taken before the attackers left.
And also this same morning, while running through
the Strait of Malacca en route to Pasir Gudang, Malay-
sia, the Panamanian-registered chemical tanker Shoryu
Emmy is boarded by stealth at 4:50 a.m., while off Riau
Island, its master being attacked in his cabin by an
unknown number of assailants armed with long knives
who tie him up and steal cash and other valuables.
March 2,
1999
The 131,654-ton, French-ﬂagged tanker Chaumont is
attacked in the Phillip Channel, in Indonesian waters
near Singapore, by boarders who threaten its watch
ofﬁcer with a machete and bind his hands. The tanker
reportedly wanders off course while under the
pirates’ control.
March 17,
1999
The Panamanian-ﬂag cargo ship Marine Master is
attacked and hijacked at 2:00 a.m. in the Indian
Ocean-Andaman Sea. The Master and 20 crew were
placed on nine small inﬂatable rafts March 21 and
rescued on March 27 by a passing Thai ﬁshing boat.
The hijacked ship was carrying a cargo of bagged
soda ash from Nantong, China to Calcutta, India. A
July 21, 1999 report states that the Nuevo Tierra was
detained in Fangcheng, China on July 20th by port
ofﬁcials. It is believed that the Nuevo Tierra is in fact
the Marine Master. Nuevo Tierra was last reported dis-
charging a cargo of soda ash in Shantou, China.
March 21,
1999
A cargo ship is reportedly boarded at 9:05 p.m., while
steaming through Indonesia’s Selat Karimata Strait,
Chronology
123

March 21,
1999
(cont.)
bound from Jakarta toward Singapore. The boarding
takes place in light rain, as the mate and seaman on
watch are monitoring a small group of nearby ﬁshing-
boats.
Five masked men armed with knives appear sud-
denly on the bridge. They tied the crewmembers’s
hands with plastic cord when seven more masked
men entered the bridge. The mate was taken to his
cabin and the captain’s cabin where various items
were stolen, including $1,000. The mate was taken
by the pirates to where two boats were tied when he
escaped and was attempting to untie the AB. He
was retaken and later found unconscious but other-
wise unhurt on deck.
April 9,
1999
The Lithuanian-ﬂag refrigerated cargo ship Orionas is
attacked by armed intruders after sailing from Mat-
adi, Congo Republic. Two speedboats opened ﬁre
and at 2:30 p.m. the vessel was stopped. Fifteen men
boarded taking about $5,000 cash and other valuables
and stores. Attackers left the vessel at 4:25 p.m. No
injuries were reported.
April 11,
1999
The Antigua-ﬂagged container ship Karin S is inter-
cepted, ﬁred upon with light weapons, and pursued
off Somalia’s east coast. The attack was made from
one of two boats, which approached from shore-
ward as the Karin S passed another ship. One of
the attacking boats was described as wood with an
outboard motor, while the second was steel hulled.
The attack began at 1:35 p.m., when six or seven
armed men waved their weapons as a signal to the
ship to stop. The ship’s master altered course to sea-
ward and increased speed. After about three
minutes’ pursuit, during which shots were ﬁred,
the boats gave up chase. Damage was reported to
bridge windows and deck crane but no crew were
injured.
And this same day, three ﬁshermen are killed in an
attack on their anchored boat near the Basilan Straits
124
Chronology

in the Southern Philippines, these attackers stealing
the engine and other equipment. The provincial
Governor orders increased military and police patrols
in the area, which is plagued by armed separatist
groups.
April 26,
1999
The Norwegian-ﬂag bitumen tanker Rathrowan is
boarded by armed thieves while underway off Lepar
Island, Indonesia. Six men with heavy knives entered
the bridge through the only unlocked door and
forced the bosun to take them to the master’s cabin.
The master barricaded himself in his cabin but
slipped the key to the ship’s safe under the door
when the intruders threaten to kill the bosun. The
robbers ransacked the ship’s ofﬁce, stealing valuables
and $3,500. The bosun and the second mate suffered
wrist abrasions and shock from being tied up. The
bosun also suffered a small knife wound in the arm
and was punched by the thieves.
April 28,
1999
The 22,009-ton Bahamas-ﬂag bulk carrier Sidrela is
boarded while underway at full speed (approx. 16
knots) in Selat Bangka off Sumatra, Indonesia. The
attackers attempted to stop the ship and, when theat-
tempt failed, left with $10,000 from the ship’s safe.
The next day another attempt at an illegal boarding
was repelled by the crew using ﬁre hoses. No serious
injuries were reported from either attack.
May 1,
1999
Somali gunmen kidnap two Finnish tourists from a
yacht off Bosaso on the Gulf of Aden coast. The
Somali Salvation Democratic Front claims respon-
sibility for this hostage taking.
May 27,
1999
Six pirates armed with long knives board a vessel in
Selat Baur, off the west coast of Belitung Island, and
held the master as hostage. They stole $18,700 from
the ship’s safe and $8,000 cash and valuables from
the master before escaping on a small open craft.
June 5,
1999
The Malaysian-ﬂagged tug Galaxy I and barge Galaxy
II are reported missing from their anchorage at Kota
Chronology
125

June 5,
1999
(cont.)
Kinabalu, Malaysia. Vessels are suspected to have
changed name, color, and ﬂag, and may be used for
piracy attack and armed robbery.
June 24,
1999
Somali Salvation Democratic Front militiamen, oper-
ating from a speedboat, kidnap four German tourists
from a yacht off the north coast of Somali, about
100 miles east of Bosaso. The kidnappers take the hos-
tages to the coastal village of Bolimog, holding them
for $50,000 ransom.
July 13,
1999
A small bitumen tanker navigating off the Guinea-
Bissau coast is intercepted by a launch equipped with
a large gun on its aft deck and forced to stop in
international waters by threat of arms from govern-
ment forces. The ship is then boarded and ordered
to sail into Bissau, where it is accused of violating pol-
lution regulations, so that it is held in port for a week
while these charges are processed. In order to secure
the tanker’s release, a negotiated settlement is
reached, local authorities agreeing to accept a pay-
ment of $150,000—reduced from the original ﬁne of
$1 million.
July 20,
1999
A group of about twenty armed men board the 4,497-
ton Bahamanian-ﬂagged tanker Kilchem Oceania off
Lagos, Nigeria. After stealing numerous items from
the vessel, the attackers force two Russian seafarers,
the ship’s third ofﬁcer and an oilman, to join them
as they leave the ship. The attackers demand that
the vessel return to the same spot in two days’ time,
to exchange additional goods as ransom for the
release of the two seafarers. A September 1st, 1999
report indicates that the two Russian hostages were
released at Port Harcourt on August 26, 1999, follow-
ing extensive negotiations.
July 28,
1999
In Indonesia’s Selat Gelasa, the strait between the
islands of Bangka and Belitung, four pirates armed
with knives board a merchant vessel and threaten its
captain, inﬂicting an injury on his hand.
126
Chronology

July 31,
1999
The 11,748-ton, Panamanian-ﬂagged cargo ship Sabrina I
is reported missing by its owners. Having left Tanjong
Priok, Indonesia, on July 17th with a cargo of bagged
cement destined for Al Mukalla, Yemen, its Captain
reported a leak in a cargo hold July 31st, saying that
he was steering for Mogadischu’s outer anchorage to
await a tug from Kenya. The ship did not make this
rendezvous, and its owners fear that their ship may
be in some Somali port under control of a warlord.
August 19,
1999
Pirates armed with guns board a vessel from a boat
while it is underway off Jawa, along the north coast
of Indonesia. Its duty ofﬁcer ﬁrst notices them when
they appear on the bridge wing, ﬁring three shots that
shatter the windows. The duty ofﬁcer, armed with a
gun himself, crouches down and ﬁres eight shots in
return so that the pirates ﬂee. No injuries are reported.
August 27,
1999
Pirates in a 25-foot, rusted speedboat with a gun
mounted on its foredeck approach a merchant vessel
in the South China Sea, intending to board. The ship
sounds its foghorn and alerts all nearby vessels by
radio so that after a few minutes, the pirate boat alters
course and gives up the chase.
August 31,
1999
Guyanese authorities report nearly a dozen cases of
robbery from ﬁshing boats along its coastline and riv-
ers, as well as the killing of one robber aboard a ship
moored at Georgetown. On a single day in August
alone, six ﬁshing boats working within a 30-square-
mile area have been robbed of engines, ﬁsh catches,
equipment, and left adrift, while the robbers ﬂee back
toward Venezuela, reputedly working from border
towns in Suriname and Venezuela.
September
16, 1999
While underway through the Selat Sunda off Eastern
Sumatra in Indonesia, the 16,927-ton, Malaysian-
ﬂagged bulk carrier Alam Aman is boarded from a
wooden boat by four pirates armed with knives. They
handcuff the master and chief engineer then steal
cash, binoculars, and expensive equipment.
Chronology
127

September
16, 1999
(cont.)
This same day in the nearby Selat Leplia, the 14,063-
ton, Singapore-ﬂagged container ship Maersk Atlantic
is also boarded by pirates armed with knives who
enter the bridge and tie up its master, chief engineer,
and lookout. These pirates then take the master at
knifepoint to his cabin, where they steal the vessel’s
cash and other valuables before taking the master as
a hostage to the starboard quarter and escaping over
the side. No injuries to the crew are reported.
September
25, 1999
About 50 miles off Mullaittivu, a known stronghold
of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, the 9,182-
ton, Chinese-ﬂagged freighter Yu Jia—on a voyage
from Aqaba, Jordan, with a cargo of fertilizer for
Madras, India—is attacked with rocket-propelled
grenades ﬁred from boats. It suffers several holes
near its waterline and is brieﬂy boarded by the Liber-
ation Tigers of Tamil Eelam ﬁghters before Sri Lankan
Navy units intervene and destroy four rebel craft.
One crewmember is reportedly injured aboard the
Chinese ship.
Also this same day, the 21,030-ton, Bahamian-ﬂagged
bulk carrier Aspidoforos is pursued near the Strait of
Hormuz by two speedboats, each carrying four per-
sons, which make several attempts to come alongside.
The ship’s general alarm is therefore sounded, crew
put on high alert with ﬁre hoses pressurized, and
zig-zag maneuvers begin. After 10 minutes, the boats
break off their pursuit, this incident being reported to
the United Arab Emirates’s Coast Guard and other
nearby vessels.
October
13, 1999
Three days after the 137-ton, Hong Kong-owned,
Nigerian-ﬂagged ﬁshing boat Unicorn 1 has departed
Port Harcourt and cleared the Bonny River for Con-
arky, Guinea (intending to sail via Monrovia and
Freetown), it is reportedly hijacked by Nigerian
pirates, its four-man crew being unharmed.
October
23, 1999
While steaming toward Miike, Japan, bearing a cargo
of 7,000 tons of aluminum ingots, the 7,762-ton,
128
Chronology

Panamanian-registered cargo ship Alondra Rainbow is
intercepted by pirate speedboats in the vicinity of
Kuala Tanjung, Indonesia. Ten pirates come aboard
armed with pistols, knives, and swords, who set the
ship’s 15 crewmen adrift in life rafts on October 29th,
to be rescued 10 days later by friendly ﬁshermen off
Phuket, Thailand.
Eventually, the hijacked Alondra Rainbow is recovered
off Goa by the Indian Coast Guard and Navy on
November 16th. Upon being sighted, the pirates
attempt to scuttle their prize by setting it aﬁre and
ﬂooding its holds. Fifteen suspects are nonetheless
arrested, and 3,000 tons of its cargo is found to be
missing, believed to have been bartered in Cambodia
or Thailand for weapons destined to support the
Tamil Tiger insurgency in Sri Lanka.
November
19, 1999
The 47-foot sailing vessel Leopard Star is boarded near
Jabal Attair in the Southern Red Sea by eight men
armed with AK-47s who demand money and pass-
ports. They are given fuel and drink only, and then
leave the vessel, no casualties being reported.
December
6, 1999
The 19,925-ton, Liberian-ﬂagged tanker Louise, while
adrift about eighteen miles off the Guinea coast, is
approached by a gray craft armed with ﬁxed
machine-guns. Fifteen persons can be seen on board,
all wearing brown uniforms. They close upon the
tanker as if to board so that Louise’s master gets
underway, standing away from the coast at full
speed. The attackers open ﬁre with their machine
guns, aiming at the ship’s accommodation, bridge,
and radio room. Extensive damage is inﬂicted, bullets
piercing through the steel bulkheads and penetrating
the accommodation. As the distance between the
tanker and its pursuer increases to about two-ﬁfths
of a mile, the attackers switch to rocket ﬁre, then abort
their attack altogether after the distance widens to
about three-ﬁfths of a mile. Their assault has lasted
for about 30 minutes of continuous gunﬁre, yet
miraculously no crewmen are injured.
Chronology
129

September
11, 2001
New York City and Washington, D.C. are struck by
devastating terrorist attacks. The administration of
President George W. Bush will retaliate with an inva-
sion of Afghanistan by U.S. and allied forces in pur-
suit of the al-Qaeda mastermind Osama bin Laden,
followed during the ensuing months by a sweeping
counteroffensive throughout the Near and Far East
codenamed “Operation Enduring Freedom.”
February
2002
Warships from more than a dozen allied nations hav-
ing arrived to bolster the U.S. Fifth Fleet in the Indian
Ocean, they are formed up into a separate “Com-
bined Maritime Forces” division under U.S. Naval
Forces Central Command out of Bahrain.
October
2002
U.S. authorities sign an agreement with the govern-
ment of Djibouti, to establish a fortiﬁed advance base
outside their capital for use by the “Combined Joint
Task Force-Horn of Africa,” a Marine contingent
intended to detect and disrupt Islamic extremists in
the desert expanses of northeastern Africa.
March 20,
2003
The U.S. aerial bombardment of Iraq begins, and twin
fast-moving armored columns quickly bring about
the fall of Baghdad by April 9th, and an end to all
conventional ﬁghting six days afterward. The large
number of U.S. Navy battle-groups and major war-
ships deployed into the Arabian Sea for this invasion
is quickly drawn down, while lighter American and
coalition warships are moved up closer to Iraq to pro-
tect its vulnerable offshore oil-installations, patrol its
porous borders, and escort supply-convoys.
May 6,
2003
The refurbished 88-acre compound in Djibouti is
occupied by 2,000 U.S. Marines and Naval personnel,
with offshore support from the allies’ Combined Task
Force-150.
June 20,
2005
The Joint War Committee of Lloyd’s Market Associ-
ation in London, list the Strait of Malacca as one of
several global danger-zones, branding it a passage
“highly prone to piracy, war strikes, terrorism, and
130
Chronology

related perils for ocean shipping.” This sudden dec-
laration quickly shoots up insurance-premiums by
as much as 30 percent, galvanizing the three nations
that control the Strait—Singapore, Malaysia, and
Indonesia—into a fast-paced series of reforms
intended to combat piracy and restore the lower
insurance rating.
June 27,
2005
This evening, the small and elderly Kenyan freighter
Semlow, chartered by the UN to carry 850 tons of
donated rice to Bosaso for distribution among survi-
vors of a recent tsunami, is seized about 30 miles off
the Somali coast by three speedboats manned by
15 young gunmen. They take Semlow to an anchorage
off the coast, phoning a ransom demand to the ship’s
owners in Mombassa, despite global outrage over this
hijacking of a humanitarian shipment. Eventually, a
reduced ransom will be paid so that the freighter is
towed into a safe port by October 2nd.
August 11,
2005
After a successful yearlong campaign by Singapore,
Malaysia, and Indonesia to reduce incidents of piracy
in their shared Strait of Malacca, the Joint War Com-
mittee of Lloyd’s Market Association removes this
waterway’s name from the list of global danger-
zones so that insurance premiums are restored to
previous levels.
April 4,
2006
The South Korean ﬁshing vessel Dong Won comes
under rocket attack off the coast of Somalia and two
patrolling ships of the Combined Task Force 150—
the Dutch warship Zeven Provincie¨n (F802) and U.S.
guided-missile destroyer Roosevelt (DDG-80)—
immediately respond. However, the hijacked vessel
has already been carried into Somali territorial waters
by the time that they arrive, the pirates threatening its
captive crewmembers.
June 5,
2006
After a month of bitter ﬁghting against rival Somali
warlords, a religious faction known as the Islamic
Courts Union (ICU) gains control over the capital of
Mogadishu and its surrounding district. Jowhar also
Chronology
131

June 5,
2006
(cont.)
falls to ICU militiamen nine days later, securing much
of the weaponry available in this impoverished
country.
Mid-
August
2006
ICU militiamen sweep into the Somali port-towns of
Hobyo and Harardhere, 300 miles northeast of Moga-
dishu, without opposition.
November
17, 2006
As part of its imposition of strict Sharia law, the fun-
damentalist ICU bans the addictive, leafy khat for
the entire month of Ramadan, sparking riots at Kis-
maayo and other ports.
December
8, 2006
Fighting erupts between ICU militiamen and Somali
counterforces loyal to its Transitional Federal
Government, backed by Ethiopian troops and covert
American support. The hard-pressed ICU soon calls
for jihad against Ethiopia so that international Muja-
hideen volunteers begin arriving in Somalia, but the
Islamists are quickly defeated and driven from the
capital Mogadishu by December 28th.
January
2007
An American airstrike is conducted with an AC-130
gunship against al-Qaeda members embedded with
the defeated ICU forces near Ras Kamboni in
southern Somalia, while the aircraft carrier USS
Dwight D. Eisenhower and other naval forces remain
poised off the coast to provide support and prevent
any escape out to sea.
February
25, 2007
Around 9:30 a.m. on this Sunday morning, the
freighter Rozen is boarded by Somali pirates near Bar-
gal, north of Hafun in the State of Puntland. Manned
by a crew of six Sri Lankans and six Kenyans, this
ship has been chartered by the World Food Program
to deliver 1,800 tons of humanitarian aid into the
ports of Berbera and Bosaso, and is running back
empty toward its home port of Mombasa. Deliveries
of World Food Program aid are temporarily sus-
pended until after 40 days and the payment of a ran-
som, the captive vessel is released two miles off the
ﬁshing village of Dhighdhiley.
132
Chronology

October
15, 2007
Armed clashes escalate in Somalia, when a Somaliland-
aligned faction of the Dulbahante clan attacks their
Puntland-aligned clansmen in Las Anod, capital of a
disputed region encompassing Sool, Sanaag, and Cayn.
This latter faction has ruled over the town since 2003
after driving out their opponents. Regular Somaliland
forces mobilize from their base in the town of Adhica-
deeye, west of Las Anod, tipping the balance in this lat-
est clan conﬂict. Puntland proves slow to respond due
to its weak economy and feeble, overstretched military.
October
28, 2007
While on routine patrol as part of the multinational
Combined Task Force 150, the guided missile
destroyer USS Porter picks up a distress call from the
Japanese tanker Golden Nori, reporting that it is being
boarded in the Gulf of Aden from two pirate skiffs.
Porter overtakes this same afternoon, destroying the
pirate skiffs being towed astern, isolating the notori-
ous Farah Hirsi Kulan, better known as “Boyah,”
and his minions on board.
The Transitional National Government in distant
Mogadishu grants permission for the American
destroyer and other foreign warships to continue this
pursuit into Somalia’s territorial waters, but they are
unable to storm the vessel because of its cargo of
highly-volatile chemicals and 23 hostage crewmen.
A two-month standoff ensued until Boyah ﬁnally
manages to inch his prize into the harbor at Bosaso,
where a ransom of $1.5 million is ﬁnally paid to
secure the release of both ship and crew.
January 4,
2008
Ships of the multinational Combined Task Force 150
routine “Visit, Board, Search, and Seizure” operations
on passing dhows and oil tankers near the Somali coast.
April 11,
2008
Having been paid a ransom of some $2 million, the
Somali pirates holding the French cruise ship Le Pon-
ant release their hostages in good condition, then
escape ashore. Some disperse upon reaching land,
but six get into a 4 × 4 truck. French helicopters pur-
sue this vehicle until a sniper is able to halt it by ﬁring
Chronology
133

April 11,
2008
(cont.)
into its engine. Two helicopters then land nearby and
take the six Somalis into custody, recovering part of
the ransom as well. One week later, formal criminal
proceedings will begin against these six captured
pirates in France.
August 22,
2008
The U.S. and coalition Combined Task Force 150 estab-
lishes a “Maritime Security Patrol Area,” a narrow cor-
ridor within the Gulf of Aden routinely patrolled by its
warships and aircraft so as to deter attacks and hijack-
ings of merchant ships passing through these troubled
waters.
September
17, 2008
The Danish warship Absalon, acting as temporary ﬂag-
ship for Combined Task Force 150, captures 10 pirates
in two small ships who are found to be in possession
of ladders and other implements for boarding ships,
as well as rocket launchers, machine guns, and gre-
nades. After consulting with the Danish Ministry of
Justice and other task-force members, it was deter-
mined by the Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs that
the pirates could only be prosecuted in Copenhagen,
partly because the pirates would have faced the death
penalty in nearby states, and Danish law prohibits
extraditing criminals when they might be so con-
demned. Eventually, the pirates were freed, since the
Danish authorities were concerned that it would prove
difﬁcult to deport them back to Somalia once their sen-
tences were served. The pirates were allowed to keep
their ships, although not their weapons.
October
23, 2008
India, concerned by the increasing threat posed by
piracy in the Gulf of Aden, since most of its shipping
trade-routes pass through those waters, deploys a
warship into the region, after calling for a UN peace-
keeping force under uniﬁed command to tackle this
problem off Somalia.
Late
October
2008
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) agree
to a special request from the Secretary-General of the
United Nations to send some warships to help escort
World Food Program humanitarian shipments
134
Chronology

through pirate-infested waters into starving Somalia,
an effort which will be designated “Operation Allied
Provider.” The Greek frigate Themistokles guides the
ﬁrst such chartered merchantman into the anchorage
at Merka by October 28th.
November
10, 2008
An UN-sponsored gathering of an “International
Expert Group on Piracy off the Somali Coast” meets
at Nairobi, Kenya, producing a report 11 days later
which gives a fairly comprehensive picture as to
how pirate operations are being conducted.
November
11, 2008
The European Union announces that the previous day,
its foreign ministers have agreed to dispatch ﬁve to
seven frigates and support aircraft to the Horn of Africa
region within a month to protect merchant shipping
and humanitarian food-relief into Somalia from pirates,
an expedition codenamed “Operation Atalanta.”
November
21, 2008
The Indian Navy receives UN approval to enter
Somali waters to combat piracy.
December
2008
Absalon is involved in the rescue of suspected Somali
pirates, found adrift for several days some 90 miles
off Yemen, with rocket-propelled grenades and AK-
47 assault riﬂes aboard. These weapons are seized,
their craft sunk, and the prisoners turned over to the
Yemeni Coast Guard.
January
2009
The United Nations establishes a multilateral “Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia” to coordi-
nate the antipiracy efforts by various American,
NATO, European Union, regional, and other naval
forces patrolling the waters off the Horn of Africa. It
will be criticized for only meeting sporadically and
not including the two main groups that are central to
this problem: Owners and operators of the small
coastal craft that make up the bulk of victims in the
Gulf of Aden, as well as the Somalis themselves.
February
1, 2009
MSCHOA establishes the “Internationally Recom-
mended Transit Corridor” through the pirate-plagued
Chronology
135

February
1, 2009
(cont.)
waters of the Gulf of Aden, which is to be regularly
patrolled by naval warships and aircraft to protect
transiting merchantmen.
Late
March
2009
NATO authorizes a second antipiracy campaign in
the Horn of Africa region, designated Operation
“Allied Protector,” by diverting its Standing NATO
Maritime Group 1 on an extended tour.
April 6,
2009
Near the Seychelles, Somali pirates capture the Tai-
wanese ﬁshing vessel Win Far 161, using it as a “mother
ship” to launch other strikes, including the attack on
the American container ship Maersk Alabama.
April 23,
2009
UN donor nations pledge over $250 million to help
stabilize Somalia, including $134 million to increase
the African Union peacekeeping force from 4,350 to
8,000 troops, and $34 million to upgrade security
forces of the Somali Transitional Federal Government.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon tells delegates that
“Piracy is a symptom of anarchy and insecurity on
the ground,” and that “more security on the ground
will make less piracy on the seas.”
April 24,
2009
In an effort to project an air of reform against pirates,
the newly-elected President Abdirahman Farole of
Puntland—concerned about rumored international
plans to bomb their bases within his district—
announces the start of a police campaign, who raid
two suspected pirate safe-houses in the capital of
Garowe and conﬁscate four AK-47s, 327 bottles of
alcohol, and roughly $10,500 in cash.
May 8,
2009
Islamist forces from the breakaway al-Shabaab and
Hizbul Islam factions attack Somalia’s capital of
Mogadishu, driving out its more moderate Islamic
Courts Union government after eight days of intense
ﬁghting, during which hundreds of casualties are
inﬂicted.
However, the ICU government gains support from
the powerful warlord Yusuf “Indho Ade” Mohamed
136
Chronology

Siad and successfully counterattacks by May 22nd,
setting off a summerlong round of ﬁghting in which
the luckless capital changes hands several more
times. These clashes ﬁnally subside after al-Shabaab
and Hizbul Islam turn on each other in early
October during their own power struggle around
Kisimayo.
August 17,
2009
NATO announced its third “contribution to inter-
national efforts to combat piracy off the Horn of
Africa,” by authorizing the dispatch of its Standing
NATO Maritime Group 2 into that region on a cam-
paign designated as Operation “Ocean Shield.”
February5,
2010
The Danish warship Absalon, operating in the Gulf of
Aden as part of NATO’s “Operation Ocean Shield,”
responds to a distress call from the merchantman
Ariella, which has been boarded by armed pirates.
Ariella’s crew having all withdrawn inside a locked
safe room, Danish Marines board the vessel and
regain control, as well as detaining the pirates.
February
11, 2010
Somali pirates ﬁnally release the Taiwanese ﬁshing
vessel Win Far 161, three of its 30 crewmen having
died during their 10-month detention.
March 14,
2010
After ﬁve months in captivity, the small Iranian cargo
dhow Saad 1 stands away from the Somali coast, its
pirate captors compelling its crew to steer out into
busy sea lanes, so that they might launch a strike from
this “mother ship.” However, the Italian warship
Scirocco of Commander Massimiliano Giachino—
which has been monitoring pirate camps ashore—fol-
lows and closes in two days later, chasing the dhow
back toward the Somali coast.
As the pirates hastily ﬂee ashore on the evening of
March 17th, the dhow escapes out to sea, being met
by Scirocco. The Italians repair its radio, provide
1,000 liters of fuel, plus provisions and water for Saad 1
to return home.
Chronology
137

March 23,
2010
A European Union Naval Force spokesman announces
that after the Spanish frigate Navarra has responded to
a distress signal from a United Arab Emirate-owned
cargo ship pursuing the three pirate boats which tried
to attack it, they capture six perpetrators and ﬁnd a
seventh pirate dead on board—believed shot by hired
private guards aboard the United Arab Emirate vessel.
138
Chronology

5
Biographical Sketches
Piracy cannot be beaten offshore. It has to be eradicated on the
ground.
— Abdirahman Mohamed Farole, President
of the Somali region of Puntland, June 2009
Afweyne
See Hassan Hayir, Mohamed Abdi
Bi’ir, Owkeh (fl. 2009), Minor Somali
Pirate Commander
When the newly-elected President of the Somali region of Puntland,
Abdirahman Mohamed Farole, inaugurated his administration in
January 2009 with a loudly-trumpeted drive to “stamp out” piracy,
it was alleged that his electoral campaign had in fact been partially
ﬁnanced with proceeds from extorted piratical ransoms, and that
his own nephew Bi’ir was a well-known pirate commander.
Boya or Boyah
See Kulan, Farah Hirsi
139

Dhegey, Mohamed Hidig (fl. 2009),
a Somali Pirate Gunman
Although not a major ﬁgure, this veteran raider was nonetheless
contacted by telephone in April 2009 at Garowe—a town lying
almost 100 miles inland from the main Somali pirate hotbed of
Eyl—to be interviewed by Mustafa Haji Abdinur, a reporter for
Agence France-Presse stationed in Mogadishu.
During their conversation, Dhegey offered the following
idealized account of the rules of conduct observed among the
various pirate groups prowling offshore:
If any one of us shoots and kills another, he will auto-
matically be executed and his body thrown to the sharks.
If a pirate injures another, he is immediately discharged,
and the network is instructed to isolate him. If one aims
a gun at another, he loses ﬁve percent of his share of
the ransom. (Abdinur)
Little else is known about Dhegey’s participation in any piratical
ventures beyond this single chance interview.
Garad, Abdi (fl. 2008–Present), Somali
Pirate Chieftain Involved in the Maersk
Alabama Incident
The ﬁrst mention of this leader occurred in October 2008, when he
gave a telephone interview “from an undisclosed location in the
semi-autonomous breakaway region of Puntland,” to an Agence
France-Presse reporter stationed in Mogadishu (“Somali Piracy”).
Garad began by declaring: “I have been on the ocean for a
long time, not to ﬁsh but to hunt down ships in our territorial
waters, which nobody will guard if I don’t do it” (ibid.). He went
on to justify such depredations by claiming that:
We’re defending our waters from foreigners dumping
toxic waste, and plundering our sea resources. I hope
the world can understand this is the responsibility of
140
Biographical Sketches

Somalis, and we shall one day be rewarded for our
efforts. (ibid.)
Apparently, Garad had already begun proﬁting handsomely from
his chosen career, for he added: “We enjoy life with the money we
get as a ransom.” His own personal shares had allowed him to
marry two additional wives, buy a ﬁne apartment, several
vehicles, plus many other luxuries. He regarded his occupation
as a business, declaring: “We care about it, just like anyone would
care about their job” (ibid.).
Nothing more would be heard from Garad until seven
months later, when he became embroiled in the tense standoff fol-
lowing a failed pirate attempt to seize the American container
ship Maersk Alabama on April 8, 2009. Having lost their skiff and
retreated back out onto the ocean aboard a lifeboat that same
night, with Captain Richard Phillips as their hostage, the four
assailants then used a satellite phone to contact fellow gunmen
operating in the vicinity, as well as their leaders on shore, seeking
help from both in extricating themselves from this predicament.
Garad was apparently the nominal leader of this group, and
informed the AFP reporter during another telephone interview
from the port of Eyl:
We are planning to reinforce our colleagues, who told us
that a Navy ship was closing in on them, and I hope the
matter will soon be solved. They are closely monitored
by a Navy ship, and I think it will be difﬁcult for us to
reach the area promptly. But we are making ﬁnal prepa-
rations, and will try our best to save our friends. (“US
Navy Closes Grip”)
Garad was soon in contact with U.S. authorities as well, insisting
upon payment of a reputed $2 million for ending this standoff.
“We are demanding to get ransom and to return home safely,
before releasing the Captain,” Garad explained during yet
another telephone interview next day, adding that his men were
adamant that they should not “be arrested if they release the
Captain, and the American ofﬁcials will hopefully fulﬁll that
condition, otherwise the Captain will not be released” (“Pirates
Demand Ransom”).
On April 11, 2009, Garad announced that there were still no
new developments in the impasse, beyond the fact that his
Biographical Sketches
141

followers were “planning to transfer the hostage onto one of the
ships our friends are holding around Garacad area, so that we
can wait” there for the eventual American acquiescence. However,
in light of a recent French assault which had freed the captive yacht
Tanit—resulting in the deaths of a hostage and two pirates—Garad
noted: “I’m afraid this [Maersk Alabama] matter is likely to create
disaster, because it’s taking too long, and we are getting informa-
tion that the Americans are planning rescue tricks like the French
commandos did” (“Pirates Issue New Threat”).
Indeed, three of his pirates were killed next day by U.S. Navy
SEAL sharpshooters, while the fourth was arrested and detained to
stand trial, and Captain Phillips was freed. “The American liars
have killed our friends, after they agreed to free the hostage with-
out ransom,” Garad ranted impotently over the phone, “but I tell
you that this matter will lead to retaliation, and we will hunt down
particularly American citizens travelling our waters” (Watts). Two
days later, some of his minions apparently attempted to act upon
this threat, when a boatload of pirates chased and ﬁred at the
American freighter Liberty Sun on the evening of Tuesday, April 14,
2009, yet failed to get aboard. Garad nonetheless declared:
The aim of this attack was totally different. We were not
after a ransom. We also assigned a team with special
equipment to chase and destroy any ship ﬂying the
American ﬂag, in retaliation for the brutal killing of our
friends. (“French Warship”)
Yet this second pirate assault would also end in failure, for the
3,000-ton French frigate Nivoˆse of the EU Operation Atalanta had
already detected the pirates’ “mother ship” that same evening.
After Liberty Sun escaped, French Marines swooped in aboard a
helicopter on Wednesday morning to snap up all 11 pirates and
their craft, who were then handed over to Kenyan authorities by
April 22, 2009 to stand trial.
One week later, Garad attempted to give a more responsible
veneer to his men’s activities at sea. In one ﬁnal interview with
the AFP reporter Mustafa Haji Abdinur, he alleged that all of
Puntland’s rovers maintained a secret mountain retreat at Bedey,
a few miles from Eyl, where their leaders could confer and resolve
internal differences. “We have an impregnable stronghold, and
when there is a disagreement among us, all the pirate bosses
gather there,” Garad declared. “We have a kind of mobile court
142
Biographical Sketches

that is based in Bedey. Any pirate who commits a crime is charged
and punished quickly, because we have no jails to detain them”
(Abdinur).
Nothing more is known about Garad’s role in such activities.
Gortney, William Evans (1955–Present),
Vice Admiral and Commander of U.S. Naval
Forces Central Command in Bahrain
Born on September 25, 1955, at La Jolla, California, Bill Gortney
graduated from Elon College in North Carolina with a Bachelor
of Arts in History and Political Science in the spring of 1977. He
thereupon entered the U.S. Navy as an aviation ofﬁcer candidate,
receiving his commission as an ensign in the United States Naval
Reserve by September 2, 1977, and his wings of gold after success-
fully completing training at the Naval Aviation Schools Com-
mand in Pensacola, Florida, by December 1978.
He was then assigned to the Naval Air Station at Beeville in
Texas until June 1980, and had his ﬁrst ﬂeet assignment with Attack
Squadron 82 (VA-82) onboard the carrier USS Nimitz from April 1981
to March 1984. After a three-and-a-half-year stint at Naval Air
Station Lemoore in California, he was promoted to lieutenant-
commander and served a second ﬂeet assignment from Novem-
ber 1987 to July 1989 with Strike Fighter Squadron 87 (VFA-87) on
board the carrier USS Theodore Roosevelt. As an aviator, he would
eventually log over 5,360 mishap-free ﬂight hours and make 1,265
carrier-landings, primarily in the A-7E Corsair II and FA-18 Hornet.
After serving as aide and ﬂag lieutenant from July 1989 to
March 1991 to the Assistant Chief of Naval Operations for Air War-
fare in Washington DC, Gortney became executive ofﬁcer of Strike
Fighter Squadron 132 (VFA-132) on board the USS Forrestal until
June 1992, then held the same posting for VFA-15 on board USS
Theodore Roosevelt through October 1993. Now a full Commander,
his ﬁrst command tour ensued on this latter carrier until Janu-
ary 1995, after which he graduated in March 1996 from the Naval
War College at Newport, Rhode Island with a Master of Arts in
International Security Affairs. A second command our followed
until July 1997 with VFA-106—the East Coast FA-18 Fleet Replace-
ment Squadron at Naval Air Station Cecil Field in Florida—after
which Gortney served as Operations Ofﬁcer of J-33 Joint Operations
Biographical Sketches
143

Department CENTCOM or Central Command Division, from
July 1997 until July 1999.
Promoted to Captain, his ﬁrst overseas tour ensued from
October 1999 until February 2000 as Deputy Commander for Cur-
rent Operations of Joint Task Force Southwest Asia in Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia, after which Gortney deployed in May 2000 as
deputy commander of Carrier Air Wing 7 on board the carrier
USS Dwight D. Eisenhower, assuming command over this Wing
and shifting his ﬂag aboard the USS John F. Kennedy for the open-
ing phase of “Operation Enduring Freedom.” He also served as
chief of Naval and Amphibious Liaison Element to the Combined
Forces Air Component Commander of U.S. Central Command
during the opening months of the Iraqi invasion, then after its
conclusion, as chief of staff for the Commander of Naval Forces
Central Command and the U.S. Fifth Fleet as of February 2003.
His ﬁrst ﬂag tour as Rear Admiral then ensued at Norfolk, Vir-
ginia, as deputy chief of staff for Global Force Management and
Joint Operations, Fleet Forces Command, from 2004 to 2006.
Rear Admiral Gortney returned to the Mideast theater as
commander of Carrier Strike Group 10 on board the USS Harry
S. Truman, patrolling in support of Maritime Security Operations
from 2007 before being promoted to Vice Admiral and succeeding
Kevin J. Cosgriff as Commander of Naval Forces Central Com-
mand in early July 2008. Within a month, Somali pirate attacks
began expanding northward into the Gulf of Aden, prompting
Gortney to authorize the establishment of a “Maritime Security
Patrol Area” through its waterways, a concentrated yet movable
trafﬁc-lane where his limited number of warships and aircraft
could maintain more regular surveillance, thus affording
merchantmen a greater measure of protection. A veteran naval
ofﬁcer, Gortney recognized and has often repeated that piracy
cannot be entirely defeated at sea, but must be addressed on land.
Hassan Hayir, Mohamed Abdi (fl. 2003–
Present), Ground-Breaking Pirate Organizer
at Harardheere
More commonly known by the nickname of Afweyne or “Big
Mouth,” Hassan was a penniless ex-civil servant who in 2003
sought to transform the forays being randomly launched by
144
Biographical Sketches

diverse gangs against passing targets offshore into a united and
proﬁtable business venture.
Ironically, Hassan came from a town and region with rela-
tively little inclination toward piracy—Harardheere, an impover-
ished town located some 12 miles inland from the ocean, in the
Somali province of South Mudug or Galmudug—as well as from
a clan that until then had not been involved in any such activities,
the Suleiman branch of the extensive Hawiye clan group. Previ-
ously, piracy had been a phenomenon mainly occurring in neigh-
boring Puntland and dominated by the Majerteen clan, although
a few outsiders (some with matrilineal as opposed to patrilineal
ties to the Majerteen) had also been allowed to participate.
Afweyne nonetheless scraped together what money he could
from a few ﬁnancial supporters, and used this small cache to
travel into Puntland in 2003 and recruit veteran pirates, choosing
rovers with the greatest local notoriety. Famous leaders such as
Garad Mohamed, Farah Hirsi “Boya” Kulan, and Farah Abdul-
lahi were lured south by Hassan’s inducements, to serve him—
both as active pirates offshore, as well as instructors for new local
recruits. Afweyne himself had no experience, a colleague later
recalling:
He had no clue about the sea. On technical matters
related to boats, I had to teach him from scratch, and
the ﬁrst times we went out to sea, he was sick all the
time. (Mojon)
Afweyne nonetheless managed to cobble together a tightly-knit
corps of hand-picked pirates, the entire purpose of his enterprise
being to waylay foreign vessels and patiently hold them while
extorting large ransoms, with proper logistical support ashore so
as to ensure eventual success, and thus secure a signiﬁcant inﬂow
of cash for future operations. His organization was given a self-
serving veneer of legality by proclaiming itself to be a “National
Volunteer Coast Guard,” supposedly created to prevent illicit
ﬁshing and dumping in Somalia’s territorial waters, although this
was merely a cover. What actually ensued was a notable upswing
in offshore seizures starting in 2004, as dozens of prizes were soon
being intercepted and brought to anchor along the lonely, unpo-
liced stretch of coastline between Harardheere and Hobyo, to
patiently await the payment of ransoms from their distant
owners.
Biographical Sketches
145

Harardheere’s very remoteness proved advantageous to
Afweyne as a base of operations, being barely accessible to the
rest of the country even by road, being connected by only a few
dirt tracks. This bleak, sun-baked town therefore lay beyond all
effective central authority, and furthermore was spared much of
the bitter civil wars raging elsewhere in Somalia—which meant
that no pressing demands could be made on Hassan’s ﬂedgling
organization, either, to share its proﬁts with any of the large feud-
ing factions. Instead, proceeds were spent on bribes to a few ofﬁ-
cials, as well as payments to local suppliers, so that ample funds
were left over to be re-invested in more sorties, as well as procur-
ing better equipment and recruits.
Foreign observers soon noted how Afweyne’s new southern
marauders enjoyed better boats, armaments, even satellite phones
and Global Positioning Systems. The small number of pirates
actually engaged in his raids also minimized frictions and
ensured an informal alliance between the Suleiman clan of
Mudug and the Majerteen of Puntland, both groups cooperating
as they proﬁted from this compact yet lucrative joint venture.
“Later, members of other clans with a local presence—especially
the Saad clan—were to join, but Suleiman and Majerteen still
dominate Somali piracy today” (Hansen, p. 25).
The ruthlessness and scope of Afweyne’s criminal enterprise
soon made itself felt, exempliﬁed by his hijacking of the UN-
chartered aid ship Semlow. On the evening of June 27, 2005, this
elderly 920-ton freighter was plodding north about 30 miles off-
shore, bearing 850 tons of German- and Japanese-donated rice
for the World Food Program or WFP, to be distributed at Bosaso
among survivors of a recent tsunami. Suddenly, Semlow was ﬁred
on from three ﬁberglass speedboats equipped with powerful
outboard-motors, then boarded by ﬁfteen barefoot young men
wearing shorts and T-shirts—although armed with an abundance
of AK-47s and rocket-propelled grenade launchers. The freight-
er’s Sri Lankan Captain Sellathurai Mahalingam noted that all
were very calm, and some even told him that “this was the 20th
ship they had hijacked this year” (Robinson).
After stealing $8,500 from the captain’s safe and ransacking
the cabins of the Tanzanian engineer and eight Kenyan deck-
hands, the pirates ordered their prize steered for the town of Ceel
Huur, 70 miles from Harardheere, where it dropped anchor
within sight of land. Three days after its hijacking, a man came
146
Biographical Sketches

aboard with a note instructing Mahalingam to radio Semlow’s
Kenyan owners in Mombassa, relaying two telephone numbers:
one for a mobile phone, the other a Thuraya satellite phone. The
director of the Motaku Shipping Agency received this call and
was eventually told that he would have to pay $500,000 for the
return of his ship and crew. Unable to raise such a sum, he left
negotiations to diplomats from Kenya, Sri Lanka, Tanzania, and
the United Nations—yet who could only deal through ofﬁcials of
Somalia’s ineffectual Transitional Federal Government at Moga-
dishu, not directly with Afweyne or any of his representatives.
More captures ensued offshore, while outrage mounted over
the hijacking of a humanitarian shipment. After the WFP sus-
pended all trafﬁc into starving Somalia on July 4, 2005, Hassan
granted a telephone interview three days afterward to a reporter,
during which he blandly lied: “We are not pirates and we are
not after any ﬁnancial gain, as people are claiming.” Yet he
refused to release the prize, and his men aboard the distant Sem-
low remained relaxed throughout this interlude—passing the
time by cleaning their weapons, occasionally marching in hap-
hazard parades on deck, chewing the mildly narcotic leaf known
as khat or miraa, and sniping at any boats that drifted too close.
The merchant crew was kept conﬁned to the rear of the ship,
resorting to ﬁshing when their food-supplies began to run low,
and rationing their water. But Afweyne’s organization ensured
that his pirates were kept regularly supplied with goats, potatoes,
tomatoes, and onions bought from local farmers and sent aboard,
as well as by cooking some of the WFP’s rice cargo. Every four or
ﬁve days, a fresh group of guards would arrive to relieve their
colleagues.
After two months of fruitless negotiations, Afweyne wished
to exert more pressure, so had a regional commissioner from Har-
ardheere named Mohamed Sheikh Ali grant another telephone
interview to a French reporter from Agence France-Presse, during
which this ofﬁcial threatened to put the captive crew on trial for
illegal ﬁshing and dumping of chemical wastes in Somali
territorial waters. Hassan then got on, and added his own com-
ment that: “The owners of the ship and WFP seem to be less con-
cerned about the crew, than the cargo” (“Somali Warlord”).
A tentative deal ﬁnally seemed within reach by mid-
September 2005, so that the captive Semlow was steamed to the
port of El Ma’an near Mogadishu for ofﬂoading and exchange.
Biographical Sketches
147

Unsatisﬁed with the ﬁnal terms, though, Afweyne ordered it back
toward Harardheere by September 22nd. While en route, its frus-
trated pirate prize crew spotted the Egyptian cement ship Ibn
Batuta passing by farther out at sea, so jumped into their speed-
boats to capture it as well. Both prizes were then sailed directly
to Harardheere, where Captain Mahalingam and his Tanzanian
engineer were taken ashore and driven 30 miles inland, to meet
with Hassan and other pirate bosses. “At that stage, I realized that
all the coastal villages were involved,” Mahalingam would later
declare (Robinson).
Finally, the Kenyan owners agreed to pay $135,000 for Sem-
low’s release, and Afweyne relented. Since the freighter was now
completely out of fuel, it had to be towed toward El Ma’an behind
Ibn Batuta. Along the way, the pirate guards abandoned both
prizes on Sunday, October 2, 2005, speeding away on their skiffs,
leaving the pair to limp into safety three days afterward.
Afweyne’s successful yet heartless business was dealt a set-
back next summer, when the fundamentalist Islamic Courts
Union or ICU fought its way into power at Mogadishu, then
pushed its militia northeastward to sweep uncontested into
Hobyo and Harardheere by mid-August 2006. Being opposed to
piracy on religious grounds, the ICU ordered a halt to such sor-
ties, so that almost no pirate skiffs were able to put out to sea
when the summer monsoon season ended that September. But
an American-backed invasion drove the ICU from power by the
end of 2006, so that Afweyne’s interrupted operations were free
to resume next spring with a vengeance.
Dozens of vessels would be taken by his pirates and ran-
somed for millions during the ensuing couple of years, so that
Afweyne became a very rich man—without ever having to per-
sonally venture out to sea. When the Libyan dictator Muammar
al-Gaddaﬁhosted lavish celebrations in Tripoli in August 2009
to mark his 40 years in power, one of the invited dignitaries
would be the newly wealthy and inﬂuential Afweyne, described
by one Western reporter present as “a confessed leader of one of
the largest pirate gangs that has been terrorising shipping off the
Horn of Africa” (Howden). An exiled Somali press-group in
Stockholm further identiﬁed Hassan as “a big tycoon” with
commercial interests in India, Dubai, and Kenya, in addition to
Somalia, and even noted that: “In Dubai, his business is managed
by his cousin called Yolah, and in India it is managed by a man
called Abdirhaman” (Waagacusub).
148
Biographical Sketches

Hayeysi, Dahir Mohamed (fl. 2009), Rank-
and-File Pirate Gunman from Harardheere
This otherwise unremarkable 25-year-old Somali rover gave a
telephone interview to Mohamed Olad Hassan of the BBC News
in April 2009, describing his participation in various piratical for-
ays over that previous couple of years, and summarizing his
career in the following simple language:
I used to be a ﬁsherman, with a poor family that depended
only on ﬁshing. The ﬁrst day [that] joining the pirates
came into my mind, was in 2006. A group of our villagers,
mainly ﬁshermen I knew, were arming themselves. One of
them told me that they wanted to hijack ships, which he
said were looting our sea-resources. He told me it was a
national service, with a lot of money in the end. Then I
took my gun, and joined them. (Olad Hassan)
Hayeysi felt that such depredations were justiﬁed because of the
years of illegal ﬁshing and dumping of toxic wastes by foreign
vessels, which had eroded Somali ﬁsh stocks to the point that it
had ruined their meager livelihoods.
He claimed to have ﬁrst ventured out as a pirate early that
following year, helping intercept the freighter Rozen near Bargal,
north of Hafun off the State of Puntland, at 9:30 a.m. on a Sunday
morning, February 25, 2007. This ship, manned by a crew of six
Sri Lankans and six Kenyans, had been chartered by the World
Food Program to deliver 1,800 tons of humanitarian aid into the
ports of Berbera and Bosaso, and was running empty back toward
its home port of Mombassa when it was boarded and seized.
After 40 days of extortionate negotiations by his bosses and the
payment of a ransom, it was released two miles from the ﬁshing
village of Dhighdhiley.
Unconcerned by the fact that Rozen’s detention had caused a
temporary suspension of World Food Program aid into starving
Somalia, Hayeysi participated in three more piratical expeditions
over the next couple of years, declaring his ambition was simply
“to get a lot of money so that I can lead a better life” (ibid.). He
proudly informed the reporter that he now owned two trucks, a
luxury car, and had started his own small business, and only
wanted “one more chance in piracy to increase my cash assets,
Biographical Sketches
149

then I will get married and give up” (ibid.). Rather defensively, he
went on to add:
We have local support; most of the people here depend
on pirates, directly or indirectly—because if there is a
lot of money in the town, they can get some through
friendship, relatives, or business. Also, our work is seen
by many in the coastal villages as legal, and we are
viewed as heroes. (ibid.)
The only way piracy could ever be stopped, he concluded, would
be through restoration of a truly effective national government for
Somalia, which could protect its ﬁshing trade. “Then we will dis-
arm, give our boats to that government, and will be ready to
work” (ibid.).
Hussein, Moktar Mohamed (fl. 2006),
Teenage Somali Pirate Convicted in Kenya
When the U.S. guided-missile destroyer USS Winston S. Churchill
ran down a suspected pirate mother ship in January 2006, it
proved to be a hijacked Indian dhow named Saﬁna Al Bisarat, with
sixteen captive crewmen and ten pirates on board. The latter were
deposited on February 25th at Mombassa, to be tried that same
October at a maximum-security prison an hour’s drive north of
the Kenyan capital.
An American reporter brieﬂy interviewed 17-year-old
Moktar Mohamed Hussein and an 18-year-old codefendant, the
day before their trial started. They stated that they were merely
ﬁshermen, whose boat had broken down, so that they had sought
help from the dhow. When asked why they were carrying AK-47s
and RPG launchers, Hussein replied: “Every man in Somalia car-
ries such weapons for his protection” (Raffaelle). They had
steered the dhow away when the American warship ﬁrst
appeared over the horizon, they added, as they feared being sus-
pected of being members of Al-Qaeda. “We just want to go
home,” Hussein concluded softly.
Next afternoon, proceedings commenced before Judge
Beatrice Jaden, all 10 Somali prisoners being charged with com-
mitting “acts of piracy on the high seas.” The defense counsel
150
Biographical Sketches

objected to this trial on grounds that nobody involved—victims,
defendants, or their American captors—was a Kenyan, to which
the prosecutor Margaret Mwangi “countered that the UN’s Con-
vention on the Law of the Sea allows Kenya to prosecute pirates
of any nationality, under the corresponding section of the Kenyan
penal code,” and requested the death penalty for these charges.
A fortnight later, all ten were found guilty, and sentenced to seven
years in prison apiece (Raffaele).
Ilkacase, Ahmed (fl. 2009), Member
of a Somali Pirate Gang
Virtually nothing is known about this individual, beyond the fact
that he was one of several pirates who granted an interview to a
French reporter out of Mogadishu in April 2009, during the
immediate aftermath of the Maersk Alabama incident—when
worldwide interest in piratical activity off the Horn of Africa
was running at an all-time high.
Ilkacase painted a glowing picture of piracy’s rewards, relat-
ing how:
The ﬁrst pirate to board a hijacked ship is entitled to a
luxurious car, or a house, or a wife. He can also decide
to take his bonus share in cash. (Abdinur)
Moreover, he went on to defend the conduct observed by Soma-
lia’s rovers, apparently seeking to refute a universal stereotype
of lawless gunmen violently plying the sea. Discipline was strictly
enforced, Ilkacase insisted, alleging that:
Anybody who is caught engaging in robbery on the ship,
will be punished and banished for weeks. Anyone
shooting a hostage, will immediately be shot. I was once
caught taking a wallet from a hostage: I had to give it
back, and then 25,000 dollars were removed from my
share of the ransom. (ibid.)
Accounts from countless survivors victimized by Somali board-
ing parties would ﬂy in the face of such glowing tribute, as inter-
cepted ships are routinely pillaged of money immediately after
Biographical Sketches
151

their capture, before being sailed off to await the major payoff
from a ransom demand. However, it is true that the syndicates
who organize such forays do insist upon a measure of responsible
conduct from their gunmen, so that foreign hostages are seldom
ill-treated, as this would prove bad for business.
Kulan, Farah Hirsi (fl. 1994–Present),
Somali Lobster Diver Turned
Pirate Chieftain
More commonly known as “Boyah” or “Boya,” Kulan is an impos-
ingly tall, powerful, and menacing man of the sea. In the years
immediately after the collapse of Somalia’s central government
early in 1991, he toiled as a humble lobster diver, working the reefs
outside his home port of Eyl. However, foreign vessels—mostly
Chinese, Taiwanese, and South Korean trawlers—took advantage
of Somalia’s subsequent power vacuum to begin overﬁshing its
waters, even using steel-pronged dragnets and other illegal equi-
pmentm which soon seriously depleted local lobster stocks.
His meager livelihood threatened, Boyah had turned to
armed resistance by 1994, when he and several colleagues banded
together and succeeded in capturing three foreign ﬁshing vessels
between 1995 and 1997, keeping their catches and ransoming the
crews, and even receiving an $800,000 bounty for one particular
ship. Undaunted, foreign ﬁshing ﬂeets countered by arranging
for “protection” from local warlords ashore, so that armed guards
and anti-aircraft guns soon became regular ﬁxtures aboard for-
eign trawlers. Boyah’s ill-armed makeshift group of followers
were no match for such formidable targets, therefore increasingly
began turning upon any passing commercial vessel, which
proved easier prey.
Efforts as of 1999 by the regional government of Puntland to
create a proper Somali Coast Guard, only worsened the ﬁsher-
men’s plight. The few craft deployed on patrol were often
diverted to serve as private guard boats for foreign trawlers,
who had purchased “ﬁshing licences” and curried other favors
from corrupt government ofﬁcials. Boyah would later allege that
such arrangements often caused serious confrontations, such as
when he and his men seized several ﬁshing vessels in 2001
“licensed” by Pres. Abdullahi Yusuf, which were being escorted
152
Biographical Sketches

by regional coast-guard craft. And all such halfhearted ofﬁcial
efforts at restoring a proper control over Somalia’s waters ended
in dismal failure, anyway, with the inevitable dissolution of the
contracting company and dismissal of its employees; who not
only retained much of their equipment, but then ironically—
having been left unpaid and unemployed—proved easy recruits
for pirate bands.
When the novice organizer Mohamed Abdi “Afweyne”
Hassan Hayir ventured north from Harardheere in 2003, seeking
to hire veteran pirates to act as practical instructors in his own
home waters, the formidable Kulan entered into his service. Somali
piracy surged as a result of these professionalized criminal efforts,
the trade becoming alluringly proﬁtable as foreign commercial
vessels were targeted farther and farther out at sea, and held for
sizeable ransoms. Boyah quickly joined in on this trend, after
returning home to Eyl to resume his own local operations. Any
pretence of defending his home port’s ﬁshing banks against for-
eign interlopers was now long gone, as he brazenly prowled the
commercial sea lanes of the distant Gulf of Aden seeking prizes.
In October 2007, Boyah captured the Japanese chemical
tanker Golden Nori as it was transiting through the Gulf, immedi-
ately steering this captive vessel south toward Somalia’s 12-mile
limit, intending to round the Horn of Africa close inshore and
eventually anchor it several hundred miles farther to the south,
so as to await the payment of ransom near his own stronghold
at Eyl. Instead, his lumbering prize was overtaken while still in
the Gulf of Aden by the 9,000-ton destroyer USS Porter, which
blasted his trailing pair of pirate skiffs to bits, isolating Boyah
and his handful of pirates aboard the captive tanker. The tottering
Transitional National Government in distant Mogadishu granted
authorization for the American destroyer Arleigh Burke and other
warships to continue this pursuit into Somalia’s territorial waters,
so that Boyah could not shake off the foreign squadron.
Only the fact that Golden Nori’s 23-man crew was being held
hostage, and that the tanker was loaded with 40,000 tons of vola-
tile chemicals—including extremely ﬂammable benzene—
prevented an outright assault. A two-month standoff nonetheless
ensued, before Boyah ﬁnally managed to inch his prize into the
harbor at Bosaso, Puntland’s biggest port and most populous city.
Eventually, a ransom of $1.5 million was paid to secure the release
of both ship and crew, after which Boyah and his pirates escaped
ashore.
Biographical Sketches
153

Undeterred by this close call, Boyah’s gang seized the French
luxury yacht Le Ponant next April 2008, while it was en route back
from the Seychelles toward the Mediterranean. Despite receiving
a ransom payment and freeing its hostages, French helicopters
then tracked Boyah’s disembarked pirates as far as the village of
Jariban, where Special Forces sharpshooters disabled their get-
away vehicle and French commandos captured six pirates, who
were later ﬂown off to Paris to face trial.
Public support for piracy in Somalia was furthermore shaken
during that same summer of 2008, when a delegation of clan and
religious leaders visited Eyl, announcing that all dealings with
pirates were haram or “religiously forbidden” according to
Islamic law. Even the grizzled Boyah began to sense some disap-
proval, so issued a public statement calling for an end to all
hijackings, while continuing about his business more discreetly.
He also pointedly mentioned during an interview that several
local ofﬁcials were complicit in receiving large percentages from
his piratical ransoms, sometimes totalling as much as 30 percent
(Garowe Online, August 28, 2008).
Still, Boyah assured a Western reporter in April 2009 that he
hadn’t been on a piratical foray in more than two months, because:
“I got sick [with tuberculosis] and became rich” (Bahadur,
“I’m Not”). That same May 27, 2009, the pirate chieftain told the
Puntland Post in another interview that he had “reformed,”
because piracy was “unlawful in religion.” He nonetheless
remained a formidable ﬁgure among the criminal-syndicates
organizing such ventures, despite delegating active sea-duties to
his subordinates.
Ludwig, Daniel Keith (1897–1992),
American Shipping Billionaire and Developer
of the First Supertankers
Born far from the sea on June 24, 1897 in South Haven, Michigan,
the only child of a real-estate agent, young Daniel left school after
the eighth grade and by age 19 had gone into a chartering busi-
ness, with $5,000 raised mostly on his father’s credit. Ludwig
bought an old steamer and converted it into a barge for hauling
molasses on the Great Lakes, struggling ﬁnancially throughout
the Great Depression of the late 1920s and early 1930s (Shields).
154
Biographical Sketches

Moving to New York City, he ﬁnally began to prosper during
the late 1930s in the expanding world oil trade, speciﬁcally by lin-
ing up long-term charters with major oil companies, then turning
these agreements over to a bank or insurance company as collateral
for a loan, which would cover his costs for building a new tanker—
without requiring him to actually put up any of his own money
toward its construction. When World War II erupted, Ludwig also
built a tiny shipyard near Norfolk, Virginia, where he developed
a process for welding rather than riveting tankers, which allowed
him to rapidly and cheaply build a ﬂeet of vessels for the U.S.
government.
Once that conﬂict ended, Ludwig was given back these tank-
ers and moved to expand his fortune globally, by seeking out
inexpensive foreign labor. He rented the huge Kure naval yards
from the defeated Japanese government in 1950 at bargain-
basement prices and was among the ﬁrst to recognize the proﬁt-
ability of transporting bulk cargoes of oil on ever-bigger ships
with minimal crews. Early on, he had begun escalating into larger
tankers, and after the temporary closure of the Suez Canal in 1956,
became known as the “father of the supertanker.” Over the next
couple of decades, Ludwig would compete in a building race
with Greek rivals such as Aristotle Onassis, launching six mam-
moth 335,000-ton crude carriers to transport oil from the Persian
Gulf to Ireland. By the mid-1970s, Ludwig owned 5–6 million in
deadweight tonnage, spread among some 60-plus tankers and
bulk carriers operated by his Universe Tankships subsidiary. As
a further cost-saving measure, most were registered under Liber-
ian or Panamanian ﬂags of convenience (ibid.).
The success of his shipping business, built entirely on credit,
not only provided Ludwig with huge amounts of collateral and
cash for other giant enterprises, it made him one of the richest
men in the United States, and spawned a host of commercial imi-
tators. By 1980, Ludwig ranked only third in his control over
global tonnage, having been surpassed by the Chinese ship
owners Y. K. Pao and C. Y. Tung. An eccentric loner, Ludwig
spent much of his later life developing a huge project on the Jari
River, far up the Amazon, to meet what he anticipated would be
world shortages of food, lumber, and wood pulp for papermak-
ing. This proved to be an economic and ecological failure, yet
by the time Ludwig died of heart failure on August 27, 1992, he
could still leave behind a huge fortune, most of it dedicated to
cancer research.
Biographical Sketches
155

Ludwig’s single-minded drive toward developing the most
cost-effective way of transporting vast amounts of crude oil over
the high seas, had resulted in an unexpected by-product: huge,
rich, yet thinly manned tankers roaming the world’s oceans, easy
prey for even tiniest bands of armed pirates.
McLean, Malcolm or Malcolm Purcell
(1913–2001), American Shipping Magnate
and Developer of the Container Ship
Born on November 14, 1913 in Maxton, North Carolina, young
Malcolm received only a high-school education and pumped gas
at a service station during the Great Depression, managing to
save enough money to buy a secondhand pickup truck by 1934
for $120. He, his sister Clara, and brother Jim then founded the
McLean Trucking Company, hauling empty tobacco barrels out
of Winston-Salem.
Within 15 years, it had become the second-largest trucking
ﬁrm in the United States, yet by the early 1950s McLean wished
to further expand his operations into an all-encompassing land-
and sea-service. Legend had it that he had originally conceived
such an idea while still a young driver, sitting in his truck at a port
waiting for a ship to be unloaded, yet his project was also very
similar to already existing methods: For example, Seatrain Lines
of New Jersey had been shunting railway cars on and off multi-
decked ships for transportation to and from Cuba since the
1930s, while the Dover-Calais ferries had carried trucks for years,
just as many Army trucks had also been transported at sea during
World War II. However, McLean intended to apply this technique
to a global commercial venture.
Since U.S. regulations at that time prohibited any trucking
company from owning a steamship line, McLean sold his truck-
ing ﬁrm in 1955 for $25 million and purchased the Pan-Atlantic
Steamship Corporation and Gulf Florida Terminal Company from
Waterman Steamship Corporation, with the aim of creating his
own unique line of “trailer-ships”—vessels which could receive
trailers detached from semitrucks, so as to be driven out of their
holds by different truck cabs once they reached their destination.
Securing a bank loan for $22 million, he bought two or three
156
Biographical Sketches

World War II-vintage T-2 tankers in January 1956, beginning to
transform them by the erection of wooden spar-decks several feet
above their weather decks, a technique known as “Mechano”
decking (a common wartime practice for carrying oversized car-
gos, such as aircraft). When his intended idea of driving truck
trailers directly on board was deemed too wasteful of valuable
cargo space, McLean reﬁned his concept further, to instead hoist-
ing specially reinforced, stackable containers off a trailer onto the
deck, so that only these “boxes” or containers need be conveyed
at sea—such vessels consequently becoming known as container
ships or “box” ships.
McLean’s ﬁrst extemporized container ship—the 10,500-ton
SS Ideal X—set sail from Port Newark in New Jersey on April 26,
1956, bearing 58 trailer-boxes on its six-day run to Houston,
Texas. Other shipping ﬁrms soon began experimenting with this
concept, but loading and unloading nonetheless remained difﬁ-
cult and slow throughout the industry, because of a lack of stand-
ardized containers. It would not be until 1961 that 20- and 40-foot
metal shipping units could be widely agreed upon, designated as
TEUs or “Trailer Equivalent Units.” But McLean’s system only
truly came to excel during the Vietnam War of the late 1960s and
early 1970s, delivering such prodigious amounts of supplies in a
streamlined operation to U.S. forces in Asia, that many imitators
now began adopting his method. In May 1969, he furthermore
sold his company—since renamed Sea-Land Service, Inc.—to the
R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company for $530 million in cash and
stocks, personally reaping $160 million from this sale, and a seat
on Reynolds’s board. Unhappy with this corporation’s sub-
sequent management of Sea-Land, though, he resigned and sev-
ered all ties with Reynolds by 1977.
Instead, McLean next year purchased the United States Lines,
and set out to build a globe circling ﬂeet of huge 4,400-TEU
container ships, the largest aﬂoat. However, these diesel-driven
behemoths—laid down in South Korean yards in the aftermath
of the 1970s oil shortages —proved fuel-efﬁcient but slow, unable
to compete against faster and more reliable competitors. United
States Lines therefore went bankrupt by 1987, and McLean took
very personally the criticisms heaped upon him for its collapse,
along with having to ﬁle for Chapter 11 protection against a debt
of some $1.3 billion. He nonetheless rebounded to found a small
new company at the age of 78, in 1991, to operate between Puerto
Rico, the Dominican Republic, and Jacksonville, Florida. He died
Biographical Sketches
157

at his home on the East Side of Manhattan on May 25, 2001, hon-
ored throughout the world’s shipping industries.
By then, McLean’s innovative container ship design and
intermodal practices had become universally adopted, producing
an enormous boom in the volumes of seaborne commerce.
Wholly unexpectedly, though, his creation of such large, sparsely
manned merchantmen had also resulted in rich, vulnerable
targets at sea for a new generation of modern pirates.
Mohamed, Garad or Garaad Mohamud
(fl. 2002–Present), Somali Fisherman
Turned Pirate Chieftain
Details about his birth and early career have been deliberately
kept obscure by the secretive Mohamed, even his real name being
unknown: Garaad being an honoriﬁc nickname taken from the
Somali term for a “clan elder,” a sign of status among his piratical
colleagues. He apparently began as a lowly ﬁsherman from the
port of Eyl, watching as its meager offshore stocks were stripped
bare by foreign trawlers during the 1990s, and so became a teen-
age gunman.
Mohamed insisted to a Canadian reporter that his own inde-
pendent forays had only begun as of 2002, and “with the sole
objective of defending his livelihood and that of his fellow ﬁsher-
men” (Bahadur, “Pirate King”). He had nonetheless soon gained
such local notoriety as a successful rover, that when Mohamed
Abdi “Afweyne” Hassan Hayir traveled north next year to hire
veterans to act as piratical instructors in his home waters off Har-
ardheere, Garaad Mohamed was among those chosen for this ser-
vice. The proﬁts from targeting foreign commercial vessels farther
out at sea and holding them for hefty ransoms soon proved so
alluring, that Somali piracy surged as a result.
Garaad Mohamed certainly participated in this upswing,
after returning to Eyl and resuming his own local operations.
Any pretence of defending its ﬁshing banks against foreign
trawlers was long since gone, yet he still tried to maintain a low
proﬁle as a pirate chieftain. One of the few exceptions occurred
in late January 2006, after the U.S. guided-missile destroyer USS
Winston S. Churchill had intercepted the captive Indian dhow
158
Biographical Sketches

Saﬁna Al Bisarat, arresting ten pirates and sending them to face
trial in Mombassa, Kenya. In a telephone interview with the
Mogadishu radio station Shabelle, Mohamed claimed to be com-
mander of the “National Volunteer Coast Guard group” and
threatened henceforth to kill anyone found aboard captured ships
unless the U.S. Navy released his colleagues unconditionally. “No
one has been killed in these hijackings so far, but we are now
starting to kill anyone we catch in Somali waters, unless our
men are freed,” he blustered, going on to add that America had
no business in Somalia or the Indian Ocean.
Such an outburst was unusual, though, and Mohamed soon
resumed his shadowy existence of facilitating sorties by other
pirates. He has acknowledged being involved in the capture of
the Japanese-owned bulk carrier Stella Maris, which was inter-
cepted in the Gulf of Aden in July 2008, and held for 11 weeks
before being released for a ransom of $2 million. A reporter who
interviewed him early in 2009 at a hotel on the outskirts of the
northern Somali port city of Bosaso, described Mohamed as a
well-dressed man in his mid-30s, although with a ragged face
and “eyes scratched raw by constant rubbing—a textbook case
of khat withdrawal” (ibid.).
Murphy, Shane Michael (1975–Present),
Chief Mate of the Maersk Alabama
Born at South Weymouth, Massachusetts, on June 12, 1975—the
son of a local merchant skipper—Murphy would later say that he
got his ﬁrst taste of the sea as a toddler on his father’s lobster boat,
operating out of Plympton. As a teenager, young Shane attended
Silver Lake Regional High School in nearby Kingston from 1989,
graduating four years later. While majoring in English at the Uni-
versity at Massachusetts-Dartmouth, he continued to remain close
to the sea, working as a mess cook on Martha’s Vineyard, as well
as serving aboard a ferry, before enrolling at the age of 22 in the
Massachusetts Maritime Academy at Bourne, graduating by 2001.
His father, Capt. Joseph S. Murphy II, had become a profes-
sor at this same institution as of 1984, and was already the well-
known author of a series of U.S. Coast Guard deck-ofﬁcer study
guides known as The Murphy Books. Yet despite such a seafaring
pedigree, young Shane would later mention: “Nobody in my
Biographical Sketches
159

family wanted me to get involved—it’s tough being away from
family and friends for so long” (Casella).
However, immediately after graduating he went to work on
East Coast ships, soon earning his Chief Mate’s license, and by
the spring of 2008 had accumulated enough experience to be
hired permanently to serve aboard the Maersk Alabama on its dis-
tant East African runs. After returning home that winter on leave,
Murphy was to play a leading role in the successful resistance
mounted against four Somali pirates who boarded that container
ship at sea on April 8, 2009. Left in command when they departed
in a lifeboat with Capt. Richard Phillips as their hostage, Murphy
was directed next dawn from the USS Bainbridge to proceed
toward Mombassa, bringing Maersk Alabama safely into that port
by April 11th.
Returning home along with all other crewmembers to a hero-
es’s welcome, Murphy spoke publicly in favor of permitting at
least some defensive arms aboard merchantmen, for use in emer-
gencies. He now serves as a spokesman for the private security
ﬁrm Nexus.
Muse´, Abduwali Abdukhadir
(1992?–Present), Captured Somali Pirate
Brought to New York City for Trial
He was born far from the sea, in the large and divided inland city
of Gaalkacyo, whose northern portion falls within the jurisdiction
of Puntland—one of two troubled semi-autonomous states that
comprise central Somalia. The exact date of Muse´’s birth remains
in some dispute, his father telling his American defense-attorneys
that his son was born on November 20, 1993, while Muse´’s
mother says that Abduwali was born in 1992—both dates which
would make him a juvenile at the time of his arrest, thus exempt
from trial as an adult in American courts. However, U.S. author-
ities refute such claims, offering numerous statements made by
Muse´ himself which indicate that he was born in 1990, if not ear-
lier. His diminutive size, being only ﬁve-foot, two-inches tall,
adds to his general impression of youthfulness.
Details about Muse´’s early life and career remain sketchy.
Given the arid country where he had been born and raised, it
160
Biographical Sketches

seems obvious that he had never been a seafarer, so presumably
was recuited through clan connections to serve as a gunman by
one of the syndicates organizing forays off the distant coastline—
most likely for the group directed out of Eyl by the notorious
Abdi Garad. When Muse´ was later brought to New York City
and underwent further investigation, two additional sets of
charges would be ﬁled against him on January 12, 2010: one alleg-
ing that he and several comrades had participated in boarding
and seizing an unnamed vessel in the Indian Ocean in March 2009,
threatening its crew. The second that Muse´ and his colleagues had
thereupon hijacked yet another ship, a ﬁshing vessel, on April 6,
2009—believed to be the Taiwanese Win Far 161—and used it as
their “mother ship” to launch their ill-fated strike against the
passing Maersk Alabama.
It was apparently this captive ﬁshing vessel which had been
detected around 3:45 a.m. on Wednesday morning, April 8, 2009,
by Alabama’s 24-mile-range radar, and which hailed the American
ship over VHF radio with the words: “Stop ship. Stop ship. This is
Somali pirate” (Murphy). Alabama’s Captain Richard Phillips
instead increased speed and altered course slightly, yet Muse´
and three colleagues nonetheless managed to creep under its
radar sweeps in their tiny skiff, emerging within three-and-a-
half miles of their target and charging in at a speed of 30 miles
an hour at 6:48 a.m.
Within 25 minutes, they had come along Alabama’s port side,
tossing grappling hooks over its railings so that two gunmen
could clamber aboard, while the other pair ﬁred rounds menac-
ingly into the air. It took several more minutes for these ﬁrst two
boarders to gain the main deck, shoot their way past some locked
doors, and capture Captain Phillips along with three other sea-
men on the bridge. But when one gunman then returned amid-
ships with a pair of prisoners at 8:30 a.m., to order them to
secure a rope ladder over the side so that the other two pirates
might climb up, Alabama’s rudder was swung around so violently
from down in its engine room, that the waiting skiff capsized and
left all four pirates stranded on board. Every system on the huge
ship was then shut down so that Alabama drifted to a stop in eerie
silence.
Despite looting the Captain’s safe and crew cabins, the
boarders could not control their prize and were fearful of
descending into its dark hold, where most of the crew still
remained hidden. The captive American third mate was released
Biographical Sketches
161

with instructions to order everyone up on deck, yet simply disap-
peared. It was therefore shortly before 9:00 a.m., after the Third
Mate had failed to return, that Muse´ was persuaded by Alabama’s
Bangladeshi- American helmsman—a resident of West Hartford,
Connecticut, named Abu Tasir Mohammed “Zahid” Reza—to
accompany him below decks unarmed, in a second attempt to
contact the hidden crew.
I convinced him, I told him: “Trust me. I am Muslim, you
are Muslim. Trust me, Abdul. I am from Bangladesh,
you are from Somalia. So we are brothers.” (Bone)
Muse´ agreed to go, ﬁrst handing his pistol to a colleague, appa-
rently because the Somalis were concerned about losing any
weapon to an American ambush in the darkness. And indeed,
the tiny pirate was jumped in a dark passageway by Chief Engi-
neer Mike Perry, who along with Reza stabbed Muse´ several
times in subduing him. The helmsman would later relate how:
I saw the pirate lying on the ﬂoor, and the Chief Engi-
neer on his back with the knife. He was having [a] hard
time to control him. I jumped over the pirate and
stabbed him, and the Chief Engineer also stabbed him
in the back. I was attempting to kill him, [but the] Chief
Engineer said: “No, no, no, don’t. We need him alive.”
(Bone)
Muse´ was trussed up and thrust into a safe room under guard,
spending the remainder of that day sweltering in the boiling heat
of close conﬁnement, along with the American crew.
Finally at 4:00 p.m., the captive Phillips up on the bridge had
talked the remaining trio of pirates into retreating back to sea
aboard one of Alabama’s boats, to regain their mother ship with
whatever booty they had looted. The American crew was
informed of this arrangement by radio, so that as the three pirates
went down into a boat, Alabama’s crew emerged to reclaim the
bridge and main deck. After three hours of preparations, Muse´
was brought up to be exchanged for the American captain, prior
to the pirates’ actual departure. However, Chief Mate Shane Mur-
phy would later describe how this trade went awry, for as the
injured Muse´ clambered down a rope ladder, Murphy called to
Phillips to start climbing back up:
162
Biographical Sketches

He just stood there looking up at us, the pirates pointing
guns at him. “Captain,” I shouted, “get on the ladder!”
“I’m just going to show them how to drive the
boat,” Captain Phillips said. The door closed, and then,
the Captain told me later, the pirates drew down on
him. We didn’t realize right away that they’d screwed
us, and snatched the Captain. The lifeboat puttered
away, and I was holding out hope that Captain Phillips
was just going to do a quick loop, and come back to the
ladder. But the distance between us and them kept open-
ing up. (Murphy)
Muse´ had been reunited with his colleagues, and they had come
away from Alabama with a valuable hostage, for whom their
land-based leader Garad would soon begin demanding a hefty
ransom. Yet despite using a satellite phone to contact other pirates
roaming at sea and request their help, the appearance at dawn of
April 9, 2009 of the 9,200-ton destroyer USS Bainbridge effectively
dashed any hopes they had of escaping. The low-powered,
bright-orange lifeboat simply could not get away from such a for-
midable warship, and as even more American vessels gathered,
the four pirates began bartering by radio for simple safe-passage
home, in exchange for Phillips.
On Easter Sunday, April 12, 2009, the weather got up, so that
the reeling lifeboat was steadied by being taken under tow by
Bainbridge. The pirates also requested that Muse´ be brought
aboard to receive medical attention for his wounds, and while still
on board that evening, Navy SEAL sharpshooters killed his three
companions in the lifeboat with simultaneous shots, freeing Phil-
lips. The unarmed Muse´ was consequently taken prisoner, and
eight days later landed in a cold driving rain in New York City,
to be paraded past an array of ﬂashing news cameras and driven
to FBI headquarters at 26 Federal Plaza in lower Manhattan.
Next morning, he was brought into the U.S. Southern District
Court of New York to answer 10 charges, eight of which carried a
maximum sentence of life in prison: piracy; possession of a
machine gun while seizing a ship by force; hostage taking; con-
spiracy to commit hostage taking; possession of a machine gun
during hostage taking; kidnapping; conspiracy to commit kid-
napping; and possession of a machine gun during kidnapping.
The remaining two charges carried a maximum of 20 years each,
these being seizing a ship by force, and conspiracy to seize a ship
Biographical Sketches
163

by force. As noted previously, two additional sets of charges
would also be ﬁled against Muse´ on January 12, 2010, for his
involvement in the two other piratical seizures off the coast of
Somalia, prior to his encounter with the Alabama.
Still incarcerated, Muse´’s trial is believed to be “the ﬁrst pros-
ecution on piracy charges in the United States, since the 1861 trial
of the crew of the Confederate privateer Shenandoah” (“A Pirate”).
Phillips, Richard, American Merchant
Captain Rescued from Somali Pirates
Originally from the town of Winchester, only eight miles north of
Boston, Phillips grew up in a large family along with seven broth-
ers and sisters, attending Winchester High School from 1969–
1973, where he excelled in various sports.
Entering the University of Massachusetts with vague notions
of studying international law, he dropped out after only a year,
ﬁnding temporary employment driving a Boston taxi. Picking
up a fare from the airport one day in 1974, his passenger—a mer-
chant seaman home on leave—gave such a glowing account of a
sailor’s life, that Phillips enrolled next year in the Massachusetts
Maritime Academy at Bourne, graduating by 1979 with a degree
in Marine Transportation. Over the next three decades, he would
sail the world’s oceans in a variety of merchant vessels: tankers,
container ships, freighters, and military transport charters. He
met his future wife—a nursing-student named Andrea Coggio—
in a bar outside Fenway Park, and they were married in 1987,
soon buying an old farmhouse in the small rural town of Under-
hill in Vermont, from where she worked in the emergency room
at nearby Burlington. Eventually, they would have two children,
Mariah and Daniel.
Phillips won promotion to his ﬁrst Captaincy in 1991, prov-
ing to be a strict and exacting commander at sea, while in the
employ of a professional placement ﬁrm called LMS Ship Man-
agement. After a routine home-leave during the winter of 2008–
2009, Phillips was ﬂown out to the United Arab Emirates, and
two weeks later relieved Captain Larry Aasheim at Djibouti in
command of the Maersk Alabama on March 30, 2009. This vessel
was a 17,500-ton, 500-foot-long container ship capable of trans-
porting 1,100 cargo units known as TEUs. Originally a Danish
164
Biographical Sketches

ship, it had been reﬂagged ﬁve years previously to serve as an
American vessel, and was registered with Norfolk, Virginia, as
its home port. Although operated by Waterman Steamship Cor-
poration, it ownership on paper was by the U.S. company Maersk
Line, Limited, itself a subsidiary of the global Danish conglomer-
ate A. P. Moller-Maersk Group—the largest shipping ﬁrm in the
world.
Maersk Line is one of the Department of Defense’s primary
contractors, and also operates U.S.-ﬂagged ships with American
crews for the Maritime Security Program, run by the Department
of Transportation’s Maritime Administration. Although not
under Pentagon contract at the time of its ill-fated run down
toward Kenya, Maersk Alabama had been chartered to transport
U.S. Agency for International Development humanitarian cargoes
into that region, which by law must be mostly carried on Ameri-
can vessels. Its regular route, known as “Maersk’s East Africa 4,”
was to run between Salalah in Oman and Mombassa, Kenya,
through waters which had become perilously prone to Somali
pirate attacks.
With the northeastern monsoon season at an end, tiny pirate
craft were reemerging in ever greater numbers along this route,
and multiple sightings were already being reported. Phillips
would later say he hoped the speed and high freeboard of his ship
would spare it from capture, although he had already informed
his crew to be prepared for an attempt, as it was only “a matter
of when, not if” (Kahn). Maersk Albama was brieﬂy pursued by
three skiffs from a pirate mother ship on the afternoon of April 7,
2009, so that Phillips’s written orders for that overnight watch
read:
After today’s incident, there’s no need to say where we
are, and what’s required: early observation and notiﬁca-
tion. We’re in Apache territory, with no cavalry in sight.
Keep a wary eye. Call me if in doubt, or if needed.
Indeed, he was summoned back to the bridge around 3:45 a.m. on
Wednesday morning, April 8, 2009, when another pirate mother
ship was spotted on Alabama’s 24-mile radar, radioing them
to stop.
Phillips increased speed to 18 knots and altered course
slightly, so that this second contact soon faded. Yet at 6:48 a.m., a
new contact was detected only three-and-a-half miles away, a tiny
Biographical Sketches
165

ﬁbreglass skiff racing at 26 knots across a smooth sea in the grow-
ing light, with four armed gunmen aboard. They drew along
Alabama’s port side by 7:13 a.m., two gunmen ﬁring rounds at
the racing ship, while the other pair tossed grappling hooks over
its midship railings and started to clamber up. Phillips warned
his crew over their portable radios, so that most took cover below
decks. By the time the boarders shot their way past several locked
gates and stormed the bridge, only the Captain, Third Mate Colin
Wright, the helmsman, and a seaman remained to be captured.
However, ship-controls had been taken over from down in the
engine room, and when a rope ladder was lowered at 8:30 a.m.
for the pair of pirate gunmen waiting in the boat to climb up, Ala-
bama’s rudder was swung around so violently that their skiff cap-
sized, leaving all four pirates stranded on board. Immediately
thereafter, every system was shut down, so that the entire vessel
“went black” and drifted to a halt in eerie silence. Fearful of
descending into its dark hold, the pirates released the captive
Third Mate to order the hidden crewmen up on deck, yet he quite
naturally failed to reappear. Then at 9:00 a.m., the helmsman per-
suaded one of the pirates to accompany him below decks
unarmed, who was seized in a dark passageway and captured.
Phillips bravely bore the brunt of the pirates’s wrath up on
the bridge, relaying their threats by radio to his crew below, yet
without suggesting that they surrender. Chief Mate Shane Mur-
phy succeeded in securing a VHF radio and a cell-phone, and
from a vantage point began making a series of distress calls by
1:00 p.m., advising the world of Maersk Alabama’s plight. When
initial reports of this attack reached the United States, stating that
Phillips was being held captive by the pirates and not his crew,
family members mistakenly assumed that he had volunteered to
bear this burden for all. “What I understand is that he offered
himself as the hostage,” the half-sister of Phillips’s wife would tell
the press that same afternoon. “That is what he would do. It’s just
who he is, and his responsibility as a Captain” (Houreld).
Eventually, as the torrid heat of the day built, Phillips talked
the remaining trio into retreating back out to sea aboard Alabama’s
lifeboat, so as to at least regain their mother ship. Preparations
were concluded by 7:00 p.m., at which point it only remained
for the captive pirate to clamber down a rope ladder, and Phillips
to be freed in exchange. But the switch went wrong, the wounded
Muse´ entering the lifeboat, after which the reunited pirates
refused to release Phillips, instead shutting the hatch and
166
Biographical Sketches

puttering off slowly into the evening. Since Alabama’s engines and
systems had been brought fully back on line, the container ship
easily followed the low-powered craft, illuminating it with a
searchlight.
Phillips would spend a difﬁcult four days being held
hostage aboard the bobbing lifeboat. He jumped into the sea
once, in an unsuccessful attempt to escape toward the trailing
American warships, only to be hauled back in and secured. Even-
tually on Sunday morning, April 12, 2009, the wounded pirate
was transferred aboard USS Bainbridge for medical treatment,
and his three companions were killed that evening by Navy
SEAL sharpshooters.
Phillips was freed, and returned home to a tumultuous
national welcome, for the undoubted bravery which he had dis-
played throughout this ordeal. However, he also felt uncomfort-
able at the well-intended misconception of having volunteered
for captivity on behalf of his crew, repeatedly correcting this
fact. His newfound fame was also spoiled when some for-
mer crewmen ﬁled a lawsuit, for having steered Alabama into
harm’s way.
Shukri, Hasan (fl. 2009), Low-Level
Member of a Pirate Gang Operating Out
of Harardheere, Somalia
During a telephone interview conducted in April 2009 by Mustafa
Haji Abdinur, a reporter for Agence France-Presse stationed in
Mogadishu, this rover gave a brief description of the loose-knit
organizational practices observed by the various coastal-groups
involved in offshore raids:
There are hundreds of small cells, linked to each other.
We talk every morning, exchange information on what
is happening at sea and if there has been a hijacking,
we make onshore preparations to send out reinforce-
ment, and escort the captured ship closer to the coast.
(Abdinur)
Virtually nothing else is known about this particular individual.
Biographical Sketches
167

Siad, Yusuf Mohamed (fl. 2002), Somali
Warlord Suspected of Past Associations
with Piracy
This mercurial chieftain, widely known by his nickname of “White-
Eyed Joseph” or Yusuf Indho Ade (variously spelled Inda’ade,
Inda’adde, Indha’adde, Indhaccade, etc.), had acquired a power
base in 2002 in the Lower Shabelle region, which stretches south-
westward from the beleaguered national capital of Mogadishu.
Born into the Ayr subclan, itself part of the Habar Gidir, a
branch of the larger Hawiye clan, Yusuf was suspected by U.S.
authorities of condoning piratical forays out of Shabelle’s princi-
pal seaport of Marka, during the general upsurge in depredations
all along Somalia’s coastline from 2000 to 2005. However, Yusuf
was to become more deeply embroiled in his nation’s land-based
civil wars over the next several years, rather than maritime mat-
ters, and often switching sides from his strategically placed prov-
ince. He joined the rising fundamentalist Islamic Courts Union
movement late, in September 2006, emerging as its Defense Chief.
After the ICU’s defeat by the end of that same December 2006,
Yusuf would ﬁght on with fellow warlords against the Ethiopian
occupation of central Somalia. In January 2008, he joined the
hard-line resistance movement named Hizbul Islam, yet soon fell
out with his leadership, and subsequently defected to the Transi-
tional National Government, eventually becoming Somalia’s cur-
rent “State Minister for Defense Affairs.”
Sources
Abdinur, Mustafa Haji. “Life in Somalia’s Pirate Army.” National Post
[Canada], April 30, 2009.
“A Pirate Comes to New York.” The World Newser: ABC World News’ Daily
Blog, April 21, 2009.
Bahadur, Jay. “I’m Not a Pirate, I’m the Saviour of the Sea.” The Times
Online [UK], April 16, 2009.
Bahadur, Jay. “The Pirate King of Somalia.” Globe & Mail [Canada],
April 26, 2009.
Bone, James. “Maersk Alabama Crew Return to US to Tell of Somali Pirate
Ordeal.” The Times Online [UK], April 18, 2009.
168
Biographical Sketches

Casella, Robin. “Seekonk Sailor Recalls Experience at the Helm of Maersk
Alabama.” Taunton Daily Gazette, June 25, 2009.
Davis, Paul. “Chief Mate on Pirated Ship Sought Adventure and Found It
Off Somalia.” The Providence Journal Online, April 14, 2009.
“French Warship Captures Pirates.” BBC News, April 15, 2009.
Hansen, Stig Jarle. Piracy in the Greater Gulf of Aden: Myths, Misconceptions,
and Remedies. Oslo: “Report 2009:29” of the Norwegian Institute for
Urban and Regional Research, 2009.
Houreld, Katharine. “Maersk Alabama Seized: Somali Pirates Overrun
Danish Ship.” Hufﬁngton Post Online, April 8, 2009.
Howden, Daniel. “Gaddaﬁ’s Forty Years in Power Celebrated with a
‘Gallery of Grotesques.’ ” Belfast Telegraph [Northern Ireland],
September 2, 2009.
Kahn, Joseph P. “Uncharted Waters.” Boston Globe Online, August 29, 2009.
Mojon, Jean-Marc. “Harardhere: The Cradle of Somali Piracy.” Middle
East Online [UK], October 29, 2009.
Murphy, Shane, as told to Sean Flynn. “ ‘I’m Your Worst F**king
Nightmare.’ ” GQ Online, November 18, 2009.
“Pirates Demand Ransom as US Captain’s Escape Bid Fails.” France 24
International News, April 10, 2009.
“Pirates Issue New Threat Over US Hostage.” Sky News Online [UK],
April 11, 2009.
Raffaele, Paul. “The Pirate Hunters.” Smithsonian Magazine 38, Number 5
(August 2007), pp. 38–44.
Robinson, Simon, with Xan Rice. “In Peril on the Sea.” Time Magazine,
November 7, 2005.
Shields, Jerry. The Invisible Billionaire: Daniel Ludwig. Boston: Houghton
Mifﬂin, 1986.
“Somali Piracy: ‘We’re Defending Our Waters.’ ” Mail & Guardian Online
[UK], October 14, 2008.
“Somali Warlord Threatens to Try Crew of UN Ship.” Associated Press,
August 24, 2005.
“US Navy Closes Grip on Somali Pirates.” Agence France-Presse, April 8,
2009.
Waagacusub Independent Somali Journalists. “The Boss of Somali Pirates
Sighted in Libya.” Waagacusub Media [Sweden], August 29, 2009.
Watts, Alex. “Backlash Fear After US Navy Shoots Pirates.” Sky News
Online [UK], April 13, 2009.
Biographical Sketches
169

This page intentionally left blank 

6
Data and Documents
Whenever ten guys get paid ransom-money, twenty more pirates
are created.
—Osman Hassan Uke, police chief of Bosaso, Somalia, June 2009
The Data reproduced here below includes tables illustrating the
wholesale shifts in world commerce which facilitated a resurgence
of modern piracy, as well as the best statistics available on the num-
ber of attacks inﬂicted in recent years. However, it should be noted
that reliable information on modern depredations is almost impos-
sible to afﬁx precisely, given the reluctance by many shipping
ﬁrms—as well as certain countries—to report every single negative
encounter. Consequently, these ﬁgures should be regarded as
representative samples, useful for identifying trends—such as ris-
ing or falling activity in certain zones—rather than complete statis-
tical records of every global attack.
As for the Documents, many sensationalized accounts on piracy
can be found in all sorts of media, so that the materials included
here below have been selected for the more sober judgment which
they shed on this problem: ofﬁcial materials revealing some of the
very real considerations—such as expense and legal complexities—
entailed in ﬁghting piracy in the world today.
171

Data
Table 6.1: Global Shipping Totals,
September 1939 and June 1946
The information here below dramatically illustrated the commanding
position in which U.S. merchant shipping had emerged from World
War II, thanks to enormous wartime production and the country’s safe
remove from the catastrophic losses endured by other major combatants.
During the ensuing decade, though, U.S. percentages would begin to
plummet precipitously, as thousands of surplus merchantmen were sold
off to the highest bidder, while American owners furthermore turned to
“reﬂagging” their vessels with less-demanding foreign registers.
Country
1939 Tonnage
Percent
1946 Tonnage
Percent
United States
11,682,000
14.5
55,071,000
55.5
British Empire
24,054,000
29.9
21,167,000
21.3
Japan
7,145,000
8.9
1,427,000
1.4
Norway
6,931,000
8.6
4,197,000
4.2
Germany
5,177,000
6.4
1,160,000
1.2
Italy
3,911,000
4.9
692,000
0.7
France
2,999,000
3.7
1,473,000
1.5
Greece
2,791,000
3.5
856,000
0.9
Source: New York Times, October 27, 1946 edition, p. 85.
Table 6.2: Disappearance of the U.S.
Merchant Fleet, 1955–2005
The downward spiral in the number and global percentage of American-
ﬂagged merchantmen is vividly summarized by the following table. In
fact, these ﬁgures here below even include Great-Lake carriers—vessels
which are intended solely to operate in inland waterways—so that the
U.S. absence from international ocean trade is even more profound.
Virtually every major Western merchant ﬂeet has contracted in a
similar fashion, their services being replaced by vast ﬂeets of assorted,
less-expensive, multinational transports, more vulnerable to piracy.
Year
Number of Ships
Avg. Deadweight
Tonnage
Percent of U.S.
Ocean Trade
Percent of Total
World Tonnage
1955
1,072
12,688
33.8
23.6
1960
957
13,945
26.4
11.1
172
Data and Documents

1965
912
15,293
21.4
7.5
1970
764
18,080
20.7
5.6
1975
534
25,556
17.5
5.4
1980
543
34,893
14.4
3.8
1985
401
42,394
14.9
4.4
1990
449
42,041
15.5
3.9
1995
331
45,773
13.6
3.9
2000
262
44,966
7.6
2.6
2005
249
Not available
Not available
2.0
Source: U.S. Maritime Administration.
Table 6.3: Leading “Flag of Convenience”
Nations, 2008
The preponderance of merchantmen plying today’s commercial lanes are
not only foreign-built, a signiﬁcant majority are furthermore registered
on the books of “ﬂag of convenience” nations—a practice originally
devised to reduce shippers’ taxes and operating costs, yet which has
since resulted in ﬂeets of under-regulated vessels, more vulnerable to
pirate attacks. The following are the principal “open-register” nations,
which between them are responsible for administering most modern-
day international shipping, however ill-prepared or motivated to do so.
Country
Registered Ships
Foreign-owned
Percent Foreign
Panama
5,764
4,949
86
Liberia
1,948
1,904
98
Malta
1,281
1,197
93
Bahamas
1,213
1,134
93
Antigua & Barbuda
1,059
1,021
96
Marshall Islands
990
857
95
Cyprus
868
724
83
Cambodia
586
463
79
St. Vincent & Grenadines
582
536
92
Belize
261
217
83
Gibraltar
216
201
93
Georgia
209
180
86
Netherlands Antilles
138
125
91
Bermuda
133
126
95
Cayman Islands
124
122
98
Mongolia
73
62
85
Barbados
71
67
94
Vanuatu
51
51
100
Source: CIA World Factbook, “Transportation,” 2008.
Data
173

Table 6.4: Distribution of the World’s
Piratical Attacks, 2003–2009
The following table offers the most recent “Total” ﬁgures for all pirate
attacks reported throughout the world during a span of seven years,
followed underneath each by a breakdown of actual numbers recorded in
ﬁve main trouble-spots. It should be noted that only assaults reported
ofﬁcially to the International Maritime Bureau’s piracy-monitoring
center in Kuala Lumpur are included, many other incidents doubtless
passing unnoticed. The lowest Total number in recent years occurred in
2006, when a crackdown by the Islamic Courts Union temporarily
curtailed piracy out of Somalia, although it soon resurged dramatically.
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
Total
445
329
276
239
263
293
406
Indonesia
121
94
79
59
43
28
15
Strait of Malacca
28
38
12
11
7
2
2
Nigeria
39
28
16
12
42
40
28
Gulf of Aden
18
8
10
10
13
92
116
Somalia
3
2
35
10
31
19
80
Source: International Maritime Bureau.
Table 6.5: Reduction in Piracy, Indonesia and
Strait of Malacca—Analysis
The IMB statistics extracted here below, illustrate a signiﬁcant decline
in reported piratical attacks in these once-troubled waters of Southeast
Asia. As recently as 2005, the Strait of Malacca had been deemed so
risky and “highly prone to piracy” by Lloyd’s Market Association in
London, that insurance premiums were raised by as much as
30 percent. This sudden jump in costs had thereupon galvanized a
concerted policing-effort by all three nations adjoining the Strait,
resulting in such improved security that Malacca’s name was removed
from the danger list by that very next year, and incidents of piracy
continued to dwindle even afterward.
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
Indonesia
121
94
79
59
43
28
15
Strait of Malacca
28
38
12
11
7
2
2
174
Data and Documents

Table 6.6: Persistent Piracy Problem in
Nigeria—Analysis
Statistically, assaults somewhat misleadingly categorized as “piracy”
have remained constant in Nigeria over the past decade. However, these
are actually felonious sea robberies and extortions perpetrated in the
river approaches to its petroleum installations deep inside the Niger
Delta, as well as the looting of merchantmen at anchor off its capital of
Lagos. Neither crime can be addressed by outside governments or
foreign naval patrols, though, as they occur well within Nigeria’s
territorial waters, and so must be alleviated by local police or national
military forces.
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
Nigeria
39
28
16
12
42
40
28
Table 6.7: Piracy Boom, Somalia and
the Gulf of Aden—Analysis
The statistics below reveal a remarkable spike in piratical attacks off the
Horn of Africa in recent years. This upsurge ﬁrst became apparent as
of 2005, largely due to the organized efforts to extort ransoms
inaugurated out of Harardheere by the mastermind Mohamed Abdi
“Afweyne” Hassan Hayir. An equally noticeable dip would ensue next
year, when the fundamentalist Islamic Courts Union fought their way
into power, and for ideological reasons clamped down on all Somali
sorties. But with the ICU’s defeat and dispersal that same
December 2006, piracy has ballooned out of Somalia, even spreading
over to infest the nearby commercial sea lanes of the Gulf of Aden. The
statistics for 2008 actually represent a combined total of 111 strikes
made in both bodies of water by Somali raiders, while the ﬁgures for
2009 do not include another 21 attacks which happened near the
mouth of the Red Sea, bringing the total number to 217.
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
Gulf of Aden
18
8
10
10
13
92
116
Somalia
3
2
35
10
31
19
80
Data
175

Documents
Excerpts from the UN Convention
on the Law of the Sea
Amid a rising tide of territorial claims and competing demands from
nations all around the globe in November 1967, Arvid Pardo—Malta’s
Ambassador to the United Nations—gave a speech before that body,
asking that a third international conference be convened so as to create
a ﬁrmer legal framework for regulating and protecting the oceans.
Six years were to elapse before its ﬁrst session was even held in
New York City, and—with more than 160 nations participating—it
would take another nine years of delegations shuttling through
Geneva, Switzerland, before the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea was ﬁnally passed and signed in Jamaica’s Montego
Bay on December 10, 1982. It did not actually come into effect until
November 16, 1994, more than a quarter-century after Pardo’s appeal.
Most of the representatives who had originally helped draft this
document were consumed with questions of expanding their own
territorial waters so as to claim offshore resources and control ﬁshing
rights upon which their nations’ future prosperity seemingly depended.
Of the Convention’s 320 articles, only eight dealt with the minor issue
of piracy, plus another couple touching on it tangentially, all 10 being
reproduced here below. As can be seen, the deﬁnition of piracy was kept
succinct, as were the use of authorized countermeasures or remedies.
Signatory nations agreed, in principle, to adapt these articles in keeping
with their criminal codes.
For example, when 10 Somali prisoners were deposited at Mom-
bassa in February 2006 by the guided-missile destroyer USS Winston
S. Churchill, then appeared before a judge that same October to be tried
for committing “acts of piracy on the high seas,” their defense counsel
would object on grounds that nobody involved—victims, defendants,
or their U.S. captors—was a Kenyan, to which prosecutor Margaret
Mwangi had swiftly “countered that the UN’s Convention on the Law
of the Sea allows Kenya to prosecute pirates of any nationality, under
the corresponding section of the Kenyan penal code” (Raffaele).
Yet the application of such charges remained at the discretion of
local justice ofﬁcials, and would be subject to many interpretations over
the intervening decades, often inﬂuenced by outside political events or
agendas. Even today, piracy charges are still laid somewhat haphazardly
and sporadically around the globe.
176
Data and Documents

Article 100: Duty to cooperate in the repression of piracy
All States shall cooperate to the fullest possible extent in the repression
of piracy on the high seas, or in any other place outside the jurisdiction
of any State.
Article 101: Deﬁnition of piracy
Piracy consists of any of the following acts:
(a)
any illegal acts of violence or detention, or any act of
depredation, committed for private ends by the crew or the
passengers of a private ship or a private aircraft, and directed:
(i)
on the high seas, against another ship or aircraft, or
against persons or property on board such ship or aircraft;
(ii)
against a ship, aircraft, persons, or property in a place
outside the jurisdiction of any State;
(b)
any act of voluntary participation in the operation of a ship
or of an aircraft, with knowledge of facts making it a pirate
ship or aircraft;
(c)
any act of inciting or of intentionally facilitating an act
described in subparagraph (a) or (b).
Article 102: Piracy by a warship, government ship, or government aircraft
whose crew has mutinied
The acts of piracy, as deﬁned in article 101, committed by a warship,
government ship, or government aircraft whose crew has mutinied and
taken control of the ship or aircraft, are assimilated to acts committed
by a private ship or aircraft.
Article 103: Deﬁnition of a pirate ship or aircraft
A ship or aircraft is considered a pirate ship or aircraft, if it is intended
by the persons in dominant control to be used for the purpose of
committing one of the acts referred to in article 101. The same applies if
the ship or aircraft has been used to commit any such act, so long as it
remains under the control of the persons guilty of that act.
Article 104: Retention or loss of the nationality of a pirate ship or aircraft
A ship or aircraft may retain its nationality, although it has become a
pirate ship or aircraft. The retention or loss of nationality is determined
by the law of the State from which such nationality was derived.
Article 105: Seizure of a pirate ship or aircraft
On the high seas, or in any other place outside the jurisdiction of any
State, every State may seize a pirate ship or aircraft, or a ship or aircraft
Documents
177

taken by piracy and under the control of pirates, and arrest the per-
sons and seize the property on board. The courts of the State which
carried out the seizure may decide upon the penalties to be imposed,
and may also determine the action to be taken with regard to the ships,
aircraft, or property, subject to the rights of third parties acting in good
faith.
Article 106: Liability for seizure without adequate grounds
Where the seizure of a ship or aircraft on suspicion of piracy has been
effected without adequate grounds, the State making the seizure shall
be liable to the State the nationality of which is possessed by the ship or
aircraft, for any loss or damage caused by the seizure.
Article 107: Ships and aircraft which are entitled to seize on account of piracy
A seizure on account of piracy may be carried out only by warships or
military aircraft, or other ships or aircraft clearly marked and
identiﬁable as being on government service, and authorized to that
effect.
. . .
Article 110: Right of visit
1. Except where acts of interference derive from powers conferred
by treaty, a warship which encounters on the high seas a for-
eign ship, other than a ship entitled to complete immunity in
accordance with articles 95 and 96, is not justiﬁed in boarding it
unless there is reasonable ground for suspecting that:
(a)
the ship is engaged in piracy;
(b)
the ship is engaged in the slave trade;
(c)
the ship is engaged in unauthorized broadcasting and the
ﬂag State of the warship has jurisdiction under article 109;
(d)
the ship is without nationality; or
(e)
though ﬂying a foreign ﬂag or refusing to show its ﬂag, the
ship is, in reality, of the same nationality as the warship.
2. In the cases provided for in paragraph 1, the warship may pro-
ceed to verify the ship’s right to ﬂy its ﬂag. To this end, it may
send a boat under the command of an ofﬁcer to the suspected
ship. If suspicion remains after the documents have been
checked, it may proceed to a further examination on board the
ship, which must be carried out with all possible consideration.
3. If the suspicions prove to be unfounded, and provided that the
ship boarded has not committed any act justifying them, it shall
be compensated for any loss or damage that may have been
sustained.
178
Data and Documents

4. These provisions apply mutatis mutandis to military aircraft.
5. These provisions also apply to any other duly authorized ships
or aircraft, clearly marked and identiﬁable as being on
government service.
Article 111: Right of hot pursuit
1. The hot pursuit of a foreign ship may be undertaken, when the
competent authorities of the coastal State have good reason to
believe that the ship has violated the laws and regulations of that
State. Such pursuit must be commenced when the foreign ship or
one of its boats is within the internal waters, the archipelagic
waters, the territorial sea or the contiguous zone of the pursuing
State, and may only be continued outside the territorial sea or
the contiguous zone if the pursuit has not been interrupted. It is
not necessary that, at the time when the foreign ship within the
territorial sea or the contiguous zone receives the order to stop,
the ship giving the order should likewise be within the territorial
sea or the contiguous zone. If the foreign ship is within a con-
tiguous zone, as deﬁned in article 33, the pursuit may only be
undertaken if there has been a violation of the rights for the
protection of which the zone was established.
2. The right of hot pursuit shall apply mutatis mutandis to violations
in the exclusive economic zone or on the continental shelf,
including safety zones around continental shelf installations, of
the laws and regulations of the coastal State applicable in accor-
dance with this Convention to the exclusive economic zone or
the continental shelf, including such safety zones.
3. The right of hot pursuit ceases as soon as the ship pursued enters
the territorial sea of its own State or of a third State.
4. Hot pursuit is not deemed to have begun unless the pursuing
ship has satisﬁed itself by such practicable means as may be
available, that the ship pursued or one of its boats or other craft
working as a team and using the ship pursued as a mother ship,
is within the limits of the territorial sea, or, as the case may be,
within the contiguous zone or the exclusive economic zone or
above the continental shelf. The pursuit may only be com-
menced after a visual or auditory signal to stop has been given,
at a distance which enables it to be seen or heard by the
foreign ship.
5. The right of hot pursuit may be exercised only by warships or
military aircraft, or other ships or aircraft clearly marked and
identiﬁable as being on government service, and authorized to
that effect.
Documents
179

6. Where hot pursuit is effected by an aircraft:
(a)
the provisions of paragraphs 1–4 shall apply mutatis
mutandis;
(b)
the aircraft giving the order to stop must itself actively
pursue the ship until a ship or another aircraft of the
coastal State, summoned by the aircraft, arrives to take over
the pursuit, unless the aircraft is itself able to arrest the
ship. It does not sufﬁce to justify an arrest outside the
territorial sea, that the ship was merely sighted by the
aircraft as an offender or suspected offender, if it was not
both ordered to stop and pursued by the aircraft itself, or
other aircraft or ships which continue the pursuit without
interruption.
7. The release of a ship arrested within the jurisdiction of a State
and escorted to a port of that State for the purposes of an
inquiry before the competent authorities, may not be claimed
solely on the ground that the ship, in the course of its voyage,
was escorted across a portion of the exclusive economic zone or
the high seas, if the circumstances rendered this necessary.
8. Where a ship has been stopped or arrested outside the territorial
sea, in circumstances which do not justify the exercise of the
right of hot pursuit, it shall be compensated for any loss or
damage that may have been thereby sustained.
Source: United Nations Convention of the Law of the Sea, December 10,
1982. Retrieved from http://www.un.org/Depts/los/convention
_agreements/texts/unclos/closindx.htm. Retrieved on August 4, 2009.
Reprinted with permission of the United Nations Publications Board.
Renewed U.S. Policy Against
Piracy, June 2007
After more than ﬁve-and-a-half years of its global “War on Terrorism,”
the administration of President George W. Bush ofﬁcially issued the
following policy statement on June 14, 2007, outlining its new stance
on the separate issue of piracy, which it had previously viewed
conjointly. Henceforth, the U.S. government would unite with its allies
in a speciﬁc series of coordinated measures, intended to reduce the
growing problem of piratical attacks, especially off the Horn of Africa.
This declaration was to be given “immediate implementation by all
domestic and overseas branches of the U.S. government.”
Policy for the Repression of Piracy and Other Criminal Acts of
Violence at Sea
180
Data and Documents

I. Purpose
This document establishes U.S. Government policy and implementation
actions to cooperate with other states and international and regional
organizations, in the repression of piracy and other criminal acts of
violence against maritime navigation.
II. Background
Piracy is any illegal act of violence, detention, or depredation
committed for private ends by the crew, or the passengers, of a private
ship and directed against a ship, aircraft, persons, or property on the
high seas or in any other place outside the jurisdiction of any state.
Piracy also includes inciting or facilitating an act of piracy, and any act
of voluntary participation in the operation of a ship with knowledge of
facts making it a pirate ship. Piracy is a universal crime, and all states
are obligated to cooperate to the fullest possible extent in the repression
of piracy.
Piracy threatens U.S. national security interests, and the freedom and
safety of maritime navigation throughout the world; undermines
economic security; and contributes to the destabilization of weak or
failed state governance. The combination of illicit activity and violence
at sea might also be associated with other maritime challenges,
including illegal, unlawful, and unregulated ﬁshing, international
smuggling, and terrorism.
Criminal and terrorist activities not deﬁned as piracy also occur at
sea, and similarly threaten U.S. economic and national security
interests. These acts of violence endanger the safety of maritime
navigation and may involve weapons of mass destruction. The
prevention, interdiction, and punishment of those acts occurring in
territorial seas are generally the responsibility of the coastal state.
Prevention and punishment of acts occurring in international waters
likely will require international cooperation and adequate domestic
legal systems, most recently reﬂected in the 2005 Protocols to the 1988
Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of
Maritime Navigation and the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful
Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms located on the Continental
Shelf.
The policy set forth in this annex fosters both increased interagency
coordination and international cooperation, and is consistent with,
supports, and builds upon existing maritime security efforts for piracy
repression.
III. Policy
The United States strongly supports efforts to repress piracy and other
criminal acts of violence against maritime navigation. The physical and
economic security of the United States—a major global-trading nation
Documents
181

with interests across the maritime spectrum—relies heavily on the
secure navigation of the world’s oceans for unhindered legitimate
commerce by its citizens and its partners. Piracy and other acts of
violence against maritime navigation endanger sea lines of
communication, interfere with freedom of navigation and the free ﬂow
of commerce, and undermine regional stability.
Piracy endangers maritime interests on a global scale, and the
responsibility for countering this threat does not belong exclusively to
the United States. Consequently, the United States will engage states
and international and regional organizations to develop greater
resources, capacity, and authorities to repress piracy and maximize
inclusion of coalition assets in piracy repression operations.
Piracy repression should include diplomatic, military, intelligence,
economic, law enforcement, and judicial actions. Effectively responding
to piracy and criminal activity sends an important deterrent message
and requires coordination by all departments and agencies of the U.S.
Government in order to ensure that those responsible are brought to
justice in a timely manner.
It is the policy of the United States to repress piracy, consistent with
U.S. law and international obligations, and to cooperate with other
nations in repressing piracy through the following actions:
•
Prevent pirate attacks and other criminal acts of violence against
U.S. vessels, persons, and interests;
•
Interrupt and terminate acts of piracy, consistent with
international law and the rights and responsibilities of coastal
and ﬂag states;
•
Reduce the vulnerability of the maritime domain to such acts
and exploitation when U.S. interests are directly affected;
•
Ensure that those who commit acts of piracy are held
accountable for their actions by facilitating the prosecution of
suspected pirates, and ensure that persons suspected of
committing acts of violence against maritime navigation are
similarly held accountable by ﬂag and littoral states and, in
appropriate cases, the United States;
•
Preserve the freedom of the seas, including high seas freedoms;
•
Protect sea lines of communication; and
•
Continue to lead and support international efforts to repress
piracy and other acts of violence against maritime navigation,
and urge other states to take decisive action both individually
and through international efforts.
Responses to these threats will vary according to geographic,
political, and legal environments. The scope of the mission and the
deﬁned nature of the threat also will affect the choice of response.
182
Data and Documents

IV. Implementation
The Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, and the
Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and Counterterrorism,
shall lead an interagency process to accomplish the following tasks:
•
Incorporate this policy into the Maritime Operational Threat
Response Plan (Protocols), as appropriate;
•
Oversee the development of speciﬁc guidance and protocols
for the prevention of and response by the United States
Government to piracy and other acts of violence against the
safety of maritime navigation;
•
Review existing U.S. laws against or relating to piracy, and
prepare for consideration such amendments as may be
necessary to enhance our ability to prosecute pirates in U.S.
courts; and
•
Seek international cooperation, consistent with the International
Outreach and Coordination Strategy of the National Strategy for
Maritime Security, to enhance the ability of other states to
repress piracy and other criminal acts of violence against
maritime navigation and to support U.S. anti-piracy actions.
Source: “Policy for the Repression of Piracy and Other Criminal Acts of
Violence at Sea” press release. Retrieved from http://georgewbush
-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2007/06/20070614-3.html.
Retrieved on February 17, 2009.
UN Security Council Resolution 1816,
Regarding Somali Piracy
As the pace of attacks off the Horn of Africa accelerated during the ﬁrst
half of 2008, with pirates indiscriminately preying upon any and all
passing vessels, several governments began to express concerns about
its long-term economic detriment, enough to consider underwriting a
naval countereffort. Yet before embarking upon any such armed
intervention, a series of United Nations Security Council resolutions
would have to be passed ﬁrst, clearly ensuring acquiescence from
recognized Somali authorities. The following is one of these early
resolutions, adopted on June 2, 2008, and which reads in its totality:
The Security Council,
Recalling its previous resolutions and the statements of its
President concerning the situation in Somalia,
Documents
183

Gravely concerned by the threat that acts of piracy and armed
robbery against vessels pose to the prompt, safe, and effective
delivery of humanitarian aid to Somalia, the safety of commercial
maritime routes and to international navigation,
Expressing its concerns at the quarterly reports from the
International Maritime Organization (IMO) since 2005, which
provide evidence of continuing piracy and armed robbery, in par-
ticular in the waters off the coast of Somalia,
Afﬁrming that international law, as reﬂected in the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of December 10, 1982
(“the Convention”), sets out the legal framework applicable to com-
bating piracy and armed robbery, as well as other ocean activities,
Reafﬁrming the relevant provisions of international law with
respect to the repression of piracy, including the Convention,
and recalling that they provide guiding principles for cooperation
to the fullest possible extent in the repression of piracy on the
high seas or in any other place outside the jurisdiction of any
state, including but not limited to boarding, searching, and seiz-
ing vessels engaged in or suspected of engaging in acts of piracy,
and to apprehending persons engaged in such acts with a view
to such persons being prosecuted,
Reafﬁrming its respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
political independence, and unity of Somalia,
Taking into account the crisis situation in Somalia, and the lack
of capacity of the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) to inter-
dict pirates or patrol and secure either the international sea lanes
off the coast of Somalia or Somalia’s territorial waters,
Deploring the recent incidents of attacks upon and hijacking of
vessels in the territorial waters and on the high seas off the coast
of Somalia, including attacks upon and hijackings of vessels oper-
ated by the World Food Program and numerous commercial ves-
sels, and the serious adverse impact of these attacks on the
prompt, safe, and effective delivery of food aid and other humani-
tarian assistance to the people of Somalia, and the grave dangers
they pose to vessels, crews, passengers, and cargo,
Noting the letters to the Secretary-General from the Secretary-
General of the IMO dated July 5, 2007 and September 18, 2007
regarding the piracy problems off the coast of Somalia, and the
IMO Assembly resolution A.1002 (25), which strongly urged Gov-
ernments to increase their efforts to prevent and repress, within
the provisions of international law, acts of piracy and armed rob-
bery against vessels, irrespective of where such acts occur, and
184
Data and Documents

recalling the joint communique´ of the IMO and the World Food
Program of July 10, 2007,
Taking note of the Secretary-General’s letter of November 9,
2007 to the President of the Security Council, reporting that the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia (TFG) needs and
would welcome international assistance to address the problem,
Taking further note of the letter from the Permanent Representa-
tive of the Somali Republic to the United Nations, to the President
of the Security Council dated February 27, 2008, conveying the con-
sent of the TFG to the Security Council for urgent assistance in
securing the territorial and international waters off the coast of
Somalia for the safe conduct of shipping and navigation,
Determining that the incidents of piracy and armed robbery
against vessels in the territorial waters of Somalia and the high
seas off the coast of Somalia exacerbate the situation in Somalia,
which continues to constitute a threat to international peace and
security in the region,
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
1. Condemns and deplores all acts of piracy and armed robbery
against vessels in territorial waters and the high seas off the
coast of Somalia;
2. Urges States whose naval vessels and military aircraft operate on
the high seas and airspace off the coast of Somalia, to be vigilant
to acts of piracy and armed robbery and, in this context, encour-
ages, in particular, States interested in the use of commercial
maritime routes off the coast of Somalia, to increase and coordi-
nate their efforts to deter acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea,
in cooperation with the TFG;
3. Urges all States to cooperate with each other, with the IMO and,
as appropriate, with the relevant regional organizations in con-
nection with, and share information about, acts of piracy and
armed robbery in the territorial waters and on the high seas off
the coast of Somalia, and to render assistance to vessels threat-
ened by or under attack by pirates or armed robbers, in accor-
dance with relevant international law;
4. Further urges States to work in cooperation with interested organ-
izations, including the IMO, to ensure that vessels entitled to ﬂy
their ﬂag receive appropriate guidance and training on avoid-
ance, evasion, and defensive techniques, and to avoid the area
whenever possible;
5. Calls upon States and interested organizations, including the
IMO, to provide technical assistance to Somalia and nearby
coastal States upon their request to enhance the capacity of these
Documents
185

States to ensure coastal and maritime security, including com-
bating piracy and armed robbery off the Somali and nearby
coastlines;
6. Afﬁrms that the measures imposed by paragraph 5 of Resolution
733 (1992) and further elaborated upon by paragraphs 1 and 2 of
Resolution 1425 (2002) do not apply to supplies of technical as-
sistance to Somalia solely for the purposes set out in paragraph 5
above, which have been exempted from those measures in
accordance with the procedure set out in paragraphs 11 (b) and
12 of Resolution 1772 (2007);
7. Decides that for a period of six months from the date of this reso-
lution, States cooperating with the TFG in the ﬁght against piracy
and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia, for which
advance notiﬁcation has been provided by the TFG to the
Secretary-General, may:
(a)
Enter the territorial waters of Somalia for the purpose of
repressing acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea, in a
manner consistent with such action permitted on the high
seas with respect to piracy under relevant international
law; and
(b)
Use, within the territorial waters of Somalia, in a manner
consistent with action permitted on the high seas with
respect to piracy under relevant international law, all
necessary means to repress acts of piracy and armed
robbery;
8. Requests that cooperating states take appropriate steps to ensure
that the activities they undertake pursuant to the authorization in
paragraph 7, do not have the practical effect of denying or impair-
ing the right of innocent passage to the ships of any third State;
9. Afﬁrms that the authorization provided in this resolution applies
only with respect to the situation in Somalia, and shall not affect
the rights or obligations or responsibilities of member states under
international law, including any rights or obligations under the
Convention, with respect to any other situation, and underscores
in particular that it shall not be considered as establishing
customary international law, and afﬁrms further that this
authorization has been provided only following receipt of the
letter from the Permanent Representative of the Somalia Republic
to the United Nations, to the President of the Security Council
dated February 27, 2008, conveying the consent of the TFG;
10. Calls upon States to coordinate their actions with other participat-
ing States, taken pursuant to paragraphs 5 and 7 above;
11. Calls upon all States, and in particular ﬂag, port, and coastal States,
States of the nationality of victims and perpetrators of piracy and
armed robbery, and other States with relevant jurisdiction under
186
Data and Documents

international law and national legislation, to cooperate in deter-
mining jurisdiction, and in the investigation and prosecution of
persons responsible for acts of piracy and armed robbery off the
coast of Somalia, consistent with applicable international law
including international human rights law, and to render assis-
tance by, among other actions, providing disposition and logistics
assistance with respect to persons under their jurisdiction and
control, such victims and witnesses and persons detained as a
result of operations conducted under this resolution;
12. Requests States cooperating with the TFG to inform the Security
Council within 3 months of the progress of actions undertaken
in the exercise of the authority provided in paragraph 7 above;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Security Council
within 5 months of adoption of this resolution, on the imple-
mentation of this resolution and on the situation with respect to
piracy and armed robbery in territorial waters and the high seas
off the coast of Somalia;
14. Requests the Secretary-General of the IMO to brief the Council on
the basis of cases brought to his attention by the agreement of
all affected coastal states, and duly taking into account the
existing bilateral and regional cooperative arrangements, on the
situation with respect to piracy and armed robbery;
15. Expresses its intention to review the situation and consider, as
appropriate, renewing the authority provided in paragraph 7
above for additional periods upon the request of the TFG;
16. Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Source: United Nations Security Council Resolution 1816 (2008).
Retrieved from http://ods-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/
N08/361/77/PDF/N0836177.pdf?OpenElement. Retrieved on
February 15, 2009.
EU Approval for Launching
“Operation Atalanta”
As concern mounted in international capitals about the economic threat
posed to marine trafﬁc off the Horn of Africa, by emboldened Somali
pirates venturing ever farther offshore to capture large merchantmen
and hold them for ransom, a movement began toward more direct
engagement in that affected region. With the dwindling number of
U.S. naval forces still being required around the Persian Gulf and
Arabian Sea, it remained for various allied nations to respond to UN
appeals, and furnish additional warships so as to bolster antipiracy
patrols farther south, in the troubled sea lanes around the Gulf of Aden.
Documents
187

Given that Europe’s economic well-being depended directly on safe-
passage through those waters, the Council of the European Union
adopted an act at Brussels on November 10, 2008, ofﬁcially designated
as Joint Action 2008/851/CFSP, which authorized a “military operation
to contribute to the deterrence, prevention, and repression of acts of
piracy and armed robbery off the Somali coast.” This would mark the
ﬁrst occasion on which the European Union (EU)—a political, ﬁnancial,
and cultural association—would raise a joint naval task force, and dis-
patch it overseas. The complexities of organizing, managing, and sus-
taining a multinational squadron are reﬂected in the Act itself. Actual
authorization to launch “Operation Atalanta” was given subsequently
by the EU Council as “Decision 2008/918/CFSP” on December 8,
2008, which is also appended here below:
Having regard to the Treaty on European Union, and in particular
Article 14, the third subparagraph of Article 25, and Article 28(3)
thereof,
Whereas:
1. In its Resolution 1814 (2008) on the situation in Somalia, adopted
on May 15, 2008, the United Nations Security Council (UNSC)
has called on States and regional organizations, in close co-
ordination with one another, to take action to protect shipping
involved in the transport and delivery of humanitarian aid to
Somalia and in activities authorized by the United Nations.
2. In its Resolution 1816 (2008) on the situation in Somalia, adopted
on June 2 2008, the United Nations Security Counsel (UNSC)
expressed its concern at the threat that acts of piracy and armed
robbery against vessels pose to the delivery of humanitarian aid
to Somalia, the safety of commercial maritime routes, and
international navigation. The UNSC encouraged, in particular,
States interested in the use of commercial maritime routes off the
coast of Somalia to increase and coordinate their efforts, in co-
operation with the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia
(TFG), to deter acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea. It
authorized, for a period of six months from the date of the reso-
lution, States cooperating with the TFG, of which advance noti-
ﬁcation had been given by the TFG to the UN Secretary-General,
to enter the territorial waters of Somalia and to use, in a manner
consistent with relevant international law, all necessary means to
repress acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea.
3. In its Resolution 1838 (2008) on the situation in Somalia, adopted
on October 7, 2008, the UNSC commended the ongoing planning
188
Data and Documents

process towards a possible European Union (EU) naval opera-
tion, as well as other international or national initiatives taken
with a view to implementing Resolutions 1814 (2008) and 1816
(2008), and urged States that have the capacity to do so, to co-
operate with the TFG in the ﬁght against piracy and armed rob-
bery at sea in conformity with the provisions of Resolution 1816
(2008). The UNSC also urged States and regional organizations,
in conformity with the provisions of Resolution 1814 (2008), to
continue to take action to protect the World Food Program (WFP)
maritime convoys, which is vital to bring humanitarian assis-
tance to the affected populations in Somalia.
4. In its conclusions of May 26, 2008, the Council expressed its con-
cern at the upsurge of piracy attacks off the Somali coast, which
affect humanitarian efforts and international maritime trafﬁc in
the region, and contribute to continued violations of the UN
arms embargo. The Council also commended the sequenced ini-
tiatives of some Member States to provide protection to WFP
vessels. It stressed the need for wider participation by the
international community in these escorts in order to secure the
delivery of humanitarian aid to the Somali population.
5. On 5 August 2008, the Council approved a crisis management con-
cept for action by the EU, to help implement UNSC Resolution
1816 (2008), and for peace and international security in the region.
6. On 15 September 2008, the Council reafﬁrmed its serious concern
at the acts of piracy and armed robbery off the Somali coast,
deploring, in particular, their recent resurgence. As regards the
EU’s contribution to the implementation of UNSC Resolution
1816 (2008) on combating piracy off the Somali coast and to the
protection, under Resolutions 1814 (2008) and 1816 (2008), of
vessels chartered by the WFP and bound for Somalia, the Coun-
cil decided to establish a coordination cell in Brussels with the
task of supporting the surveillance and protection activities car-
ried out by some Member States off the Somali coast. On the
same day, it approved, on the one hand, a plan for the imple-
mentation of this military coordination action European Union
Navy Ofﬁce of Community Outreach (EU NAVCO) and, on the
other, a strategic military option for a possible EU naval opera-
tion for which those Member States wishing to cooperate with
the TFG under Resolution 1816 (2008) would make available
military resources for the deterrence and repression of acts of
piracy and armed robbery off the Somali coast.
7. On September 19, 2008, the Council adopted Joint Action 2008/
749/CFSP on the European Union military coordination action,
in support of UN Security Council Resolution 1816 (2008)
(EU NAVCO) (1).
Documents
189

8. On the launch of the Atalanta military operation, the tasks of the
military coordination cell will be exercised under this Joint
Action. The coordination cell should then be closed.
9. The Political and Security Committee (PSC) should exercise
political control over the EU military operation in order to help
deter acts of piracy off the Somali coast, provide it with strategic
direction, and take the relevant decisions in accordance with
third subparagraph of Article 25 of the Treaty.
10. Under Article 28(3) of the Treaty, the operational expenditure aris-
ing from this Joint Action, which has military or defense implica-
tions, should be borne by the Member States in accordance with
Council Decision 2007/384/CFSP of May 14, 2007 establishing a
mechanism to administer the ﬁnancing of the common costs of
European Union operations having military or defense implica-
tions (Athena) (2) (hereinafter referred to as ‘Athena’).
11. Article 14(1) of the Treaty calls for Joint Actions to lay down the
means to be made available to the European Union. The ﬁnan-
cial reference amount, for a 12-month period, for the common
costs of the EU military operation constitutes the best current
estimate, and is without prejudice to the ﬁnal ﬁgures to be
included in a budget to be approved in accordance with the rules
laid down in the decision regarding Athena.
12. By letter dated October 30, 2008, the EU made an offer to the
TFG, pursuant to point 7 of Resolution 1816 (2008), which con-
tains proposals for States other than Somalia to exercise juris-
diction over persons captured in Somali territorial waters who
have committed, or are suspected of having committed, acts of
piracy or armed robbery.
13. In accordance with Article 6 of the Protocol on the position of
Denmark annexed to the Treaty on European Union and to the
Treaty establishing the European Community, Denmark does not
participate in the elaboration and implementation of decisions
and actions of the European Union, which have defense impli-
cations. Denmark does not participate in the implementation of
this Joint Action, and therefore does not participate in the
ﬁnancing of the operation,
HAS ADOPTED THIS JOINT ACTION:
Article 1
Mission
1. The European Union (EU) shall conduct a military operation in
support of Resolutions 1814 (2008), 1816 (2008), and 1838 (2008)
190
Data and Documents

of the United Nations Security Council (UNSC), in a manner
consistent with action permitted with respect to piracy under
Article 100 et seq. of the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea signed in Montego Bay on December 10, 1982 (here-
inafter referred to as “the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea”) and by means, in particular, of commitments
made with third States, hereinafter called “Atalanta” in order to
contribute to:
— the protection of vessels of the WFP delivering food aid to
displaced persons in Somalia, in accordance with the
mandate laid down in UNSC Resolution 1814 (2008),
— the protection of vulnerable vessels cruising off the Somali
coast, and the deterrence, prevention, and repression of acts
of piracy and armed robbery off the Somali coast, in
accordance with the mandate laid down in UNSC Resolution
1816 (2008),
2. The forces deployed to that end shall operate, up to 500 nautical
miles off the Somali coast and neighboring countries, in accor-
dance with the political objective of an EU maritime operation,
as deﬁned in the crisis management concept approved by the
Council on August 5, 2008.
Article 2
Mandate
Under the conditions set by the relevant international law and by
UNSC Resolutions 1814 (2008), 1816 (2008), and 1838 (2008),
Atalanta shall, as far as available capabilities allow:
(a)
provide protection to vessels chartered by the WFP, including
by means of the presence on board those vessels of armed
units of Atalanta, in particular when cruising in Somali
territorial waters;
(b)
provide protection, based on a case-by-case evaluation of
needs, to merchant vessels cruising in the areas where it is
deployed;
(c)
keep watch over areas off the Somali coast, including
Somalia’s territorial waters, in which there are dangers to
maritime activities, in particular to maritime trafﬁc;
(d)
take the necessary measures, including the use of force, to
deter, prevent, and intervene in order to bring to an end acts
of piracy and armed robbery which may be committed in the
areas where it is present;
Documents
191

(e)
in view of prosecutions potentially being brought by the
relevant States under the conditions in Article 12, arrest,
detain, and transfer persons who have committed, or are
suspected of having committed, acts of piracy or armed
robbery in the areas where it is present, and seize the vessels of
the pirates or armed robbers, or the vessels caught following
an act of piracy or an armed robbery and which are in the
hands of the pirates, as well as the goods on board;
(f)
liaise with organizations and entities, as well as States,
working in the region to combat acts of piracy and armed
robbery off the Somali coast, in particular the “Combined Task
Force 150” maritime force which operates within the
framework of “Operation Enduring Freedom”.
Article 3
Appointment of the EU Operation Commander
Rear Admiral Phillip Jones is hereby appointed EU Operation
Commander.
Article 4
Designation of the EU Operational Headquarters
The EU Operational Headquarters shall be located at Northwood,
United Kingdom.
Article 5
Planning and launch of the operation
The Decision to launch the EU military operation shall be adopted by
the Council following approval of the Operation Plan and the Rules of
Engagement, and in the light of the notiﬁcation by the TFG to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations of the offer of cooperation
made by the EU pursuant to point 7 of UNSC Resolution 1816 (2008).
Article 6
Political control and strategic direction
1. Under the responsibility of the Council, the Political and Secu-
rity Committee (PSC) shall exercise the political control and
strategic direction of the EU military operation. The Council
hereby authorizes the PSC to take the relevant decisions in
accordance with Article 25 of the EU Treaty. This authorization
shall include the powers to amend the planning documents,
including the Operation Plan, the Chain of Command and the
192
Data and Documents

Rules of Engagement. It shall also include the powers to take
decisions on the appointment of the EU Operation Commander
and/or EU Force Commander. The powers of decision with
respect to the objectives and termination of the EU military
operation shall remain vested in the Council, assisted by the
Secretary-General/High Representative (hereinafter referred to
as the ‘SG/HR’).
2. The PSC shall report to the Council at regular intervals.
3. The PSC shall receive reports from the chairman of the EU Mili-
tary Committee (EUMC) regarding the conduct of the EU mili-
tary operation, at regular intervals. The PSC may invite the EU
Operation Commander and/or EU Force Commander to its
meetings, as appropriate.
Article 7
Military direction
1. The EUMC shall monitor the proper execution of the EU military
operation conducted under the responsibility of the EU Opera-
tion Commander.
2. The EUMC shall receive reports from the EU Operation Com-
mander at regular intervals. It may invite the EU Operation
Commander and/or EU Force Commander to its meetings as
appropriate.
3. The chairman of the EUMC shall act as the primary point of con-
tact with the EU Operation Commander.
Article 8
Coherence of EU response
The Presidency, the SG/HR, the EU Operation Commander, and the EU
Force Commander shall closely coordinate their respective activities
regarding the implementation of this Joint Action.
Article 9
Relations with the United Nations, neighboring countries,
and other actors
1. The SG/HR, in close coordination with the Presidency, shall act
as the primary point of contact with the United Nations, the
Somali authorities, the authorities of neighboring countries, and
other relevant actors. Within the context of his contact with the
African Union, the SG/HR shall be assisted by the EU Special
Documents
193

Representative (EUSR) to the African Union, in close co-
ordination with the presidency.
2. At operational level, the EU Operation Commander shall act as
the contact point with, in particular, ship-owners’ organiza-
tions, as well as with the relevant departments of the UN Gen-
eral Secretariat and the WFP.
Article 10
Participation by third States
1. Without prejudice to the decision-making autonomy of the EU or
to the single institutional framework, and in accordance with the
relevant guidelines of the European Council, third States may be
invited to participate in the operation.
2. The Council hereby authorizes the PSC to invite third States to
offer contributions and to take the relevant decisions on accep-
tance of the proposed contributions, upon the recommendation
of the EU Operation Commander and the EUMC.
3. Detailed modalities for the participation by third States shall be
the subject of agreements concluded in accordance with the
procedure laid down in Article 24 of the Treaty. The SG/HR,
who shall assist the Presidency, may negotiate such agreements
on behalf of the Presidency. Where the EU and a third State have
concluded an agreement establishing a framework for the lat-
ter’s participation in EU crisis management operations, the pro-
visions of such an agreement shall apply in the context of this
operation.
4. Third States making signiﬁcant military contributions to the EU
military operation shall have the same rights and obligations in
terms of day-to-day management of the operation as Member
States taking part in the operation.
5. The Council hereby authorizes the PSC to take relevant decisions
on the setting-up of a Committee of Contributors, should third
States provide signiﬁcant military contributions.
6. The conditions for the transfer to a State participating in the
operation of persons arrested and detained, with a view to the
exercise of jurisdiction of that State, shall be established when
the participation agreements referred to in paragraph 3 are con-
cluded or implemented.
Article 11
Status of EU-led forces
The status of the EU-led forces and their personnel, including
the privileges, immunities, and further guarantees necessary
194
Data and Documents

for the fulﬁllment and smooth functioning of their
mission, who:
— are stationed on the land territory of third States,
— operate in the territorial or internal waters of third States,
shall be agreed in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article
24 of the Treaty. The SG/HR, who shall assist the Presidency, may
negotiate such arrangements on behalf of the Presidency.
Article 12
Transfer of persons arrested and detained with a
view to their prosecution
1. On the basis of Somalia’s acceptance of the exercise of jurisdic-
tion by Member States or by third States, on the one hand, and
Article 105 of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea, on the other hand, persons having committed, or suspected
of having committed, acts of piracy or armed robbery in Somali
territorial waters or on the high seas, who are arrested and
detained, with a view to their prosecution, and property used to
carry out such acts, shall be transferred:
— to the competent authorities of the ﬂag Member State or of
the third State participating in the operation, of the vessel
which took them captive, or
— if this State cannot, or does not wish to, exercise its
jurisdiction, to a Member States or any third State which
wishes to exercise its jurisdiction over the aforementioned
persons and property.
2. No persons referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 may be transferred
to a third State unless the conditions for the transfer have been
agreed with that third State in a manner consistent with relevant
international law, notably international law on human rights, in
order to guarantee in particular that no one shall be subjected to
the death penalty, to torture or to any cruel, inhuman, or
degrading treatment.
Article 13
Relations with the ﬂag States of protected vessels
The conditions governing the presence on board merchant ships,
particularly those chartered by the WFP, of units belonging to Atalanta,
including privileges, immunities, and other guarantees relating to the
proper conduct of the operation, shall be agreed with the ﬂag States of
those vessels.
Documents
195

Article 14
Financial arrangements
1. The common costs of the EU military operation shall be adminis-
tered by Athena.
2. The ﬁnancial reference amount for the common costs of the EU
military operation shall be EUR 8,300,000. The percentage of
the reference amount referred to in Article 33(3) of Athena shall
be 30 %.
Article 15
Release of information to the United Nations
and other third parties
1. The SG/HR is hereby authorized to release to the United
Nations and to other third parties associated with this Joint
Action, classiﬁed EU information and documents generated for
the purposes of the EU military operation up to the level of
classiﬁcation appropriate for each of them, and in accordance
with the Council’s security regulations (1).
2. The SG/HR is hereby authorized to release to the United
Nations and to other third parties associated with this Joint
Action, unclassiﬁed EU documents relating to Council delibera-
tions on the operation which are covered by the obligation of
professional secrecy pursuant to Article 6(1) of the Council’s
Rules of Procedure (2).
Article 16
Entry into force and termination
1. This Joint Action shall enter into force on the date of its
adoption.
2. Joint Action 2008/749/CFSP shall be repealed as from the date
of closure of the coordination cell put in place by that Joint
Action. It shall be closed on the launch date of the operation
referred to in Article 6 of this Joint Action.
3. The EU military operation shall terminate 12 months after the
initial operating capability is declared, subject to the prolonga-
tion of UNSC Resolutions 1814 (2008) and 1816 (2008).
4. This Joint Action shall be repealed following the withdrawal of
the EU force, in accordance with the plans approved for the ter-
mination of the EU military operation, and without prejudice to
the relevant provisions of Athena.
196
Data and Documents

Article 17
Publication
1. This Joint Action shall be published in the Ofﬁcial Journal of the
European Union.
2. The PSC’s decisions on the appointment of an EU Operation
Commander and/or EU Force Commander, as well as the
PSC’s decisions on the acceptance of contributions from third
States and the setting-up of a Committee of Contributors, shall
likewise be published in the Ofﬁcial Journal of the European Union.
Source: Council Joint Action 2008/851/CFSP of November 10, 2008 on a
European Union military operation to contribute to the deterrence,
prevention and repression of acts of piracy and armed robbery off the
Somali coast, published in the Ofﬁcial Journal of the European Union, L301,
Vol 51, November 12, 2008, p 33. Retrieved from http://eur-lex.europa.eu/
LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2008:301:0033:0037:EN:PDF.
Retrieved on March 8, 2009. © European Union, http://eur-lex
.europa.eu/. Only European Union legislation printed in the paper
edition of the Ofﬁcial Journal of the European Union is deemed
authentic.
Actual authorization to launch this operation was given subsequently by the
EU Council, as “Decision 2008/918/CFSP” on December 8, 2008, and
which reads in its entirety:
Having regard to the Treaty on European Union, and in particular
Article 17(2) thereof,
Having regard to Council Joint Action 2008/851/CFSP of
November 10, 2008 on a European Union military operation to
contribute to the deterrence, prevention, and repression of acts of piracy
and armed robbery off the Somali coast (ATALANTA), and in particular
Article 5 thereof,
Whereas:
1. In its Resolution 1814 (2008) on the situation in Somalia, adopted on
May 15, 2008, the UN Security Council called on States and regional
organizations, in close coordination with one another, to take action
to protect shipping involved in the transport and delivery of
humanitarian aid to Somalia and UN-authorized activities.
2. In its Resolution 1816 (2008) on the situation in Somalia, adopted
on June 2, 2008, the UN Security Council expressed its concern at
the threat that acts of piracy and armed robbery against vessels
pose to the delivery of humanitarian aid to Somalia, the safety of
commercial maritime routes and international navigation. The
UN Security Council encouraged, in particular, States interested
in the use of commercial maritime routes off the coast of Somalia
Documents
197

to increase and coordinate their efforts to deter acts of piracy and
armed robbery at sea in cooperation with the Transitional
Federal Government of Somalia (TFG).
3. In its Resolution 1838 (2008) concerning the situation in
Somalia, adopted on October 7, 2008, the UN Security Council
commended the ongoing planning process towards a possible
European Union naval operation, as well as other international
or national initiatives taken with a view to implementing
Resolutions 1814 (2008) and 1816 (2008), and urged all States
that have the capacity to do so to cooperate with the TFG
in the ﬁght against piracy and armed robbery at sea, in con-
formity with the provisions of Resolution 1816 (2008). It also
urged all States and regional organizations, in conformity with
the provisions of Resolution 1814 (2008), to continue to take
action to protect the World Food Program maritime convoys,
which is vital to bring humanitarian assistance to the Somali
population.
4. The Somali Transitional Federal Government informed the
United Nations Secretary-General by letter dated November 14,
2008 of the offer made to it, in conformity with paragraph 7 of
Resolution 1816 (2008).
5. The European Union may be brought to rely on subsequent
UNSC resolutions regarding the situation in Somalia.
6. In accordance with Article 6 of the Protocol on the position of
Denmark annexed to the Treaty on European Union and to the
Treaty establishing the European Community, Denmark does
not participate in the elaboration and implementation of deci-
sions and actions of the European Union which have defense
implications, and therefore does not participate in the ﬁnancing
of the operation,
HAS DECIDED AS FOLLOWS:
Article 1
The Operation Plan and the Rules of Engagement concerning
the EU military operation to contribute to the deterrence,
prevention, and repression of acts of piracy and armed robbery
off the Somali coast, hereinafter referred to as “Operation Atalanta,”
are approved.
Article 2
Operation Atalanta shall be launched on December 8, 2008.
198
Data and Documents

Article 3
The Commander of Operation Atalanta is hereby authorized with
immediate effect to release the Activation Order in order to execute the
deployment of the forces and start execution of the mission.
Article 4
This Decision shall take effect on the day of its adoption.
Article 5
This Decision shall be published in the Ofﬁcial Journal of the European Union.
Source: “Council Decision 2008/918/CFSP of December 8, 2008 on the
launch of a European Union military operation to contribute to the
deterrence, prevention and repression of acts of piracy and armed
robbery off the Somali coast (Atalanta),” published in the Ofﬁcial Journal
of the European Union, L330, Vol 51, December 9, 2008, p 19. Retrieved
from http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:
L:2008:330:0019:0020:EN:PDF. Retrieved on March 8, 2009. European
Union, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/. Only European Union legislation
printed in the paper edition of the Ofﬁcial Journal of the European Union is
deemed authentic.
UN Assessment of Somali Piracy,
November 2008
From November 10–21, 2008, the United Nations hosted a meeting by a
group of leading international experts in Nairobi, Kenya, to gather the
most current and accurate information available to help the international
community “develop a coordinated response to the challenge of
maritime piracy along the Somali coast.” This assembled group
included experienced Somali hands, naval and police ofﬁcers, relief
organizations, legal scholars, security specialists, etc., who offered
considerable insights into the inner workings of this problem, most of
which have subsequently proven to be quite reliable, if not all. A 92-page
report was quickly compiled and submitted to the Security Council, from
which some excerpts from its Chapter 3 are reproduced here below:
3. UNDERSTANDING PIRACY IN SOMALIA
Piracy in Somalia is deeply rooted in a number of socioeconomic
factors, predominantly poverty, hunger, and civil insecurity of the
Documents
199

coastal population. Puntland is currently the epicenter of piracy. This is
due, in no small part, to the fact that vessels can be identiﬁed and
targeted much more easily as they travel through the Gulf of Aden.
3.1 Origins of Piracy in Somalia
Prior to 1990, piracy was not a major issue off the coast of Somalia, but
like most coastal nations, there were irregular incidences of armed
robbery against small ﬁshing or leisure craft that fell prey to an armed
group, or ships that foundered off the coast. A more structured form of
piracy began in the mid-1990s, when some armed groups, claiming they
were authorized coast guards charged with protecting Somalia’s ﬁshing
resources, attacked vessels they claimed were ﬁshing illegally in their
territorial waters, and held them for ransom. This slowly expanded after
2000 to any vessel that sailed within, or close to Somali territorial waters.
Both vessels and crews would be held hostage, and ransom demanded.
During 2005 an increase was noted in the number of attacks being
attempted against vessels sailing in the Indian Ocean, off the coast of
Somalia. By 2006, some of the pirate attacks were extending as far as
350 nautical miles off the coast of Somalia. During 2006 piracy escalated
as more attempts were made to hijack ships, not only in the Indian
Ocean, but also in the Gulf of Aden and the mouth of the Red Sea. The
phenomenon grew through 2007 from the major pirate bases of Eyl,
Hobyo, and Haradheere, concentrated along the east coast of Somalia.
By 2008, this reached outlandish proportions, with ships being attacked
seemingly at random and whenever the pirates decide. Consequently,
marine travel off the northern coast of Somalia, known as Puntland, has
become the most dangerous region in the world for pirate attacks.
3.1.1 Why Piracy in Somalia?
Compared to pirate operations in other parts of the world—namely the
Java Sea, South China Sea, and off the coast of Nigeria—Somalia does
not have the natural coastal terrain so required by pirates, namely
numerous forested inlets and islands, where ships can be hidden from
aerial and maritime surveillance. Somali pirates do not need this type of
terrain because their piratical aims are very singular and
straightforward, ransom for hostages only. They are not interested in
stealing the cargo and/or reusing the ship for other purposes, where
there is a need to have a secure location hidden from view, where a ship
can be concealed while it is renamed and repainted. They are interested
in ransom only.
When a ship is taken by Somali pirates, it and the crew are held for
ransom. It is, in effect, a hostage situation. The ship is sailed to one of
the bases where the pirates can be supplied with food, water, khat,
weapons and ammunition, and other resources while the negotiations
take place. This is all done very openly, with the ship visibly anchored
off the Somali coast. The pirates are fully aware that they are relatively
200
Data and Documents

secure from any rescue mission being launched directly against them
while on the ship. The only alternative remaining to guarantee a secure
and safe conclusion to the hostage situation is the payment of the
requested ransom.
One striking aspect of piracy along the Somali coast is that despite
differences of location and clan, the methodology used for the targeting,
attack and capture of ships, the detention of crews, the progress of
negotiation, the amounts of ransom demands, the methods of receiving
payments, and ultimately release of ship and hostages are all identical.
Some experts believe that these identical procedures come from a
coordination of the pirates’s activities. Others believe that there is little
or no central coordination. These experts think that the basic
operational procedures were organically developed, either in Puntland
or in Central Region, and transferred to other groups along the coast. It
is also known that there is a fundamental operational directive or base
code of practice, among the pirates: That once a ship has been
ransomed and is released, that it cannot be further targeted by any
other group of pirates.
3.1.2 What Drives Piracy in Somalia?
There are many factors that drive piracy in Somalia. One should not be
surprised that piracy has taken root in Somalia, given the social
upheavals, human hardship, environmental degradation, and the
entrepreneurial spirit of the Somali. Piracy is ﬂourishing in Somalia, as
it is a quick way for all involved to earn a large amount of money, way
beyond any other means of income generation. While the action of
piracy involves some risk, the beneﬁts far outweigh that risk, a fact
indicated by the few arrests made, and less deaths and injury suffered
by pirates to date.
Poverty, lack of employment, environmental hardship, pitifully low
incomes, reduction of pastoralist and maritime resources due to
drought and illegal ﬁshing, and a volatile security and political
situation all contribute to the rise and continuance of piracy in Somalia.
This situation will remain so until there is an effective and simultaneous
action taken against the pirate trade and an alternative means of income
support mechanism implemented to replace it; otherwise criminal
activity, in some shape or form, will continue to take priority as a means
of generating income among the armed militias of Somalia.
The pirates also ﬁrmly believe that they have every right and
entitlement to attack illegal ﬁshing vessels operating in their territorial
waters, as their ﬁshing resources are being pillaged daily by
international shipping vessels from Asia and Europe. The international
community is fully aware that this illegal activity has been going on for
nearly seventeen years, but has taken no action against it. The pirates
believe they are the only option to curtailing this injustice. Equally, the
pirates do admit that the initial idea of protecting their coastline has
Documents
201

been hijacked to the current situation, where any vulnerable vessel is a
target. Targeting other ships is supposed to highlight the illegal
shipping, but has now become such a huge international problem that
the origins for the initial actions have been forgotten. However, they do
admit that humanitarian aid and other supporting commercial vessels
should not be targeted for piratical gain.
. . .
3.5 Pirate Methodology
The most active and renowned pirate bases are scattered along the
Indian Ocean coast of Central Somalia and Puntland: Eyl, Hobyo, and
Harardheere. These bases are well-equipped and strongly armed. It is
currently beyond the capacity of the local authorities to carry out raids
on these bases.
The methodology of the pirate attacks, from transport preparation,
weapons preparation, target identiﬁcation, and subsequent hostage
negotiation, has improved with practice and reinvestment of funds
from ransom payments.
Initially, pirate attacks were launched from beachheads in open 20-
inch-long skiffs, with high freeboards and powered by 75–85
horsepower outboard motors whose range and safety was dictated by
the state of the sea, amount of fuel on board, and engine power. The
most highly regarded outboard motor along the east coast is the
Yamaha 85 horsepower outboard motor. This allows a skiff to attain
speeds of 30 knots in relatively calm seas with four people aboard.
More recent reports indicate that these skiffs are now being powered by
as much as two 150 horsepower-motors.
These skiffs move about looking for slow moving vulnerable
commercial or ﬁshing vessels, ideally traveling under 15 knots with a
low freeboard. Once the vessel is targeted, the skiffs form a two- or
three-pronged attack, depending upon the number of skiffs in the attack
group. Attacking from a number of directions simultaneously, usually
allows one of the skiffs to approach a vessel unnoticed, and enable a
number of armed pirates to board the vessel. Once this is accomplished,
the crew is easily captured and the remaining pirates come on board.
The pirated vessel is then brought to one of the main bases of operation—
Eyl, Hobyo, or Harardheere, depending upon the origin of the pirate’s
subclan—and negotiations begin for the release of the vessel.
In the late 1990s and early 2000, the number of hijacked vessels was
very few and consisted of an equal representation of ﬁshing vessels,
commercial traders, or private yachts. When these relatively rare
incidences occurred, they were viewed somewhat sensationally, and
often involved the local support capability of the clan elders to assist in
opening negotiations with the correct representatives of the identiﬁed
pirates. In these early cases, the priority was the release of the crew, as
202
Data and Documents

the vessels and their contents were looted by the pirates as part of their
modus operandi.
In mid-2000, a new breed of piracy was noted, one that started
targeting and holding bigger commercial vessels for longer periods and
demanding higher ransoms. With little to fear from local or international
law, the trade mushroomed incrementally to the state it is today.
The step to this stage was founded on an interim period of targeting
ﬁshing vessels accused of ﬁshing illegally in Somali territorial waters.
The pirates called themselves “Somali coastguards,” with such names
as the Kismaayo Volunteer Coastguards and the Somalia Marines for
Hobyo and Harardheere, and sanctioned their actions by stating they
were protecting Somali ﬁshing resources. When the rewards of these
actions began to bear ﬁnancial returns, attacks quickly ranged well
beyond Somali territorial waters into the Indian Ocean looking for
targets. With the extension of the operational area, their modus operandi
also changed. No longer could beachhead launches give them the range
they needed for deep-ocean operations. The pirates began to use
“mother ships,” larger ships or dhows already pirated that could move
inconspicuously into the ocean, carrying pirates’ weapons and skiffs.
When a targeted ship was spotted, the skiffs were released close by and
raced towards the targeted ship with pirates armed with automatic
weapons and RPGs. These were used to threaten the crew into
submission, either by waving their weapons or by ﬁring volleys against
the bridge, or in some cases, ﬁring an RPG into the vessel. The pirated
vessel was then taken to one of the land bases and held offshore during
the negotiations.
In late 2007, the pirates realized that the rewards of captured
vessels would increase, for less danger and trouble, if they targeted
vessels exiting the chokepoint in the immediate region, principally
the Gulf of Aden as ships exited the Red Sea out of the Suez Canal.
This resulted in many more vessels being attacked, and increased
hijacked vessels. This situation exists until the current time, even
with the existence of the Combined Task Force warships and the
arrival of a number of NATO and EU warships, and warships from
other countries.
While the pirates still use the “mother ship” system, many observers
now believe that some of the pirate groups combine AIS interception
and satellite positioning systems to identify and track their intended
target. Others also believe that the pirates are receiving information
from “spotters,” who are working in ports around the region and
providing advanced knowledge on the routes and physical details of
potential targeted vessels. Regardless of what system the pirates are
using, they are still able to hijack ships within the tight operational
conﬁnes of the Gulf of Aden, and amidst the increasing number of
foreign warships.
Documents
203

3.6 Ransom
Ransom amounts demanded by the pirate groups over the past few
years, have risen from the tens of thousands of US$ to hundreds of
thousands. In 2008, the average ransom is estimated between $500,000–
$2 million. Estimated income from piracy for 2008 is projected at
between $18–30 million.
Ransom demands are now negotiated directly between the pirates on
the seized vessel, and the shipowners or companies, using the ship’s
communication equipment. In most instances, ransoms are paid in cash
and are delivered to the pirates aboard the seized ship. The cash is
usually transported by a representative of the shipowner. Upon receipt
of the money, the pirates wait until the money courier has departed
before leaving the ship. To reduce the chance of identiﬁcation, capture,
and loss of the ransom, they will leave individually, travel separately,
and divide the money amongst members of the group.
Reports of other payment methods indicate that ransoms are paid to
a trusted third representative, at a regional location outside of Somalia.
Upon receipt of the money, a call is placed to the pirates, and the ship
and hostages released.
3.6.1 Dispersion of Ransom Incomes
At present, piracy has an air of respectability about it, with pirates
much sought after due to their newfound wealth. At present, the
revenues for ransoms are being diffused into various sectors of the
communities, with a sizeable proportion being spent in Puntland.
Garoowe, in Puntland, is one place that appears to be beneﬁting from
this newfound income, with the construction of large homes, and
increase in the price of marriage dowries, and more and more
expensive vehicles appearing on the streets.
As a result of this spending, many ancillary businesses are reaping
the rewards of increased income, thus improving their livelihood and
standard of living. This spending is conﬁned exclusively to Garoowe,
but penetrates throughout the Puntland economy. With a projected
income of nearly $30 million expected from piracy this year, the activity
dwarfs the Puntland government income of $10 million dollars by three
times.
No authority can compete with this easy and untaxed income. As
long as a favorable size of the ransom money stays within Puntland,
one can argue that the beneﬁts of piracy is supporting a new and
relatively vibrant economy, and presumably raising the living standards
of a number of business interests, their families, and extended families.
One of the concerns about this input of easy cash, is that it could be
used for a more disruptive practice of affecting the outcome of
upcoming elections in Puntland, where the money could be used to
ensure that government representatives favorable to piracy activities, or
204
Data and Documents

not willing to interfere with their operations, remain in power to allow
them to continue their activities undisturbed.
Source: UN Security Council, Report of the Monitoring Group on Somalia
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1811 (2008), 10 December 2008, S/
2008/769. Retrieved from http://ods-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/
N08/604/73/PDF/N0860473.pdf?OpenElement. Retrieved on March 22,
2009. Reprinted with permission of the United Nations Publications Board.
UN Security Council Resolution 1846,
Re: Piracy in Somalia
As more and more nations volunteered to participate in the ongoing
anti-piracy efforts off the Horn of Africa, the Security Council
continued issuing new resolutions in its support, gradually expanding
the scope of these operations with the compliance and urging from the
beleaguered Transitional Federal Government in Mogadishu. The latest
in this string of UN Resolutions was adopted on December 2, 2008,
and which reads in its totality:
The Security Council,
Recalling its previous resolutions concerning the situation in
Somalia, especially resolutions 1814 (2008), 1816 (2008) and 1838
(2008),
Continuing to be gravely concerned by the threat that piracy
and armed robbery at sea against vessels pose to the prompt, safe,
and effective delivery of humanitarian aid to Somalia; to
international navigation and the safety of commercial maritime
routes; and to other vulnerable ships, including ﬁshing activities
in conformity with international law,
Reafﬁrming its respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
political independence, and unity of Somalia,
Further reafﬁrming that international law, as reﬂected in the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of December 10,
1982 (“the Convention”), sets out the legal framework applicable
to combating piracy and armed robbery at sea, as well as other
ocean activities,
Taking into account the crisis situation in Somalia, and the lack
of capacity of the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) to inter-
dict pirates, or patrol and secure either the international sea lanes
off the coast of Somalia or Somalia’s territorial waters,
Documents
205

Taking note of the requests from the TFG for international as-
sistance to counter piracy off its coasts, including the September 1,
2008 letter from the President of Somalia to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, expressing the appreciation of the TFG to
the Security Council for its assistance, and expressing the TFG’s
willingness to consider working with other States and regional
organizations to combat piracy and armed robbery at sea off the
coast of Somalia; the November 20, 2008 letter conveying the
request of the TFG that the provisions of resolution 1816 (2008)
be renewed; and the November 20, request of the Permanent
Representative of Somalia before the Security Council that the
renewal be for an additional 12 months,
Further taking note of the letters from the TFG to the Secretary-
General providing advance notiﬁcation with respect to States coop-
erating with the TFG in the ﬁght against piracy and armed robbery
at sea off the coast of Somalia, and from other Member States to the
Security Council to inform the Council of their actions, as requested
in paragraphs 7 and 12 of resolution 1816 (2008), and encouraging
those cooperating States, for which advance notiﬁcation has been
provided by the TFG to the Secretary-General, to continue their
respective efforts,
Expressing again its determination to ensure the long-term
security of World Food Program (WFP) maritime deliveries to
Somalia,
Recalling that in its resolution 1838 (2008) it commended the
contribution made by some States since November 2007 to protect
(WFP) maritime convoys, and the establishment by the European
Union of a coordination unit with the task of supporting the sur-
veillance and protection activities carried out by some member
States of the European Union off the coast of Somalia, as well as
other international and national initiatives taken with a view to
implementing resolutions 1814 (2008) and 1816 (2008),
Emphasizing that peace and stability within Somalia, the
strengthening of State institutions, economic and social develop-
ment, and respect for human rights and the rule of law are neces-
sary to create the conditions for a full eradication of piracy and
armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia,
Welcoming the signing of a peace and reconciliation Agree-
ment (“the Djibouti Agreement”) between the TFG and the Alli-
ance for the Re-Liberation of Somalia on 19 August 2008, as well
as their signing of a joint ceaseﬁre agreement on October 26,
2008, noting that the Djibouti Agreement calls for the United
206
Data and Documents

Nations to authorize and deploy an international stabilization
force, and further noting the Secretary-General’s report on Somalia
of November 17, 2008, including his recommendations in this
regard,
Commending the key role played by the African Union Mis-
sion to Somalia in facilitating delivery of humanitarian assistance
to Somalia through the port of Mogadishu, and the contribution
that African Union Mission to Somalia has made towards the goal
of establishing lasting peace and stability in Somalia, and recog-
nizing speciﬁcally the important contributions of the Govern-
ments of Uganda and Burundi to Somalia,
Welcoming the organization of a ministerial meeting of the
Security Council in December 2008 to examine ways to improve
international coordination in the ﬁght against piracy and armed
robbery off the coast of Somalia, and to ensure that the inter-
national community has the proper authorities and tools at its dis-
posal to assist it in these efforts,
Determining that the incidents of piracy and armed robbery
against vessels in the territorial waters of Somalia and the high
seas off the coast of Somalia exacerbate the situation in Somalia,
which continues to constitute a threat to international peace and
security in the region,
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations,
1. Reiterates that it condemns and deplores all acts of piracy and
armed robbery against vessels in territorial waters and the high
seas off the coast of Somalia;
2. Expresses its concern over the ﬁnding contained in the Novem-
ber 20, 2008 report of the Monitoring Group on Somalia, that
escalating ransom payments are fuelling the growth of piracy off
the coast of Somalia;
3. Welcomes the efforts of the International Maritime Organization
(IMO) to update its guidance and recommendations to the ship-
ping industry and to Governments for preventing and suppressing
piracy and armed robbery at sea, and to provide this guidance as
soon as practicable to all Member States and to the international
shipping community operating off the coast of Somalia;
4. Calls upon States, in cooperation with the shipping industry, the
insurance industry, and the IMO, to issue to ships entitled to ﬂy
their ﬂag appropriate advice and guidance on avoidance, evasion,
and defensive techniques and measures to take if under the threat of
attack or attack when sailing in the waters off the coast of Somalia;
Documents
207

5. Further calls upon States and interested organizations, including
the IMO, to provide technical assistance to Somalia and nearby
coastal States upon their request to enhance the capacity of these
States to ensure coastal and maritime security, including com-
bating piracy and armed robbery at sea off the Somali and
nearby coastlines;
6. Welcomes initiatives by Canada, Denmark, France, India, the
Netherlands, the Russian Federation, Spain, the United King-
dom, the United States of America, and by regional and
international organizations to counter piracy off the coast of
Somalia pursuant to resolutions 1814 (2008), 1816 (2008), and
1838 (2008); the decision by the North Atlantic Treaty Organiza-
tion (NATO) to counter piracy off the Somalia coast, including by
escorting vessels of the WFP; and in particular the decision by
the EU on November 10, 2008 to launch, for a period of
12 months from December 2008, a naval operation to protect
WFP maritime convoys bringing humanitarian assistance to
Somalia and other vulnerable ships, and to repress acts of piracy
and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia;
7. Calls upon States and regional organizations to coordinate,
including by sharing information through bilateral channels or
the United Nations, their efforts to deter acts of piracy and
armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia in cooperation with
each other, the IMO, the international shipping community, ﬂag
States, and the TFG;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to present to it a report, no later
than three months after the adoption of this resolution, on ways
to ensure the long-term security of international navigation off
the coast of Somalia, including the long-term security of WFP
maritime deliveries to Somalia, and a possible coordination and
leadership role for the United Nations in this regard to rally
Member States and regional organizations to counter piracy and
armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia;
9. Calls upon States and regional organizations that have the capac-
ity to do so, to take part actively in the ﬁght against piracy and
armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia, in particular, con-
sistent with this resolution and relevant international law, by
deploying naval vessels and military aircraft, and through seiz-
ure and disposition of boats, vessels, arms, and other related
equipment used in the commission of piracy and armed robbery
off the coast of Somalia, or for which there is reasonable ground
for suspecting such use;
10. Decides that for a period of 12 months from the date of this reso-
lution, States and regional organizations cooperating with the
TFG in the ﬁght against piracy and armed robbery at sea off the
208
Data and Documents

coast of Somalia, for which advance notiﬁcation has been pro-
vided by the TFG to the Secretary-General, may:
(a)
Enter into the territorial waters of Somalia for the purpose
of repressing acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea, in a
manner consistent with such action permitted on the high
seas with respect to piracy under relevant international
law; and
(b)
Use, within the territorial waters of Somalia, in a manner
consistent with such action permitted on the high seas
with respect to piracy under relevant international law, all
necessary means to repress acts of piracy and armed
robbery at sea;
11. Afﬁrms that the authorizations provided in this resolution apply
only with respect to the situation in Somalia, and shall not affect
the rights or obligations or responsibilities of Member States under
international law, including any rights or obligations under the
Convention, with respect to any other situation, and underscores
in particular that this resolution shall not be considered as estab-
lishing customary international law; and afﬁrms further that such
authorizations have been provided only following the receipt of
the 20 November letter conveying the consent of the TFG;
12. Afﬁrms that the measures imposed by paragraph 5 of resolution
733 (1992) and further elaborated upon by paragraphs 1 and 2
of resolution 1425 (2002) do not apply to supplies of technical
assistance to Somalia solely for the purposes set out in paragraph
5 above, which have been exempted from those measures in
accordance with the procedure set out in paragraphs 11 (b) and
12 of resolution 1772 (2007);
13. Requests that cooperating States take appropriate steps to ensure
that the activities they undertake pursuant to the authorization
in paragraph 10, do not have the practical effect of denying or
impairing the right of innocent passage to the ships of any third
State;
14. Calls upon all States, and in particular ﬂag, port, and coastal
States; States of the nationality of victims and perpetrators of
piracy and armed robbery; and other States with relevant juris-
diction under international law and national legislation, to co-
operate in determining jurisdiction, and in the investigation and
prosecution of persons responsible for acts of piracy and armed
robbery off the coast of Somalia, consistent with applicable
international law including international human-rights law, and
to render assistance by, among other actions, providing disposi-
tion and logistics assistance with respect to persons under their
jurisdiction and control, such victims and witnesses and persons
Documents
209

detained as a result of operations conducted under this
resolution;
15. Notes that the 1988 Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful
Acts Against the Safety of Maritime Navigation (“SUA Conven-
tion”) provides for parties to create criminal offences, establish
jurisdiction, and accept delivery of persons responsible for or
suspected of seizing or exercising control over a ship by force, or
threat thereof, or any other form of intimidation; urges States
parties to the SUA Convention to fully implement their obliga-
tions under said Convention and cooperate with the Secretary-
General and the IMO to build judicial capacity for the successful
prosecution of persons suspected of piracy and armed robbery at
sea off the coast of Somalia;
16. Requests States and regional organizations cooperating with the
TFG to inform the Security Council and the Secretary-General
within nine months, of the progress of actions undertaken in the
exercise of the authority provided in paragraph 10 above;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Security Council
within 11 months of adoption of this resolution, on the imple-
mentation of this resolution and on the situation with respect to
piracy and armed robbery in territorial waters and the high seas
off the coast of Somalia;
18. Requests the Secretary-General of the IMO to brief the Council on
the basis of cases brought to his attention by the agreement of all
affected coastal States, and duly taking into account the existing
bilateral and regional cooperative arrangements, on the situation
with respect to piracy and armed robbery;
19. Expresses its intention to review the situation and consider, as
appropriate, renewing the authority provided in paragraph 10
above for additional periods upon the request of the TFG;
20. Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Source: United Nations Security Council Resolution 1846 (2008),
December 2, 2008. Retrieved from http://ods-dds-ny.un.org/doc/
UNDOC/GEN/N08/630/29/PDF/N0863029.pdf?OpenElement.
Retrieved on March 8, 2009.
U.S.-Sponsored UN Security Council
Resolution 1851
During its ﬁnal few months in ofﬁce, the outgoing U.S. administration of
Pres. George W. Bush—presumably with at least tacit understanding
from the incoming President-elect, Barack Obama—led the drive
toward adoption of yet another Security Council resolution on
210
Data and Documents

December 16, 2008, which expanded the scope of potential coalition efforts
by securing authorization for their use of land-based operations in the ﬁght
against piracy off the coast of Somalia. This document reads in its entirety:
The Security Council,
Recalling its previous resolutions concerning the situation in
Somalia, especially resolutions 1814 (2008), 1816 (2008), 1838
(2008), 1844 (2008), and 1846 (2008),
Continuing to be gravely concerned by the dramatic increase
in the incidents of piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast
of Somalia in the last six months, and by the threat that piracy
and armed robbery at sea against vessels pose to the prompt, safe,
and effective delivery of humanitarian aid to Somalia, and noting
that pirate attacks off the coast of Somalia have become more
sophisticated and daring, and have expanded in their geographic
scope, notably evidenced by the hijacking of the M/V Sirius Star
500 nautical miles off the coast of Kenya and subsequent unsuc-
cessful attempts well east of Tanzania,
Reafﬁrming its respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
political independence, and unity of Somalia, including Somalia’s
rights with respect to offshore natural resources, including ﬁsh-
eries, in accordance with international law,
Further reafﬁrming that international law, as reﬂected in the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of December 10,
1982 (UNCLOS), sets out the legal framework applicable to com-
bating piracy and armed robbery at sea, as well as other ocean
activities,
Again taking into account the crisis situation in Somalia, and
the lack of capacity of the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) to interdict, or upon interdiction to prosecute pirates, or to
patrol and secure the waters off the coast of Somalia, including
the international sea lanes and Somalia’s territorial waters,
Noting the several requests from the TFG for international
assistance to counter piracy off its coast, including the letter of
9 December 2008 from the President of Somalia requesting the
international community to assist the TFG in taking all necessary
measures to interdict those who use Somali territory and airspace
to plan, facilitate or undertake acts of piracy and armed robbery
at sea, and the September 1, 2008 letter from the President of
Somalia to the Secretary-General of the UN expressing the appre-
ciation of the TFG to the Security Council for its assistance and
Documents
211

expressing the TFG’s willingness to consider working with other
States and regional organizations to combat piracy and armed
robbery off the coast of Somalia,
Welcoming the launching of the EU operation Atalanta to
combat piracy off the coast of Somalia and to protect vulnerable
ships bound for Somalia, as well as the efforts by the North Atlan-
tic Treaty Organization, and other States acting in a national
capacity in cooperation with the TFG to suppress piracy off the
coast of Somalia,
Also welcoming the recent initiatives of the Governments of
Egypt, Kenya, and the Secretary-General’s Special Representative
for Somalia, and the United Nations Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) to achieve effective measures to remedy the causes,
capabilities, and incidents of piracy and armed robbery off the
coast of Somalia, and emphasizing the need for current and future
counter-piracy operations to effectively coordinate their activities,
Noting with concern that the lack of capacity, domestic legisla-
tion, and clarity about how to dispose of pirates after their cap-
ture, has hindered more robust international action against the
pirates off the coast of Somalia and in some cases led to pirates
being released without facing justice, and reiterating that the
1988 Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against
the Safety of Maritime Navigation (“SUA Convention”) provides
for parties to create criminal offences, establish jurisdiction, and
accept delivery of persons responsible for, or suspected of seizing
or exercising control over a ship by force or threat thereof, or any
other form of intimidation,
Welcoming the report of the Monitoring Group on Somalia of
November 20, 2008 (S/2008/769), and noting the role piracy may
play in ﬁnancing embargo violations by armed groups,
Determining that the incidents of piracy and armed robbery at
sea in the waters off the coast of Somalia exacerbate the situation
in Somalia, which continues to constitute a threat to international
peace and security in the region,
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
1. Reiterates that it condemns and deplores all acts of piracy and
armed robbery against vessels in waters off the coast of Somalia;
2. Calls upon States, regional, and international organizations that
have the capacity to do so, to take part actively in the ﬁght
against piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia,
in particular, consistent with this resolution, resolution 1846
212
Data and Documents

(2008), and international law, by deploying naval vessels and
military aircraft, and through seizure and disposition of boats,
vessels, arms, and other related equipment used in the commis-
sion of piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia,
or for which there are reasonable grounds for suspecting such
use;
3. Invites all States and regional organizations ﬁghting piracy off
the coast of Somalia, to conclude special agreements or arrange-
ments with countries willing to take custody of pirates, in order
to embark law-enforcement ofﬁcials (“ship-riders”) from the lat-
ter countries, in particular countries in the region, to facilitate the
investigation and prosecution of persons detained as a result of
operations conducted under this resolution for acts of piracy and
armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia, provided that the
advance consent of the TFG is obtained for the exercise of third-
state jurisdiction by ship-riders in Somali territorial waters, and
that such agreements or arrangements do not prejudice the
effective implementation of the SUA Convention;
4. Encourages all States and regional organizations ﬁghting piracy
and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia, to establish
an international cooperation mechanism to act as a common
point of contact between and among states, regional, and
international organizations on all aspects of combating piracy
and armed robbery at sea off Somalia’s coast; and recalls that
future recommendations on ways to ensure the long-term secu-
rity of international navigation off the coast of Somalia, includ-
ing the long-term security of WFP maritime deliveries to
Somalia, and a possible coordination and leadership role for the
United Nations in this regard to rally Member States and
regional organizations to counter piracy and armed robbery at
sea off the coast of Somalia, are to be detailed in a report by the
Secretary-General no later than three months after the adoption
of resolution 1846;
5. Further encourages all states and regional organizations ﬁghting
piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia, to con-
sider creating a center in the region to coordinate information
relevant to piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of
Somalia; to increase regional capacity with assistance of UNODC
to arrange effective ship-rider agreements or arrangements con-
sistent with UNCLOS; and to implement the SUA Convention,
the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, and other relevant instruments to which States in the
region are party, in order to effectively investigate and prosecute
piracy and armed robbery at sea offences;
Documents
213

6. In response to the letter from the TFG of December 9, 2008,
encourages Member States to continue to cooperate with the TFG
in the ﬁght against piracy and armed robbery at sea; notes the
primary role of the TFG in rooting out piracy and armed robbery
at sea; and decides that for a period of 12 months from the date of
adoption of resolution 1846, States and regional organizations
cooperating in the ﬁght against piracy and armed robbery at sea
off the coast of Somalia, for which advance notiﬁcation has been
provided by the TFG to the Secretary-General, may undertake all
necessary measures that are appropriate in Somalia, for the pur-
pose of suppressing acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea,
pursuant to the request of the TFG, provided, however, that any
measures undertaken pursuant to the authority of this para-
graph shall be undertaken consistent with applicable
international humanitarian and human rights law;
7. Calls on Member States to assist the TFG, at its request and with
notiﬁcation to the Secretary-General, to strengthen its opera-
tional capacity to bring to justice those who are using Somali
territory to plan, facilitate, or undertake criminal acts of piracy
and armed robbery at sea, and stresses that any measures under-
taken pursuant to this paragraph shall be consistent with appli-
cable international human rights law;
8. Welcomes the communique´ issued by the International
Conference on Piracy around Somalia held in Nairobi, Kenya,
on December 11, 2008 and encourages Member States to work to
enhance the capacity of relevant states in the region to combat
piracy, including judicial capacity;
9. Notes with concern the ﬁndings contained in the 20 November 2008
report of the Monitoring Group on Somalia, that escalating ransom
payments are fuelling the growth of piracy in waters off the coast
of Somalia, and that the lack of enforcement of the arms embargo
established by resolution 733 (1992) has permitted ready access to
the arms and ammunition used by the pirates, and driven in part
the phenomenal growth in piracy;
10. Afﬁrms that the authorization provided in this resolution apply
only with respect to the situation in Somalia and shall not affect
the rights or obligations or responsibilities of Member States
under international law, including any rights or obligations
under UNCLOS, with respect to any other situation, and under-
scores in particular that this resolution shall not be considered as
establishing customary international law, and afﬁrms further that
such authorizations have been provided only following the
receipt of the December 9, 2008 letter conveying the consent of
the TFG;
214
Data and Documents

11. Afﬁrms that the measures imposed by paragraph 5 of resolution
733 (1992) and further elaborated upon by paragraphs 1 and 2
or resolution 1425 (2002), shall not apply to weapons and mili-
tary equipment destined for the sole use of Member States and
regional organizations undertaking measures in accordance with
paragraph 6 above;
12. Urges States in collaboration with the shipping and insurance
industries, and the IMO to continue to develop avoidance, eva-
sion, and defensive best practices and advisories to take when
under attack or when sailing in waters off the coast of Somalia,
and further urges States to make their citizens and vessels avail-
able for forensic investigation as appropriate, at the ﬁrst port of
call immediately following an act or attempted act of piracy or
armed robbery at sea or release from captivity;
13. Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Source: United Nations Security Council Resolution 1851 (2008),
16 December 2008. Retrieved from http://ods-dds-ny.un.org/doc/
UNDOC/GEN/N08/655/01/PDF/N0865501.pdf?OpenElement.
Retrieved on March 22, 2009. Reprinted with permission from the United
Nations Publication Board.
Documents
215

This page intentionally left blank 

7
Directory of Organizations
Foreign navies can do nothing to stop piracy.
—Dahir Mohamed Hayeysi, a pirate gunman from Harardheere,
Somalia, April 2009
Naval Forces
Prior to the events of 9/11, the only foreign warships operating
routinely in international waters near the Horn of Africa were
detachments from the U.S. Fifth Fleet, under the overall strategic
direction of U.S. Naval Forces Central Command, which is head-
quartered deep inside the Persian Gulf in Bahrain. However, after
the terrorist attacks against New York City and Washington on
September 11, 2001, warships from more than a dozen allied
nations soon began rotating in and out of the Indian Ocean as
well, to join the broad counteroffensive which was launched by
the administration of President George W. Bush against terrorist
groups and their backers through the Mideast and Asia, code-
named “Operation Enduring Freedom.”
These coalition warships were organized into a separate
United States Naval Forces Central Command (USNavCent) divi-
sion by February 2002, intended to serve as an adjunct to the Fifth
Fleet, and operating under the general designation of “Combined
Maritime Forces.” The coalition squadron known as Combined
Task Force 150 helped support the newly-created U.S. Marine base
being erected beside the international airport at Djibouti, which
was to house a fast-strike unit codenamed “Combined Joint Task
217

Force-Horn of Africa,” by conducting regional antiterrorist sweeps
known as Maritime Security Operations in its adjacent waters.
Meanwhile, the U.S. Fifth Fleet was being built up into a huge
force for the invasion of Iraq in March 2003, with the addition to
its strength of ﬁve aircraft carriers, a half-dozen huge amphibious
assault-ships, plus numerous other frontline warships. Soon after
that invasion had succeeded, this large extra number of U.S. Navy
battle-groups and major warships began to be drawn down out of
the Arabian Sea and Indian Ocean, while lighter American and
allied warships were moved in closer to occupied Iraq to protect
its offshore oil installations, patrol its porous borders, and escort
the convoys which would have to bring in the endless amounts of
supplies required by the occupation forces. But as Iraq’s internal
security then began to spin out of control, a deterrent naval pres-
ence had to be sustained in this theater much longer than antici-
pated, to help maintain watch against interference and subversion
from hostile neighboring states.
Consequently, when the separate issue of piracy began explod-
ing out of Somalia a few years later, the U.S. Fifth Fleet still included
numerous frontline warships as late as 2007–2008, which were
deemed too large and elaborately armed to prove cost-effective in
chasing down boatloads of teenage gunmen. Occasionally, some
might be diverted for a limited time on an antipiracy sweep or
rescue mission, while any would naturally steam to the assistance
of any nearby merchantman under attack. However, the American
container ship Maersk Alabama wasto be jointly rescued in April 2009
by the 1,100-man, 41,500-ton amphibious assault-ship USS Boxer;
the 270-man, 9,200-ton guided-missile destroyer USS Bainbridge;
the 225-man, 4,100-ton guided-missile frigate USS Halyburton; plus
a host of other high-priced resources—judged an excessively waste-
ful use of force by naval professional, when arrayed against only
four young gunmen trapped aboard a bobbing lifeboat.
Moreover, some potentially useful smaller coalition warships
from Combined Task Force 150 had not even authorized by their
home governments to participate in any antipiracy campaigns
whatsoever, indeed nothing beyond their original antiterrorist man-
date, while Washington was increasingly reluctant to prolong its
own commitment of heavy warships in the region for this entirely
new purpose of hunting pirates. And given that it was the commer-
cial trafﬁc of Europe and Asia which were much more directly
affected by this sudden upsurge in Somali piracy, it would instead
be a variety of North Atlantic Treaty Organization, European Union,
218
Directory of Organizations

and multinational forces which were dispatched to combat piracy in
the vital sea lanes of the Gulf of Aden and off the Horn of Africa,
with the full approval and material backing from Washington.
To bolster these allied-led expeditions, the U.S. Navy agreed to
reconstitute any coalition warships from its “Combined Maritime
Forces” division which had been authorized by their home govern-
ments to participate in separate antipiracy operations, into a new
USNavCent unit designated as Combined Task Force-151, which
was intended to play a role in this new campaign under American
command.
U.S. Navy and Coalition Partners
U.S. Naval Forces Central Command
(NAVCENT)
Manama, Bahrain
Tel: 011-973-1785-4027
e-Address: cusnc.navy.mil
The strategic headquarters for all American naval operations that
are conducted in “the Red Sea, Arabian Sea, Gulf of Oman, parts
of the Indian Ocean, as well as the coast of East Africa as far south
as Kenya.” Its commander directly controls the 10 U.S. Task
Forces that comprise the U.S. Fifth Fleet, as well as a half-dozen
Combined Task Forces, which form a separate division of USNav-
Cent designated as “Combined Maritime Forces,” and are made
up of temporarily assigned coalition warships. The primary cur-
rent mission of USNavCent is to defend and sustain the occupa-
tion of Iraq as well as to pursue extremist elements within the
region; antipiracy sweeps and protection of commercial trafﬁc
are only secondary considerations among its manifold duties.
U.S. Fifth Fleet
(FIFTHFLT)
Manama, Bahrain
Tel: 011-973-1785-4000 (Naval Support Activity)
011-973-1785-4027 (Public Affairs Ofﬁce)
The actual U.S. naval warships deployed in this theater, whose
command-staff are housed as part of USNavCent headquarters
in Bahrain. The number of the U.S. Fifth Fleet’s strength ﬂuctuates,
as vessels are rotated in and out for tours according to need, from
Directory of Organizations
219

the U.S. Paciﬁc and Atlantic Fleets. In addition to the 10 U.S. Navy
task forces currently comprising the Fifth Fleet, it also directs the
activities of several attached coalition formations, such as:
•
Combined Task Force 150, which patrols from the Strait of
Hormuz, halfway across the Arabia Sea, south as far as
the Seychelles, around the Horn of Africa and through the
Gulf of Aden, up through the Bab-al-Mandeb Strait
between Djibouti and Yemen, and into the Red Sea,
•
Combined Task Force 151, a recently created squadron
which patrols much this same area but is primarily
focused on deterring and disrupting Somali pirate attacks
against commercial shipping,
•
Combined Task Force 152, which patrols the Persian Gulf
from near its northern end, down as far as the Strait of
Hormuz between Oman and Iran,
•
Combined Task Force 158, which patrols the North
Persian Gulf, to help protect Iraq’s oil-terminals.
Given the huge expanse of ocean which constitutes the U.S. Fifth
Fleet’s theater-of-operations, its warships could only occasionally
assist in antipiracy sweeps prior to January 2009, when the sepa-
rate formation of its Combined Task Force 151 was created and
speciﬁcally tasked with assisting in this duty.
Combined Maritime Forces
c/o U.S. Naval Forces
Central Command
Manama, Bahrain
Tel: 011-973-1785-4027
As mentioned above, this division was originally formed as part of
regional U.S. naval strength in February 2002, from warships of
more than a dozen allied nations that had begun arriving in the
Indian Ocean to join in on the post-9/11 counteroffensive against
terrorist groups, codenamed Operation “Enduring Freedom.”
United into a squadron designated as Combined Task Force
150, with a few U.S. Navy warships also occasionally taking part,
command of this separate formation was to be shared in turns:
German Admiral Gottfried Hoch being appointed as Combined
Task Force 150’s ﬁrst commander on May 5, 2002, to be succeeded
a few months later by Spanish Rear Admiral Juan Moreno, etc.
220
Directory of Organizations

Another similar allied unit formed as part of Operation
“Enduring Freedom” and attached to USNavCent, would be
Combined Task Force 152, comprised of regional navies and coast
guard forces and established in March 2004 to “coordinate Theater
Security Cooperation” in the international waters of the Arabian
Gulf. Operations initially focused on local counterterrorism and
security efforts, actively seeking to impede the use of those waters
as a venue for a terrorist attack, or to transport hostile personnel,
weapons, or other material along its coastlines. This formation con-
sequently conducted Maritime Security Operations (MSO) in the
territorial waters of all Gulf Cooperation Council nations, and has
since expanded its mission to promote stability and maritime
prosperity throughout the region. At the time of this writing, Com-
bined Task Force 152 is commanded by Colonel Tareq Khalfan A.
Al Zaabi of United Arab Emirates Navy Staff.
European and NATO Formations
As Somali pirates resumed their depredations after their usual
summer-long hiatus for the monsoon season of 2008, striking ever
farther out at sea early that autumn, with greater vigor than
before, allied European nations began initiating their own inde-
pendent antipiracy efforts—with Washington’s full approval and
support—so as to combat this growing menace to their oil-and
commercial routes passing near the Horn of Africa, coordinating
all efforts through the United Nations. Eventually, both the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (of which the United States is a lead-
ing member) and the European Union would dispatch separate
expeditions into those troubled waters, uniting with already
existing American, regional, and other multinational forces in a
joint campaign to try to bring this problem under control.
NATO or North Atlantic Treaty Organization
c/o Allied Maritime
Component Command
Atlantic Building
Northwood Headquarters
Northwood, Middlesex
England HA6 3HP
Tel: +44 (0) 1923, 956763 (Public Affairs)
e-Address: manw.nato.int
Directory of Organizations
221

This long-established alliance headquartered at Brussels,
Belgium, created in April 1949 for collective defense during the
aftermath of World War II and today comprised of the United
States plus more than two-dozen other nations, was the ﬁrst
group to respond to a special request from the UN Secretary-
General, to dispatch more warships into the Horn of Africa
region, to temporarily supplement the few overworked naval
vessels that were already escorting chartered merchantmen
through those pirate-infested waters, delivering World Food
Program humanitarian shipments into starving pockets of Somalia.
The NATO Council therefore agreed in late October 2008 to
answer this plea, and before that month was out, the four
warships of its Standing NATO Maritime Group 2 arrived off
Somalia, to bolster the ongoing escort services under its opera-
tional codename of “Allied Provider.” A second expedition was
organized in March 2009, when Standing NATO Maritime Group
1 was also ordered to supplant the ﬁrst deployment in that the-
ater, and with even more robust mission orders to actively “deter,
defend against, and disrupt pirate activities.” This ﬁve-warship
squadron included the 225-man, 4,100-ton guided-missile frigate
USS Halyburton, which four days after this particular group had
reached the Gulf of Aden on March 24, 2009, disrupted a pirate
attack against the yacht Grandezza. SNMG-1 would continue
patrolling in those waters for more than three more months,
under the codename of Operation “Allied Protector.”
NATO’s third “contribution to international efforts to combat
piracy off the Horn of Africa” came in August 2009, and proved
even more ambitious. Codenamed Operation “Ocean Shield” and
consisting of another ﬁve warships of a reconstituted NATO Mari-
time Group 2—including the 280-man, 8,900-ton American
destroyer USS Laboon—it was not only tasked with chasing pirates,
but furthermore the diplomatic mission of building up contacts
and better relationships with regional governments so that they
too might begin developing their own local counterpiracy
measures.
Operation “Ocean Shield” has been authorized to continue
until at least December 2012, with fresh squadrons arriving in suc-
cession to relieve one another, each performing four-month tours.
In the spring of 2010, the NATO force deployed in the Gulf of Aden
and off the Horn of Africa consisted of the 250-man, 5,300-ton
British frigate HMS Chatham (ﬂag); the 280-man, 8.900-ton
American frigate USS Cole; the 220-man, 4,100-ton Turkish frigate
222
Directory of Organizations

TCG Gelibolu; the 3,650-ton Greek frigate HS Limnos; and the
225-man, 3,100-ton Italian frigate ITS Scirocco. Typical actions
included dispersal for an immediate helicopter reconnaissance of
pirate bases along the Somali coast by Scirocco; a simultaneous
rescue in the Gulf of Aden by Gelibolu—guided by a French
surveillance-plane from the EU naval force—which steamed to
the aid of the Danish chemical-carrier Torm Ragmhild as it was being
chased by two pirate boats (plus the subsequent freeing of these
pursuers’ “mother ship,” the hijacked dhow Saﬁna-al-Gavatri); a
sweep far out into the Indian Ocean by Limnos, which—piloted by
Swedish and Luxembourgian patrol aircraft stationed in the
Seychelles—snapped up 30 pirates and destroyed six attack boats
between April 7–9, 2010; while to the east of the Gulf of Aden, Chat-
ham doggedly shadowed the hijacked Indian dhow Vishvakalyan for
three days, until it ran out of fuel and its pirate captors abandoned
it to ﬂee back into Somali waters.
Diplomatic efforts were equally as important, as on April 28,
2010, this NATO ﬂagship hosted a visit by a delegation of eight
representatives from in and around the pirate-controlled seaport
of Eyl and its district, which included Suldan Said M. Garase,
one of two traditional leaders for its Nugal region; a local chief-
tain and spiritual leader named Khalif Aw Ali; Abdi Hersi Alim,
Governor for the Nugal region; as well as Musse´ Osman Yusuf,
the Mayor of Eyl’s district.
EU NavFor or “European Union Naval Force”
Sandy Lane
Northwood, Middlesex
England HA6 3HP
Tel: +44 (0) 1923, 958611 (Media Center)
e-Address: www.eunavfor.eu
A joint task-force organized by a worried European Union, to
patrol the troubled waters off the Horn of Africa in concert with
other allied formations. The EU had already, with the establish-
ment of EU NavCO in September 2008, created a coordination cell
at its headquarters in Brussels, to receive input on this mush-
rooming problem from a broad cross section of the maritime
community. Part of its buildup for combating piracy in that
region, this ofﬁce would soon evolve into the “Maritime Security
Center-Horn of Africa” or MSC-HOA, an information hub for
gathering and disseminating news on piratical activity in the Gulf
Directory of Organizations
223

of Aden, as well as tracking the movements of merchantmen
transiting through its troubled waters, so as to provide better
coordination with EU and other naval forces destined for that
region.
Then at a general meeting in Brussels on November 10, 2008,
its foreign ministers agreed to dispatch ﬁve to seven frigates, with
a requisite number of support aircraft, within a month into the
Horn of Africa region to protect merchant shipping from pirates,
in addition to escorting WFP food relief shipments into Somalia.
Codenamed “Operation Atalanta,” this expedition represented an
unprecedented step—the ﬁrst independent naval campaign ever
launched by what had formerly been only a ﬁnancial, political,
and cultural confederation.
The ﬁrst six warships and three patrol aircraft, manned by a
total of 1,200 men, began departing as of December 9, 2008 under
the overall command of British Rear Admiral Phillip Jones. EU
NavFor’s ﬁrst engagement occurred on Christmas Day 2008,
when the 3,700-ton German frigate Karlsruhe received a distress
call from the 65,000-ton Egyptian bulk carrier Wadi-al-Arab, as it
was transiting through the Gulf of Aden. The German frigate
promptly launched its helicopter, which drove off a pursuing
pirate skiff with gunﬁre. An Egyptian seaman was subsequently
treated for a pirate gunshot wound, while the suspected perpetra-
tors were also detained, then released without their arms. More
recent actions include:
•
On the evening of April 30, 2010, a twin-engine Swedish
patrol-aircraft out of the Seychelles spots a trio of suspect
boats, roaming 450 nautical miles east of Somalia. Rear
Admiral Jan Tho¨rnquist, aboard his EU NavFor ﬂagship—
the 170-man, 3,800-ton HSwMS Carlskrona—directs the
750-man, 32,300-ton French amphibious assault-ship
Tonnerre on an interception course, which sights this
whaler and two skiffs by next morning, launching a heli-
copter to make a closer inspection. The 11 occupants are
ﬁlmed frantically tossing their weaponry overboard, so
that they are arrested on suspicion of piracy, their whaler
being destroyed, and two skiffs hoisted onboard the car-
rier, along with their incriminating evidence.
•
This same day of May 1, 2010, a helicopter from the
140-man, 3,600-ton French frigate La Fayette sights
another pair of suspicious boats far out at sea, halfway
224
Directory of Organizations

between Mogadishu and the Seychelles. This whaler and
skiff attempt to ﬂee, tossing weaponry overboard, until
ﬁred upon. The nine occupants are arrested on suspicion
of piracy, the whaler destroyed, and the skiff retained as
evidence.
•
On the morning of May 4, 2010, while escorting a mer-
chant convoy through the International Recommended
Transit Corridor in the Gulf of Aden, a Super Auk-12
helicopter from a Japanese warship spots a suspicious
skiff with seven men aboard, prowling 50 miles south of
Al Mukalla in Yemen. After radioing EU NavFor, the
200-man, 3,360-ton Greek frigate HS Elli is sent to inves-
tigate. The skiff ﬂees, tossing materials overboard, until
ﬁred upon; a boarding party eventually decides to release
the now-unarmed skiff.
•
On the morning of May 5, 2010, a Swedish patrol plane
out of the Seychelles spots a trio of suspect pirate craft,
roaming 400 nautical miles northwest of those islands.
The French frigate La Fayette is directed on an interception
course, and sights this whaler and two skiffs later that
same afternoon. When one of the skiffs attempts to ﬂee, its
twin outboard-motors are destroyed by a burst of gunﬁre,
and a total of twelve pirates are captured.
•
Learning that the Russian-owned, Liberian-ﬂagged
tanker Moscow University has been boarded by pirates
approximately 350 miles east of Suqutra Island, its 23
crewmen having retreated inside their fortiﬁed rudder
compartment, the 300-man, 7,900-ton Russian destroyer
Marshal Shaposhnikov races to the rescue. A EU NavFor
aircraft soon arrives over the tanker and establishes radio-
contact with its crew, while a German plane attached to
the U.S.-led Combined Task Force 151 remains on
standby, along with numerous other naval support-units.
When Shaposhnikov sights the tanker on the morning of
May 6, 2010, it launches a helicopter to reconnoiter, which
is ﬁred at by the pirates. Knowing the crew to be safe
below decks, the Russian warship returns ﬁre and a
boarding party storms aboard, killing one pirate and
capturing ten others, in freeing this vessel.
•
On May 7, 2010, a Swedish patrol plane out of the Sey-
chelles sights another trio of pirate craft, and the 130-man,
16,800-ton Dutch amphibious assault-ship Johan de Witt is
Directory of Organizations
225

sent to intercept. As it approaches this whaler and two
skiffs by mid-afternoon, 11 pirates are observed tossing
their weapons overboard, so that all are arrested.
Somali Coastal Forces
Since initiating regular antipiracy sweeps and convoy-escorts
through the Gulf of Aden, European governments have also tried
to cultivate partnerships with the fractured Somali governments
along its southern shores. These efforts have achieved some degree
of success in deﬂecting pirate raids out of the Gulf’s narrow and
vulnerable shipping lanes, for despite the sporadic sorties which
are all that Somaliland’s or Puntland’s run-down naval strength
can manage with only a handful of dilapidated patrol-boats, fear
of a lengthy incarceration in one of their prisons has nonetheless
driven many pirates to instead seek to hunt prey in the distant
waters of the Indian Ocean.
Somaliland Coast Guard
Berbera, Somalia
e-Address: somalilandgov.com
Because of its strategic position directly overlooking the western
reaches of the Gulf of Aden, the autonomous, divided, and ram-
shackle State of Somaliland (once a colony known as “British
Somaliland”) has been encouraged by various Western govern-
ments to maintain coast-guard activity in its territorial waters, in
hopes of intercepting a few small pirate boats which might come
sneaking along its extensive coastline, with the intent of veering
steering out into the nearby international shipping lanes to snap
up merchantmen.
In May 2010, the few-score men serving aboard the three tiny
patrol-boats of the Somaliland Coast Guard were under the com-
mand of Vice Admiral Ahmed Ali Salah, headquartered in the
shabby wreck-strewn harbor of Berbera. A system of informants
sometimes gave warning of the transit of suspected pirate boats,
while Western navies also deposited captives ashore to stand trial.
Those convicted are incarcerated within Mandheera maximum-
security prison, simmering about 30 miles out in the desert, south
of the capital. The government of Somaliland is willing to sustain
such efforts in hopes of having their breakaway State eventually
recognized as an independent republic—“We do everything
226
Directory of Organizations

right,” its exasperated President once told a Western reporter, “We
even ﬁght piracy!”—but most Western nations are still waiting for
an African country to be the ﬁrst to do so.
Puntland Coast Guard
(“Ilaalinta Xeebaha Puntland”)
Bossaso, Somalia
e-Mail Contact: info@puntlandgovt.com
Like Somaliland, the neighboring State of Puntland also has a
vested interest in being seen to help the international community
ﬁght piracy and convict outside marauders, although its naval
component is only a ramshackle unit with a colorfully checkered
history. A couple of years after the separate “Puntland State of
Somalia” had been established in 1998, a force of 70 militiamen—
drawn from a careful cross section of all local clans—was organ-
ized in the year 2000 by the private British ﬁrm Hart Security
Maritime Services, Ltd., to patrol close offshore in a single 65-foot
trawler, acting against illegal ﬁshing or toxic-waste dumping.
However, when a revolt erupted next year, these British
advisers left and the President of Puntland was then overthrown
by his predecessor, the ex-guerrilla chieftain Abdullahi Yusuf,
who granted a new contract to reconstitute its coast guard—as
well as administer offshore ﬁshing licenses, a lucrative arrangement
which entailed splitting any proceeds with the government—
to a company headed by his supporters the Taars, a family of
Somali exiles resettled in Toronto, Canada. They increased the
Puntland Coast Guard’s strength to more than 300 men aboard
eight lightly armed oceangoing craft, yet when Yusuf was elected
as national President and departed for Mogadishu late in 2004, a
falling out ensued between the Taars and the new President of
Puntland: Another exile returned from Canada, General Moha-
mud Muse´ Hersi.
Already beset by economic difﬁculties, the Taars were further
embarrassed in March 2005 when three of their Coast Guardsmen—
unpaid for almost three months—hijacked the Thai trawler
Sirichainava 12 and demanded $800,000 in ransom. An armed
boarding party from the 167-man, 3,250-ton U.S. Coast Guard
cutter Munro, backed by a Royal Navy attack helicopter, ended
this standoff, with the three renegade Somali Coast Guardsmen
being ﬂown off to face trial in Bangkok, being sentenced to
10 years’s imprisonment in Thailand as pirates.
Directory of Organizations
227

Puntland’s President Hersi consequently cancelled the
remainder of the Taars’s ﬁve-year contract to administer Coast
Guard operations late in 2005, instead granting it to the Saudi com-
pany Al-Hababi. Some 250 new recruits were given basic training
at Gardo, and this new force even made a two-day sortie from
Bossaso in late April 2007, which netted nine trespassing trawlers,
plus a pair of ships from Yemen and Egypt. However, the contract
with Al-Hababi was subsequently cancelled in February 2008 and
restored to the Taars by Hersi, after the Puntland Coast Guard
had refused a direct Presidential order to free the hijacked tug
Svitzer Korsakov.
Puntland Intelligence Service
This potentially useful unit was originally created in 2002 with
ﬁnancing from the U.S. government as part of Washington’s global
offensive against terror, intended to serve as a regional “intelli-
gence and counter-terrorism agency” working in concert with
American forces stationed in Djibouti. However, the Puntland
Intelligence Service’s headquarters in the city of Bossaso was
blasted by two simultaneous suicide bomb attacks on October 29,
2008.
Darawiish
A paramilitary force, originally raised to be “primarily engaged
in border security,” and as such which might have been deployed
against pirate boats circulating through Puntland’s territorial
waters out of central Somalia, along with their prizes. However,
the Darawiish—several thousand strong—were soon converted
in the lawless and fractious State to serve its government as an
internal police force, and even engaged in combat against military
forces from neighboring Somaliland during their frequent cross-
border clashes.
Regional Coordinating Hubs
As the U.S. and Western navies began ramping up antipiracy
patrols and escorted convoys in 2008, most especially through
the pirate-infested waters of the Gulf of Aden, the dissemination
of information to and from transiting commercial vessels became
of primary importance for reducing and eventually defeating
such criminality. Consequently, the European Union and United
228
Directory of Organizations

Kingdom Maritime Trade Organization both set up purposely
created communication centers, which operated in close concert
with each other and the U.S. Navy’s Marine Liaison Ofﬁce in
Bahrain.
Through a carefully coordinated system, sightings of sus-
pected pirate craft by patrol aircraft, warships, or passing
merchantmen could be gathered and instantly shared among all
affected parties. Advisories could be issued, alternate routes pro-
posed, danger zones avoided, all by on-line postings or radio
communications. More distant approaching vessels could be redi-
rected, even assembled into convoys, without slowing down the
ﬂow of trafﬁc funneling into this chokepoint. And any merchant-
men which did chance to be attacked, could contact either of these
hubs by phone or e-mail even in the very act of being boarded, as
they are kept manned 24 hours a day. This distress-signal would
in turn be relayed to the nearest patrolling warship, so as to steam
toward the rescue.
MARLO or “Marine Liaison Ofﬁce”
U.S. Navy
P. O. Box 116
Manama, Bahrain
Tel: +973, 1785 3927
Cell: +973, 3944 2117
Fax: +973, 1785 3930
e-Address: Marlo.bahrain@me.navy.mil
The U.S. Navy’s “Marine Liaison Ofﬁce,” located in Central
Command’s main headquarters in Manama, Bahrain. It helps
coordinate exchanges of information between both the U.S.
and coalition navies, as well as friendly regional coast-guard
services.
MSC-HOA or “Maritime Security Centre (Horn of Africa)”
c/o EU NavFor
Sandy Lane
Northwood, Middlesex
ENGLAND HA6 3HP
Tel: +44 (0) 1923, 958545
Fax: +44 (0) 1923, 958520
e-Address: www.mschoa.org
Directory of Organizations
229

An information hub established by European Union Naval Force
Somali out of its West London headquarters, for gathering and
disseminating news on piratical activities, as well as tracking
movements of merchantmen through the troubled sea lanes of
the Gulf of Aden.
UKMTO Dubai
Tel: +971 50 552, 3215
Fax: +971 4 306, 5710
e-Address: UKMTO@eim.ae
A British-run regional ofﬁce, a subsidiary located in Dubai to
serve as “the ﬁrst point of contact” for merchant ships transiting
through the Gulf of Aden or Horn of Africa region. The United
Kingdom Maritime Trade Organization records details on courses
and estimated times of arrival, publishes bulletins on-line with
the latest intelligence, offers advice on the safety of routes, and
maintains a round-the-clock listening post to receive distress calls
or other radioed information from ships at sea, which can
immediately be relayed to Maritime Security Center—Horn of
Africa or other naval authorities. Every week, the UKMTO also
issues a Piracy Analysis and Warning Weekly (PAWW) Report,
apprising transiting mariners of expected dangers “in or near
the Gulf of Aden and off the East coast of Somalia.”
International Monitoring Agencies
Reports on the number and concentrations of piratical attacks
world-wide, are marshaled and compiled several times a year by
more remote institutions, to be used in a variety of ways. The
U.S. Navy’s Ofﬁce of Naval Intelligence and the U.S. Department
of Transportation’s Maritime Administration use them to warn
American mariners of danger-prone areas around the world. The
United Nations’ London-based International Maritime Organiza-
tion monitors similar statistics for that multinational organization,
while its Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia assem-
bles sporadically to report on the problem out of that speciﬁc
troubled country. The International Maritime Bureau of the
International Chambers of Commerce are concerned by piracy’s
particular effect on shipping and insurance rates, its Piracy
230
Directory of Organizations

Reporting Center in Kuala Lumpur being the most often-quoted
monitoring agency in this regard.
Civil Maritime Analysis Department
Ofﬁce of Naval Intelligence
United States Navy
Washington, D.C.
Tel: 1-301-669-4905
Fax: 1-301-669-3247
e-Address: dpearl@nmic.navy.mil
Collates information from global sources and issues a weekly
“Worldwide Threat to Shipping Report,” which is posted for gen-
eral consultation at the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency’s
Maritime Safety Web site at nga.mil/portal/site/maritime.
Commercial Crime Services
c/o International Maritime Bureau
Cinnabar Wharf
26 Wapping High Street
London, England E1W 1NG
Tel: +44 (0)20, 7423 6960
The anti-crime division of the International Chamber of Com-
merce, which oversees three bureaus in total, two of which deal
with Financial Investigation and Counterfeiting. The third, the
International Maritime Bureau, is tasked with all other aspects
for prevention of “trade fraud and malpractice,” including acts
of piracy.
Contact Group on Piracy Off the
Coast of Somalia
A multilateral organization established by the United Nations to
coordinate the antipiracy efforts of the various U.S., NATO, Euro-
pean Union, regional, and other naval forces patrolling the waters
off the Horn of Africa. It has been criticized for not meeting regu-
larly, and not including the two main groups that are most
concerned in this problem: the owner-operators of the small coastal
craft Maritime Security Center—Horn of Africa that make up the
bulk of victims in the Gulf of Aden, and the Somalis themselves.
Directory of Organizations
231

International Maritime Bureau
c/o International Chamber of Commerce
Cinnabar Wharf
26 Wapping High Street
London, England E1W 1NG
Tel: +44 (0)20, 7423 6960
A specialized division of the International Chamber of Com-
merce, the IMB was created in 1981 to ﬁght all aspects of maritime
crime and fraud.
International Maritime Organization
4, Albert Embankment
London, England SE1 7SR
Tel: +44 (0)20, 7735 7611
e-Address: www.imo.org
A United Nations’s agency headquartered in London, orig-
inally created in 1959 to help regulate all aspects of safe
international sea trafﬁc. Among its numerous other activities
today, the IMO coordinates international efforts to counter pirati-
cal acts.
Also maintains the “Maritime Knowledge Centre,” whose
online catalog can be accessed at MaritimeKnowledgeCentre@
imo.org.
Maritime Administration
Ofﬁce of Ship Operations, MAR-613
West Building
1200 New Jersey Avenue SE
Washington, D.C. 20590
Tel: 1-800-996-2723
Fax: 1-202-366-3954
e-Address: www.marad.dot.gov or opcentr1@marad.dot.gov
An agency of the U.S. Department of Transportation, created to
facilitate all aspects of American waterborne transportation, in
both domestic and international waters. Among many other
duties, the Maritime Administration compiles and publishes
reports on piratical acts around the globe, and issues advisories
to forewarn American ship-masters and merchant seamen.
232
Directory of Organizations

International Maritime Bureau Piracy Reporting Center
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Tel: +60 3, 2031 0014
+44 (0)20, 7423 6960 (main)
Fax: +60 3, 2078 5769
e-Address: piracy@icc-ccs.org
Often abbreviated as “IMB PRC,” this ofﬁce is maintained by the
International Maritime Bureau (see above) out of London,
England—itself a specialized division of the International Cham-
ber of Commerce. The Piracy Reporting Center was created in
October 1992 to record any and all piratical attacks occurring any-
where in the world, gathering up such data so as to provide warn-
ings to seamen, shippers, and insurers, as well as to exert pressure
on governments to eradicate such crimes. Its Web site offers
weekly piracy alerts and a live map, listing actual and attempted
pirate attacks by year from 2001 to the present, plus other infor-
mation which can be accessed at www.icc-ccs.org/prc/
piracyreport.php.
Somali Pirate Syndicates
Precise details on the numerous regional groups which have par-
ticipated in past attacks, and are currently conducting forays off
1,000 miles of Somali coastline—as well as striking into the neigh-
boring Gulf of Aden and far out into the Indian Ocean—is not
only vague, but subject to frequent shifts or reinterpretations.
Generally speaking, the most active and renowned pirate bases
are scattered around three dilapidated seaports strung along the
Indian Ocean coastline of central Somalia and southern Puntland:
Eyl, Hobyo, and Haradheere. All are virtually inaccessible by
overland roads out of the interior of the country, and their resi-
dent pirate syndicates are too inﬂuential and entrenched for local
authorities to challenge them, if any should prove so inclined.
Other reports suggest that there are three vague pirate agglomer-
ations in Somalia: the “Northern Gang” based around Eyl; the
“Central Gang” at Hobyo; and the “Southern Gang” around
Harardheere, although none acknowledges these names.
A United Nations intelligence summary of May 2006, mis-
leadingly identiﬁed four main pirate groups as operating at that
time off the Somali coast:
Directory of Organizations
233

1. The “National Volunteer Coast Guard” or NVCG, com-
manded by Garaad Mohamed, which is said to specialize
in intercepting small boats and ﬁshing vessels around
Kismayu on the southern coast.
2. The “Marka Group,” under the command of Sheikh Yusuf
Mohamed Siad (also known as Yusuf Indha’adde), made
up of several scattered and less-organized groups operat-
ing around the town of Marka.
3. Traditional Somali ﬁshermen carrying gunmen out of
Puntland, referred to generally as the ‘Puntland Group.”
4. The “Somali Marines,” reputed to be the most powerful and
sophisticated of the pirate groups with a military structure, a
ﬂeet admiral, vice admiral, head of ﬁnancial operations, etc.
However, this information is garbled and repeats some common
mistakes, such as:
“National Volunteer Coast Guard”
Eyl, Somalia
A misinterpretation of the Somali expression badaadinta badah,
which literally means “saviors of the sea,” although it is most often
rendered in English-language translations as “coast guard.”
Because of its positive connotations, this expression is preferred
by pirates and often used—in several variants by different pirate
groups—to lend a veneer of legitimacy to their depredations at sea.
“Somali Marines”
Harardheere, Somalia
Fictitious nickname once given to the pirate organization created
by Mohamed Abdi Hassan Hayir, more commonly known as
“Afweyne.” In 2003, this unemployed civil servant had sought to
transform the random forays being launched by ad hoc bands
against passing vessels offshore, into a proﬁtable business venture.
He gathered some seed money and hired successful pirates from
Eyl to instruct his own followers at Harardheere. Afweyne’s new
organization would soon become characterized by its deliberate
planning, focus of purpose, and logistical support.
The effectiveness of these new rovers began to garner
international attention as of 2005. Next year, the UN Monitoring-
Group would describe Afweyne’s self-servingly titled Somali
234
Directory of Organizations

Marines as “the most sophisticated of all Somali pirate groups”
(Report S/2006/229). Not only could they operate at much greater
distance offshore than other bands, they furthermore specialized
in grand-scale “acts of piracy involving vessel seizure, kidnapping,
and ransom demands,” rather than petty robbery. The UN report
also noted how during the capture and exploitation of the Indian
vessel Saﬁna Al Bisarat, “the Somali Marines demonstrated an effec-
tive level of competence and knowledge of dhow operations, and
the maritime environment in which they operated” (ibid.).
However, as better intelligence was gathered on Afweyne’s
shadowy network, the term Somali Marines came to be dropped,
although this loose-knit confederacy continues to operate around
Harardheere today, partly under the direction of Afweyne’s son.
Major ﬁnanciers of pirate enterprises remain shadowy, for
obvious reasons, while government ﬁgures deny any knowledge
of their activities—yet many are suspected of at least pocketing
bribes derived from ransoms, if not outright complicity. The raid-
ers themselves are usually teenage gunmen and poor ﬁshermen,
operating under the radioed directions of a veteran sub com-
mander, who is often aboard a nearby mother ship or even sta-
tioned hundreds of miles away on land. Hijacked vessels are
anchored openly offshore, and supplied for weeks on end by local
merchants, who are paid once any ransoms are received.
Another UN report, compiled more than three years later in
November 2008, offered more reﬁned intelligence on this matter,
Pirate groups revolve around clan and sub-clan lines, but are not
exclusively so, with members from other clans accepted into the
groups if they have a pakrticular skill that may be required, or
they need extra numbers. Pirates also entice bona ﬁde ﬁshermen
to forego using their skiffs at sea, and use them to assist the
pirates, who will be paid far more than they can earn at ﬁshing.
There are also reports of ﬁshermen being bullied into assisting
the pirates, who generally have little or no knowledge of the sea.
The most active groups involved in piracy include the following:
•
Eyl: Isse Mahmuud and Leelkase of the Darood clan
•
Garad: Omar Mahmuud of the Darood clan
•
Hobyo: Habargedir (Saad, Ayr, Suleiman) of the Hawiye
clan
•
Harardheere: Habargedir (Ayr, Sarur, Suleiman) of the
Hawiye clan
•
Mogadishu: Habargedir (Ayr) of the Hawiye clan
Directory of Organizations
235

At present, the epicenter of piracy is Puntland, where it is
penetrating all levels of society, including government structures
at both senior and junior level. A number of Puntland ministers
are suspected of being involved in piracy and its attendant
activities.
The pirates raise their manpower from the coastal localities
of their bases, surrounding villages, and other clan members
from the interior. Due to the lack of employment, there is no
shortage of willing recruits for the business. Most of the opera-
tives involved in piracy have very little education and would
not ﬁnd employment with any commercial operation or
humanitarian-agency, except as an armed guard. From informa-
tion received from a convicted pirate, a single armed pirate can
earn anywhere from $6,000 to $10,000 from a $1 million ransom.
This is approximately equivalent to a two-to-three-year salary
for an armed guard at a humanitarian agency and much better
than a local commercial enterprise would pay. The pirates also
encourage ﬁshermen to join their operations with the enticement
of payments outlined above. By enticing ﬁshermen to join their
gangs, they get marine and boat-handling knowledge, and the
use of their skiffs.
It is evident from the numbers of ships hijacked at any one
time, that there is an almost endless supply of recruits available.
These numbers do not include the support groups on land that
support the pirates at sea, once they have pirated the vessel.
These would include local traders supplying food, water, soft
drinks, tea, qat, and whatever other necessities are required
during a long drawn-out negotiation.
The pirates rely for logistical support upon the ﬁshing com-
munities where they live, or from which they are temporarily
operating. These communities provide them with food, water,
and shelter. Where on board food supplies prove inadequate for
the crew and the pirates, provisions are supplied from ashore.
Supplies of weapons and equipment (including ladders and grap-
pling hooks) are judged to be easily obtainable, whilst the more
sophisticated equipment, including satellite-phones and GPS
navigation systems are likely to be the result of investing proﬁts
to increase capability.
Interesting, in terms of other “victims of Piracy,” the pirates
are strongly reliant on the traditionally lower-caste groups of
ﬁsherman to provide technical support to the operations. The
pirates from nomadic, land-based clans cannot swim, and know
236
Directory of Organizations

very little about the ocean. Some are said to receive a basic salary
only, and some are forced into the work.
While some members and businesses of the communities
beneﬁt from the acts of piracy, either intentionally or be default,
other members of the communities speak out openly and directly
against piracy. These include the religious leaders, who have con-
demned piracy and advised their communities not to support this
action. They advise people not to be attracted by the wealth of the
pirates, and have declared that any marriage to a pirate is
regarded in their eyes as null and void, and therefore breaking
strict Islamic law.
Source
Report S/2006/229 of the U.N. Monitoring Group on Somalia, Submitted to
the Security Council on May 4, 2006. New York: United Nations Security
Council, 2006.
Directory of Organizations
237

This page intentionally left blank 

8
Resources
If you ask around, everybody will tell you pirates are bad.
But that’s just in conversation . . .
—Haji Abdi Warsame, an elder from the coastal
Somali town of Eyl, October 2008
Because of a widespread and unﬂagging interest in the topic of piracy, a
great many works are produced every year on this subject, from sensa-
tionalized mass-media accounts to more measured professional or
scholarly studies. The following selections constitute a representative
cross-sampling from among a far more plentiful body of materials,
having been selected as carefully as possible, to avoid too much repetition
of published works.
General Studies and Overviews
Bateman, Sam. “International Solutions to Problems of Maritime
Security—Think Globally, Act Regionally!” Maritime Studies 139
(November–December 2004), pp. 9–17.
Pair of overview articles written by a retired Australian naval Commo-
dore, who obtained a doctorate from the University of New South Wales,
and specializes in maritime policy and regional security concerns.
———. “Piracy and the Challenge of Cooperative Security and
Enforcement Policy.” Maritime Studies 117 (March–April 2001),
pp. 11–22.
239

Booth, Forrest, and Altenbrun, Larry. “Maritime and Port Security,
Piracy, and Stowaways: Renewed Concerns over Old Problems.”
University of San Francisco Maritime Law Journal 15 (2002–03),
pp. 1–47.
Scholarly article on modern international complications of policing vari-
ous aspects of criminality at sea, amid heightened post-9/11 concerns.
Chalk, Peter. The Maritime Dimension of International Security:
Terrorism, Piracy, and Challenges for the United States. Santa Monica,
California: The Rand Corp., 2008. Found at www.rand.org.
A study prepared for the U.S. Air Force, assessing the potential threat
from a “nexus” between modern pirates and terrorists, to launch a sea-
borne attack against the United States.
Ellen, Eric, editor. Piracy at Sea. Paris: International Chamber of
Commerce for the International Maritime Bureau, March 1989.
One of the earliest overviews signaling a resurgence of criminality at sea,
prepared by a former Chief Constable of the Port of London Police force.
Elliot, Robert. “Piracy on the High Seas.” Security Management 51,
Number 6 (June 2007), pp. 40–42.
Report indicating that while the number of pirate attacks worldwide has
declined, their level of violence has risen, so that law-enforcement coun-
termeasures must be maintained.
Farley, Mark C. “International and Regional Trends in Maritime
Piracy, 1989–1993.” Monterey, CA: Naval Postgraduate School,
December 1993.
Unpublished thesis by a Lieutenant-Commander. in the U.S. Navy,
toward a Master’s degree in National Security Affairs; includes analysis
of a database of 523 acts of piracy reported world-wide between
January 1989 and September 1993.
Gottschalk, Jack A., and Flanagan, Brian P. Jolly Roger with an Uzi:
The Rise and Threat of Modern Piracy. Annapolis: Naval Institute
Press, 2000.
Wide-ranging book, covering historical eras and warning of the resur-
gence of criminality at sea off Indonesia, Brazil, Somalia, and in the South
240
Resources

China Sea, written by two lawyers familiar with modern piracy’s
consequences.
Heathcote, Peter. “An Explanation of the New Measures for Mari-
time Security Aboard Ships and in Port Facilities.” Maritime Studies
137 (July–August 2004), pp. 13–21.
Article published in an international journal dedicated to modern marine
issues, published by the Center for Maritime Research headquartered in
Amsterdam.
Herrmann, Wilfried A. “Maritime Piracy and Anti-Piracy Mea-
sures, Part I: Piracy—Increasing Challenge with New Dimensions.”
Naval Forces 25 (February 2004), pp.18–25.
Wide-ranging article written by a German specialist in Asian studies.
International Maritime Bureau. Piracy and Armed Robbery Against
Ships, Annual Report: 1 January–31 December 2004. Barking, Essex,
England: International Chamber of Commerce Publishing,
2005.
One of a series of publications issued by this monitoring agency.
———. Piracy and Armed Robbery Against Ships: Annual Report
2006. Barking, England: International Chamber of Commerce
Publishing, 2006.
See above.
———. Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships: Report for the Period
January 1–December 31, 2008. Barking, England: International
Chamber of Commerce Publishing, 2009.
See above.
Jane’s Overview 2008: Growth of Merchant Shipping. London: Jane’s
Information Group, 2008.
Brief annual report describing the state of world shipping by a British
publisher who has long specialized in all aspects of naval issues.
Langewiesche, William. The Outlaw Sea: A World of Freedom, Chaos,
and Crime. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 2004.
General Studies and Overviews
241

A sweeping overview by a well-traveled American journalist, describing
the problems emerging from current maritime practices; only partly
related to piracy.
Lehr, Peter, editor. Violence at Sea: Piracy in the Age of Global
Terrorism. New York: Routledge, 2007.
An overview of modern piracy off the African coast, in the Arabian Sea,
Bay of Bengal, Straits of Malacca, and South China Sea, with contribu-
tions from various specialists, all edited by an expert on Asian studies.
Me´nard, Christian, chief editor and compiler. Rapport d’informa-
tion de´pose´ en application de l’article 145 du Re`glement par la Commis-
sion de la De´fense nationale et des forces armies, sur la piraterie
maritime. Paris: l’Assemble´e nationale, May 13, 2009.
A detailed and lengthy overview of the problems from modern piracy,
presented by a Deputy to the French National Assembly.
Murphy, Martin N. Contemporary Piracy and Maritime Terrorism:
The Threat to International Security. London: Adelphi Paper 338
for the International Institute for Strategic Studies, 2007.
A study assessing the potential of modern piracy to facilitate terrorist
acts.
———. “Slow Alarm: The Response of the Marine Insurance
Industry to the Threat of Piracy and Maritime Terrorism.” Mari-
time Studies 148 (May–June 2006), pp. 1–14.
Parritt, Brian A. H. Crime at Sea: A Practical Guide. London: The
Nautical Institute, 1996.
A manual intended for merchant Masters, written by a British Brigadier
with a background in intelligence work.
———. Security at Sea: Terrorism, Piracy, and Drugs—A Practical
Guide. London: Nautical Institute, 1991.
A manual intended for merchant Masters, written by a British Brigadier
with a background in intelligence work.
———, editor. Violence at Sea: A Review of Terrorism, Acts of War and
Piracy,
and Countermeasures
to
Prevent
Terrorism.
Paris:
International Chamber of Commerce Publishing, 1986.
242
Resources

Compilation of various papers presented in March 1986 at a workshop
convened by the International Maritime Bureau at San Jose State Uni-
versity in California.
Reinhardt, Charles J. “Maritime Piracy: Sign of a Security Threat?”
Mercer on Transport & Logistics 11, Number 1 (2005), pp. 16–19.
Brief statistical analysis of piratical incidents reported between 1995 and
2003 to the International Maritime Bureau, assessing their spread
and potential threat.
Roach, J. Ashley. “Initiatives to Enhance Maritime Security at
Sea.” Marine Policy 28, Number 1 (2004), pp. 41–66.
General study of the many threats at sea—including hijacking, gun-
running, drug-smuggling, terrorists, migrant-smuggling, and armed
robbery—which can be mitigated by multinational cooperation.
Romi-Levin, Rivka. Piracy at Sea: Bibliography. Haifa, Israel: Wydra
Institute of Shipping and Aviation Research, July 2003.
Includes deﬁnitions of piracy; antipiracy measures for vessels; a 2003
International Maritime Organization report listing reported attacks by
region; plus useful tables and diagrams, etc.
Talley, Wayne K. Maritime Safety, Security, and Piracy. London:
Informa Law, 2008.
General overview of diverse aspects affecting the safety of ships and
ports, written for the maritime industry.
Touret, Corinne. La piraterie au vingtie`me sie`cle: Piraterie maritime et
ae´rienne. Paris: Librairie Ge´ne´rale de Droit et de Jurisprudence,
1992.
Study written by a French legal scholar, based upon her doctoral disser-
tation in obtaining a degree in Public Law.
Unsinger, Peter Charles. “Meeting a Commercial Need for Intelli-
gence: The International Maritime Bureau.” International Journal of
Intelligence and Counterintelligence 12, Number 1 (March 1999),
pp. 58–72.
Description of the monitoring bureau run by Eric Ellen, former Chief
Constable of the Port of London Police force.
General Studies and Overviews
243

Villar, Roger. Piracy Today: Robbery and Violence at Sea since 1980.
London: Conway Maritime Press, 1985.
Written by a Royal Navy Captain who was a decorated World War II
veteran, and later helped found Jane’s Information Services after retiring
from the sea.
Walters, Stephen. “Contemporary Maritime Piracy.” Crime &
Justice International 23, Number 96 (January–February 2007),
pp. 10–16.
Analyzes data on global pirate attacks in 2004 from the International
Maritime Bureau’s statistics, ﬁnding that most were by lone groups with
low-tech weapons against anchored ships, the most violent incidents
occurring in the Far East and Southeast Asia. Expresses concern, among
other things, that future pirate attacks might shift into congested
shipping lanes.
Background and History
Starting in the decade immediately following the conclusion of World
War II, shipping industries all over the globe not only began a remark-
able revival from their catastrophic losses during that struggle, they also
entered into a period of unprecedented change and expansion. Sea lanes
would become crowded with many more and much larger merchantmen,
yet ﬂying a myriad of unfamiliar ﬂags and manned by greatly reduced
crews of mixed nationalities, providing easy prey for tiny bands of armed
pirates.
Maritime Transformation
The relatively small freighters and traders of the immediate post-World
War II era, each manned by several-dozen Western seamen to operate
its onboard winches, booms, etc., would soon become a thing of the past.
Greenman, David. “Freedom Freighters.” Ships Monthly [UK],
June 1976.
Brief but knowledgeable article about the basic Allied freighter designs
prevalent during World War II, and which were subsequently sold off
once peace was restored to form the backbone of the ﬁrst postwar com-
mercial ﬂeets, both domestically and foreign.
244
Resources

Greenwald, Richard A.; Gibson, Andrew; and Donovan, Arthur.
The Abandoned Ocean: A History of United States Maritime Policy.
Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 2000.
Detailed study of the abrupt decline of United States’s merchant marine
since the end of World War II, going from when U.S.-ﬂagged vessels car-
ried more than 55 percent of all global seaborne commerce in 1946, to a
ﬁgure which today has been reduced to scarcely one percent.
La Pedraja, Rene de. The Rise and Decline of U.S. Merchant Shipping
in the Twentieth Century. New York: Cengage Gale, 1992.
A comprehensive history of the rise and fall of the U.S. merchant shipping
industry, from 1901 when ﬁnancier J. P. Morgan’s infamous International
Mercantile Marine or IMM launched the nation into world trade.
Marx, Daniel, Jr. “The Merchant Ship Sales Act of 1946.” The Journal
of Business of the University of Chicago 21, Number 1 (January 1948),
pp. 12–28.
A contemporary scholarly article describing in factual detail, the sale of
America’s wartime merchant ﬂeet for postwar commercial use by any
purchaser, many residing abroad.
Container Ships
One of the major developments driving the evolution into our modern
commercial ﬂeets, was the emergence and construction of ever-larger
“container ships,” capable of carrying enormous amounts of easily-
transferable goods, with a minimum number of crewmen.
McKesson, Chris B. Alternative Powering for Merchant Ships: Task
1 — Current and Forecast Powering Needs. Long Beach: California
State University “Center for the Commercial Deployment of Trans-
portation Technologies,” 2000.
A specialized study on the remarkable growth in size and range of con-
tainer ships, most particularly in Paciﬁc waters.
Mercogliano, Salvatore R. “The Container Revolution.” Sea His-
tory 114 (Spring 2006), pp. 8–11.
Brief biographical study of the U.S. trucking magnate Malcolm
P. McLean, who created the ﬁrst successful containership enterprise,
spawning a host of modern imitators all around the globe.
Background and History
245

Supertankers
Just as with freighters, the small and heavily manned tankers of World
War II-vintages also went through a dramatic technological transforma-
tion during the latter half of the twentieth century, being superseded by
gigantic supertankers manned by tiny crews.
Shields, Jerry. The Invisible Billionaire: Daniel Ludwig. Boston:
Houghton Mifﬂin, 1986.
A biography of the U.S. shipping magnate Daniel K. Ludwig, known as
“the father of the supertanker.”
Santa Maria Hijacking (1961)
An early example of the divergent and unresolved international perspec-
tives on piracy in the immediate post-World War II era, was demonstrated
during the hijacking of the Portuguese luxury liner Santa Maria in late
January 1961, by a small band of opponents of its repressive Salazar
regime. Despite killing an ofﬁcer and being pursued initially as pirates,
world opinion soon shifted in favor of the hijackers, who were allowed to
surrender in Brazil a few days later and claim political asylum.
Anta˜o, Nelson Moreira, and Tavares, Ce´lia Gonc¸alves. “Henrique
Galva˜o e o assalto ao Santa Maria: Percurso de uma dissideˆncia do
Estado Novo e suas repercusso˜es internacionais.” Sapiens: His-
to´ria, Patrimo´nio e Arqueologia [Portugal], December 2008,
pp. 84–110. Http://www.revistasapiens.org/Biblioteca/numero0/
henriquegalvao.pdf.
Excellent scholarly article, describing the political circumstances
prevailing in Salazar’s Portugal, which had led to this dramatic confron-
tation at sea.
Fenwick, Charles G. “Piracy in the Caribbean.” American Journal of
International Law 55, Number 4 (October 1961), pp. 426–428.
Brief legal opinion written by an U.S. scholar in the immediate after-
math of this hijacking, deeming it to have been a piratical act, despite
popular opinions to the contrary, both at home and abroad.
Raby, David. “Transatlantic Intrigues: Humberto Delgado,
Henrique Galva˜o, and the Portuguese Exiles in Brazil and Morocco,
246
Resources

1961–62.” Portuguese Journal of Social Science 3, Number 3
(December 2004).
Modern account of this hijacking, as well as its aftermath among the
exiled opponents of the Salazar regime.
Zeiger, Henry A. The Seizing of the Santa Maria. New York: Popular
Library, 1961. Found at SolantAmity.com.
A contemporary book rushed into print the same year of the hijacking,
drawn from numerous newspaper accounts, yet well-compiled and carefully
written.
Achille Lauro Hijacking (1985)
Bohn, Michael K. The Achille Lauro Hijacking: Lessons in the Politics
and Prejudice of Terrorism. Dulles, VA: Brassey’s, 2004.
A recent study of this 20-year-old incident and its repercussions into
modern times.
Cassesse, Antonio. Terrorism, Politics, and Law: The Achille Lauro
Affair. Cambridge: Polity Press, 1989.
English translation of an Italian work, originally published two years
earlier in Rome by Editori Riuniti.
Constantinople, George R. “Towards a New Deﬁnition of Piracy:
The Achille Lauro Incident.” Virginia Journal of International Law
26 (1986), pp. 723–753.
One of numerous opinion-pieces written by legal scholars in the aftermath
to this hijacking, attempting to judge its impact on the international
standards regarding piracy.
Halberstam, Malvina. “Terrorism on the High Seas: The Achille
Lauro, Piracy, and the IMO Convention on Maritime Safety.”
American Journal of International Law 82 (1988), pp. 269–310.
See above.
Pancracio, Jean-Paul. “L’affaire de l’Achille Lauro et le droit
international.” Annuaire franc¸ais de droit international 31 (1986),
pp. 219–236.
See above.
Background and History
247

Paust, Jordan J. “Extradition and United States Prosecution of the
Achille Lauro Hostage-Takers: Navigating the Hazards.” Vanderbilt
Journal of Transnational Law 20 (1987), pp. 235–257.
Article by an American legal scholar, debating the various international
charges and complaints leveled against the U.S. Navy’s interception of
an Egyptian airliner over the Mediterranean, while it was ﬂying toward
Tunisia with the Achille Lauro’s four escaping Palestinian hijackers.
Ronzitti, Natalino, editor. Maritime Terrorism and International Law.
Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff, 1990.
A compilation of articles and papers by eight different legal scholars,
dealing with the issues raised in the wake of the PLO hijacking of the
Italian liner Achille Lauro.
Simon, Jeffrey D. The Implications of the Achille Lauro Hijacking for
the Maritime Community. Santa Monica, CA: The Rand Corporation,
1986.
Brief professionally oriented study, issued in the immediate aftermath of
the seizure of this Italian liner.
Flags of Convenience
Alderton, Tony, and Winchester, Nik J. “Regulation, Representa-
tion, and the Flag Market.” Journal for Maritime Research [UK],
September 2002.
An excellent historical study of the modern evolution of “open” ship
registers in diverse nations, by a pair of professional observers.
Carlisle, Rodney. Sovereignty for Sale: The Origin and Evolution of
the Panamanian and Liberian Flags of Convenience. Annapolis, MD:
Naval Institute Press, 1981.
Study by a Canadian historian, detailing how the registry of American
vessels under the ﬂags of Panama since 1919 and Liberia since 1948,
was driven by a corporate desire to economize on taxes and labor expenses.
———. “Second Registers: Maritime Nations Respond to Flags of
Convenience, 1984–1998.” The Northern Mariner/Le marin du nord
[Canada] 19, Number 3 (2009), pp. 319–340.
Modern update on this issue.
248
Resources

Ferrell, Jessica K. “Controlling Flags of Convenience: One Measure
to Stop Overﬁshing of Collapsing Fish Stocks.” Environmental Law
35 (2005), pp. 323–390.
Lengthy scholarly argument addressing this issue, with the aim of con-
trolling one single international maritime problem.
Stanley, William R. “Serving Aboard the World’s Largest Flag of
Convenience Fleet: Some Geographical Implications Concerning
Crew’s Nationality.” GeoJournal [The Netherlands] 7, Number 3
(May 1983), pp. 261–269.
Statistical compilation and analysis by an U.S. professor of Geography, of
the seamen from more than 100 different nations already serving world-
wide at that time aboard the 2,500 merchantmen ﬂying the Liberian ﬂag.
Toweh, Alphonso. “Shipping’s Flag of Convenience Pays Off for
Liberia.” Business Day [South Africa], March 3, 2008.
Brief newspaper article describing the economic beneﬁts derived from
this policy, by one of its earliest practitioners.
Treves, Tullio. “Flags of Convenience before the Law of the
Sea Tribunal.” San Diego International Law Journal 6 (2004),
pp. 179–189.
Legal article written by a judge who served as a founding negotiator of
the UN’s Convention on the Law of the Sea, as well as a Professor at
the University of Milan, and presides over the Tribunal of the Law of
the Sea at Hamburg, Germany.
Winchester, Nik J., and Alderton, Tony. Flag State Audit 2003. Car-
diff: Seafarers International Research Centre, 2003.
Statistical investigation of the global shipping industry and its use of
“ﬂags of convenience,” by a professional maritime organization.
Wing, Maria J. “Rethinking the Easy Way Out: Flags of Conven-
ience in the Post-September 11th Era.” Tulane Maritime Law Journal
28 (2003), pp. 173–190.
Editorial piece, questioning the prevalent commercial practice of regis-
tering merchantmen in foreign countries, and the security concerns
which might arise.
Background and History
249

Proliferation of Light Arms
Boutwell, Jeffrey; Klare, Michael T.; and Reed, Laura W., editors.
Lethal Commerce: The Global Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons.
Cambridge, Mass.: American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 1995.
A single volume containing articles by nine different contributors, who
examine “one of the most important and least studied
international security problems of the post-Cold War era: the pro-
liferation of small arms and light weapons in trouble spots
around the globe,” attempting to suggest some controls and remedies.
Choong, William. “Today’s WMD of Choice—the AK-47.” The
Straits Times [Singapore], December 25, 2008, and AsiaOne News,
December 27, 2008. Retrieved on February 2, 2010.
Newspaper article repeating salient points from Larry Kahaner’s book
AK-47: The Weapon That Changed The Face of War.
Fleshman, Michael. “Small Arms in Africa: Counting the Cost of
Gun Violence.” Africa Recovery [since renamed “Africa Renewal,”
United Nations] 15, Number 4 (December 2001). Retrieved on
February 2, 2010 from http://africa_recovery@un.org.
General, yet informative article on the deleterious spread of military
light weaponry from African lawless war zones passing into the hands
of civilians, especially among the young.
Haydon, Peter T., and Grifﬁths, Ann L., editors. Maritime Security
and Conﬂict Resolution at Sea in the Post-Cold War Era. Halifax,
Nova Scotia, Canada: Centre for Foreign Policy Studies at Dal-
housie University, 1994.
Compilation of scholarly papers delivered at a conference, dealing with
the changing nature of modern maritime threats, partially attributable
to more potent weaponry.
Hympendahl, Klaus. Pirates Aboard!: 40 Cases of Piracy Today and
What Blue-water Cruisers Can Do About It. Dobbs Ferry, NY: Sheri-
dan House, 2003.
Compilation of ﬁrsthand accounts by various pleasure yachters, of having
been boarded by armed gangs at various places around the globe, primarily
during the period 1995–2001.
250
Resources

Killicoat, Phillip. Weaponomics: The Global Market for Assault Riﬂes.
Washington, D.C.: World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
4202, Post-Conﬂict Transitions Working Paper No. 10, April 2007.
http://econ.worldbank.org
One of many studies published on the spread of such military weaponry.
Nyuydine, Ngalim E. “Outdated Laws as Impetus for Illicit Pro-
liferation of Small Arms and Light Weapons in Cameroon.”
Subtitled “Paper Presented on the Occasion of an Informative Ses-
sion on the Fight Against the Proliferation of Small Arms in Cam-
eroon,” before a meeting at Yaounde´ of the Cameroon Youth and
Students Forum for Peace.
Smith, Chris. “Light Weapons Proliferation: A Global Survey.”
Jane’s Intelligence Review 11, Number 7 (July 1999), pp. 46–51.
A brief summary of this problem.
Steel, David G. “Piracy: Can the Order of the Oceans Be Safe-
guarded?” Journal of the Royal United Service Institute [UK] 141,
Number 1 (1996), pp. 17–25.
Article by a British naval Commander, describing the resurgence of
piratical acts around the world, and the need for international co-
operation in order to effectively police territorial waters.
Wu, Bin, and Winchester, Nik J. “Crew Study of Seafarers: A
Methodological Approach to the Global Labour Market for Sea-
farers.” Marine Policy 29, Number 4 (2005), pp. 323–330.
One of the few studies revealing the extent of economizing measures
being adopted by modern shippers, of hiring diverse nationalities to
man their merchantmen.
International Law
Documents
1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, Done at Montego Bay on
December 10, 1982, Entered into Force on November 16, 1994. Available
online at: http://www.un.org/Depts/los/convention_agreements/
texts/unclos/unclos_e.pdf.
International Law
251

IMO Assembly Resolution A.922(22): Code of Practice for the Investi-
gation of the Crimes of Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships,
November 29, 2001. Found at: http://www.imo.org/includes/
blastDataOnly.asp/data_id%3D23528/A922(22).pdf.
IMO Maritime Safety Committee Circular 622, Revision 1: Recommen-
dations to Governments for Preventing and Suppressing Acts of Piracy
and Armed Robbery against Ships, June 16, 1999. Available online
through links at http://www.imo.org.
IMO Maritime Safety Committee Circular 623, Revision 3: Guidance to
Shipowners and Ship Operators, Shipmasters and Crews, on Preventing
and Suppressing Acts of Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships,
May 29, 2002. Available online through links at http://www.imo.org.
General Works
Agyebeng, William K. “Theory in Search of Practice: The Right of
Innocent Passage in the Territorial Sea.” Cornell International Law
Journal 39 (2006), pp. 371–399.
Balkin, Rosalie. “The International Maritime Organization and
Maritime Security.” Tulane Maritime Law Journal 30 (2006), pp. 1–34.
Barry, Ian Patrick. “The Right of Visit, Search, and Seizure of
Foreign-Flagged Vessels on the High Seas, Pursuant to Custom-
ary International Law: A Defense of the Proliferation Security Ini-
tiative.” Hofstra Law Review 33 (2004), pp. 299–330.
Becker, Michael A. “The Shifting Public Order of the Oceans: Free-
dom of Navigation and the Interdiction of Ships at Sea.” Harvard
International Law Journal 46 (2005), pp. 131–230.
Bornick, Brooke A. “Bounty Hunters and Pirates: Filling in the
Gaps of the 1982 U.N. Convention on the Law of the Sea.” Florida
Journal of International Law 17 (2005), pp. 259–270.
Bryant, Dennis L. “Historical and Legal Aspects of Maritime
Security.” University of San Francisco Maritime Law Journal 17
(2004–05), pp. 1–27.
Dahlvang, Niclas. “Thieves, Robbers, & Terrorists: Piracy in the
21st Century.” Regent Journal of International Law 4 (2006), pp. 17–45.
Diaz, Leticia, and Dubner, Barry Hart. “On the Problem of Utilizing
Unilateral Action to Prevent Acts of Sea Piracy and Terrorism:
252
Resources

A Proactive Approach to the Evolution of International Law.” Syra-
cuse Journal of International Law and Commerce 32, Number 1 (2004),
pp. 1–50.
Lengthy article studying the parameters of both modern piracy and ter-
rorism, and suggesting that where regional countermeasures against
either may have failed, unilateral action might be justiﬁed in order to
avert a larger catastrophe.
Dubner, Barry H. The Law of International Sea Piracy. The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff, 1980.
———. “Piracy in Contemporary National and International
Law.” California Western International Law Journal 21, Number 1
(1990), pp. 139–149.
Ellen,
Eric.
“Contemporary
Piracy.”
California
Western
International Law Journal 21, Number 1 (1989), pp. 123–128.
Garmon, Tina. “International Law of the Sea: Reconciling the Law
of Piracy and Terrorism in the Wake of September 11th.” Tulane
Maritime Law Journal 27, Number 1 (Winter 2002), pp. 257–275.
Goodman, Th. H. “Leaving the Corsair’s Name to Other Times:
How to Enforce the Law of Sea Piracy in the 21st Century through
Regional International Agreements.” Case Western Reserve Journal
of International Law 31, Number 1 (1999), pp. 139–168.
Goodwin, Joshua Michael. “Universal Jurisdiction and the Pirate:
Time for an Old Couple to Part.” Vanderbilt Journal of Transnational
Law 39, Number 3 (May 2006), pp. 973–1012.
Gutoff, Jonathan M. “The Law of Piracy in Popular Culture.” Jour-
nal of Maritime Law & Commerce 31, Number 4 (October 2000),
pp. 643–648.
Lighthearted article contrasting the legal records of early pirates, with
their depictions in modern ﬁctional accounts.
Jesus, Jose´ Luis. “Protection of Foreign Ships against Piracy and
Terrorism at Sea: Legal Aspects.” The International Journal of
Marine and Coastal Law 18, Number 3 (2003), pp. 363–400.
Lodge, Michael W. “Improving International Governance in the
Deep Sea.” The International Journal of Marine and Coastal Law 19
(2004), pp. 299–316.
International Law
253

Lodge, Michael W., and Frank Meere. “High Seas Governance:
Meeting of the High Seas Task Force, Paris, March 9, 2005.” Mari-
time Studies 141 (March–April 2005), pp. 1–15.
Mellor, Justin S. C. “Missing the Boat: the Legal and Practical
Problems of the Prevention of Maritime Terrorism.” American
University International Law Review 18 (2002), pp. 341–397.
Menefee, Samuel P. “Anti-Piracy Law in the Year of the Ocean:
Problems and Opportunity.” ILSA Journal of International and Com-
parative Law 5 (1999), pp. 309–318.
———. “Foreign Naval Intervention in Cases of Piracy: Problems
and Strategies. The International Journal of Marine and Coastal
Law 14, Number 3 (1999), 358–361.
———. “’Yo Heave Ho!’: Updating America’s Piracy Laws.” Cali-
fornia Western International Law Journal 21 (1990), pp. 151–179.
Noone, Gregory P., et alia. “Prisoners of War in the 21st Century:
Issues in Modern Warfare.” Naval Law Review 50 (2004), pp. 1–69.
Noyes, John E. “An Introduction to the International Law of
Piracy.” California Western International Law Journal 21 (1990),
pp. 105–121.
Paust, Jordan J. “Essays on Piracy.” California Western International
Law Journal 21, Number 1 (1989), pp. 105–122.
Pugh, Michael C. “Piracy and Armed Robbery at Sea: Problems
and Remedies.” Low Intensity Conﬂict and Law Enforcement 2,
Number 1, 1993.
———, editor. Maritime Security and Peacekeeping: A Framework for
United Nations Operations. Manchester, England: Manchester Uni-
versity Press, 1994.
Rubin, Alfred P. The Law of Piracy. New York: Transnational Pub-
lishers, 1998; ﬁrst published by the Naval War College in Newport,
RI, in 1988.
A historical work by a legal scholar, which covers the origins and evolu-
tion of the concept of piracy, as well as the subsequent enactment and
application of statutes to counter this crime, up to the mid-twentieth
century.
———. “Revising the Law of ‘Piracy.’ ” California Western
International Law Journal 21 (1990), pp. 129–137.
254
Resources

Stiles, Ethan C. “Reforming Current International Law to Combat
Modern Sea Piracy.” Suffolk Transnational Law Review 27, Number 2
(2004), pp. 299–326.
Tiribelli, Carlo. “Time to Update the 1988 Rome Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Maritime
Navigation.” Oregon Review of International Law 8 (2006), pp. 133–155.
Westcott, Kathryn. “Pirates in the Dock.” BBC News [UK], May 21,
2009.
News report describing the wish expressed by the Dutch Foreign Minis-
ter, Maxime Verhagen, that captured Somali pirates be tried somewhere
else than The Netherlands—such as Kenya—revealing the difﬁculties
and expense being faced by numerous Western countries seeking to pros-
ecute such prisoners.
Southeast Asia
Ahmad, Hamzah, and Ogawa, Akira, eds. Combating Piracy and
Ship Robbery: Charting the Future in Asia-Paciﬁc Waters. Tokyo:
The Okazaki Institute, 2001.
Compilation of thirteen papers delivered at a conference to address this
growing problem in Asian waters.
Amirell, Stefan Eklo¨f. Pirates in Paradise: A Modern History of
Southeast Asia’s Maritime Marauders. Singapore: Institute of South-
east Asian Studies, 2006.
Excellent modern study by a Swedish scholar from the Centre for East
and Southeast Asian Studies, at Lund University,
Barrios, Erik. “Casting a Wider Net: Addressing the Piracy Prob-
lem in Southeast Asia.” Boston College International and Comparative
Law Review 28 (2005), pp. 149–163.
Legal arguments addressing the problems of cross-border raids and
multinational seaborne trafﬁc in this region.
Bateman, Sam. “Safety and Security in the Malacca and Singapore
Straits.” Maritime Studies 148 (May–June 2006), pp. 20–23.
Brief overview of the efforts to contain the problem of piracy in these
waters.
Southeast Asia
255

Beckman, Robert C. “Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery
against Ships in Southeast Asia: The Way Forward.” Ocean Develop-
ment and International Law 33, Numbers 3–4 (July–December 2002),
pp. 317–341.
Analyzes the dramatic increase in reported incidents of piracy and armed
robbery against ships in the Malacca Straits and Indonesian waters during
1998–2000, proposing various solutions to address this growing problem.
Bradford, John F. “Japanese Anti-Piracy Initiatives in Southeast
Asia: Policy Formulation and the Coastal State Responses.”Contem-
porary Southeast Asia 26, Number 3 (December 2004), pp. 480–505.
Description of the measured assistance offered by the government of
Japan, to support regional efforts defending commercial trafﬁc transiting
through Southeast Asian waters.
Burnett, John S. Dangerous Waters: Modern Piracy and Terrorism on
the High Seas. New York: Dutton, 2002.
Account written by a former United Press International reporter, after he
was robbed aboard his own small vessel while sailing alone through the
South China Sea, and later traversed the Malacca Straits aboard a super-
tanker as part of his research into the growing problem of modern piracy.
Chalk, Peter. Grey-Area Phenomena in Southeast Asia: Piracy, Drug
Trafﬁcking, and Political Terrorism. Canberra: Strategic and Defence
Studies Centre, Research School of Paciﬁc and Asian Studies,
Australian National University, 1997.
Early study of criminality in those waters by an Australian scholar, who
also works for the RAND Corporation and lectures in America.
———. “Contemporary Maritime Piracy in Southeast Asia.” Stud-
ies in Conﬂict and Terrorism 21, Number 2 (1998), pp. 87–112.
Paper by an Australian professor describing the nature of piratical
attacks up to that time in the region, main countermeasures taken, and
possible future multinational actions to suppress this criminality.
———. “Low-Intensity Conﬂict in Southeast Asia: Piracy, Drug
Trafﬁcking, and Political Terrorism.” Conﬂict Studies 1, Number 1
(1998), pp. 1–36.
See above.
256
Resources

Davis, Gregory S. “Piracy in Southeast Asia: A Growing Threat to
the United States’ Vital Strategic and Commercial Interests.” Quan-
tico, VA: U.S. Marine Corps Command and Staff College, 2002.
Thesis which suggests that Southeast Asian links to both piracy and
Islamic fundamentalism, might allow a terrorist group to use a hijacked
ship for an attack on U.S. shores.
Eadie, Edward N. “Relevance of International Criminal Law to
Piracy in Asian Waters.” Maritime Studies 136 (May–June 2004),
pp. 21–33.
———. “Deﬁnitions of Piracy, Particularly That of the International
Maritime Bureau.” Maritime Studies 119 (July–August 2001),
pp. 10–16.
Eklo¨f, Stefan. Pirates in Paradise: A Modern History of Southeast
Asia’s Maritime Marauders. Copenhagen, Denmark: NIAS Press,
2006.
General history of Southeast Asian piracy over the past quarter-century,
examining the historical, social, political, and economic factors that have
contributed to the resurgence of piracy in that region.
Freeman, Donald B. The Straits of Malacca: Gateway or Gauntlet?
Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2003.
Ho, Phil Joshua, and Raymond, Catherine Zara, editors. The Best
of Times, the Worst of Times: Maritime Security in the Asia-Paciﬁc.
Singapore: World Scientiﬁc and the Institute of Defence and Stra-
tegic Studies, 2005.
A single volume bringing together the views of various international
specialists, discussing current trends relating to maritime security as
they apply to Asia.
International Maritime Organization. “Cooperation in the Straits
of Malacca and Singapore.” Maritime Studies 150 (September–
October 2006), pp. 15–19.
Johnson, Derek, and Valencia, Mark J., editors. Piracy in Southeast
Asia: Status, Issues, and Responses. Singapore: Institute of Southeast
Asian Studies, 2005.
Excellent compilation of articles by eight different contributors, summa-
rizing the evolution and state of piratical activity in Southeast Asia
Southeast Asia
257

until that time, as well as some suggested avenues for joint international
countermeasures.
Keyuan, Zou. “Enforcing the Law of Piracy in the South China
Sea.” Journal of Maritime Law and Commerce 3, Number 1 (2000),
pp. 107–117.
———. “Piracy at Sea and China’s Response.” Lloyd’s Maritime
and Commercial Law Quarterly (2000), pp. 365–376.
Liss, Carolin. “The Role of Private Security Companies in Secur-
ing the Malacca Straits.” Maritime Studies 157 (November–
December 2007), pp. 14–22.
———. “Maritime Piracy in Southeast Asia.” Southeast Asian
Affairs 2003 (Singapore: ISEAS, pp. 52–68).
Menefee, Samuel Pyeatt. “Modern Asian Maritime Crime.”
Mains’l Haul 36, Number 4 (Fall 2000), pp. 50–54.
Mo, John. “Options to Combat Maritime Piracy in Southeast Asia.”
Ocean Development & International Law 33 (2002), pp. 343–358.
Nguyen, Anh Viet. “What Are the Political and Strategic Interests of
Major Regional Players in Addressing Piracy and the Risk of Mari-
time Terrorism?” Maritime Studies 146 (January–February 2006), pp.
12–19.
Ong-Webb, Graham Gerard, editor. Piracy, Maritime Terrorism, and
Securing the Malacca Straits. Singapore: Institute of Southeast
Asian Studies, 2006.
———. “Ships Can Be Dangerous Too”: Coupling Piracy and Maritime
Terrorism in Southeast Asia’s Maritime Security Framework. Singapore:
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 2004.
Peterson, M. J. “Naval Forces and the Control of Piracy in South-
east Asia.” Naval Forces 6, Number 1 (1995), pp. 58–60.
Raymond, Catherine Zara. “Malacca Straits: A High-Risk Zone?”
Maritime Studies 143 (July–August 2005), pp. 18–19.
Richardson, Michael. “Conference Report: The 5th Tri-Annual
IMB Meeting on Piracy and Maritime Security, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia, June 29 and 30, 2004.” Maritime Studies 140 (January–
February 2005), pp. 22–27.
258
Resources

———. “The Threats of Piracy and Maritime Terrorism in South-
east Asia.” Maritime Studies 139 (November–December 2004),
pp. 18–21.
Richardson, Michael, and Mukundan, P. Political and Security Out-
look 2004: Maritime Terrorism and Piracy. Singapore: Institute of
Southeast Asian Studies, 2004.
Rosenberg, David, and Chung, Christopher. “Maritime Security
in the South China Sea: Coordinating Coastal and User-State Pri-
orities.” Ocean Development and International Law 39, Number 1
(2008), pp. 51–68.
Salleh, Iskandar Sazlan Mohd, and Yassin, Mat Taib. “Southeast
Asian Maritime Security Cooperation: Malaysian Perspectives and
Recent Developments.” Maritime Studies 137 (July–August 2004),
pp. 28–30.
Schuman, Michael. “How to Defeat Pirates: Success in the Strait of
Malacca.” Time, April 22, 2009.
Sheppard, Ben. “Maritime Security Measures.” Jane’s Intelligence
Review, March 1, 2003.
Sittnick, Tammy M. “State Responsibility and Maritime Terrorism
in the Strait of Malacca: Persuading Indonesia and Malaysia to
Take Additional Steps to Secure the Strait.” Paciﬁc Rim Law &
Policy Journal 14 (2005), pp. 743–769.
Stuart, Robert. In Search of Pirates: A Modern-Day Odyssey in the
South China Sea. Edinburgh and London: Mainstream Publishing,
2002.
An early investigative report by a journalist who traveled through Indo-
nesia, inspired by the rising number of piratical incidents being reported
out of the South China Sea and Straits of Malacca.
Tanter, Richard. “The Challenges of Piracy in Southeast Asia and
the Role of Australia.” Nautilus Institute: Austral Peace and Security
Network [Australia], Austral Policy Forum Paper Number 07-19A,
October 25, 2007. Found at austral@rmit.edu.au.
Edited summary of a longer version of a paper delivered by the scholar
Carolin Liss at the “Australia and Asia: Issues of Global Security”
conference, held at the University of Western Australia on August 17,
Southeast Asia
259

2007. An excellent summary of the future challenges in the ﬁght against
piracy in Southeast Asia.
———. “The Roots of Piracy in Southeast Asia.” Nautilus Institute:
Austral Peace and Security Network [Australia], Austral Policy
Forum Paper Number 07-18A, 22 October 2007. Found at austral
@rmit.edu.au
Edited summary of a longer version of a paper delivered by the scholar Car-
olin Liss at the “Australia and Asia: Issues of Global Security”
conference, held at the University of Western Australia on 17 August 2007.
An excellent overview of the origins of piracy in Southeast Asia.
Teitler, Ger. “Piracy in Southeast Asia: A Historical Comparison.”
Amsterdam: Maritime Studies 1, Number 1 (2002), from the Centre
for Maritime Research.
U¨ nlu¨ , Nihan. “Protecting the Straits of Malacca and Singapore
against Piracy and Terrorism.” The International Journal of Marine
and Coastal Law 21 (2006), pp. 539–549.
Vagg, John. “Rough Seas? Contemporary Piracy in South East
Asia.” The British Journal of Criminology 35, Number 1 (1995),
pp. 63–80.
Vietnamese Boat People: Pirates’s Vulnerable Prey. New York: U.S.
Committee for Refugees, 1984.
Warren, James F. “A Tale of Two Centuries: The Globalisation of
Maritime Raiding and Piracy in Southeast Asia at the End of the
Eighteenth and Twentieth Centuries.” ARI Working Paper Series 2
(2003).
Young, Adam J. Contemporary Maritime Piracy in Southeast Asia:
History, Causes, and Remedies. Singapore: Institute of Southeast
Asian Studies, 2007.
Young, Adam J, and Valencia, Mark J. “Conﬂation of Piracy and
Terrorism in Southeast Asia: Rectitude and Utility.” Contemporary
Southeast Asia [Singapore] 25, Number 2 (August 2003), pp. 269–284.
Scholarly paper differentiating between the aims of modern pirates and
terrorists, suggesting that a single counterapproach will not address
both problems, but rather that solutions should be tailored to each
particular situation.
260
Resources

Zubir, Mokhzani, and Basiron, Mohd Nizam. “The Strait of Mal-
acca: The Rise of China, America’s Intentions, and the Dilemma
of the Littoral States.” Maritime Studies 141 (March–April 2005),
pp. 24–26.
Brief editorial on the complicated international perspectives regarding
this vital commercial waterway.
Somalia and Horn of Africa
Abdinur, Mustafa Haji. “Life in Somalia’s Pirate Army.” National
Post [Canada], April 30, 2009.
English translation of a French report originally published by Agence
France-Presse, offering insights into the “code of conduct” allegedly
observed by pirates, according to various members.
Ahmed, Mohamed. “Somali Sea Gangs Lure Investors at Pirate
Lair.” Reuters, December 1, 2009.
Report describing the “piracy” exchange created at Harardheere, for
locals to invest funds toward future forays, and receive shares from ship
ransoms.
Bahadur, Jay. “ ‘I’m Not a Pirate, I’m the Saviour of the Sea.’ ” The
Times Online [UK], April 16, 2009.
Interview conducted by a Canadian reporter with a pirate chieftain from
Eyl, Farah Hirsi “Boyah” Kulan, in the immediate aftermath to the
Maersk Alabama incident.
———. “The Pirate King of Somalia.” Globe & Mail [Canada],
April 26, 2009.
Interview with another notorious pirate chieftain from Eyl, Garaad
Mohamud Mohamed.
Baldauf, Scott. “Pirates, Inc.: Inside the Booming Somali Business.”
Christian Science Monitor, May 31, 2009.
A thoughtful report on piratical forays out of Somalia, as well as the
ﬁnanciers ﬁnancing such forays by teenage gunmen, by a reporter who
interviewed a half-dozen captured pirates in Berbera, Somaliland.
Somalia and Horn of Africa
261

Best Management Practices to Deter Piracy in the Gulf of Aden and off
the Coast of Somalia. London: Commercial Crime Services division
of the International Chamber of Commerce, 2009.
A manual compiled from numerous recommendations offered by diverse
ﬁrms and groups involved in maritime trafﬁc in the Indian Ocean; origi-
nally issued in February 2009, followed by a revised edition in
August 2009.
Bohaty, Rochelle F. H. “Chemical Vessels Under Siege.” Chemical
& Engineering News 86, Number 34 (August 25, 2008), pp. 27–28.
Article in the American Chemical Society’s industrywide journal,
describing the seizure and ransom of the Japanese chemical-tanker
Golden Nori that previous year, plus other threats by pirates against
similar vessels.
“Council Joint Action 2008/851/CFSP of November 10, 2008 on a
European Union military operation to contribute to the deter-
rence, prevention, and repression of acts of piracy and armed rob-
bery off the Somali coast.” Brussels: Ofﬁcial Journal of the European
Union 12.11.2008, pp. L 301/33 to 37.
The ofﬁcial European Union act organizing the dispatch of an expedition
codenamed Operation “Atalanta,” to combat piracy off Somalia.
Countering Piracy Off the Horn of Africa: Partnership & Action Plan.
Washington, D.C.: National Security Council, December 2008.
An update of American policy regarding anti-piracy measures off Somalia,
revised by the George W. Bush administration after the November 2008
election of Barack Obama, so as to incorporate more cooperation with allied
nations in this struggle.
Fisher, Jonah. “Somali Pirate Patrol: Day Five.” BBC News [UK],
February 23, 2009.
Brief article by a British reporter, describing incidents during a patrol of
the Gulf of Aden by the Royal Navy frigate HMS Northumberland, as
part of an EU task force protecting UN humanitarian shipments.
Fitzgerald, Nina J., editor. Somalia: Issues, History, and Bibliography.
New York: Nova Science, 2002.
262
Resources

Offers a brief version of this nation’s troubled history, the challenges
after its government’s collapse, plus a selective bibliography.
“French Warship Captures Pirates.” BBC News, April 15, 2009.
British press report on the capture of eleven Somali pirates involved in
an attack against the American container ship Liberty Sun, plus other
incidents; compiled from various sources.
Gerges, Makram A. “The Red Sea and Gulf of Aden Action Plan—
Facing the Challenges of an Ocean Gateway.” Ocean & Coastal
Management 45 (2002), pp. 885–903.
Hansen, Stig Jarle. Piracy in the Greater Gulf of Aden: Myths, Miscon-
ceptions, and Remedies. Oslo: “Report 2009:29” of the Norwegian
Institute for Urban and Regional Research, 2009.
An excellent recent study commissioned by Norway’s Ministry of
Defence, which combines numerous ﬁeld interviews with former Somali
pirates, as well as a thoughtful statistical analysis.
Hess, Robert L. Italian Colonialism in Somalia. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1966.
One of the few English-language scholarly studies on this subject, com-
piled from archival materials in Rome, with little input from Somali
sources.
Howden, Daniel. “Gaddaﬁ’s Forty Years in Power Celebrated
with a ‘Gallery of Grotesques.’ ” Belfast Telegraph [Northern
Ireland], September 2, 2009.
Among the dignitaries invited to this celebration was the notorious
Somali pirate chieftain, Mohammed Abdi “Afweyne” Hassan.
Knaup, Horand. “Prelude to Piracy: The Poor Fishermen of Soma-
lia.” Der Spiegel Online [Germany], April 12, 2008.
English translation of a report on the plight of Somalia’s ﬁshing indus-
try, providing recruits for piracy.
“Lawless Tradition of Piracy off the Coast of Somalia.” The Guard-
ian [UK], November 18, 2008.
Somalia and Horn of Africa
263

Brief article, succinctly summarizing the evolution of criminality off
Somalia.
Menkhaus, Ken John. Somalia: State Collapse and the Threat of
Terrorism. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press for the
International Institute for Strategic Studies, 2004.
Brief description of the disintegration of Somali government and its
consequences.
———. “Dangerous Waters.” Survival: Global Politics and Strategy
[UK] 51, Number 1 (February–March 2009), pp. 21–25.
Knowledgeable article on the current state of Somali piracy in the wake
of the hijacking of the Saudi supertanker Sirius Star.
Middleton, Roger. Piracy in Somalia: Threatening Global Trade, Feed-
ing Local Wars. London: Brieﬁng Paper AFP BP 08/02 published
by Chatham House, headquarters of the Royal Institute of
International Affairs, October 2008.
Mojon, Jean-Marc. “Harardhere: The Cradle of Somali Piracy.”
Middle East Online [UK], October 29, 2009.
Report describing how Mohamed Abdi “Afweyne” Hassan Hayir had
transformed this sleepy ﬁshing village into a major pirate lair, where a pair
of middle-aged British yachters were being held captive, among others.
National Security Council. Countering Piracy Off the Horn of Africa:
Partnership & Action Plan. Washington, D.C.: The White House,
December 2008.
Brief review of this problem, as well as a renewed attempt at ﬁnding an
effective remedy—signaling a shift in policy, as it was issued during
the waning days of the Bush administration.
Otterman, Sharon, and McDonald, Mark. “11 Pirates Seized by
French Navy.” New York Times, April 15, 2009.
Brief report describing the capture of eleven Somali pirates involved in an
attack on the American container ship Liberty Sun and other passing
merchantmen, by the French warship Nivoˆse.
“Peril on the High Seas.” The Economist: Premium Content Online
[UK], April 23, 2008.
264
Resources

Brief editorial observation on the palpable shift of depredations from
“traditional piracy hot spots,” such as the Malacca Strait and Indonesia,
to the waters off Somalia.
Perl, Raphael. Terrorist Attack on the USS Cole: Background and
Issues for Congress. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research
Service, RS20721, January 30, 2001.
Piracy Off the Somali Coast: Workshop Commissioned by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations to Somalia,
Ambassador Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah. Nairobi, Kenya, November
2008.
Raffaele, Paul. “The Pirate Hunters.” Smithsonian Magazine 38,
Number 5 (August 2007), pp. 38–44.
An early article, as public interest began to swing over from the war on
terror to the growing problem of a resurgent modern piracy. Gives a
detailed account of the capture by the USS Winston S. Churchill of
ten Somali pirates, and their subsequent trial in Kenya.
Report S/2005/625 of the U.N. Monitoring Group on Somalia, Submit-
ted to the Security Council on October 4, 2005. New York: United
Nations Security Council, 2005.
An overview of the many difﬁculties besetting Somalia, especially the
importation of weaponry, in spite of an arms embargo; includes men-
tions of its burgeoning problem with piracy.
Report S/2006/229 of the U.N. Monitoring Group on Somalia, Submit-
ted to the Security Council on May 4, 2006. New York: United
Nations Security Council, 2006.
A study of the continuing difﬁculties in Somalia, including a growing
number of piratical forays; offers some valuable intelligence on the prolif-
eration of weaponry, and other insights on the organization of pirate
groups.
Report S/2008/769 of the U.N. Monitoring Group on Somalia, Submit-
ted to the Security Council on December 10, 2008. New York: United
Nations Security Council, 2008.
Another in-depth study of the problems in Somalia, including signiﬁ-
cant acts of piracy.
Somalia and Horn of Africa
265

Robinson, Simon, with Xan Rice. “In Peril on the Sea.” Time Mag-
azine, November 7, 2005.
Excellent report on the hijacking in late June 2005 of the U.N.-chartered
aid-ship Semlow, off the Somali coast.
Schoﬁeld, Clive. “Horn of Africa Conﬂicts Threaten US Anti-
Terrorism Efforts.” Jane’s Intelligence Review, June 2004.
———. “Plaguing the Waves: Rising Piracy Threat off the Horn of
Africa.” Jane’s Intelligence Review, July 2007.
“Somali Piracy: ’We’re Defending Our Waters.’ ” Mail & Guardian
Online [UK], October 14, 2008.
English translation of an Agence France-Presse interview with Abdi
Garad and other Somali leaders, describing and even justifying piratical
hijackings, plus their economic impact in that impoverished nation.
“Somali Warlord Threatens to Try Crew of UN Ship.” Associated
Press, August 24, 2005.
Description of how the pirate ringleader Afweyne used a local Somali
ofﬁcial to threaten to try a captive crew for illegal ﬁshing and chemical
dumping, in order to sharpen his ransom demands.
Tripodi, Paolo. The Colonial Legacy in Somalia. New York:
St. Martin’s Press, 1999.
USS Cole Commission Report. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department
of Defense, 2001.
Results of the investigation of the suicide bombing of the American war-
ship Cole, while at anchor in the port of Aden in Yemen on October 12,
2000. Recommends a proactive as opposed to a defensive response to
these sorts of acts of maritime terrorism.
Waagacusub Independent Somali Journalists. “The Boss of Somali
Pirates Sighted in Libya.” Waagacusub Media [Sweden], August 29,
2009.
Refers to the attendance at the 40th anniversary celebrations of Muam-
mar Gaddaﬁascension to power, by the Somali pirate chieftain
Mohamed Abdi Hassan Hayir, more commonly known as “Afweyne.”
266
Resources

Nigeria
Although often listed as a current world hot spot for piracy, this large
West African nation is actually beset by violent incidents in some of its
rivers and coastal waters, not piratical acts on any of its outlying seas.
Speciﬁcally, disenfranchised ethnic groups living within its oil-rich
Niger Delta—deprived of the bulk of export proﬁts, while subjected to
many of the most onerous environmental hazards—have unilaterally
begun targeting passing vessels, both foreign and domestic, in an effort
to extort funds.
Egede, Edwin. “The Nigerian Territorial Waters Legislation and
the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention.” The International Journal of
Marine and Coastal Law 19 (2004), pp. 151–176.
Fabi, Randy. “Piracy Off Nigeria Delays Oil Projects.” Reuters UK,
January 29, 2009.
Report describing how a “wave of piracy off Nigeria’s southern
coast, is delaying offshore energy projects in the world’s eighth-
biggest oil exporter.”
Gambrell, Jon. “With Rusty Ammo, Nigeria Fights Piracy.” Mail &
Guardian Online [UK], March 31, 2010.
Republication of a SAPA report, describing the material limitations of
the few Nigerian naval craft patrolling against pirates; this same story
was also picked up by the Associated Press.
L’Huillery, Jacques. “Nigeria Becomes World Piracy Hot-Spot.”
Mail & Guardian Online [UK], May 20, 2008.
English translation of a French report originally published by Agence
France-Presse, describing a recent upsurge in depredations in Nigerian
waters, which its government was ill-prepared to challenge.
Ojukwu, Chudi Nelson. “Arrest and Detention of Ships and
Other Property in Nigeria.” Tulane Maritime Law Journal 28,
Number 2 (Summer 2004), pp. 249–269.
Article by a legal writer, explaining the applications of admiralty law in
Nigeria, especially as it affects foreign vessels.
Nigeria
267

Sirius Star Seizure (November 2008)
At present, only newspaper- and other similar mass-media accounts
have been published about the interception of this huge Saudi super-
tanker, whose multimillion dollar ransom is believed to have inspired
many more Somali forays.
Cramb, Auslan. “Sailor Tells of the Moment Pirates Captured the
Sirius Star.” The Daily Telegraph [UK], January 29, 2009, http://www
.telegraph.co.uk.
Personal interview with 53-year-old James Grady, Second Ofﬁcer of this
vessel, after his safe return home to Johnstone, Scotland.
Jamieson, Alastair. “Briton Captured by Somali Pirates on Sirius
Star Tells of Fears.” The Sunday Telegraph [UK], January 25, 2009,
http://www.telegraph.co.uk.
Interview with 45-year-old Peter French, who was serving as Chief Engi-
neer aboard the supertanker when it was captured by Somali pirates.
Karon, Tony. “Battling the Somali Pirates: The Return of the Islam-
ists.” Time Magazine, November 25, 2008.
Article describing the short-lived intervention in the Sirius Star affair
by the militant Somali movement al-Shabaab, who threatened to act
toward the release of this captive tanker, because they deemed any seizure
of a Muslim-owned vessel as running contrary to Islamic law.
Leach, Ben. “Somali Pirates Who Hijacked Supertanker Sirius Star
‘Demand Ransom of $25 Million.’ ” The Daily Telegraph [UK],
November 20, 2008, http://www.telegraph.co.uk.
Details of the negotiation regarding the ransom demand itself, as well as
growing concern among Western observers as to the mushrooming prob-
lem of Somali pirate hijackings.
Roberts, Lesley. “Hostage’s Secret Pictures of £2 Million Ransom
Drop on Ship Hijacked by Pirates.” Sunday Mail [UK], February 1,
2009, http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk.
Diary excerpts and pictures covertly taken by Second Ofﬁcer James
Grady, giving a vivid and progressive portrayal of his two-month
captivity at the hands of these Somali pirates.
268
Resources

Wadhams, Nick. “As Somali Pirates Get Bolder, Policing Them
Gets Tougher.” Time Magazine, November 19, 2008.
Report ﬁled by an American reporter stationed in Nairobi, Kenya,
describing the piratical capture of the Saudi supertanker Sirius Star,
and the expected consequences from such a high-proﬁle action.
Maersk Alabama Incident (April 2009)
“A Pirate Comes to New York.” The World Newser: ABC World
News’ Daily Blog, April 21, 2009.
Initial news report of the arrival of the captive Abduwali Abdukhadir
Muse´, lone surviving Somali pirate of the attack on the Maersk Alabama,
to face trial in lower Manhattan.
Bone, James. “Maersk Alabama Crew Return to U.S. to Tell of
Somali Pirate Ordeal.” The Times Online [UK], April 18, 2009.
British newspaper account, summarizing the events surrounding the
near-capture of this American container ship, as well as the killing of
three of its four pirate atackers, and the release of Captain Phillips.
Casella, Robin. “Seekonk Sailor Recalls Experience at the Helm of
Maersk Alabama.” Taunton Daily Gazette, June 25, 2009.
Report compiled by the GateHouse News Service of a talk given before
the Rotary Club at Raynham, Massachusetts, by Chief Mate Shane
Murphy of the Maersk Alabama; including some biographical facts
about his early seafaring background.
Curran, John. “Mutiny: Crew Blames Richard Phillips, Maersk
Alabama Captain, For Ignoring Pirate Warnings.” Hufﬁngton Post
Online, December 2, 2009.
Account reporting on the lawsuit launched by four ex-crewmen, angry
to learn that their ship had been steered into pirate-infested waters,
despite advance warnings. Others defend Captain Phillips’s actions.
Davis, Paul. “Chief Mate on Pirated Ship Sought Adventure and
Found It Off Somalia.” The Providence Journal Online, April 14, 2009.
Reﬂective report on the participation of Chief Mate Shane Murphy
during the Maersk Alabama hijacking, written during its immediate
aftermath; includes biographical information.
Maersk Alabama Incident (April 2009)
269

“Don’t Give Up the Ship!: Quick Thinking and a Boatload of
Know-how Saves the Maersk Alabama.” Marine Ofﬁcer (Summer
2009), 18 pp.
One of the best eyewitness accounts of the hijacking, compiled from sur-
viving crewmen; published in Washington, D.C., in the ofﬁcial maga-
zine of the Marine Engineers’ Benevolent Association.
Houreld, Katharine. “Maersk Alabama Seized: Somali Pirates
Overrun Danish Ship.” Hufﬁngton Post Online, April 8, 2009.
An early report, including family reactions to the news that Captain
Richard Phillips was being held hostage by Somali pirates.
Kahn, Joseph P. “Uncharted Waters.” Boston Globe Online,
August 29, 2009.
Report on Capt. Richard Phillips, compiled more than four months after
having survived his captivity by pirates while in command of Maersk
Alabama. Includes some biographical details, as well as philosophical
reﬂections on his unsought fame.
Murphy, Shane, as told to Sean Flynn. “ ‘I’m Your Worst F**king
Nightmare.’ ” GQ Online, November 18, 2009.
Dramatic and detailed eyewitness account of the piratical seizure of the
American-ﬂagged container ship Maersk Alabama, as recounted sev-
eral months later by its second-in-command.
“Pirates Demand Ransom as U.S. Captain’s Escape Bid Fails.”
France 24 International News, April 10, 2009.
English-language version of a French press report, ﬁled after the second
day of the Maersk Alabama standoff. Quotes statements by principal
leaders, including shore-based pirate chieftain Abdi Garad.
“Pirates Issue New Threat Over US Hostage.” Sky News Online
[UK], April 11, 2009.
British press report, ﬁled at the end of the third day of the Maersk Ala-
bama standoff; includes statements by principal ﬁgures, among them
the pirate chieftain Abdi Garad.
“U.S. Navy Closes Grip on Somali Pirates.” Agence France-Presse,
April 8, 2009.
270
Resources

English-language version of a French press report, ﬁled early during the
Maersk Alabama standoff. Quotes statements by principal leaders,
including shore-based pirate chieftain Abdi Garad.
Watts, Alex. “Backlash Fear After U.S. Navy Shoots Pirates.” Sky
News Online [UK], April 13, 2009.
British press report, ﬁled at the conclusion of the Maersk Alabama
ordeal, includes threatening statements made by the pirate chieftain
Abdi Garad.
Maersk Alabama Incident (April 2009)
271

This page intentionally left blank 

Glossary
He insists that he is not a criminal, but that he knows what he is
doing is wrong.
—a Western reporter, after interviewing the
pirate chieftain Boyah of Eyl, April 2009
AFP
Initials of the French news service “Agence France-Presse,” whose
reporters are often involved in covering piracy stories around the Horn of
Africa.
African credit card
Jocular expression in some parts of Africa, includ-
ing the pirate lair at Harardheere, to describe an AK-47 assault-riﬂe, as
in the advertised sense of “don’t leave home without it.”
AIS
Acronym for “Automatic Identiﬁcation System,” a transmitter
featured on most large merchantmen, which is often switched off by
Masters during transit through any pirate-infested stretches of ocean, as
it will reveal their ship’s position, course, speed, etc., to any nearby
predators.
badaadinta badah
A Somali term literally meaning “saviours of the
sea,” which is most often rendered into English-language translations as
“coast guard.” Because of its positive connotations, this expression is pre-
ferred by pirates and often used—in several variants by different pirate
groups—to lend a veneer of legitimacy to their depredations at sea.
burcad badeed
Somali term literally meaning “ocean robber” or “sea
bandit,” often used in ofﬁcial government circles to describe and deni-
grate that nation’s pirates, who prefer much more-favorable labels such
as badaadinta badah.
CCS
Acronym for “Commercial Crime Services,” a division of the
International Chamber of Commerce, which is headquartered in London,
England.
CGPCS
Acronym for the multilateral “Contact Group on Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia,” established by the United Nations to coordinate
273

anti-piracy efforts among the various American, NATO, European Union,
regional, and other naval forces patrolling the waters off the Horn of
Africa. It has been criticized for only meeting sporadically, and not includ-
ing the two main groups that are focal to this problem: owner-operators of
the small coastal-craft that make up the bulk of victims in the Gulf of
Aden, and the Somalis themselves.
CTF
Naval acronym meaning “Combined Task Force.”
dhow
An ancient Arabic ship-design, still often seen today in the
Indian Ocean, as well as in the Arab Sea, Red Sea, and Mediterranean.
Such vessels have a characteristically high-swept bow and are usually
of only 150–350 tons burthen, sometimes with a single mast stepped aft.
Employed for centuries as coastal traders, they have been victimized in
recent times by Somali pirates to serve as their mother-ships, towing their
captors’ skiffs hundreds of miles farther out into the main sea-lanes, so as
to unsuspectingly approach transiting merchantmen.
DWT
Maritime abbreviation for “Dead-Weight Tonnage.”
EU
Initials for “European Union,” a political and economic alliance
comprised of most countries in Europe.
EUNavFor
Acronym for “European Union Naval Force,” a joint squad-
ron organized in December 2008 to patrol the troubled waters off the
Horn of Africa, as a supplement to other allied formations.
haram
Arabic expression meaning “religiously forbidden,” piracy
being considered haram according to Islamic teachings.
hawala
Ancient Arabic money-transfer system, mentioned in Islamic
legal texts as early as the eighth century, whereby a person pays a sum
to a hawaladar in one place, who instructs a colleague at another locale
to issue a like sum to another person. These transactions are done entirely
on the honor system, no paperwork being involved, and has provided a
useful function for centuries. One of its few modern drawbacks is that it
allows large sums of illicitly-obtained funds, such as multimillion dollar
pirate ransoms, to vanish without a trace among unknown recipients.
ICC
Initials representing the “International Chamber of Commerce.”
ICU
Acronym for the “Islamic Courts Union,” an umbrella group of
Sharia courts who united under Sharif Sheikh Ahmed during the
summer of 2006 to seize power at Mogadishu and much of southern
Somalia. Their fundamentalist Islamic beliefs led them to ban piracy at
such notorious ports as Hobyo and Harardheere, producing a noticeable
decline in offshore depredations that autumn.
However, because some were conservative extremists and harbored
al-Qaeda refugees, the ICU were defeated by an Ethiopian-led and
American-backed intervention that same December 2006. A moderate
wing thereupon went into exile in Eritrea and Djibouti, while more
hard-line factions splintered into armed groups such as al-Shabaab and
274
Glossary

Hizbul Islam, ﬁghting on against the Ethiopian occupation. The moder-
ate faction returned to ofﬁce in a power-sharing arrangement in
January 2009, only to then be attacked by its former two partners, as
Somalia’s civil strife continued unabated.
IMB
Acronym for the International Chamber of Commerce’s
“International Maritime Bureau.”
IMO
Acronym for the United Nations’s “International Maritime
Organization.”
intermodalism
Name given to container trafﬁc, the modern method of
transporting goods within standardized metal containers that can be
seamlessly conveyed on either ships, trains, or trucks, greatly accelerat-
ing deliveries through such speedier loading and ofﬂoading.
IRTC
Acronym for the “International Recommended Transit Corridor,”
an area lying between 12° North, 58° East, and 10° South, where foreign
navies suggest that merchantmen remain during their passages through
the Gulf of Aden or around the Horn of Africa, so as to remain within
range of aerial and naval patrols. Westbound vessels should tend toward
its northern side, eastbound ships toward its southern side.
ISC
Acronym for the “Information Sharing Center,” an agency set up
under the United Nations’ ReCAAP agreement, for Asian nations beset
by piracy to pool their intelligence.
ISPS
Initials standing for “International Ship and Port Facility
Security.”
Joint Islamic Courts
See “ICU.”
JWC
Acronym for the “Joint War Committee” of Lloyd’s Market
Association, the branch of that insurance brokerage which assesses the
dangers posed by piracy and other threats in world sea lanes, affecting
the insurance premiums which are to be charged for transiting
merchantmen.
khat or qat
Name of a mildly addictive East African plant, whose
bright-green leaves are chewed as a stimulant, while also repressing hun-
ger; a favorite of Somali pirates, it is sometimes known as well as miraa.
When the fundamentalist Islamic Courts Union movement banned khat
on November 17, 2006 for the entire month of Ramadan, riots ensued at
Kismaayo and other ports.
Kill-and-Go
See “Mopol.”
knot
Ancient measurement of sea-speed, equivalent to 6,080 feet or
1.15 miles, known as a “nautical mile” (see below). Consequently, a
motorboat speeding at 20 knots, is traveling at 23 miles per hour.
LTTE
Acronym for “Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eeelam,” more commonly
known as the “Tamil Tigers,” the insurgent group ﬁghting to create an in-
dependent state on the island of Sri Lanka. Their hijackings and attacks
Glossary
275

against offshore shipping, including numerous violent assaults on neutral
or civilian vessels, were denounced as acts of piracy by the Sri Lankan
authorities and foreign agencies, yet defended as legitimate tactics by the
Tigers themselves and their overseas allies.
MARLO
Acronym for “Marine Liaison Ofﬁce,” operated by U.S. Naval
Forces Central Command in Bahrain as a conduit of information between
the allied Combined Maritime Forces or CMF, and the commercial-
shipping community sailing in the Gulf of Aden and Horn of Africa
region.
MFV
Common maritime acronym for a “motor ﬁshing vessel.”
MMEA
Acronym for the “Malaysian Maritime Enforcement Agency,”
the
equivalent
of that nation’s Coast
Guard,
established
in
November 2005.
MoPol
Acronym for Nigeria’s “Mobile Police,” a force which has been
deployed into the Niger Delta to protect tankers and oil-installations
against repeated depredations by disgruntled local residents; also known
as the “Kill-and-Go” police.
mother ship
Any larger vessel that transports extra men, supplies, or
equipment for smaller boats to use as their seaborne base of operations,
such as the ﬂagship or supply-ship for a ﬁshing or a whaling ﬂeet. In
the context of piracy, though, it is largely applied to vessels captured near
shore by Somali brigands in light skiffs, who then compel their captives
to tow their light craft farther out to sea into the main sea lanes, and wait
there aboard these innocuous-looking prizes to prey upon unsuspecting
merchantmen.
MSCHOA
Acronym for the “Maritime Security Centre—Horn of
Africa,” the planning and coordination headquarters for the European
Union naval squadron or EU NAVFOR “Atalanta,” which was deployed
into the Gulf of Aden and off the coasts of Somalia in December 2008 on
antipiracy patrols.
MSPA
Acronym for the “Maritime Security Patrol Area,” a movable
trafﬁc-lane through the Gulf of Aden created on August 22, 2008 to be
patrolled by U.S. and allied warships or aircraft, so as to afford transiting
merchantmen some measure of protection against Somali pirates, until
more a long-term solution could be instituted. See also “IRTC” above.
MV
Common maritime designation for a “motor vessel” or merchant
freighter.
NATO
Initials of the “North Atlantic Treaty Organization.”
nautical mile
A slightly longer distance than the measurement used on
land, being equivalent to 1.15 miles ashore (see “knot” above”).
NVCG
Acronym for Somalia’s self-proclaimed “National Volunteer
Coast Guard,” actually a pirate group.
276
Glossary

ONI
Initials of the “Ofﬁce of Naval Intelligence,” a branch of the U.S.
Navy based in Washington, D.C., whose Civil Maritime Analysis Depart-
ment regularly collates and analyses information on piracy from global
sources, and posts a weekly “Worldwide Threat to Shipping Report.”
phantom ship
Nickname for any unregistered or falsely-named
merchantman, usually a vessel hijacked by pirates, which is then
repainted and given a new identity, so as to be used for further criminal
purposes such as smuggling. A not-infrequent occurrence in the South
China Sea during the late 1990s.
PRC
Initials of the “Piracy Reporting Center” maintained in Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia, by the International Maritime Bureau out of London,
England, so that its designation is also oftentimes given as “IMB PRC.”
qat
See khat.
ReCAAP
Acronym for the “Regional Cooperation Agreement on Com-
bating Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships,” a treaty which was
concluded between sixteen Asian countries by the United Nations’
International Maritime Organization in November 2004, to help facilitate
joint efforts toward stemming piratical assaults.
RPG
Acronym for “rocket-propelled grenade,” a shoulder-ﬁred
infantry weapon favored by pirates, because of its ability to intimidate
commercial vessels.
saami sare
Somali term for the ransoms extorted to release captive
vessels.
satang
Indonesian name for the boarding poles used by Southeast
Asian pirates to board merchantmen at sea, which are assembled aboard
their boats as they draw near to their victims by tying shorter lengths of
bamboo together with twine, then attaching a hook at one end; ﬁnal
measurement can attain 65 feet in length.
sea robbery
A legal term used to describe attacks upon commercial
vessels in ports or national waters, as opposed to acts of piracy, which
are perpetrated upon the high seas, beyond any government’s jurisdic-
tion. According to international law, such inshore attacks are not true acts
of piracy, but rather criminal assaults on vessels or crews, just as armed
robberies may occur against truck drivers moving about a port area,
and so sea robbery should be dealt with by the local police.
ship-rider
Term for a law-enforcement ofﬁcial from a third country,
who travels aboard a foreign naval vessel to help determine any possible
criminal charges for subsequent prosecution on land, of any persons
detained at sea on suspicion of committing piracy or armed robbery.
SNMG
Naval acronym for “Standing NATO Maritime Group,” the
multinational squadrons regularly assembled from among all NATO
navies for joint exercises or patrols.
Glossary
277

Supreme Islamic Courts Council
See “ICU.”
Tamil Tigers
See “LTTE.”
TEU
Commercial acronym for “Trailer Equivalent Units,” the enclosed,
stackable metal containers used to transport most goods at sea. Today’s
international standards call for containers that measure 20 feet, 40 feet,
or 45 feet in length, with a uniform width of eight feet, although some
variations do exist in certain countries. The standard height is usually a
maximum of eight feet, six inches, although some “high-cube” containers
can measure as much as nine feet, six inches tall.
TFG
Initials for Somalia’s “Transitional Federal Government.”
UKMTO
Acronym for the “United Kingdom Maritime Trade Organi-
zation” in Dubai, described as “the ﬁrst point of contact” for merchant
ships transiting through the Gulf of Aden or around the Horn of Africa
region. The UKMTO serves as an “interface” between merchant Masters
and the military, maintaining round-the-clock radio communication with
ships at sea so as to relay any distress calls or other emergency informa-
tion directly to MSCHOA and other naval commanders.
ULCC
Acronym for “ultra-large crude carrier,” the biggest class of
supertanker, behemoths of more than 300,000-ton displacements, who
cannot even enter most harbors.
Union of Islamic Courts
See “ICU.”
VLCC
Acronym for “very large crude-carrier,” the second-biggest class
of supertanker, usually in the 100,000–250,000-ton range.
water curtain
The simultaneous discharge of all ﬁre-ﬁghting equip-
ment over the side of a large merchantman, which in the event of
approaching pirates, is intended to surround the ship with heavy streams
of water so as to deter their small boats from coming close enough along-
side to attempt to board.
WFP
Initials of the United Nations’s “World Food Program,” often
spelled in the English fashion as “Programme.”
278
Glossary

Index
Abdullahi, Farah, 60, 85
Absalon, antipiracy efforts and, 134
Achille Lauro hijacking, 24–25, 117–18
African waters, pirate attacks and, 120,
122, 124–26, 128, 129, 131. See also
Nigeria; Somalia
Afweyne. See Hassan Hayir, Mohamed
Abdi (Afweyne)
Aidid, Mohamed Farrah, 56
AK-47 assault riﬂes, 31–33
Alam Aman, attack on, 127
Alliance for the Restoration of Peace
and Counter-Terrorism
(Somalia), 65, 91
Alondra Rainbow, attack on, 128–29
Al-Qaeda, 65, 91, 132. See also War on
terrorism
Al-Shabaab movement, 3
Al Zaabi, Tareq Khalfan A., 221
American President Lines, 14
Anna Sierra, attack on, 45
Anro Australia, attack on, 52
Antipiracy efforts
costs of, 68, 72, 93–94
defensive measures, merchant ships
and, 101–5
differing goals of Western
governments, 64–66
difﬁculties of piracy trials, 68–69
elements for successful, 72–73, 76–79
international commitment and, 4,
94–101
international monitoring agencies
and, 230–33
Islamic Courts Union (Somalia) and,
90–91
lack of alternative income sources
for Somali pirates, 69–71, 114–15
naval forces and, 217–28
Operation Allied Protector, 100,
136, 222
Operation Allied Provider, 96, 222
Operation Atalanta, 97, 112, 142,
187–99, 212, 224–26
Operation Ocean Shield, 100–101,
137, 222–23
Policy for the Repression of Piracy
and Other Criminal Acts of
Violence at Sea (2007), 181–83
regional cooperation and,
228–30
Somali piracy and, 133–38
in the Strait of Malacca, 73–76
underreporting of piracy, 66–68
United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS),
176–80
United States and, 81–82, 91–94,
112–15
U.N. Security Council Resolution
1816 (2008), 183–87
William E. Gortney and, 144
Ariella, attack on, 137
Arms dealers, 32, 94
Asian waters
increased shipping in, 9, 26–27, 39,
40–41
pirate attacks and, 43–46, 50–55,
118–29. See also Strait of Malacca
Aspidoforos, attack on, 128
Atlanta 95, attack on, 121
Automatic Identiﬁcation Systems, 104
279

Barbary pirates, 40
Barre, Mohamed Siad, 56, 119
Bay of Bengal, 119
“Best Management Practices to Deter
Piracy” (International Chamber
of Commerce), 103
Bi’ir, Owkeh, 139
Blackbeard, 8
Boarding, by pirates, 102, 105, 107–8
Boats and ships. See Ships
“Boyah” (pirate). See Kulan, Farah
Hirsi “Boyah”
Brazil, Santa Maria hijacking and, 23–24
Bribery, 29, 51, 62, 86
British Navy, 4, 22, 23
Bush, George W., 64, 75, 180, 210
Business, piracy as, 60–61, 141, 233–37.
See also Pirate organizations
Cambodia, ﬂags of convenience
and, 28
“Cannon-shot rule,” 18
Cargo capacity
container ships and, 12–15
size of ships and, 11–12
supertankers and, 16, 17
Caribbean piracy, 6, 40, 42
Carranza, Pio, 44
Castellano, Francis X., 110
“Catch-and-release” method, 69, 99–
100, 134
Central Command, U.S. Naval Forces
and, 82
Central Gang, Somali pirates and, 233
Chaumont, attack on, 123
Cheung Son, attack on, 45, 122
China, antipiracy efforts and, 74, 101,
118, 122
Chinese triads, 50, 54
Chokepoints, for seizing ships, 40–42
Chronology, of pirate attacks, 117–38
Civil Maritime Analysis Department
(U.S. Navy), 231
Clan groups, Somali piracy and, 235
Clove, attack on, 57
Coast Guard forces, 20, 70, 75, 226–27,
227–28
“Coast guards” (pirate organizations),
145, 152–53, 159, 234–37
Cold War, 118–19
Combined Joint Task Force-Horn of
Africa, 83–84, 92, 130, 217–18
Combined Maritime Forces, 83, 130,
217–18, 220–21
Combined Task Force-150 (coalition
force), 130, 217–18, 220
Combined Task Force-151 (coalition
force), 98, 219, 220
Combined Task Force-152 (coalition
force), 220, 221
Combined Task Force-158 (coalition
force), 220
Commercial Crime Services
(International Maritime
Bureau), 231
Communications
among pirates, 110, 111
defensive measures and, 103,
104, 105
regional coordinating hubs and,
228–30
Conference on the Law of the Sea
(United Nations), 19, 21
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast
of Somalia (United Nations),
98–99, 135, 230, 231–33
Container ships, 12–16, 156–58
Convention on the High Seas (1958),
21–22
Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS), 19, 117, 119–20, 151,
176–80
Convoy routes, patrolled, 95, 102, 103,
134, 135–36
Cooperation, among pirates, 141,
142–43
Corruption, government, 70, 74
Costs
of AK-47 assault riﬂes, 32–33
antipiracy efforts and, 72, 93–94
insurance premiums and, 66, 67, 74
Operation Atalanta and, 190,
196, 198
of piracy trials, 68
pollution prevention efforts and, 76
of shipping, 12, 27, 67, 81
of toxic waste disposal, 71
Crews
decrease in size of, 9, 11–17, 33, 38
murder of, 45, 122
280
Index

nationalities of, 9
pirate crews and, 89
Sirius Star and, 1, 5
taken hostage and, 58, 137, 147
working conditions and, 29–30
Criminal syndicates. See Pirate
organizations
Damas Victory, attack on, 49
Dangerous areas, defensive measures
in, 104–5
Darawiish (paramilitary force), 228
Defensive measures, merchant ships
and, 78, 101–5, 160, 215
Denial of prey, 78, 113
Denmark, Operation Atalanta and,
190, 198
Deterrence. See Defensive measures,
merchant ships and
preconditions leading to
increased piracy
Dhegey, Mohamed Hidig, 140
Distress calls, 105, 109, 110
Djibouti, U.S. military base in,
83–84, 130
Djibouti Agreement, 206–7
Documentation requirements, ﬂags of
convenience and, 28–29
Dolphine 4, attack on, 49
Dong Won, attack on, 131
Durmitor, attack on, 52
East China Sea, 118
“Econ-ships,” 14
Emergency drills, 103
English Channel, 40
Environmental issues
Strait of Malacca and, 76
toxic waste dumping and, 70, 71,
81–82, 99, 140–41, 149
Equipment and supplies, pirates and,
86, 146, 202–3, 236
Escorted Group Transit convoys, 102
Ethnic turmoil, Nigeria and, 47
EUNavFor (Operation Atalanta), 97
European colonialism, 6, 7–8, 56
European governments
costs of antipiracy efforts and, 72
piracy trials and, 68–69, 79
Somalia and, 65–66, 94–95
European Union
antipiracy efforts and, 97, 135, 138,
223–26
Operation Atalanta, 97, 112, 142,
187–99, 212, 224–26
regional coordinating hubs and,
228–29
European Union Naval Force (EU
NavFor), 223–26
Falcon Countess, attack on, 52
Farole, Abdirahman, 136
“Feeder” ships, 15
Fione, attack on, 48
Fire hoses, defensive measures and, 104
Fisher, Matt, 108
Fishing industry
Farah Hirsi “Boyah” Kulan and,
152–53
Somalia and, 56–57, 69, 70–71,
81–82, 90, 235
Strait of Malacca and, 50–51, 54–55
underreporting of piracy and, 66, 67
Fishing permits, Somalia and, 90
Flags of convenience, 9, 27–30, 34, 39
Daniel K. Ludwig and, 155
leading nations, 173
reregistering stolen ships and, 42
supertankers and, 17
France, ransom payments and, 95
“Free Aceh Movement.” See Gerakan
Aceh Merdeka (GAM)
Frischland, attack on, 48
Funding, of pirate organizations, 89
Gaddaﬁ, Muammar al-, 148
Galaxy I and II, theft of, 125–26
Galva˜o, Henrique Carlos Malta, 22,
23–24
Garad, Abdi, 110, 140–43, 161
Geneva Conventions, 64
Gerakan Aceh Merdeka (GAM), 55, 75
“Global War on Terror.” See War on
terrorism
“Golden age” of piracy, 7–8
Golden Nori, attack on, 92–94, 133, 153
Gortney, William E., 4, 98, 101, 143–44
Governments
expansion of territorial waters and,
18–20
Index
281

of Nigeria, 47
of Somalia, 3, 63, 70–71. See also
speciﬁc countries
Grievances, local, 69–71, 78
Group Transit convoys, 102
Gulf of Aden. See Somalia
Hangjung, attack on, 44
Hassan Hayir, Mohamed Abdi
(Afweyne), 60–61, 85–87, 144–48,
153, 158, 234–35
Hayeysi, Dahir Mohamed, 149–50
Helena, attack on, 57
Hersi, Mohamud Muse´, 227, 228
Hijackings
Achille Lauro hijacking, 24–25
ﬂags of convenience and, 28–29
Santa Maria hijacking, 22–24
working conditions for
crewmembers and, 29, 30. See also
Pirate attacks
Hoch, Gottfried, 220
Hong Peng, attack on, 45
Horn of Africa
chokepoints for seizing ships,
41–42
recent pirate attacks and, 43, 55–60.
See also Somalia
Hostages
Maersk Alabama and, 109–10, 166–67
Somali piracy and, 55, 58, 112–13,
125, 126
treatment of, 151–52
Hot pursuit, right of, 179–80
Hotspots. See Locations, common, for
piracy
Humanitarian assistance
antipiracy efforts and, 84, 96, 97
Maersk Alabama and, 106
pirate attacks and, 86, 131, 132
Hussein, Moktar Mohamed, 150–51
Hye Mieko, attack on, 43–44
Ibn Batuta, attack on, 148
Igloo Moss, attack on, 52
Ilkacase, Ahmed, 151–52
Income, from piracy
Abdi Garad and, 141
Ahmed Ilkacase, 151
Dahir Mohamed Hayeysi, 149–50
Farah Hirsi “Boyah” Kulan
and, 154
Mohamed Abdi Hassan Hayir
(Afweyne) and, 146, 148
ransom payments and, 114–15
Somalia and, 62, 86, 204–5, 236
Income sources, Somalia, 69–71
India, 7, 101, 134, 135
Indonesia
antipiracy efforts and, 74–75
ﬁshing industry and, 51
Gerakan Aceh Merdeka (GAM)
and, 55
pirate attacks and, 120
regional cooperation and, 77. See
also Strait of Malacca
Innes, attempted attack on, 122
Insurance premiums, 66, 67, 74, 131
Insurgents and revolutionaries
Achille Lauro hijacking and, 24–25
antipiracy efforts and, 64
“Free Aceh Movement” and, 55
legal status of pirates and, 21,
25–26
Liberia and, 119
Santa Maria hijacking and, 23
weapons and, 32, 33
Intelligence gathering
antipiracy efforts and, 76–77, 113
international monitoring agencies,
230–31
by pirate organizations, 89
Puntland Intelligence Service, 228
United Nations and, 97–98
International commitment
antipiracy efforts and, 77, 94–101,
113, 218–19, 219–26
Operation Atalanta and, 187–99
United Nations and, 185–87, 205–10,
210–15
United States and, 92
war on terrorism and, 82–83
International Expert Group on Piracy
off the Somali Coast, 135
International law
expansion of territorial waters and,
18–20
modern piracy and, 9–10
piracy trials and, 64
sea robbery and, 20
282
Index

trends contributing to piracy and,
21–26, 34, 38–39
United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS),
176–80. See also Trials, of pirates
Internationally Recommended Transit
Corridor, 102, 135–36, 225
International Maritime Bureau
antipiracy efforts and, 112–13, 114
Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia (United
Nations) and, 232
international monitoring agencies,
230–31
Piracy Reporting Center, 233
reregistering stolen ships and, 29
underreporting of piracy and, 66
International Maritime Organization
(IMO), 184, 185, 230, 232
International monitoring agencies,
230–33
International Transport-Workers’
Federation (ITF), 29
Iraq War, 84–85, 106, 130, 144, 217, 218
Islam, piracy and, 3
Islamic Courts Union (Somalia), 63,
136–37
antipiracy efforts and, 65–66, 90–91
Mohamed Abdi Hassan Hayir
(Afweyne) and, 148
Somalia and, 131–32
Yusef Mohamed Siad and, 168
Islamists, Somalia and, 65–66
Italy, Somalia and, 56
Iver Chaser, attack on, 53
Jameh, Farah Abd, 3
Japan, 54, 74, 101
Joint War Committee, Lloyd’s Market
Association, 67, 74, 76, 130–31
Kalashnikov, Mikhail Timofeyevich, 31
Karin S, attack on, 59, 124
Kelly Marie, attack on, 120
Kenduri, attack on, 46
Kenya, piracy trials and, 68, 69, 79, 88,
100, 114, 150–51
Kidd, William, 41–42
Kidnappings, Nigeria and, 49
Kilchem Oceania, attack on, 126
Ki-moon, Ban, 63
King William’s War, 7
Klang Reefer, attack on, 53
Klinghoffer, Leon, 24–25, 118
Krk, attack on, 52–53
Kulan, Farah Hirsi “Boyah,” 152–54
attack on Golden Nori, 93
Mohamed Abdi Hassan Hayir
(Afweyne) and, 85, 86
piracy success rates and, 102
pirate organizations and, 60, 61, 133
Land sanctuaries
Abdi Garad and, 142–43
Mohamed Abdi Hassan Hayir
(Afweyne) and, 85–87, 146
pirate organizations and, 61, 89, 233,
236–37
preconditions leading to increased
piracy, 42
Somalia and, 63, 202
Law enforcement, local
absence of, 122
antipiracy efforts and, 75
Nigeria and, 47, 50
Puntland and, 136
regional cooperation and, 77–78
sea robbery and, 20
Somalia and, 63
Laws. See International law; National
laws
Lawsuits, 114, 167
Legal status, of pirates
Achille Lauro hijacking and, 25
antipiracy efforts and, 4, 99–100, 114
“golden age” of piracy and, 7–8
Operation Atalanta and, 195
Somali pirates and, 88
trials and, 64, 68–69, 78–79, 114
United Nations and, 176, 210,
213, 214
universal jurisdiction and, 21
Leopard Star, attack on, 129
Le Ponant, attack on, 95, 133–34, 154
Liberia, 28, 119
Liberty Sun, attack on, 142
Liliana Dimitrova, attack on, 57
Lloyd’s Market Association. See Joint
War Committee, Lloyd’s Market
Association
Index
283

Local involvement, antipiracy efforts
and, 113. See also Law
enforcement, local
Locations, common, for piracy
2003–2009, 174
Nigeria, 42, 47–50, 175
Somalia and, 41–42, 43, 55–60,
113, 175
South China Sea, 42, 43–46
Strait of Malacca, 40–41, 43, 50–55
Logistical support, pirate
organizations and, 236–37
Longo Barda, attack on, 57
Long Ya Men, 41
Lookouts, defensive measures
and, 104, 105
Louise, attack on, 129
Ludwig, Daniel K., 16–17, 154–56
Lydia 5, attack on, 53
Madagascar, 7
Maersk Alabama, attack on, 105–12
Abdi Garad and, 141–42
Abduwali Abdukhadir Muse´ and,
161–64
“mother ships,” piracy and, 136
piracy trials and, 68
Richard Phillips and, 164–67
Shane Michael Murphy and, 159–60
Somalia and, 105–12
United States Navy and coalition
partners, 218
Maersk Atlantic, attack on, 128
Maersk Lines, 14, 165
Ma Foroe, attack on, 121
Malaysia, 51, 74, 75, 77. See also Strait
of Malacca
Malaysian Maritime Enforcement
Agency (MMEA), 75
Marianna, attack on, 52
Marine Liaison Ofﬁce (MARLO), 229
Marine Master, attack on, 123
“Marine Security Patrol Area,” 95,
134, 144
Maritime Administration (U.S.
Department of Transportation),
232
Maritime Security Centre (Horn
of Africa), 97, 223–24, 229–30
“Marka Group,” 234
Martin, Paul, 29
McLean, Malcolm P., 12–15, 156–58
“Mechano” decking, 12, 157
Merchant ships
attack on Sirius Star and, 1–5
Caribbean piracy and, 6
decline of U.S. merchant ﬂeet, 10–11,
172–73
defensive measures and, 78, 101–5
“golden age” of piracy and, 7–8
legal status of, 21. See also Ships
Merchant Ship Sales Act (1946), 10
Mexico I (ferry), 20
Middlemen, ransom payments
and, 9–10
Military Sea Transportation Service, 13
Ming Bright, attack on, 57
MM22, attack on, 49–50
Modern era, trends in, 8–10, 37–38
availability of military light-
weaponry, 30–33, 39
changes in ship and crew sizes,
11–17, 38, 155, 156
decline of U.S. merchant ﬂeet,
10–11, 38
expansion of territorial waters,
18–20, 38
ﬂags of convenience and, 27–30, 39
increased shipping in Asian waters,
26–27, 39
international law and, 21–26, 38–39
Mohamed, Garad, 86, 158–59
Mohamed Abdi Hassan Hayir
(Afweyne) and, 85
motivations for piracy and, 69
pirate organizations and, 60, 61, 234
Molley Laura, attack on, 52–53
Monsoon season, Somali piracy and, 90
Moreno, Juan, 220
Moscow University, attack on, 225
“Mother ships,” piracy and, 87–88, 89,
92, 105, 136, 202–3
Motivations, for piracy, 69–71, 140–41,
149, 236
MSC-HOA. See Maritime Security
Centre (Horn of Africa)
Muhammad, Ali Mahdi, 56
Murder
of crews, 45–46, 122
of Leon Klinghoffer, 24–25, 118
284
Index

Murphy, Shane Michael, 107, 108, 109,
159–60, 166
Muse´, Abduwali Abdukhadir, 68, 108,
160–64
National Convoys, 102
National Defense Reserve Fleet, 10
National interests
antipiracy efforts and, 64, 77
differing goals of Western
governments and, 64–66
expansion of territorial waters
and, 20
legal status of pirates and, 25–26
Policy for the Repression of Piracy
and Other Criminal Acts of
Violence at Sea (2007), 181
Somaliland and, 226–27
United States and, 81–82
Nationality, 44, 177
National laws, 27–28, 64
“National Volunteer Coast Guard”
(pirate organization), 234
Natris, hijacking of, 28–29
Natural resources, expansion of
territorial waters and, 18, 19,
50–51
Naval forces, 219–21
antipiracy efforts and, 217–19
Asian countries and, 27
costs of deploying, 72
European Union and, 97, 135, 138,
223–26
expansion of territorial waters
and, 20
international law and, 21
modern trends and, 34
Nigeria and, 50
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), 96, 100–101, 134–35, 136,
137, 221–23
Operation Atalanta, 97, 112, 142,
187–99, 212, 224–26
Somalia and, 87–88, 92, 226–28
Strait of Malacca and, 75. See also
United States Navy
Netherlands, piracy trials and, 68
Nigeria, 42, 47–50, 77, 126, 175
Nippon Foundation, 76
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), 96, 100–101, 134–35, 136,
137, 221–23
Northern Gang, Somali pirates
and, 233
Northsea Bellows, attack on, 120
Nourstar, attack on, 58
Nuevo Tierra, 123
Ocean City, attack on, 119
Oil, shipping, 73–74, 155, 156
Oil industry, Nigeria and, 47–50
Operation Allied Protector, 100,
136, 222
Operation Allied Provider, 96, 222
Operation Atalanta, 97, 112, 142,
187–99, 212, 224–26
Operation Enduring Freedom. See
Iraq War
Operation Ocean Shield, 100–101, 137,
222–23
Orionas, attack on, 124
Orion Trader, attack on, 53
Osman, Abdullahi, 3
Overﬁshing, 50–51, 56–57, 62–63, 69,
70–71, 152
Palestinian Liberation Front, 24–25,
117–18
Panama, ﬂags of convenience and,
27–28
“Panama maximum” cargo capacity
ships, 14, 15
Patroclus, attack on, 122
Perry, Mike, 108, 162
Petchompoo, disappearance of, 43
Phantom ships, 45–46, 54
Philippines, 25, 44, 125
Phillips, Richard, 164–67
Abduwali Abdukhadir Muse´
and, 161, 162–63
Maersk Alabama and, 107, 108,
109–10, 111
Piracy Analysis and Warning Weekly
(PAWW) Report (UKMTO), 230
Piracy Reporting Center (International
Maritime Bureau), 233
Pirate attacks
chronology of, 117–38
defensive measures, merchant ships
and, 101–5
Index
285

Maersk Alabama and, 105–12
Nigeria, 47–50
Operation Atalanta and, 224–26
Somalia and, 55–60
South China Sea, 43–46
Strait of Malacca, 50–55, 174
Pirate organizations
Abdi Garad and, 141–42
advanced planning and, 88–90
Afweyne and, 85–87
attack on Sirius Star and, 2–5
Chinese triads, 50, 54
discipline in, 151–52
gathering intelligence and, 76–77
Mohamed Abdi Hassan Hayir
(Afweyne) and, 144–48
piracy as business and, 60–61
Somalia and, 62, 63, 233–37
Strait of Malacca and, 54
structure of, 167
U.N. Assessment of Somali piracy
(2008), 202–3
Pirates
Abdi Garad, 140–43
Abduwali Abdukhadir Muse´,
160–64
Ahmed Ilkacase, 151–52
Bi’ir, Owkeh, 139
Dahir Mohamed Hayeysi, 149–50
Dhegey, Mohamed Hidig, 140
Farah Hirsi “Boyah” Kulan,
152–54
Garad Mohamed, 158–59
Hasan Shukri and, 167
Mohamed Abdi Hassan Hayir
(Afweyne) and, 144–48
Moktar Mohamed Husein, 150–51
poverty and, 54–55
Puntland Coast Guard and, 227
Sirius Star and, 2–5
Yusef Mohamed Siad, 168. See also
Legal status, of pirates
Police jurisdiction. See Law
enforcement, local
Policy for the Repression of Piracy and
Other Criminal Acts of Violence
at Sea (2007), 180–83
Poloﬂat, attack on, 120
Portugal, Santa Maria hijacking and,
22–23
“Post-Panamax” cargo capacity ships,
14, 15
Poverty
income from piracy and, 62
Nigeria and, 47–48
overﬁshing and, 50–51
pirates and, 54–55
Preconditions leading to increased
piracy, 8–10, 37–38
availability of military light-
weaponry, 30–33, 39
changes in ship and crew sizes,
11–17, 38
chokepoints, 40–42
decline of U.S. merchant ﬂeet,
10–11, 38
expansion of territorial waters,
18–20, 38
ﬂags of convenience and, 27–30, 39
increased shipping in Asian waters,
26–27, 39
international law and, 21–26, 38–39
land sanctuaries, 42
U.N. Assessment of Somali piracy
(2008), 199–202
President Harrison, attempted attack
on, 120
President Johnson, attempted attack
on, 52
President Madison, attack on, 53
Privateers, 7
“Product carriers,” 17
Protection, payments for, 70, 89–90,
152–53
Puntland
antipiracy efforts and, 70, 101, 113,
136, 227–28
piracy trials and, 68, 78, 100
Somali piracy and, 236
Puntland Coast Guard, 227–28
Puntland Group, 234
Puntland Intelligence Service, 228
Qabowsade, Bile Mohamoud, 114
Radnor, attack on, 57
Ransom payments
attack on Golden Nori and, 93
attack on Semlow and, 148
attack on Sirius Star and, 3, 4–5
286
Index

France and, 95
income from piracy and, 62, 63, 69,
114–15
middlemen and, 9–10
pirate organizations and, 61,
85–87
Somali piracy and, 57, 112, 133–34,
204–5
underreporting of piracy and, 67
Rates, of pirate attacks
Islamic Courts Union (Somalia)
and, 90
since 2007, 92, 95
Somalia and, 86, 112–13, 114
success rates and, 102
Rathrowan, attack on, 125
Reagan, Ronald, 19–20
Recreational boating, 66
“Re-ﬂagging,” 10. See also Flags
of convenience
Regional cooperation
antipiracy efforts and, 77–78, 101,
113, 228–30
U.N. Security Council Resolution
1846 (2008), 208–9
U.N. Security Council Resolution
1851 (2008), 212, 213
Regional coordinating hubs, 228–30
Registration fees, ﬂags of convenience
and, 27
Reregistering stolen ships, 28–29, 42,
45–46
Rescue attempts
Abdi Garad and, 142
attack on Sirius Star and, 3, 4
Maersk Alabama and, 111–12, 167
Resistance, once boarded, 108–9
Reza, Abu Tasir Mohammed “Zahid,”
108, 162
Right of hot pursuit, 179–80
Right of visit, 178–79
Risk, of pirate attacks, 106–7, 130–31
Rocket-propelled grenades, 33
Roll-on/roll-off (RO/RO), 12
Rozen, attack on, 132, 149
RPG-7s (rocket-propelled grenades), 33
Rules of engagement
Operation Atalanta, 192–93, 198
of western navies, 4
Russia, 101
Saad 1, attack on, 137
Sabrina I, attack on, 127
Safe rooms, 103, 105, 109, 166
“Safety fees.” See Protection,
payments for
Safety standards, ﬂags of convenience
and, 30
Saﬁna Al Bisarat, attack on, 87–88, 150,
158–59, 235
Said, Mohamed, 3
Salazar, Anto´nio de Oliveira, 22, 23
Salwah, attack on, 58
Santa Maria hijacking, 22–24
SB-408, attack on, 57–58
Scirocco (Italian naval ship), 137
Sea Johanna, attack on, 58
Sea-Land Service, Inc., 13, 157
Seaports, Asian, 26
Sea robbery, 20, 47
Seawise Giant (supertanker), 17
Seizure, of pirate vessels, 177–78
Selayang, attack on, 54
Self-defense, merchant ships and,
4, 102–5
Semlow, attack on, 86, 131, 146–48
September 11 terror attacks, 130.
See also War on terrorism
Sharia law, Somali piracy and, 90
Shell Petroleum Company, 49–50
Shipbuilding, 11, 27, 155
Shipping companies
antipiracy efforts and, 76
defensive measures and, 101–5
underreporting of piracy and,
66–67
U.N. Security Council Resolution
1851 (2008), 215
Shipping volumes, 172–73
Ships
appropriate for antipiracy efforts
and, 94
cargo-loading capacity and,
11–12
container ships, 12–16, 156–58
increased size of, 9, 11–17, 33, 38
of pirates, 2, 59, 86, 94, 177
private yachts, 57, 120, 125, 126,
142, 154
seizure of, 177–78
Sirius Star and, 1–2
Index
287

stolen ships, 28–29, 42, 45–46, 123,
125–26
Strait of Malacca and, 73–74
supertankers, 16–17, 154–56
Shoryu Emmy, attack on, 123
Shukri, Hasan, 167
Siad, Yusef “Indho Ade” Mohamed,
136–37, 168, 234
Siam Xanxai, attack on, 46
Sidrela, attack on, 125
Sik Yang, attack on, 46
Singapore, 74, 77
Sirius Star, attack on, 1–5, 9–10
Slutsk, attack on, 52
Somalia
chokepoints for seizing ships
and, 41–42
Coast Guard forces, 226–28
Islamic Courts Union (Somalia)
and, 131–32, 136–37
Islamists and, 65–66
motivations for piracy and, 69–71
piracy trials and, 79
political chaos and, 119
regional cooperation and, 78
United States and, 64–65, 66, 85–91,
85–105
Somaliland, 56, 68, 100, 133
Somaliland Coast Guard, 226–27
“Somali Marines” (pirate
organization), 234–37
Somali piracy, 92–105
attack on Maersk Alabama, 105–12
attack on Sirius Star, 2–5
land sanctuaries and, 42, 202
Operation Atalanta, 187–99
pirate attacks and, 55–60, 131–38
pirate organizations, 233–37
surge of, 85–91, 175
U.N. Assessment of Somali piracy
(2008), 199–205
U.N. Security Council Resolution
1816 (2008), 183–87
U.N. Security Council Resolution
1846 (2008), 205–10
U.N. Security Council Resolution
1851 (2008), 210–15
Somali Salvation Democratic Front,
125, 126
South and Central America, 19, 127
South China Sea
decline in piracy and, 60
gathering intelligence and, 76–77
pirate attacks and, 42, 43–46, 127
Southeast Asia, 118
Southern Gang, Somali pirates
and, 233
Soviet Union, 31–32, 118–19
Spanish colonialism, piracy and, 6, 7
Sri Lanka, 25–26
Standing NATO Maritime Groups,
96, 222
Stella Maris, attack on, 159
Stennius, Edward R., 28
Stolen goods, land sanctuaries
and, 42
Stolen ships, 28–29, 42, 123, 125–26
Strait of Malacca, 26, 27
antipiracy efforts and, 73–76
chokepoints for seizing ships,
40–41
decline in piracy and, 60, 67–68, 174
gathering intelligence and, 77
piracy trials and, 79
pirate attacks and, 43, 50–55, 120,
130–31
Strait of Messina, 40
Stronghand, attack on, 49
Suci, attack on, 45
Suez Canal, 16, 56
Supertankers, 1–5, 16–17, 27, 154–56
Taiwan Strait, 44
Tamil Tigers, 26, 46, 128, 129
Tanit, attack on, 142
Taxation, ransom payments as, 69
Technology, pirates and. See
Equipment and supplies
Territorial waters
ﬁshing and, 50–51
modern era and, 34
Nigeria and, 47
pursuing pirates in, 61, 93–94
Somali piracy and, 133, 135
United Nations and, 176, 186, 209
Territorial waters, expansion of, 9,
18–20, 38
Terrorism
Islamic Courts Union (Somalia)
and, 91
288
Index

Policy for the Repression of Piracy
and Other Criminal Acts of
Violence at Sea (2007), 181
war on terrorism and, 64–65, 75,
82–85, 91, 92, 130
Tew, Thomas, 41, 42
Thor Marie, attack on, 121–22
Toxic waste dumping, 70, 71, 81–82, 99,
140–41, 149
Trade volumes, 26–27
“Trailer Equivalent Units” (TEUs), 13,
14, 157
Transitional Federal Government
(Somalia), 3, 63, 66
antipiracy efforts and, 93
Islamic Courts Union (Somalia) and,
132
United Nations and, 184, 185, 205–6,
211–12, 214
Yusef Mohamed Siad and, 168
Trans-Saharan Counter-Terrorism
Initiative, 84
Trials, of pirates
Abduwali Abdukhadir Muse´ and,
160, 161, 163–64
Achille Lauro hijacking and, 25, 118
antipiracy efforts and, 68–69, 78–79,
99–100, 114
China and, 122
Denmark and, 134
Kenya and, 68, 69, 79, 88, 100, 114,
150–51
Maersk Alabama and, 112
Moktar Mohamed Husein, 150–51
Puntland Coast Guard and, 227
United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), 176
Tsunami (2004), 71
UKMTO. See United Kingdom Maritime
Trade Organization (UKMTO)
Ultra-large crude carriers (ULCCs),
16–17
Underlying conditions, contributing to
piracy, 69–71, 114–15
Underreporting of piracy, 66–68
Unicorn 1, attack on, 128
United Kingdom Maritime Trade
Organization (UKMTO),
228–29, 230
United Nations
antipiracy efforts and, 96, 97–98,
98–99, 134–35, 136
assessment of Somali piracy (2008),
199–205
Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia (United
Nations), 231–33
Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS), 19, 117, 119–20, 151,
176–80
expansion of territorial waters
and, 19
Operation Atalanta and, 188–89,
193–94, 196
U.N. Security Council Resolution
1816 (2008), 183–87
U.N. Security Council Resolution
1846 (2008), 205–10
U.N. Security Council Resolution
1851 (2008), 210–15
United States
Achille Lauro hijacking and, 25
antipiracy efforts and, 81–82, 91–94,
112–15, 130
attack on Maersk Alabama and,
105–12
decline of U.S. merchant ﬂeet, 9,
10–11, 38, 172–73
expansion of territorial waters and,
18, 19
Policy for the Repression of Piracy
and Other Criminal Acts of
Violence at Sea (2007), 180–83
Somalia and, 64–65, 66, 85–91
Strait of Malacca and, 75, 77
war on terrorism and, 82–85
United States Lines, 13–14, 157–58
United States Navy
Achille Lauro hijacking and, 118
antipiracy efforts and, 4, 72,
87–88, 92–94, 95–96, 217–18,
219–21
Central Command, U.S. Naval
Forces and, 82
Civil Maritime Analysis
Department, 231
Combined Task Force-151, 98
Iraq War and, 84–85
Maersk Alabama and, 110–11
Index
289

Marine Liaison Ofﬁce
(MARLO), 229
Santa Maria hijacking and, 22,
23, 24
Somalia and, 65
war on terrorism and, 82
William E. Gortney and, 143–44
Universal jurisdiction, 21
U.S. Marines, 83–84
U.S. Department of Transportation,
Maritime Administration, 232
U.S. Fifth Fleet, 217–18, 219–20
U.S. Maritime Commission, 10
U.S. Naval Forces Central
Command, 219
USS Bainbridge, 110, 111, 163
USS Porter, 93–94, 133
USS Winston S. Churchill, 87–88
Vega, attack on, 49
Vehicle Movement Registration, 103
Vietnam War, 13, 157
Vira Bhum, attack on, 122–23
“Visit, Board, Search, and Seizure”
operation, 94, 133
Visit, right of, 178–79
Wages, for crews, 29
War on terrorism
antipiracy efforts and, 82–85,
92, 130
Islamic Courts Union (Somalia)
and, 91
Somalia and, 64–65
Strait of Malacca and, 75
Weapons
AK-47 assault riﬂes, 31–33
availability of military light-
weaponry, 9, 30–33, 39
merchant ships and, 78
rocket-propelled grenades, 33
of Somali pirates, 59–60, 94
Weather conditions, defensive
measures and, 104
Western governments, complicating
factors in anti-piracy efforts,
64–66
West Indies, piracy and, 6
Win Far 161, attack on, 136, 137, 161
Working conditions, crews and, 29–30
World Food Program, 96, 97, 106, 131,
132, 134–35
World Kinship, attack on, 59
World War II, 10, 16, 155, 172
Wright, Colin, 108, 166
Yachts, private, 57, 120, 125, 126,
142, 154
Yakuza (Japanese crime syndicates), 54
Yemen, territorial waters of, 104
Yu Jia, attack on, 128
Yusef, Abdullahi, 70, 227
290
Index

About the Author
David F. Marley is a naval historian who has lived and traveled
extensively in Latin America and Europe and currently resides in
Canada. His published works include ABC-CLIO’s Pirates of the
Americas, Wars of the Americas, and Historic Cities of the Americas.

