THE
 SHADOW
 SORCERESS
 BOOK FOUR OFTHESPELLSONG CYCLE
  
 L. E. MODESITT, JR.
  
 A TOM DOHERTY ASSOCIATES BOOK
 NEW YORK
  
 For Susan, Kacy, and Ava
  
 NOTE: If you purchased this book without a cover you should be aware that this book is stolen
property. It was reported as “unsold and de-stroyed” to the publisher, and neither the author nor the
publisher has received any payment for the “stripped book.”
  
 This is a work of fiction. All the characters and events portrayed In this book are either products of the
author’s imagination or are used ficti-tiously.
  
 THE SHADOW SORCERESS
 Copyright 2001 by L. E. Modesitt, Jr.
 All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce has book, & portions thereof, in any form.
 Edited by David G. Hartwell
 A Tor Book
 Published by Tom Doherty Associates, LLC.
 175 Fifth Avenue
 New York, NY 10010
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 www.tor.com
 Tor is a registered trademark of Tom Doherty Associates, LLC.
 ISBN: 0-765-34013-5
 Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 2001027048
 First edition: June 2001
 First mass market edition May 2002
 Printed in the United States of America
 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
  
  
  
 CHARACTERS
  
 AnnaFormer Regent of Defalk; Sorceress and Lady of Lojseau (Mencha)
 SeccaLady of Flossbend (Synope) and sorceress; sor-ceress heir to Loiseau.
 RoberoLord of Defalk and Lord of Elheld Falcor, and Synfal (Cheor)
 AlyssaConsort of Robero
 DythyaCounselor of Finance
 JirsitArms-commander of Defa1k
  
 LORDS OF DEFALK: THE THIRTY-THREE:
  
 BirkeLord of Abenfel; consort is Reylana; mother is Fylena
 CataryznaLady of Sudwei; consort is Skent; heir is Skansor
 ChelshayLady of Wendel; consort is Nerylt, son of Clethner
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 ClethnerLord of Nordland; son and heir is Lythner
 DinfanLady of Suhl; consort is Wasle, brother of Birke
 DostalLord of Aroch; consort is Ruetha
 EbraakLord of Nordfels
 FalarWarder of Uslyn, heir to Fussen; also consort to
    Herene, lady of Pamr
 FustarLord of Issl; son and sole heir is Kylar
 GylaronLord of Lerona; consort is Reylan; heir is Gy-lan; father of Reylana
 HereneLady of Pamr; consort is Falar; heir is Kysar
 KinorLord of Westfort [Denguic] and Lord of the Western Marches
 MietchelLord of Morra, brother of Lady Wendella of Stromwer
 SelberLord of Silberfels; heir is Helbar; sister is Bel-vera
 TiersenLord of Dubaria; consort is Lysara: eldest son and heir is Lystar
 UslynLord heir of Fussen; father was Ustal, mother Yelean
 YtrudeLady of Mossbach, sister of Tiersen; consort is Cens
 WendellaLady of Stromwer, heir is Condell Zybar Lord of Arien
  
 SORCERERS AND SORCERESSES:
  
 AnandraSorceress assistant to Clayre
 ClayreSorceress of Defalk
 JolynAssistant Sorceress of Defalk
  
 FOSTERLINGS, APPRENTICES, AND PAGES:
  
 JeagynFosterling/sorceress apprentice at Loiseau
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 KeriselFosrerling/sorceress apprentice at Loiseau
 RichinaApprentice sorceress to Secca; daughter of Dinfan
  
 DEFALKAN ARMSMEN:
  
 ElfensChief Archer, Loiseau
 DryselCaptain, Loiseau
 QuebarCaptain, Loiseau
 RickelLord’s Guard-Captain, Falcor
 WiltenOvercaptain, Loiseau
  
  
 DEFALKAN PLAYERS:
  
 BretnayViolino, Loiseau
 DelvorChief of second players, Loiseau
 DuraltFalk-horn, Ioiseau
 PalianChief Player, Loiseau
 RowalWoodwind Loiseau
 YuarlChief Player, Faicor
  
  
 OTHERS OUTSIDE DEFALK:
  
 AlyaMatriarch of Ranuak; consort is Aetlen
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 AlcarenCousin to the Matriarch
 AshtaarLeader, Council of Wei, Nordwei
 AyselinHolder of Netzla, Neserea
 BelmarHolder of Worlan. Neserea
 CleharLord High Counselor of Dumar; without con-sort
 HadrennLord High Counselor of Ebra; Lord of Synek, Ebra; consort is Belvera; heir is Haddev;   
younger son is Verad.
 HanforLord High Counselor of Neserea; consort is Aerlya; eldest daughter and heiress is  Annayal  
 KestrinLiedfuhr of Mansuur; brother of AerlyaMaitre of SturinnLeader of Sturinn; master of the
          Sea-Priests
 MotollaHolder of Itzel Neserea; heir is Chyalar
 MynntarLord of Dolov, Ebra
 StepanArms-master of Synek
 SvenmarHolder of Nesalia, Neserea
 VeriaSecond Counselor, Freewomen of Elahwa
  
  
  
 1
 Two sorceresses stood beside the scrying pool in the domed outbuilding that lay to the south of the main
keep of Loiseau. The taller woman had fine white-blonde hair, hair that could have belonged to the young
woman of nineteen that her appearance conveyed. Her thin and finely drawn face was without blemish,
without lines, and her piercing blue eyes were clear. Only the fineness of Anna’s features attested to her
true age. Her figure was nearly as slender, and far more girlish than that of the smaller redhead who stood
next to her.
  
 Anna eased into a straight-backed chair behind the small writing table, then looked at the redhead.
"Secca... our good Lord Rebero has requested that you visit him at El-held, preferably within the next
two weeks.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Doubtless he has yet another heir or lord for me to meet, Lady Anna.” Secca's mouth offered a
sardonic smile as she perched on the tiled edge of the scrying pool. Part of her smile was because Anna
had never been able to say “Robero” without a twist to her lips. Then Secca had difficulty herself. When
Secca had been growing up in Falcor under Anna’s tutelege, Robero had been “Jimbob.” Only when
he’d became Lord of Defalk had he decided “Jimbob” was too undignified and changed his name to
Robero. “After all these years, he would still have me con-sorted.”
  
 “You aren’t that old.” Anna added, “He doesn’t under-stand you, but he does care for you.”
  
 ‘That may be, for he understands women not at all. He understands but strength and power, and that is
why he respects you, lady.”
  
 Anna sighed gently. "I wish it were otherwise. Certainly we tried."
  
 Secca nodded sympathetically. While Anna almost never used Lord Jecks’ name. Anna often said “we”
when referring to what the two had accomplished for Defalk in the less than half score of years when
Anna had been re-gent and sole ruler of Defalk. The former regent spoke seldom of Lord Jecks, but
Secca had seen the lamps of Anna‘s rooms still lit late into many nights over the ten years since his death.
While Anna and Jecks had been friends and certainly lovers, consorting had been out of the question.
That Secca had understood ftom the beginning, when Anna had effectively adopted her after the deaths
of Secca’ s parents, for Jecks had been a powerful lord in his own right, and the grandsire of Lord
Robero, during the time when Anna had been Sorceress-Regent for the un-derage Robero.
  
 “Despite his inclinations, Robero has learned much,” Anna continued, “and I am thankful for Alyssa.”
  
 “So am I,” replied Secca.
  
 “You know I never would have consorted you to him.”
  
 “Alyssa made it that much easier.”
  
 The two sorceresses laughed Then Anna cleared her throat.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “You have something else I am to do?” asked Secca.
  
 “Kylar...“ Anna said.
  
 Secca winced. “The one who suffocated his consort and claimed she died of consumption?”Anna
nodded.
  
 “You wish me to go to Issl as well?”
  
 “I think you should go there first.” The older sorceress smiled. “You will be paying my respects to Lord
Fustar. He will be most happy to see your young and smiling face.” The smile vanished. ‘The pool shows
that Kylar does not understand what has happened in Defalk, and that he will abuse any woman he can.
He now seeks yet another consort.” Anna looked at Secca. “You understand how you must deal with
Kylar, and with Lord Fustar? Nothing must happen to Kylar while you are at Issl.”
  
 “I understand, lady. Nothing will occur.” Secca inclined her head. “I could take the players, and we
could stop and add a dek to the road between Mencha and the River Chean on the south end, and then
add another dek or so on our return journey from Elheld.”
  
 Anna shook her head. “You dislike Robero, and yet you would work to finish paving the road he
demands.”
  
 “Why not? He is likely to be lord for many years to came, and it will speed our travel from Loiseau to
EIheld.” She laughed. “At times, I would that there were other ways to build his roads.”
  
 “In Defalk, there are no other ways.” Anna shook her head. “Robero doesn’t have enough men or
engineers—or the golds to pay for them—and he cannot call on the Lords for anything other than their
liedgeld and their levies in battle.”
  
 “So we must build roads and bridges.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “It’s not all drudgery without rewards, Secca,” Anna pointed out. “People know we build roads and
bridges, and it helps associate sorcery with good things. Given how this land has regarded sorceresses in
the past, that’s not all bad.”
  
 “I know.” Secca grinned suddenly. “I could also use sorcery to repair a wall or bridge or something for
Lord Fustar... as a gesture from Loiseau.”
  
 The older sorceress smiled. “That might help.”
  
 “It is hard to see shadows in the light of a favor.”
  
 “Sometimes,” Anna replied. “Sometimes. Other times, light makes the shadows more obvious. This time,
I think you’re right.”
  
 “When should I leave? Tomorrow?”
  
 “If you wish to spend time on the highway and several days being a charming guest at Issl.”
  
 Secca nodded, then tilted her head. “Lady Anna?”
  
 “Yes? You have that serious tone.”
  
 “I would that you would wait until I return before you send your next scroll to your daughter in the Mist
Worlds.”
  
 Anna nodded politely.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “At least I could play for you and lessen the effort.”
  
 “We will see,” replied the Sorceress and Lady of Men-cha. “I’m not ancient yet.”
  
 “Lady...“ Secca tried not to plead, but to convey her concern.
  
 “Secca...” Anna laughed. “Don’t turn me into a dod-dering old lady.”
  
 “No one could do that.” The younger sorceress smiled at Anna’s tone, smiled in spite of her worries, for
she had seen the deepening darkness behind her foster-mother’s eyes, and sensed the ever-increasing
strain that even the lightest of Clearsong spells placed on Anna, for all that Anna looked little different
from what she had more than a score of years earlier when first she had arrived in Defalk from the Mist
Worlds.
  
  
 2
  
 In the midmorning light of early fall, before harvest, a half-score of players stood on the low rise to the
west of the dusty road. The majority held violinos or violas, but there were also two woodwinds and a
falk-horn in the group. Another half-score of players bearing lutars of var-ious sizes stood behind the first
group.
  
 Secca, wearing a pale blue tunic, walked toward Palian, the gray-haired and gray-eyed woman who
held a violino, and who stood before the first group of players. “Chief player?”
  
 “Yes, Lady Secca,” replied Palian. “We have almost fin-ished tuning.”
  
 “Good.” Secca nodded, accepting as always the neces-sary formality of Palian’s address. “We will be
using the second building spell.” That too was a formality, since Secca and Lady Anna had always used
the second building spell for road-building, although it had been years since Anna had done heavy
building sorcery.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca glanced out at the dusty road that stretched north-ward toward the River Chean from Mencha.
Behind her, nearly thirty deks of sorcery-laid stone paving extended back to Mencha. The gap between
where she stood and the paved section stretching south from the river bridge was less than ten deks, and
she hoped that she would be able to complete that section within the next few years, but that depended
on what other tasks Lady Anna and Lord Robero laid upon her. She looked toward the lank-haired
Delvor, catching his eye.
  
 “Second players are ready, lady.”
  
 Secca studied the image on the portable easel, an image with which she was all too familiar, and began
to bring up both the image of the road, and the spellsong itself, into her mind. “The second building spell,
chief player.”
  
 “The secondbuilding spell, on my mark,” declared Pal-ian. “Mark!”
  
 As the notes from the players and their instruments rose into the morning, the flint two bars merely to
stabilize the players, Secca waited, and then began the spell proper with the first note of the third
measure.
  
 "... replicate the earth and stones.
 Place them in their proper zones.
 Set all firm and set all square,
  weld them to their pattern there..."
  
 Even before the notes of the players and Secca‘s voice died away, an intense bluish glow settled over
the dusty track, initially so bright that neither Secca nor the players could have looked at it, had they
wanted to, but all had seen the brightness over the years with each new section of road built.
  
 Secca held herself erect against the faint dizziness that always came with heavy sorcery such as
road-building, then walked to her mount, a gray mare, and took out her water bottle for a long swallow,
before eating several biscuits from her provisions bag. After eating, she turned and looked at the newly
created sec-tion of paved road.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Like the sections created before over the years, the roadway itself was exactly eight yards across, and
raised almost a third of a yard above the surrounding ground. On each side was a stone rain gutter, and
every hundred yards, there was a side drain. The stone roadbed had a slight crown, enough that the
infrequent rains of eastern Defalk would run off into the lower rain gutters. Be-neath were layers of stone
and gavel going almost a yard deep.
  
 “How do you feel, sorceress?” asked Palian.
  
 “Fine.” Secca smiled. “How are the players?”
  
 ‘We can do another spell, perhaps two.”
  
 “We’ll move up to the end of what we’ve finished here and do another section,” Secca said. ‘Then we’ll
ride north and see how we feel when we reach where the paved section coming from the north begins.
I’d like to finish this road before...“ She shrugged, not certain what comparison might even be useful. “I’d
like to see it finished”
  
 “We can add another dek or so on our return from Issl and Elheld, can we not?" asked Palian.
  
 “I would think so,” Secca replied. "I'd like to be able to tell Lady Anna that we can have the entire road
paved within a few more years.” Generally, a road spell was good for about five hundred yards—half a
dek.
  
 “You will.” Palian smiled.
  
 “I hope so.” Secca nodded.
  
 “Players, prepare to mount and ride!” ordered the chief player.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Secca folded the small easel, and turned back toward her own mount.
  
  
 3
 The harvest-time sun was hot and beat down upon the two riders, and upon the column of players and
lanc-ers in the green of Loiseau who followed them along the dusty lane that led between two hills, hills
covered with hardwoods whose leaves had begun to turn yellow, gold, and deep red. Beside Secca rode
Kylar. the stocky and blond heir of Lord Fustar. Kylar, a good ten years older than Secca, wore a
nondescript tan tunic and an indifferent smile.
  
 “Why do you remain an assistant to Lady Anna?" His tone was casual.
  
 “I do owe her my life, and my lands.” Secca did not look at Kylar but at the narrow and winding road
that paralleled the ancient wooden aqueduct leading farther back into the low hills.
  
 “Your lands?”
  
 Secca smiled, although she felt more like drawing her sabre and spitting the condescending heir to Issl. “I
am already Lady of Flossbend.”
  
 “You are that Lady Secca?" He frowned as if he had not made the connection.
  
 “I am that Lady Secca. I have been for many years. Since I was nine.”
  
 “And yet you serve...?"
  
 “I’m also sorceress heir to Loiseau.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Oh... you are an ambitious woman.”
  
 “No. I’m still learning,” Secca pointed out. She saw no need to say that she was ambitious, at least in the
sense that she wished to rule her own lands rather than surrender them to a consort, and that she had no
intention of becom-ing a brood mare for some brainless lord.
  
 “You are well past the age—”
  
 “When most women have long since consorted and pro-duced heirs?” interrupted Secca gently. “That is
true. Some women see that as their calling. Others see arms, or sor-cery.
  
 “Arms? There are few indeed in Defalk.”
  
 “But not in Elahwa or in Ranuak or in Nordwei,” Secca replied. “And there are some lords now in
Defalk who have women as armsmen.
  
 “Because they cannot find men who will serve them, no doubt,” rejoined Kylar. “We have no such
difficulties here.”
  
 “I am most certain you do not.” Secca gestured at the low line of earth and rock visible through the
passlike opening between two low hills. “Is that the dam your sire mentioned?”
  
 “It is.”
  
 Secca rode along the narrow lane, so close to the maples and oaks that she could almost reach out and
touch them, before the lane turned uphill to the east and narrowed even more. Secca found herself riding
single file, with Kylar behind her. As she neared the hilltop, she could see an expanse that had once been
cleared, but now held low bushes, including blackberries that had long since been picked.
  
 Guiding the mare around the browning and thorny berry bushes, Secca made her way to an area that
had been grazed relatively clear, just above a dried mud flat. She reined up and studied the
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

earth-and-rock dam, noting the streaks of dampness on both rock and earth. Then her eyes went to the
wooden planks that comprised the beginning of the crude aqueduct.
  
 “My sire would have you repair the dam and the aq-ueduct to the keep,” said Kylar, reining up beside
her.
  
 “I would have to be here longer than I can be for such,” Secca replied politely. “The dam appears to be
failing. That I can replace, and perhaps the bridgework to the be-ginning of the aqueduct.”
  
 “I had understood that you were among the mare pow-erful of sorceresses..." Another shade of
condescension crept into Kylar’ s voice.
  
 Secca looked evenly at the far taller man. “It would take scores of men more than a season to rip down
and replace that dam. I will do so in less than a glass. I cannot do more, for I must leave within a few
days, at the command of Lord Robero, and I must arrive at Elheld able to do whatever sorcery he may
require.”
  
 Kylar looked from the failing dam to Secca and then back to the packed rock and earth. “I suppose any
small aid you could provide would be helpful.”
  
 “I will certainly endeavor to be helpful.” Secca dis-mounted and handed the gray’s reins to Kylar. “If
you would.”
  
 Kylar took the reins with another condescending smile. Secca turned and walked downhill to where the
players had begun to form up on the slope to the east of the ancient structure, above the blue waters held
in place by the dam. The sound of tuning began to issue from the strings, the falk-horn, and the
woodwinds, and the lutars of the second players.
  
 Palian turned toward Secca. "Lady Secca.”
  
 “I’ve made some word changes to the second building spell, but the melody will be the same,” Secca
told the chief player. “This will take as much as a long section of road. It could take more.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 "We will be ready shortly.” Palian smiled.
  
 “Thank you.” Secca stood beside the chief player and waited, not wanting to go back anywhere near
Kylar for the moment.
  
 Shortly, the sounds of tuning faded, and Palian turned to Secca. “We stand ready.”
  
 “At your mark, then,” Secca said.
  
 ‘The second building spell, at my mark” Palian said, her voice firm “Mark!”
  
 Secca waited for the opening bars, then launched into the spellsong itself.
  
 “... replicate with measured stones.
 Place them in their proper zones...
 Set all firm, and set all square,
 weld them to their pattern there...
  
 … lock each block in solid place
 -o no water goes beyond its proper space..."
  
 Even before the spell was complete, gouts of steam flared upward, white against the blue-green of the
clear sky. Rowal and several other players stutter-stepped backward, while the far older Delvor and
Palian merely exchanged knowing glances.
  
 As her last notes faded into the afternoon, a wave of faintness and dizziness swept over Secca, and she
knew she had pushed harder than she should have, For several moments, she stood facing the narrow
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

gorge, watching as the clean lines of sorcery-dressed and formed stone replaced the irregular rock and
earthen berm that had been the older dam. A graceful arched chute now car-ried water—water that
steamed as it streamed down the hot stone and flowed into the old wooden aqueduct She also observed
that the water level had dropped several feet—doubtless as a result of the stone taken from be-neath the
reservoir by the spellsong.
  
 Secca gave a small smile of success before turning and walking back toward the gray mare, where she
lifted the water bottle from its saddle holder and took a long swallow. Then she reached for the
provisions bag and extracted a biscuit.
  
 “Doesn’t seem all that hard,” offered Kylar from where he had remained mounted, watching the entire
spellsong.
  
 “It’s not,” Secca said politely. “Not after a score of years of training and practice. Just like blade
handling doesn’t look very hard when the person using it is an expert.”
  
 “You just sang.”
  
 Secca took another swallow of water, debating whether to answer.Finally, she looked up again at the
stocky blond heir. “Each one of those stones in that dam weighs between five and ten stone. It takes
work to move them, even with sorcery. The players might be able to do that twice today. They wouldn’t
be able to play another spell for several days.”
  
 “What about you?” A glint glittered in Kylar’s blood-shot eyes.
  
 “I’ve trained longer. I could sing several more spells, even without the players.” Secca smiled politely.
“Enough to kill a few armsmen, but not enough to de-stroy a large force.”
  
 She turned and walked back down to where the players were casing their instruments.
  
 “Will that be all, Lady Secca?" asked Palian.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “It’s more than either Lord Fustar or his heir deserve, but manners require the effort.”
  
 A faint smile crossed Palian’ s lips. “It was always that way, even from the beginning, when Lady Anna
first came to Liedwahr.”
  
 “I recall, young as I was.” Secca could remember most of those days, and she had no desire to relive
them—not at all. “I suppose we should have everyone mount up. We’ll need to ride back to the keep.”
  
 The chief player nodded, then turned. “Prepare to mount.”
  
 Secca walked back to the gray, taking the reins from Kylar. “Thank you.” She offered a pleasant smile,
then mounted.
  
 Once the players appeared ready, Palian lifted a hand. Secca turned her mount. “If you would not mind,
Kylar, we can return to the keep.” She let the stocky man lead the way down the narrow trail, then
forced herself to draw abreast of his mount as they passed through the gap in the hills.
  
 ‘You have many hardwoods here.” Secca gestured toward the red-leafed maples. “Do you have
crafters for the wood?"
  
 “No.” Kylar shook his head. “My sire allows the mas-tercrafters from Falcor to cut a wagonload of the
oldest timber every few years."
  
 “For golds, I imagine.”
  
 “Why else?” The stocky heir laughed.
  
 “What do your tenants grow?"
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Corn, mostly. We have a mill, and there is no other for deks.”
  
 “So you collect more golds from that?”
  
 “Not so many as we might, for my sire lets the ten-ants keep a fourth part for themselves. He is far too
generous, and they know it not.” Kylar frowned as his eyes strayed to the south, beyond the ancient
brownish walls of Issl, still more than a dek away.
  
 "What else feeds your prosperity?”
  
 “Our wool. Few have flocks and fleeces of such qual-ity as do we…”
  
 Secca nodded, listening as Kylar waxed on.
  
 Before long, the road had widened and neared the beginning of the causeway leading to the gates of the
keep. Kylar reined up, and Secca followed his example, as did the players and the company of lancers
from Loiseau that followed the column.
  
 “Sorceress, if you will pardon me...” Kylar offered a diffident half-bow from the saddle. “I needs must
at-tend to another matter before the evening meal.”
  
 “I look forward to seeing you then,” lied Secca with a smile. "I know you will deal with what must be
dealt with great skill.”
  
 “One would hope so.” With a broad smile, Kylar turned his mount and began to ride westward toward
the hamlet that held the cots of many of Fustar’s ten-ants.
  
 Secca continued riding toward the causeway
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Palian edged her mount up beside Secca’s mare. “You do not care for him.”
  
 “Is it obvious to all?”
  
 Palian laughed. “No. I have known you from the time when you would turn red at trying to utter a
falsehood. Few others would see the signs, I would wager.”
  
 “What do you think of the honorable Kylar?”
  
 “Less, if possible, than do you,” replied Palian dryly. “He reminds me too much of lords like Dannel and
your uncle.”
  
 Secca nodded. Both had tried to have her killed as a child. “We need to prepare for dinner. You and
Delvor will be above the salt at table.”
  
 “I hope the food is good,” Palian said.
  
 “It will be better than travel fare, and more honest than the conversation that accompanies it,” Secca
re-plied.
  
 Both women smiled as they neared the open gates of Issl.
  
  
 4
 Secca sat to the left of Lord Fustar, a man ancient, thin-faced and beak-nosed, with thin wispy white
hair. The lord’s green eyes were intent as he turned to the sorceress. “I know I have said this before, but
it is indeed a pleasure to have you in Issl.” There was a twinkle in his eyes as be added. “You have not
said why you offered your skills to rebuild an old lord’s dam or why you present these old eyes such a
feast.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca inclined her head slightly before replying. “Lady Anna would have liked to have been here to offer
her best wishes, but she could not. She also felt it was best that I come to know all the lands in the north
and east. I have never been to Issl before.”
  
 “Ah, yes... the Sorceress-Protector. I have but met her a bare handful of times, and always she looks
the same. She will doubtless see us all go and still preside over the defenses of the east.” Fustar laughed,
but the laugh turned into a wheezing cough. He reached for the goblet and took a small swallow of the
wine. “Dissonant time when wine’s best used to kill a cough.” He shook his head as he set the goblet
down.
  
 “She was granted the appearance of youth after she crossed from the Mist Worlds,” Secca said, “but
not im-mortality.”
  
 “She seems to have such.”
  
 “She says she will die as do we all.”
  
 "That... that will be interesting.” cackled Fustar. His eye flicked toward the figure striding through the
door. “Here comes our wayward heir. Much longer and be would have been eating scraps.”
  
 “I beg your pardon, ser, for coming to table late.” Now wearing a shimmering purple silk tunic, Kylar
approached the table and offered an indifferent bow, then turned his eyes upon Secca. "A pleasure to see
you again. Lady Secca.” was overly hearty, the cheerfulness forced.
  
 Upon closer inspection, Secca could see that his thick hair was as much silver as blonde, and that fine
lines ra-diated from the slightly bloodshot eyes. “You look well in purple, Kylar,” she replied politely.
  
 Kylar settled into the empty scat across from Secca. "I had a matter to attend to, except someone had
already taken care of it.” His eyes flicked lazily toward his father, but did not actually meet the gaze of the
older man.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Ah, yes... the peasant’s woman, wasn’t it?’ asked Fustar mildly.
  
 “She seems to have vanished, along with the peasant. I cannot imagine what happened.” Kylar filled his
goblet from the pitcher on the table, then inclined his head to Secca. “Would you like more, lady?”
  
 “Not for a bit,” Secca demurred. “Until we eat.”
  
 “I cannot understand why a peasant would leave his cot or how anyone could suffer such to happen.”
Kylar looked at neither Secca nor his father, using his knife to spear two slabs of meat from the platter
tendered by the serving woman, then his fingers to seize and break off a large chunk of the rye bread in
the basket to his left.
  
 Secca also took two hefty slabs of the mutton, knowing she needed at least that much food after the
day’s sorcery, and hoping she could force it all down.
  
 “Peasants do leave, you know. That happens when they obtain coins and a chance at something they see
as better.” Fustar sipped from the pewter goblet.
  
 “Or when they fear they have done wrong,” suggested the son. “I had thought, ser, that the peasants
deserved a lesson. They should not have been hunting the pheasants. Those are reserved for us.”
  
 “Kylar, do you think that they like a good fowl any less than do we?”
  
 “But... they are peasants.”
  
 “Yes... they are. They eat; they drink; and they piss just like we do.” Fustar offered a dry and cackling
laugh.
  
 ‘They are little better than trained animals.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 ‘They must be somewhat better.” Fustar smiled politely. “Else you would not be so wroth at one leaving
the lands. Or was it his consort you wished to discipline?”
  
 “That he would have understood.”
  
 “I am certain he understands now. He did not remain here to receive such punishment.”
  
 “How...?” Kylar shakes his head in disgust. “How...”
  
 “It might be better just to let the matter lie, Kylar.” Fustar’s voice was again mild, deceptively so, with
but the slightest accent upon the words “let the matter lie.”
  
 Kylar offered another indifferent nod. “As you wish, ser.” His eyes glittered far but a moment before be
turned to Secca. “How are you finding Issl, lady?’
  
 “Your sire has been most instructive and kind,” Secca replied.
  
 “He has always enjoyed instructing others,” Kylar said, continuing after the slightest of pauses. “Have
you seen the mews?”
  
 “No, I have not”
  
 “The falcons are Kylar’ s pride,” observed Fustar. “Along with his daughters.”
  
 “You have several daughters?” asked Secca.
  
 “Seven,” admitted the stocky heir. “As you doubtless have heard, my dear Tressa did not long survive
the last.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca had heard that, and more, considering that Tressa was his second consort, and that Kylar had
approached several other lords at the Thirty-three for the hands of their daughters. “I was most sorry to
hear that.”
  
 “As were we all,” said Fustar. “But enough of sadness.” He raised his goblet. “To the lady and sorceress
who graces Issl.”
  
 After a moment, Secca raised her goblet. “And to those who have so graciously hosted us all and made
us most welcome.”
  
 Fustar smiled broadly, Kylar politely, before both drank. Secca trusted neither smile, nor her own, but
she drank, if far less than they, before quickly cutting a chunk of the mutton and beginning to eat.
  
 She had finished both slabs, had taken a third, and was halfway through that and her second large chunk
of bread, when Kylar spoke.
  
 “You are not large, lady...” He gestured toward her platter. “Yet...”
  
 “I think I mentioned that sorcery takes much energy.” Secca replied. “You will never see afat sorcerer
or sor-ceress.”
  
 “Would you like another slice?” Kylar smiled slyly.
  
 “Yes, please.” Secca smiled demurely, and quickly ate the fourth large slab of the mutton, which was not
nearly so strong in taste as she had feared.
  
 “She’ll eat you under the table.” Fustar laughed once more, grinning at Kylar. “Never underestimate a
sorceress. Those who do have paid most dearly.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Secca was beginning to understand the old lord. While Fustar certainly believed in the older standards of
mascu-line rule, he was sharp enough to understand that times had changed, and wise enough to alter his
course and ac-tions just enough to avoid having Anna or Robero act against him.
  
 “I defer to your judgment, as I do in all matters such as these.” Kylar refilled his goblet and glanced at
Secca.
  
 “Half please,” she said politely, before turning to Fustar. “Your family has been at Issl long, has it not?”
  
 ‘Aye, lady. We date to the Corians, if not before. The first of the line...he was said to be able to plow
twice what any of his peasants did in a morning. That was why people once asked whether they
measured by an Issl mor-gen or a Corian morgen.”
  
 Secca nodded. Although a morgen had long since been set at a square of land a hundred yards on aside,
it had once meant the area plowed in a morning.
  
 “Why... in the upper tower,” continued Fustar, “there is an inscription still in the original Conan..."
  
 Secca sipped, smiled, and asked a question every time the old lord paused, or added a few words, and
then asked something that demanded a long answer.
  
 In time, Kylar pushed back his chair. “If you would...”
  
 Fustar stifled a yawn. “We all should.” He smiled at Secca. “You have been most charming and
gracious, and you may tell the Lady Anna that either of you are welcome here at my table at any time.”
  
 “I enjoyed greatly hearing about Issl and your family,” replied Secca, not entirely untruthfully.
  
 Followed by Achar, one of the younger lancers from Loiseau who was acting as her guard, Secca made
her way, led by Fustar, to the third level of the keep, and the corner guest room. Once inside, with Achar
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

outside, she stretched, then took a deep breath, and ran through one soft vocalise, then a second, before
taking her lutar from its case and softly checking its tuning.
  
 From her saddlebag, she extracted a single small bottle, opening the stopper and setting the bottle on the
window ledge.
  
 Then she stood in the shadows, just back of the case-ment, behind the open window that faced the
casement— and the windows of Kylar’s chamber—watching.
  
 When she was certain Kylar was in his room, from the play of shadow and light, she lifted the lutar and
began to sing.
  
  
 “Infuse in droplets, slow and strong,
 through this coming week along..."
  
 As the last couplet died away, she swallowed and stepped back, shivering. Methodically, she recased
the lutar, then lifted the bottle and poured the contents down the outside of the stone wall below the
window, so that the liquid left a thin and almost colorless line on the ancient stone. After the bottle was
empty, she restoppered it and replaced it in her saddlebag.
  
 The spell would put a drain on her for several days, but she would be well away from Fustar before
Kylar felt the effects. At least, that was what Lady Anna had said.
  
 The physical drain was the easy part. The knowledge of what she had done would weigh on her—as
Secca knew it weighed on Anna, for all that the older sorceress had done over the years. When Anna
had first intro-duced Secca to the shadow side of sorcery, Secca had asked one question: Why?
  
 “Because it is better that one sorceress bear the bur-den of deciding wrong than for scores or scores of
scores to die for the vanity of justification.” That was what Anna had said to Secca, and what Secca
might well have to say to Richina in years to come.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Kylar had abused peasants, and worse, according to the glass, and he was the sole heir to Issl. It would
be so much easier to let time show Kylar to all Defalk for what he was, to wait until scores more died,
another consort or two, until either all the peasants fled or a revolt occurred. People were always people,
Secca re-flected. Always reacting, always thinking that to act be-fore a disaster was cold-blooded. Yet it
was always perfectly acceptable to react to a large cruelty with bat-tles and war, or even
assassination—after scores or scores of’ scores had died.
  
 For all the arguments, there was still the other ques-tion: Who was she—or Anna—to make such
decisions?
  
 Part of that answer was simple. There was no one else who could decide on the fate of just one man.
Lords were supreme on their own lands—unless the Lord of Defalk or another lord wanted to go to war.
So, acting openly created even more suffering for far more than a lord or heir. Yet... a life was a life.
  
 Secca shook her head. If she and Anna were wrong, and a revolt did not occur, then one man already
proven at least cruel, if not far worse, would have died before his time. If they were right, years of
suffering and scores of deaths were prevented.
  
 Still... all the reasoning didn’t make it much easier. A life was a life. But Kylar’s peasants hadn’t
deserved beatings and abuse; his former consorts hadn’t deserved to be suffocated in their pillows when
they were already ill.
  
 Secca had to keep in mind that Kylar—and the oth-ers—had already demonstrated their cruelty. She
had to keep that well in mind. She had to.
  
 Secca walked to the door of the guest chamber, checking the iron bolt.
  
 She turned back to the high guest bed, laying out her short sabre on the table beside her bed. While she
doubted Kylar would be foolish enough to try to enter her chamber, even if there were a secret entrance,
she wanted to be prepared. For a moment, shealmost hoped he would.
  
 Then she shook her head. Far better to remove him from the shadows. Acting in the open always
created more anger and resentment and led to the need for ever greater force. That had become most
clear over the years she had been at Loiseau... and before.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 5
 Encora, Ranuak
  
 The woman in pale blue stands and walks to the win-dow of her study, gazing out into the darkness, a
dark-ness that bears the faint hint of salt air and the ripeness of harvest time.
  
 Her consort, also sandy-haired, if with less silver-gray in his thick, short thatch of hair, also stands and
turns. He eases up behind her and slips his arms around her waist. “You are worried, are you not?”
  
 She nods.
  
 “Why?"
  
 “Their is a time of great change coming. I can sense it. Much will change, and the Harmonies themselves
will suf-fer dissonance and disharmony.” Her lips form a crooked smile. "And I, as Matriarch, can say
not a word yet, except to you.”
  
 “Do you know where these changes will strike?”
  
 “All Erde will change.”
  
 “But you cannot tell anyone else?”
  
 She laughs. “A Matriarchknows, but how she knows, that cannot be explained, and what she senses
cannot be explained or revealed too soon because the Matriarch is either disbelieved or blamed for being
the cause of the trouble.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “How bad is this trouble?”
  
 “I fear it could be as bad as the Spell-Fire Wars. It could be worse.”
  
 “How soon?”
  
 “Soon.” The Matriarch shrugs. “We will know when it begins.”
  
 The two took silently into the darkness for a time.
  
  
 6
  
 Secca had no more stepped in through the arched door-way of the main hall at Elheld, when she was
greeted by a young woman—one of the fosterling pages from Fal-cor, she thought.
  
 “Lady Secca...? Lord Robero will await you in the private study, a half-glass before dinner is served.”
  
 "Oh... thank you.”
  
 “I am to escort you to your guest chamber.” The rangy blonde page bowed a second time. Secca
wondered if the fosterling were a daughter of Ytrude, but decided against asking as she followed her
guide up the wide polished wooden steps to the second level. The guest chamber was modest, but not
cramped, with a single double-width high bed, an armoire, a working desk and chair, and tables on both
sides of the bed. Adjoining the guest chamber was a bath chamber, clearly added later, and probably
converted from half of another adjoining chamber, from the way the paneling on the inside walls did not
match.
  
 Secca enjoyed the bath, even if she did get a slight head-ache from using her lutar and a spellsong to
reheat the water in the long tub, which swallowed her. She managed to lie back on the bed and doze for
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

almost a glass before rising and donning the single blue gown she had carried with her from Loiseau.
Then she took a deep breath and ventured forth into the ancient and dimly lit hall, making her way back
down toward the private study.
  
 “Lord Robero, Lady Secca,” announced the guard at the door to the study, opening the door almost
immediately, and then closing it behind Secca.
  
 The study was as it always had been, its dark wood paneling warm and welcoming in the illumination
cast by nearly a score of polished bronze lamps, some in wall sconces, others on the desk and side
tables.
  
 Robero stood and offered a boyish grin, an expression somehow at odds with his thickening midsection
and the thinning mahogany hair above his bushy eyebrows. The grin also reminded Secca that, changed
name or not, the Lord of Defalk was in some ways still a “Jimbob.”
  
 “Secca,it is good to see you.”
  
 "It's good to be here,” she replied, bowing, as much to his office as to him.
  
 The Lord of Defalk gestured to the armchair set at an angle to the one in which he had been seated, then
sat down as Secca did. “How was your journey?”
  
 “Long enough,” she replied with a smile. “Mencha is not close to anything.”
  
 "That’s why you will be glad when you finish the road.” He grinned.
  
 ‘We did add another dek or so along the way, but the journey is still long.”
  
 “You visited Lord Fustar, did you not?” asked Robero.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  “You know I did. Lady Anna has suggested that I visit many of the lords of the east and north. She
requested that I convey her greetings and best wishes to Lord Fustar.” Secca smiled and added, “While
we were there, I rebuilt the dam that gathers and supplies the water to his keep. It would have failed
within seasons”
  
 "I am certain he was pleased."
  
 "Notparticularly,” Secca admitted. "He and Kylar wanted me to replace three deks of wooden aqueduct
as well. With stone.”
  
 "Fustar has never been the kind to appreciate generosity. I am surprised that Lady Anna wished to gift
him so.” Robero’s smile turned chill. “I understand that less than a week after your departure, his son and
sole heir sickened and died. Before he could consort again.”
  
 “He did?” asked Secca.
  
 "Hedid, and I have my doubts as to your surprise.”
  
 “Rulers must have doubts,” Secca said quietly. “From what I saw, I would have been less astounded
had he been murdered by someone on his sire’s lands.”
  
 Robero shook his head. “Just because..."
  
 “Because what?” Secca asked politely.
  
 “Lord Fustar cannot live that much longer, can he?’ Robero’s eyes narrowed.
  
 "I would not know. Using sorcery to seek such is Darksong. I do believe Kylar left a number of
daughters,” Secca said. “One of them might well be suited to inherit”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Robero sighed. “Are you going to continue the shadow legacy?”
  
 “The shadow legacy?”
  
 “You know very well what I mean, Secca. I may not see everything, but I see enough. Disloyal lords
break their necks when a bridge collapses or a mount stumbles. Heirs who are arrogant and stupid die
when no one is around.”
  
 Secca laughed gently. “If such have happened, well... they are far better than what once occurred. I
recall vividly armsmen running toward me with blades and screaming for my head,”
  
 “Lady Anna cannot live forever.”
  
 “No. But her mind is most clear.”
  
 “She is not that strong, is she?”
  
 “Do you want to spend your armsmen reining in unruly lords? Or returning to a time when the Lord of
Falcor could count on but a handful of the Thirty-three? Do you really think her death will allow you to
go back to the days of Donjim?”
  
 This time, Robero was the one to laugh. “With three sorceresses and a handful of apprentices trained by
Anna filling Defalk?”
  
 Secca smiled and waited.
  
 “What will you do now?” he finally asked.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Return to Loiseau. I had thought that I would spend a day or so adding to the paved section of the road
between Mencha and the River Chean. Within another year or so, the paving will run all the way from
Loiseau to Elheld.”
  
 “After almost thirty years.”
  
 “You have better roads and bridges than any land in Liedwahr," Secca said lightly. “And the one from
Nordfels to Denguic serves as much for defense as trade.”
  
 “I believe I do... and the cost has been high.”
  
 “I think I’d like you better if you weren’t always feeling sorry for yourself.” Secca kept her tone light.
  
 “I think it would be better for you if you did not accept all that Lady Anna says as truth.”
  
 “It might be better for you, you mean.” Secca shook her head. For Robero, it had always been Anna.
He had never accepted fully the debt be owed her, first for restoring his kingdom, and second, for forcing
him to accept women as equals. Or maybe it had been as simple as his inability to accept that Anna was
stronger and had been a better ruler in the years she had been regent, until she had handed the land back
to him.
  
 “Let us not argue,” he offered, flashing his boyish grin again. “We must do as each of us sees best. You
have always supported what you thought best for Defalk, as has Lady Anna.”
  
 “We have always supported you, if not precisely as you have wished.” Secca smiled. “I will not argue
more... tonight.”
  
 “That is all I can hope for.” The Lord of Defalk chuck-led. “I have taken the liberty of inviting a guest.
He is waiting for us.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “I cannot say that I am surprised.”
  
 “He is someone I wanted you to meet. It has always seemed odd that you have not.”
  
 Secca did not conceal a frown.
  
 “You certainly have heard of Lythner. You have met his sire, Lord Clethner, I believe.” Robero stood.
“And he is my neighbor.”
  
 Secca also rose. “But not your closest.” She offered an impish grin.
  
 “It is but dinner.” He turned and headed toward the study door.
  
 The man who waited for them outside the dining hall was not especially tall, nor was he short, but a good
head and a half taller than Secca and clean-shaven. His dark black hair was cut short. Brilliant blue eyes
dominated a face that somehow was both masculine and square-jawed, yet slightly elfin. With his smile,
the hallway seemed to warm. “Lady Secca, my sire has said much of you.” He bowed deferentially, but
not excessively. “I can now see why he has done so.”
  
 “Lord Clethner has always been honorable and straight-forward. I see that you take after him,” replied
Secca, re-turning the bow.
  
 “Since Lythner lives not that far from Elheld, and since you had never met nor been introduced, I thought
you should.” Rubero smiled, before turning to the slightly taller and younger man. “I appreciate your
delaying your depar-ture for an additional day.”
  
 “For the pleasure and honor of meeting Lady Secca, and dining with her, it is well worth the delay.”
Lythner spoke in a way that the compliment was delivered as a fact, and not flattery.
  
 Secca managed not to flush. “It is indeed a pleasure to meet you.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Robero turned to Lythner. “We should eat before what-ever is fixed becomes too cold.”
  
 There were but the three of them at the end of the long table—and that was the smallest grouping for a
meal Secca had had with Robero in more than a score of years.
  
 She could not help but smile at the half fowl presented on her platter, covered with a pear glaze, and
accompanied with sweet-fried late apples and crisp lace potatoes.
  
 "I thought you might like something like this after Fus-tar’s table,” Robero said. “He has very good
mutton, and more very good mutton, and even more very good mut-ton.”
  
 "I did eat a great deal of mutton,” Secca admitted.
  
 A warm twinkle appeared in Lythner’s eyes.
  
 “It is solid fare for sorcery,” Secca continued, “but this fowl is most welcome.”
  
 “Alyssa did not come with you?” Lythner asked Robero.
  
 “She will be joining me tomorrow,” replied Robero. “She was visiting her sister.”
  
 “In Wendel?”
  
 His mouth full, Robero nodded.
  
 “Lady Chelshay has done wonders with Wendel…”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “No doubt due to the advice of your brother,” suggested Rebero.
  
 The faintest trace of a frown crossed Lythner’s forehead, then vanished. “Nerylt is a dear fellow... and
he does well with arms, far better than I..."
  
 Secca repressed a smile, knowing that Nerylt was a well-meaning bumbler whose principal virtues were
his love of his children, an understanding that his consort was far his better, and his willingness to follow
her directions. Secca was glad to see that Lythner had few illusions about his younger sibling.
  
 “He is a good fellow,” Robero agreed, "and a fair in-structor in arms, I’ve heard.”
  
 “He loves the practice yard, though there is little need of that skill at present in Defalk.”
  
 “It may not always be so.” Robero lifted a goblet and took a sip of the amber wine.
  
 “Oh?" asked Lythner.
  
 "There is some young fellow in Neserea, scion of one of the old families. Rumors are that he’s trying to
suggest he’s the true heir of the Prophet of Music.”
  
 “Rabyn didn’t have heirs,” Secca pointed out. “Not that he didn’t try with every woman he could find.”
She re-sisted smiling as the server slipped another half fowl onto her platter.
  
 “This one traces his lineage back to Behlem’s brother or cousin.” Robero broke off another chunk of
bread. "Lady Jolyn reported that the Sturinnese have sent another fleet to the Ostisles.”
  
 “They have held the isles for a generation.” Lythner paused. “You think they may attack somewhere in
Lied-wahr?"
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Anything is possible, but when the Maitre starts amass-ing fleets, one should watch closely.”
  
 Secca continued to eat, but nodded. Sturinn had been quiet for years, and that had scarcely been the
pattern of the Sea-Priests throughout the history of the sea-warriors.
  
 “We are most fortunate that they cannot land on the coast and harbors we do not have,” Lythner said
with a smile.
  
 “This is a good vintage. I appreciate your sending it to us.” Robero held up his goblet. “How are the
vineyards coming?"
  
 “The root rot is a problem... but we’ve begun to graft the white grapes to wild root stock, and it looks
like...”
  
 Secca continued to eat, to smile, and to ask an occa-sional question, but she had to work even to keep
her eyes open.
  
 “...too much water...as much of a problem as too little... going to try for ice-wine in the higher fields this
fall..."
  
 Secca jerked, realizing she had almost fallen asleep at the table. She could not help but yawn. She
managed to stifle the first, but not the second.
  
 “Am I boring you?" Lythner disarmed the question with his warm smile.
  
 “No. Quite the contrary. I have been trying not to show how tired I am. I rode here from Issl, where I
had used sorcery to repair a water dam. Before that, the players and I were extending the finished
sections of the road between the River Chean and Mencha.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Some day, it may even be completed,” suggested Robero.
  
 “Shortly,” promised Secca, trying to hold back another yawn and keep her eyes open.
  
 Robero shook his head. “Ever were you among the first to bed and the first to rise.” He stood and
glanced at Lyth-ner. "I will see Lady Secca to her chamber, if you do not mind. I appreciate your
courtesy, arid trust you will convey my best to your sire.”
  
 “That I will. That I will.” Lythner stood and bowed, first to Secca, then to Robero, before the two
turned and de-parted.
  
 “He did not see me at my best,” said Secca once they were outside.
  
 “It was an introduction, not a matchmaking,” Robero said dryly. “He might as well know that you do not
chatter into the night. Then—as I learned early—you never did offer idle chatter.”
  
 “I had thought he was consorted, and even has some children.” Secca raised her eyebrows.
  
 “He was consorted. His consort died last summer of a consumptive flux, and even Lady Jolyn was
unable to save her.” Robero’s voice was even.
  
 Secca started up the steps to the second level. “So... you thought...”
  
 “You, Lady Sorceress, would not cross the corridor to meet someone suited to you.” Robero pointed
out. “He may be suited to you or the reverse, but it could not hurt to have you meet. I did not intend
more than that at this point.” He continued walking along the corridor.
  
 "I suppose Jolyn recommended him?”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Hardly. What recommended him to me was that he was not interested in her.” Robero laughed.
  
 So did Secca, if more gently. “You still would like to see me consorted”
  
 Robero shook his head. “Secca. . . we have known each other since we were scarce more than
children. I am not the Lord of Defalk you would want, but I do wish you well. I do not think you are so
happy as you insist you are.”
  
 Secca opened her mouth, then shut it. After a moment, she said, “Thank you.”
  
 “I do admit I thought of Lythner because he already has two sons and a daughter. Were you attracted to
him, you would not...“
  
 Secca nodded. "The choice would truly be mine and free. Thank you for that. After I return to Mencha,
I will consider all you have said.”
  
 ‘That is all I ask” Robero continued walking until they reached the door to the guest chamber, where
Achar still stood guard.
  
 Secca turned. “Thank you.”
  
 “Good dreams, Secca.”
  
 Secca offered a tired smile before she slipped into the guest chamber, holding off yawning until she was
alone. Lythner had a warm smile... and seemed like a good man—but did she really wish to settle for just
a good man?
  
 Abruptly, she stiffened. Why did she want to settle for any man? Anna certainly had not settled for just
any man, and Jecks had had to meet Anna’s terms, not anyone else’s. Why did Robero—or most of the
lords and even the ladies of the Thirty-three—think that a woman wasn’t happy without a man?
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 She shook her head, suddenly awake again, and won-dering if she would soon sleep.
  
  
 7
  
 Still brushing the dust off her riding jacket Secca hurried accross the paving stones of the north courtyard
and up the front steps into the arched front entry hall of Loiseau, cool and dim, and lit but by a single pair
of wall lamps. Her boots echoed in the high-ceilinged hall as she made her way toward the second
archway and the main staircase beyond. The spaciousness of Loiseau always amazed her when she
returned.
  
 “Lady Secca!”
  
 At the sound of the voice, Secca stopped and turned.
  
 The white-haired but energetic and round-faced Flo-renda hastened through the side archway from the
formal dining hall to join the sorceress at the base of the staircase. "I thought that had to be you, riding in
so late,” puffed the household head as she stopped and bowed.
  
 “Is everything all right? How is Lady Anna?"
  
 “She be fine, lady. She ate well, down in the salon with Richina and young Kerisel and Jeagyn. She,
Lady Anna, was... she was telling Lizyrel that she’d better be careful with that young fellow of hers,
because he took after his father.”
  
 “That sounds like her.” Secca took a slow breath, relax-ing slightly. She’d felt tense for the entire day’s
ride, and she’d been worrying the whole time about the extra day she’d taken on the journey back to
add another dek and a half to the road from Mencha to the Chean. Yet, if she didn’t squeeze it in, she’d
never finish it, because it wasn’t something that she wanted to ride two days in order to put in a day’s
work and then ride two back. Nor did Secca wish to spend a week or so camping on the road to finish
it, especially when neither Annanor Robero liked the idea of the players being out of touch that long for
roadwork, even though Robero also complained about the length of time it had taken to build the road
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

system.
  
 “She was fussing about something, but didn’t say what. She’s been doing that for years, and she will be
after I’m long gone. You know the way she does.”
  
 Secca did. "I’ll go on up and see how she is. Is every-thing else all right?”
  
 "Nothing that Halde‘n me couldn’t handle."
  
 The sorceress smiled. There was very little the two couldn’t handle between them. Still, she hurried up
the wide stone stairs to the second level, her boots echoing on the stone steps and the stone floor of the
upper corridor leading back to the main suite that was Anna’s.
  
 After a hurried knock, Secca bowed as she entered Anna’s quarters. “Lady...“
  
 Anna sat behind the small desk in the alcove in her quarters, appearing, as always, young and beautiful,
blonde hair in perfect position, blue eyes firm and focused, and wearing her trademark green vest over a
white silk tunic -shirt. “You seem to be no worse for the wear, or from the ride, Secca.” Anna smiled
good-humoredly.
  
 ‘1 did take an extra day on the way back to add to the road."
  
 “You shouldn’t have much left before it’s done.”
  
 “Six deks or so, I would judge.” Secca perched on the chest at the foot of the bed.
  
 “Robero sent me a message.” Anna’s smile turned sar-donic. “About the unfortunate illness afflicting
Kylar."
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “He did not become ill until I was gone several days from Issl. Robero informed me when I reached
Elheld,”
  
 “Heavens.. . I’m not unhappy with you, Secca.” Anna shook her head. “Robero still doesn’t have a
grain of sense in that balding skull. Anyone could have read that scroll and figured out what he meant.
What good would writing something like that do? Alyssa’s not around for a week, and he’s already in
trouble. Robero has known for years, as well as we have, that Issl would have been a mess, worse than
the revolt in Pamr, within seasons if Kylar had inherited the holding. But Robero still had to warn me, as if
he didn’t need the protection we provide.” The Sorceress-Protector snorted.
  
 “You used the pool to find that out?”
  
 “A little scrying won’t hurt me. I’m not trying to see Elizabetta” The touch of a frown remained on the
unlined forehead as she continued, “I'd like you to try to call up her image tomorrow. . .when you’re
rested.”
  
 “I can do that.” Secca managed to keep her voice level. Anna had never asked Secca to use the glass to
bring up an image of the older sorceress’s daughter.“Are you all right?”
  
 “I’m fine. You’re the one who’s always telling me to be careful.” Anna paused, if but briefly, before
asking, “How is our Lord of Defalk?" Her tone verged on the sarcastic, as it often did when she
mentioned Robero.
  
 “He was most cheerful. He set up a dinner for just three of us—me, him, and Lythner. Lythner’s—”
  
 “Lord Clethner’s eldest. I know. Robero wrote about that, too. The smartest thing Clethner ever did
was to con-sort Nerylt with Chelshay. Robero’s trying to do the same for Lythner.”
  
 ‘Lythner seems quite nice.”
  
 Anna laughed. “I’ve always hated that word. Nice. It’s like cute. Baby ducks are cute. Simpering idiots
are nice.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca couldn’t help but laugh at Anna’s phrases.
  
 “Robero was sort of cute as a boy.” Anna went on. “He never grew out of it, not all the way.” mused
Anna. “You’re going to have to watch out for him.”
  
 “Me? You’ll be around—”
  
 “For a few years, I hope, but not forever. Clayre’s a good woman, but she’s an old-style sorceress, and
Jo-lyn. . .“ Anna shrugged. “We know about her.”
  
 “What are you worried about?” Secca shifted her weight on the foot chest. She was sore from all the
riding.
  
 "I didn’t sleep that well last night. I had this dream that the Harmonies were shifting. They weren’t the
Harmonies, exactly, either. I’m not sure it was a dream.” The ageless blue eyes focused on Secca. “You
have to learn to trust how you feel.”
  
 “I know. You’ve told me that…”
  
 “Something’s going to happen, and you’ll be the one who’ll have to deal with it. I can give you advice.”
  
 Again, Secca wanted to frown. Anna had never talked that way about Secca being the one to deal with
problems, especially major ones. That had been true even when Anna had sent Secca out to sing shadow
sorcery or do the mining spells to get the iron and gold that sustained Loiseau. Anna had just told Secca
what to do, as if each occasion had been an exception or a learning experience.
  
 “Do you know what it is?” asked Secca.
  
 The older sorceress shook her head. ‘With the Harmo-nies, you don’t.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 "Robero?"
  
 “No. It could be the Maitre of Sturinn. Jolyn sent a message about his sending more fleets to the
Ostisles. Or it could be something in Ebra. Hadrenn’s always been a weak reed. Or Dumar. Dumar’s
always bothered me, ever since Alvar died anyway.”
  
 “Have you beard from Hanfor recently?"
  
 "His younger daughter’s happy with young Eryhal, but he still doesn’t have a consort for Annayal, and
she’s the heir. He should have consorted Annayal to Eryhal, not Aerfor.” Anna paused, adding soberly,
“It’s hard to find a good match, If Robero’s boy Robal were even five years older... but he’s not. Maybe
Verad, that younger son of Hadrenn."
  
 Secca waited, then asked, “Is there anything you need from me tonight?”
  
 Anna smiled, warmly. “Not a thing. I’m glad you’re back safely. I do still worry, even at your age.”
  
 “At more than a score and a half?"
  
 “You never get over it, Secca.” Anna rose and stepped from behind the desk. “Go on. You’re tired. I
can see it in your eyes. They’re almost pink. I won’t be up that much longer myself.”
  
 Secca eased herself up from the chest then stepped for-ward and hugged Anna. Then, with a smile,
Secca turned and slipped from the room, somehow both relieved to see Annain such good spirits, and
slightly troubled by what the older sorceress had said.
  
 Trouble with the Harmonies?
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
  
  
 8
  
 Secca reined up the chestnut outside the domed sorcery building to the south of the main keep of
Loiseau. Vy-ren—the head ostler—had insisted Secca take the chestnut and give the gray mare she
preferred a rest, even if the ride down to the outbuilding was little more than half a dek. As she
dismounted, Secca glanced at the saddled raider mount tied outside the domed sorcery building, then at
the pair of guards who had straightened at her arrival.
  
 “Lady Anna must have been up early,” she said. Usually Anna was anything but someone who rose
early.
  
 “She said she couldn't sleep, Lady Secca, and might as well do something useful," said Mureyn, the
older of the two guards in the green of Loiseau.
  
 That did sound just like Anna, reflected Secca with a brief smile, “Richina should be here shortly, and
the players later.”
  
 “Yes, lady.”
  
 Secca slipped into the building, closing the door behind her and walking down the corridor toward the
room that held the scrying pool—and the area where she and Anna usually worked. The building was
silent except for the muted echo of Secca's boots. Secca paused. Never had it been so still, or so is
seemed.
  
 She opened the door to the scrying room, and the pool.
  
 “Anna!”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 The blonde and slender form of the older sorceress lay slumped accross the working desk. A quill lay on
the stone floor beside the desk. Secca ran the few steps to the desk and bent, touching Anna’s
forehead—still warm. Anna was breathing, but so lightly that Secca had trouble dis-cerning that.
  
 She eased Anna out of the chair and laid her gently on her back on the floor.
  
 Anna’s eyes opened. “No...Darksong...once... enough.” Then her eyes flicked shut.
  
 Secca knelt and listened, but Anna continued to breathe lightly. The younger sorceress straightened and
ran back to the door, and thenalong the corridor and out to the front of the building, bursting out into the
early morning light of the fall day.
  
 “Get the carriage!” Secca snapped. “Lady Anna is most ill! Get Richina to help me!”
  
 “Yes, lady!” Mureyn untied his mount and swung up into the saddle, urging the bay gelding back toward
the keep.
  
 Secca turned to the other guard—the young-faced one. Albar, she thought. “Let me know when the
carriage comes. I’ll be with her by the scrying pond. Send Richina to me as soon as she gets here.”
  
 Even before Albar could respond, Secca had turned and rushed back to be with Anna.
  
 The Sorceress-Protector was yet breathing when Secca returned, perhaps more strongly. As Secca
bent over Anna again, she listened to her mentor’s heartbeat, but could hear nothing irregular, although
the beating seemed faint. Nor could she find any sign of any wound, or bruise, or any injury.
  
 “Lady Secca?” Albar stood in the door. “The carriage is here, and I can see Richina riding down from
the keep.”
  
 Without even a thought, Secca bent and lifted Anna into her arms—the older sorceress’s form was so
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

light—and carried her down the corridor.
  
 Mureyn stepped forward as she neared the outer door and helped Secca through the door, and then to
ease Anna into the waiting carriage--the blue-lacquered carriage cre-ated more than a generation earlier
by Lord Brill, seldom used, and still in close-to-pristine condition.
  
 “We didn’t know, lady... we didn’t know.” Mureyn’s eyes were bright.
  
 “You couldn’t have known.” Secca managed to choke out the words.
  
 Richina reined up beside the carriage. The apprentice’s sandy-blonde hair was disheveled, her eyes
wide. “Lady Secca!”
  
 “She’s most ill. Ride back to the house. Have her bed ready. We’ll need some help getting her up
there.”
  
 “Yes, lady.” Richina turned her mount.
  
 Secca slid into the carriage, and Mureyn closed the door behind her.
  
 As the carnage began to move, Secca’s eyes burned, and her nose itched from the faintly musty smell of
the old velvet upholstery. She bent over Anna again, but the sorceress was still breathing, lightly but
regularly.
  
 Secca could not help but wonder what had happened. There had been no sign of sorcery. Anna’s lutar
had been nowhere in sight, and the strong room with the notebooks had still been sealed. Anna wouldn’t
have tried even mild scrying without a lutar.
  
 Secca glanced at Anna again, through the burning of unshed tears, willing the carriage to move more
quickly, hoping that Anna had merely fainted, and that rest was all she needed.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 But, thinking about all that Anna had said the night be-fore, Secca’s eyes burned as the carriage rolled
up the paved road toward the main buildings of the hold.
  
  
 9
  
 Although it wasafter harvest and the sun hung just over the western walls of Loiseau, ready to set, the
Sorceress-Protector’s room was warm, not just from the sun, but from the heated air coming through the
louvers underneath the windows.
  
 The breathing of the young-appearing sorceress on the high bed was shallow, becoming intermittent at
times be-fore returning to an irregular pattern. Anna had scarcely moved since she had been laid in the
bed by Secca, and her hair remained fine, blonde, almost like spun gold, and still almost perfectly in
place. Her eyes were closed, but had they been open, their piercing blue would have dom-inated the
chamber. Her face was thin and drawn, and her figure was so slender, almost tiny, that it looked more
like that of a young girl before maturity than that of a sorceress who had dominated Defalk for more than
a score of years.
  
 Secca sat in a blue-lacquered and delicate-appearing chair at the side of the bed. She held the dying
woman's hand in her own, swallowing as the older sorceress’s breathing lapsed into silence for a moment
before resum-ing once more.
  
 “So.. .tired... promise. me... no Darksong... no spells,” Anna had whispered less than a half a glass
before. “DefaIk... everyone... they need you... more than me.”
  
 Nodding agreement had been hard for Secca, but she had, and now she waited, her guts tied into knots,
her eyes burning, wondering why she had offered that promise.
  
  "...won’t be long.. .“ The smile on the drawn face of the sorceress had been more a rictus than a true
expression. “Elizabetta...got...my last letter...told her...be the last... didn’t tell you...tried to.. .last night..."
  
 Every time Anna had sent a missive across the void to the Mist Worlds, it shortened her life. That had
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

been the one thing about which Secca and Anna had always dis-agreed, but Anna had been adamant,
her only concessions having been limiting the frequency of such spell-transmissions and letting Secca sing
the spells to retrieve Elizabetta’s missives.
  
 The effort of merely retrieving those missives had pros-trated Secca, leaving her exhausted for one to
two days, even despite her comparative youth, and the effect re-minded her how short she fell of the
sheer power that Anna had been able to bring to her sorcery. Yet Anna had in-sisted that using
Clearsong to cross the Mist Worlds was easier for her than for those born in Liedwahr, and that the
trio—Secca, Clayre, and Jolyn—were as powerful as Anna had been.
  
 At the slightest whisper of a knock on the door, Secca turned in the chair.
  
 Richina slipped just inside the door. The sandy-haired young woman, although but a few years more
than a girl, stood nearly a head taller than Secca. Richina’s face was blotchy, and her green eyes were
reddened.
  
 Touching her finger to her lips, Secca nodded for Richina to join her, waiting until the apprentice
sorceress stood next to the chair.
  
 Richina bent and whispered. “There’s so little left. I can sense it. Can I do anything... please?”
  
 Secca shook her head, murmuring back. ‘She’s forbid-den it, and it won’t change anything. I don’t even
think Darksong would work.”
  
 “It’s unfair,” replied Richina in a whisper.
  
 “Life is unfair, child,” said the dying woman, her voice momentarily strong, her eyes opening for a
moment and fixing on the pair beside her bed, before they slowly closed. “Don’t...ask...for fairness...
create it.”
  
 “Her mind is all there,” murmured the apprentice, “but the Harmonies are leaving."
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Secca nodded. “You can stay.”
  
 Her eyes burning, Secca looked at the dying sorceress again, squeezing Anna’s hand ever so gently,
trying to let Anna know that she was there. Sometimes the slim and smooth fingers offered the faintest
pressure back, but most of the time Anna’s hand was limp, cool, but not cold. Not yet.
  
 Sceca swallowed again, blinking back tears, sensing, knowing that there was nothing she could do—not
that Anna would have accepted.
  
 So light was Anna’s breathing that Secca hadn’t been certain she would know when the pale blonde
woman on the high bed stopped breathing.
  
 She needn’t have worried... because a long and low chord, perfect in harmony, filled the room, if but for
a timeless instant. Even the sorcery-warmed air flowing from the window louvers halted for a moment.
  
 Secca stood, bent forward, and offered a last kiss. She found she wasn’t crying. Perhaps the time for
tears had been earlier, after she had found Anna collapsed be-side the reflecting pool in the domed
building that had been the elder sorceress’s working space. Secca had brought Anna back to her
chamber, fearing the worst, as it had happened.
  
 There would be more tears later. That she also knew. Richina was standing at the foot of the bed,
sobbing silently.
  
 Behind the sorceress and the apprentice, the door opened quietly.
  
 The red-haired sorceress turned. So did Richina. Two figures stood in the doorway—the graying
saal-meister Halde and the white-haired household head Flo-renda.
  
 “We heard... like a single note of farewell.” Florenda’s voice broke on the last word.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Halde nodded. He swallowed wordlessly. Secca returned the nod. Richina also swallowed, blotting her
eyes.
  
 The four stood in silence, a long silence following a single harmonic chord that had announced a great
loss to Erde, a loss so great that even those who had never heardthe chords of Harmony had done so.
  
 10
 Wei, Norwei
  
 The dark-haired seer enters the study and bows to the Council Leader. “Leader Ashtaar..."
  
 “I know. I heard the Harmonies chime.” Ashtaar brushes back a lock of fine silver hair. Her eyes are
now as dark as once her hair was, and black circles ring those eyes, eyes set in a finely wrinkled skin, but
her voice is clear and hard.
  
 “The sorceress just breathed her last,” announces the seer, her face contorted in confusion, “moments
ago."
  
 “You think the Harmonies would not mark her passing, Escadra?” Ashtaar blinks, as if something has
irritated her eyes, and she blots them with a dark green clot.
  
 Escadra lowers her head, her pale gray eyes on the green and maroon carpet that covers the polished
stones of the study floor. “I am sorry to have bothered you, Leader Ash-taar.
  
 “I asked you to let me know, and you have.” Ashtaar gestures to one of the polished wooden armchairs
across the ebony desk from her. “Sit down.”
  
 The slightest frown creases Escadra’ s forehead, then vanishes as the chunky seer seats herself.
  
 “You are what. a score less a year?” asks the older woman.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Yes, your Mightiness.”
  
 “All your life you have heard of the Sorceress of Defalk, that forbidding presence from the Mist Worlds.
Is that not so?”
  
 Escadra nods.
  
 “How she buried hundreds of scores of armsmen under lakes, entombed the Evult of Ebra with molten
rock, killed every last man in a town that revolted? Or how she pulled down an entire city upon its
innocent inhabitants to destroy the Lord of Dumar?”
  
 “Yes, leader.”
  
 Ashtaar brushes away the honorific.
  
 "Do you remember the story of Gretslen?”
  
 A quizzical expression fleets across Escadra’s eyes, quickly, but not quickly enough to escape the
scrutiny of the older woman.
  
 “You wonder why I ask that now?’ Ashtaar’s laugh is light, with a sense of brittleness. “Because it is
appropriate. Gretslen never understood why things changed, or what power is. She thought power could
be separated from its use. The great sorceress is dead, but those who would use power as she did are
not. Yet too many m Liedwahr will believe that matters will return to what they were now that she is
dead. We in Wei must not entertain that alluring temptation.”
  
 Ashtaar’s eyebrows lift. “What does that have to do with the horrible stories about the sorceress? It is
simple, if one thinks. What the sorceress did was to use power for ends she thought worthwhile. She has
taught others both how to use power as she did, and, equally important, the ends she favored, and the
reasons for those ends. There will be struggles, even here in Wei, because many will not believe the
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

changes she wrought are enduring.” An ironic smile crosses her lips. ‘Those who question those changes
will fail, but they will make us all suffer, and for that reason alone, I would mourn her passing.”
  
 Escadra’s month opens, then closes.
  
 “You wonder why I question the legends, or why I am disturbed at the passing of one seen as the eternal
enemy of Wei?" Ashtaar laughs. "Dear child, for more than a score of years. we have prospered from
trade with Defalk, Neserea, and Ebra—and even farther across the oceans. We have built our ships and
our fleets, and we have man-aged to secure safety for our traders against the Sea-Priests and their fleets.
We could do this because our borders to the south were guarded bythe sorceress. Never have we been
safer.” She laughs. “The Lady of the Shadows and her followers even grudgingly admit that, much as they
fear and dislike sorcery.”
  
 “It was to the sorceress’s interestas well,” ventures the young seer.
  
 “Indeed it was. But people are not merely interests. Did you know she had children? And was forcibly
separated from them by the sorcery that hurled her into our world? Or that once, for nearly a half-score
of years, she effec-tively ruled all of eastern Liedwahr? And then stepped aside? Did you know that
before her, not a single one of the Thirty-three of Defalk had ever been a woman?’ Ashtaar coughs,
covering her mouth with the dark green cloth. After a moment, she sets the cloth beside the
time-and-finger-polished black agate oval on the desk. “Leaders are people, Escadra. Their pasts
influence their present----and ours. Never forget that.”
  
 Escadra nods.
  
 Ashtaar’s dark eyes burn into the seer. “Use your pool to scry Defalk in the days ahead. See what you
can of how the people feel about her death. See how the younger sor-ceresses of Defalk feel, if you can.
See how Liedfuhr Kes-trin feels, and the young Matriarch of Ranuak. And if you can, the Ladies of the
Shadows in Ranuak. Then we will talk again.” After a moment of silence, the Council Leader of Wei
adds, “You may go.”
  
 Once the door closes, Asbtaar looks toward the window, and the late twilight beyond.
  
 11
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 In the midafternoon light, Secca glanced around the entry hall of Loiseau, looking at the pale blue stone
of the walls, then up, to the brass chandelier, its candles dark, and then to the trapezoidal cupola that
topped the foyer. Slowly, she let her eyes follow the blue-tinted stone blocks of the walls downward until
her eyes rested on the polished black and white interlocking stone triangles of the floor, the regularity of
the triangles emphasized by the inlaid strips of curilcued brass.
  
 In the center of the soaring hall, directly under the Cu-pola, was a rectangle of wooden planks—two
yards deep and three wide. On three sides of the rectangle were stacks of copper and tin ingots, almost
half a yard high.
  
 The red-haired sorceress stepped back to the easel and studied the drawings there, noting the simple
lines, but also the inner support struts. Even if Anna were not being pa-raded in state through Falcor, as
the greatest sorceress ever in the history of Defalk, she deserved some measure of grandeur in the
ceremony that would mark her farewell to Loiseau and the people of Mencha. For a moment Secca’s
eyes burned. She blotted them with the back of her sleeve, took a slow breath, and then studied her
drawing again. After a moment, she closed her eyes and attempted to vi-sualize just how the funeral
catafalque would look.
  
 At the squeak of ill-lubricated wheels, Secca glanced up to see the two lancers wheeling in the handcart
laden with another load—the last one—of copper ingots from the storeroom. Secca watched as Richina
followed the example Secca had set earlier and motioned to the rectangle of wooden planks set directly
under the center of the entry hall. “Put them on the planks, evenly spaced, like the oth-ers."
  
 The lancers began to stack the ingots on the section of planking that had none.
  
 Secca nodded to herself and went back to studying the schematic drawing, another innovation of
Anna’s. From what Secca had read and studied in the old books Anna had inherited from Lord Brill, the
only images used to aid in sorcery had been simple line drawings. Soon after she had become regent,
Anna had started using multiple draw-ings, some even of internal supports unseen when a device or
structure was finally fabricated through Clearsong. But the more detailed schematics had come after Lord
Jecks’ death, and after Anna had turned Defalk over to Lord Robero and returned to Mencha.
  
 “Lady Secca?" Richina stood, respectfully, a yard back from the easel and the drawings it held. “Will
you need more of the copper?”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Secca studied the ingots stacked neatly on the plank rec-tangle, then the two lancers standing by the
empty cart. “No, thank you, Richina. What we have should be enough.” She smiled. “How are you
coming on your spell to return the catafaique to ingots once...“ The words trailed off.
  
 "Ah...it’s hard.”
  
 “You haven’t started?” Secca raised her eyebrows.
  
 Richina dropped her eyes. “It’s hard to think... she’s gone.”
  
 “You don’t think I don’t care?” asked Secca gently. “She was my mother from the time I was eight.”
  
 “Oh, no, lady. Never. It’s just . . .” Richina looked down, but not before Secca could see the tears
welling up.
  
 Secca reached out and touched her hand. “I know. We still... she would want us to go on ... and she
deserves our best.”
  
 Richina lifted her eyes. “I will start once I am through here.” This time Richina paused, as if she had more
to say. “There is one thing.”
  
 Secca smiled. There was always “one thing” more with students and apprentices.
  
 “Kerisel and Jeagyn would like to watch you do the spell,” Richina ventured.
  
 “They may, if they stand well back, and behind me. You may get them.” Secca grinned momentarily.
“Thatis, if they're not already hiding just inside the dining hall.”
  
 Richina flushed. “They had hoped..."
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca shook her head ruefully.“Just tell them.” Her eyes flicked to the lancers and the empty cart. “You
had better dismiss the lancers. They’re still waiting to know about whether you need them.”
  
 Richina’s hand went to her mouth. “I’m sorry.” She turned and walked quickly to the two men. “Lady
Secca says that you may go and put the cart away. She has the copper she needs.”
  
 The shorter of the two rankers inclined his head mo-mentarily. Both turned. The taller man took the
handcart and turned it, wheeling it out the front entry doors before him. Without the ingots on it, the cart
did not squeak.
  
 Richina headed back past Secca, bowing her head as she hurried past, in the direction of the formal
grand dining hall—seldom used in recent years.
  
 Secca pulled on the gloves with the copper-tipped fingers, then picked up the grand lutar and began to
check the tuning. Even before she had finished, she heard careful footsteps on the polished stone behind
her. Looking over her shoulder, she took in the three figures, putting a finger to her lips before returning
her full attention to the task before her.
  
 Her eyes went to the drawing of the catafalque on which Anna’s coffin would rest. She began to play,
the spell mel-ody first, one time through, without words, to smooth the way for the full spell. Then came
melody and spell, well-ing out into the stillness of the entry hall.
  
 “Build of bronze, with this song
 shining true, hard and strong..."
  
 The air above the planks was filled with a glowing haze that flashed a near-brilliant blue before subsiding
into a blue-gold fog that surrounded the planks and in-gots. With a second flash, of golden white and a
single harmonic chord that was, as always, heard only by the sorceresses and the apprentices and
students, and the more gifted players, the fog lifted to reveal a rectangular structure not quite a yard high,
but three yards wide and two deep. Each surface of the catafalque glistened as if it were lit from within.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Oh...” The involuntary murmur came firm one of the students. The slender Kerisel, Secca thought as
she slowly lowered the grand lutar.
  
 “It’s beautiful,” Richina said quietly, stepping for-ward and bowing her head. “It’s almost too
beautiful—”
  
 “It’s for her only,” Secca replied firmly. “Just once, just hers.”
  
 Richina nodded slowly.
  
 As she stripped off the insulating gloves and slipped them into the pouch on the right side of her belt,
beside the dagger and opposite the short sabre on the left side, Secca hoped the sandy-haired apprentice
truly under-stood why Anna deserved the best Secca—or any of them—could provide her.
  
 12
  
 Later...after Secca had completed what else needed to be done, sent short scrolls to Clayre for Lord
Robero, and helped Florenda and Halde with what only she could do for Anna, the red-haired sorceress
stopped by the smaller room on the lower level to see Richina.
  
 As Secca knocked and stepped into Richina’s room, the sandy-haired young sorceress looked up from
where she sat in the single chair near the foot of the bed.
  
 “Lady Secca..."
  
 “I wanted to see how you were. You were troubled, more than I realized...” Secca let the words die
away.
  
 “She still looked so young,” blurted the young sorceress, “but there was no Harmony left in her.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 "That was the death Darksong of Lord Brill. It did not change her years, only her shape. You know
that,” Secca said gently.
  
 “Mother... she said that... the sorceress would never change. But...it’s hard. Two days ago...she was so
alive.”
  
 “Death is like that,” Secca reminded her apprentice. “We must never forget that it is sudden and
forever.”
  
 ‘I know. Lady Anna said that all the time.” Richina frowned. “Sometimes, she was so stern, but I know
she cared.”
  
 “She did. More than most people ever knew. She didn’t let people see. You know... once, when I was
much younger than you, nine, I think, she carried me to bed. That was when she was regent. She didn’t
have to, but she carried me there and tucked me in, and promised that I could stay with her.” Secca
swallowed. “She was the one who saw that your mother would be better at holding Suhl than her
brothers would be.”
  
 “My uncle Keithen... he wanted Suhl.”
  
 “I know. He tried to kill your mother, and then poison her. She never asked Anna for help.”
  
 “Not until I came along,” A faint smile crossed Ri-china’s lips. “She cared not for sorcery in the hold.”
  
 Secca nodded. “Are you unhappy to be here?”
  
 “No. I’m thankful. I know enough to know I’d be un-happy without the Harmonies. Jyrll... he loves the
land and the people. He’ll listen to me, if it comes to that, but he wouldn’t do anything to hurt people,
except to stop a greater hurt.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Secca wondered if Richina hadn’t just summarized rul-ing—do no harm except to stop a greater evil.
“You’ll be all right.” Secca rose.
  
 “I know.” Richina smiled wanly. “‘Thank you, lady.”
  
 After Secca closed Richina’s door, she walked farther down the lower conidor—away from the entry
hall—and stepped out the side door into the cool night air that had descended upon Loiseau and brought
a chill into the courtyard. Above her, the liedburg loomed, seemingly lightless, for all the lamps and
candles within.
  
 Her feet carried her toward the gates. Above the near-silent hold, in a clear sky, the stars shone
bright—and cold. Secca shivered, despite her green leather riding jacket, and her hand brushed the hilt of
the sabre—another gift of sorts from Anna.
  
 The white disk of the moon C1earsong shimmered near its zenith, and Secca was grateful that the red
point of light that was Darksong had not yet risen. She stopped in the space between theopen gates of
Loiseau, looking to the east, not quite sure why. Neither the stars nor Clearsong offered any answer to
her unvoiced questions. To her sight, to the south, lay the domed work building, dark and empty.
  
 In time, she turned and walked back up the stone steps and back into the soaring space of the entry hall.
Neither guard looked at her as she passed, her steps slowed as she neared the center of the spacious
foyer and what awaited her there.
  
 She looked up to the brass chandelier, its white candles still dark, for a moment before her eyes skipped
over the blue-tinted stone blocks of the walls and dropped to the polished black and white interlocking
triangular floor stones. Finally, the red-haired sorceress lifted her eyes to the shimmering bronze
catafalque that held a simple and ancientoak casket, one that had once been meant for Lord Brill’s sire,
three generations back, polished so that it shimmered under the light from the candles of the single
four-branched sconce set behind the catafalque.
  
 There. . . against the green velvet of the opensilvered coffin, lay the body of the woman who had
transformed Defalk, the woman who had saved Secca time and again, who had taught her music and
sorcery ... and life.
  
 Anna’s face was drawn, but she looked almost as young as when Secca had first seen her more than
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

twenty years before, and Secca wondered if, perhaps, her body would remain incorrupt forever, like a
statue. Anna still looked young, her features too drawn, too fine, to be beautiful without the fierce spirit
that had animated them. But she was dead, perhaps because she had demanded too much from herself,
in life, in sorcery ... and perhaps because she was tired.
  
 Lord Jecks had died nearly a half-score of years before his heart bursting as he had been instructing
young arms-men at his own hold of Eldheld. Anna had been quieter, more withdrawn, since Jecks’
death, leaving more and more of the day-to-day sorcery to the trio, only occasion-ally traveling to
Falcor. After Lord Jecks’ death, Anna sel-dom had seen or conferred with Lord Robero, and when she
had, neither had been particularly happy, not from what Secca had overheard and seen, although Robero
had always taken Anna’s advice.
  
 Secca shook her head.
  
 She doubted that Robero would care that much person-ally about Anna’s death, although he would
regret deeply the loss ofthe power Anna had held and always used for the benefit of Defalk and its
people.
  
 Secca took a deep breath. Now she would have to deal more with Robero, as Anna had
suggested—and with Jo-lyn and Clayre. She pushed that thought away. Those prob-lems could wait.
  
 How long she stood, looking at Anna’s visage, missing the fierce blue eyes, forever closed in what
seemed endless sleep, Secca neither knew nor cared. A deep void had opened within her, like a wound
she doubted would ever close, always aching, even beneath any smile she might offer.
  
 So motionless had she stood, wrapped in grief that only the aching of legs locked too tightly finally broke
through the concentration of her vigil.
  
 Slowly, slowly, she stepped back and then slipped around the catafalque and walked slowly through the
sec-ond archway and toward the grand staircase, her boots murmuring on the hard stone.
  
 Behind her remained the guards, watching over the sor-ceress who had watched over them for all their
lives.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 13
  
 In the bedchamber right at the top of the grand stair-case—the one Anna had first used when she had
come to Loiseau, a chamber larger than the master chamberin Secca’s own hold of Flossbend—the
red-haired sorceress dressed slowly in the grayness before dawn. Shedonned dark green trousers and a
lighter colored silky green shirt, but with a black vest and a black mourning scarf.
  
 She looked at her image to the robing room mirror, a mirror fringed with moisture from the hot bath she
had hoped would relieve the stiffness that had come with an uneasy sleep. Amber eyes ringed with dark
circles and set above still-freckled and youthful-looking cheeks looked back at her. She frowned, if
wryly. More than a score and a half of years behind her, and she still stood little taller than the youngest
of apprentice sorceresses. After a mo-ment, she turned heading toward the door to face a day she
dreaded.
  
 She had to talk about Anna, and she wasn’t quite sure she’d ever understood Anna. “But maybe I will .
. . like the volcalises. . .“ While Secca had appreciated Anna’s insis-tence on all the women apprentice
sorceresses and foster-lings learning skills with blades, perhaps because of the attack on Falcor when
Secca had been a child, Secca had been well into her twenties before she had begun to un-derstand fully
the value of the vocal exercises and endless technique—or the songs from the Mist Worlds that were
scarcely spells at all, except perhaps love spells. And the thought of learning songs or spells in five or six
languages, as Anna had. . . Secca wondered if anyone besides Clayre or Jolyn really understood, or even
whether they truly did.
  
 Today... all she could do was to express the feeling of loss, and that would have to do, but, inside, she
knew that was far from enough.
  
 Would Secca ever understand—or would she be old and unable to explain to anyone else before she
did?
  
 For all the older sorceress’s love and kindness to Secca, Anna had not shied from delivering
tongue-lashings to Secca herself—or even to Robero, or to Lord Jecks, or to apprentices, like Richina.
Yet Anna had gone out of her way for all of them, and for people she had scarcely even met, and she
had tried her best to heal a land that had been wounded throughout most of its long and bloody history.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Perhaps Secca’s father had said it best, decades past, when he had told Secca, before sending her to
Anna in Falcor, “She is a good woman, but far from perfect. Accept her goodness, and do not expect
perfection.”
  
 But then, in ruling Defalk or any land, could anyone be perfect? Secca’ s lips twisted into another wry
expression as she opened the door into the upper corridor.
  
 “Your thoughts are wandering,” she murmured to her-self. How could they not wander? In most ways,
for almost all of Secca’ s life—or at least the last twenty-five years— Anna had been her mother, the one
Secca looked to, talked to, and had wanted to please. And Anna was gone, gone far earlier than she had
to have died. Be-cause she had spent too much ofher life and energy to ensure Defalk was strong, too
much energy teaching the sorceresses who were to succeed her?
  
 It was strange, too, in a way, because the older three were all so different—Jolyn, blonde, almost what
Anna had called a contralto; the brown-haired Clayre with her middle voice, in some ways the closest to
Anna’s, if with-out the power the older sorceress had always projected; and Secca, the redhead with the
voice that had turned all too many glasses into crystal powdered almost like fine sand.
  
 For another moment, Secca stood at the top of the grand staircase. Then, halfway down the wide stone
steps, as she caught sight of the score of lancers in green—one com-pany of the five that had comprised
Anna’s personal arms-men—Secca found her face stiffening into a mask of grave composure.
  
 Wilten, overaptain of the Loiseau armsmen, met her at the base of the stairs. He bowed. “They’re lined
up for leagues, it seems, Lady Secca. Some have been waiting outside the gates since a good two glasses
before dawn.”
  
 Secca nodded. “‘Thank you. I suppose we should open the doors and let them pay their last respects.
Are your men ready?”
  
 “Yes, lady.”
  
 From the rear lower corridor. Richina appeared, as if she had been waiting, as she doubtless had,
slipping up to follow Secca wordlessly. Like Secca, the younger sorcer-ess wore green and black.
Behind her were Kerisel and Jeagyn, without vests, but with black scarves.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 The red-haired sorceress walked toward the front entry doors, her steps curving away from the open
coffin and the glistening bronze catafalque. Behind her followed the three younger women.
  
 At the entry hall doors, Secca looked out into the morn-ing—amorning seemingly like many other fall
mornings, with scattered clouds and blue skies. She’d almost wished for something dramatic, like a
storm, or even heavy clouds.
  
 Her eyes focused on the open gates of Loiseau. Beyond them, the line of men and women, most of them
older— gray-haired, silver-haired, or bald—stretched along the dusty stone road, back down the hill,
winding almost back to the yellow-and-red-leaved orchards, in the direction of Mencha itself. Some of
them had to have come from other towns, because there were more in the long line than could have ever
lived in Mencha.
  
 Secca turned to Wilten, who had also followed her. "Let them in.”
  
 Secca nodded at Richina. “Stay at my shoulder.”
  
 “Yes, lady."
  
 Secca reached out and squeezed Richina’s hand. “Thank you.”
  
 The sandy-haired young woman flushed, then lowered her eyes.
  
 Secca’s eyes went to the two students. “You two may stand just behind Richina.”
  
 Both inclined their heads silently.
  
 The four walked back toward the coffin, turning before the catafalque and waiting. A half-score of
Loiseau lancers eased up behind and beside her before the first of the mourners stepped into the entry
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

hall.
  
 As the men and women, but mostly women, filed past. Secca smiled politely and nodded—and listened.
  
 “Can’t believe... like as she’s gone.”
  
 "... looks like she’s sleeping
  
 "... so thin, like a child
  
 “The redheaded one there, say she was like her own daughter... sorceress, too.”
  
 "... hope she’s as strong and good…”
  
 So did Secca
  
 "... never be anyone like her again...”
  
 Secca smiled briefly at those words, knowing all too well their understatement. All too many past lords
of the Thirty-three and some of those still holding lands hoped fervently that there would never be another
like Anna.
  
 “Seems...a shame...all she did for him, and Lord Robero not even here...“
  
 Secca kept her face emotionless. Anna had demanded that she not be paraded like a trophy in the event
of her death, but laid to rest in the small mausoleum Anna and Secca had designed and created through
sorcery on the hill overlookingthe orchards.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 A small wizened woman stopped after viewing the cof-fin. Her bright brown eyes fixed on Secca. “You
carry on like her, sorceress, you’ll be all right, and so will every-thing.”
  
 "Thank you,” Secca murmured, not quite sure what else she could say.
  
 In the end, Secca had to stand before the casket and the catafalque on which it rested... and speak.
  
 “A score and a six years past, a tired woman appeared in a house in Mencha. She had been ripped from
her own world. She had been separated from her own children. She was a sorceress who knew nothing
of Defalk. She may have wept and raged. If she did, no one saw it. Instead, from the first moment, she
did what she thought was right. For this, she was attacked. She suffered more wounds than most
armsmen. For the first years she lived in Defalk, she was always attacked, if not by arrows and sorcery,
then by words. Defalk was poor and starving and suffering from a terrible drought caused by sorcery.
She destroyed the invaders and stopped the drought. Time after time, she almost died trying to put things
right.
  
 “Along the way, she helped people—a player here, a miller’s consort there, an orphaned child. I know.
I was one of those orphans. Along the way, she became pow-erful. But she still helped people. She
restored Defalk and gave a stronger land back to Lord Robero.
  
 “She was not perfect. I will not say she was, but I will say that never has Defalk or Liedwahr had a ruler
so pow-erful who was also so good. She came from another world, but she made Loiseau and Mencha
and Defalk her home.” Secca paused. With each sentence, the words got harder, and her eyes blurred
more.
  
 “Because of her, we all have what we have. Because of her, we have seen nearly a score of years of
peace and prosperity in a land that scarce knew weeks of peace be-fore her.” Secca swallowed again.
She had more to say, but there was no way she could express it all.
  
 “My father said it best The sorceress was a good woman. She asked more of herself than of anyone,
and she never stopped trying to do her best. Because she never spared herself, others did more than they
thought they could, and Liedwahr is a far better place... May we all remember that Forever.”
  
 Secca just stood before the coffin, the rest of the words she would have said choked within her, her
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

eyes burning and unable to take in the hundred or so who had crowded into the foyer—or those who
filled the courtyard outside, or even the holding’s staff and the guards who flanked her. Finally, she just
bowed her bead, then, after another long moment, turned and walked back toward the staircase.
  
 There, halfway up the steps, she stood silently. Beside her stood Richina, equally silent. On the step
below, one to each side, stood Kerisel and Jeagyn.
  
 As the mourners shuffled out into the bright fall sun-light, the four sorceresses watched. Secca stared
almost sightlessly toward the front of the entry hall, her throat thick, her stomach knotted so tightly she
could scarcely breathe, her cheeks streaked with tears.
  
 Outside, the high puffy clouds drifted westward—to-ward Falcor—in the light chill breeze.
  
 14
 Mansuus, Mansuur
  
 Kestrin, Liedfuhr of Mansuur, paces back and forth in front of the desk in the upper-level private study.
On his left arm is a mourning band of black and maroon, standing out against the sky-blue velvet of his
tunic sleeve. After a time, he stops and laughs.
  
 “And you used to tease your father for his pacing.” Mur-muring to himself, he walks to the window
behind the desk and stands there, looking out from the hillside palace at the wide river Toksul, smooth
and broad, leading westward to the port of Wharsus.
  
 With a deep breath, he walks to the bellpull and tugs it firmly, but not violently. Then he walks back to
the broad desk and picks up the scroll. He has barely reread the short report when the study door
opens.
  
 “Yes, sire?” The trim lancer overcaptain steps inside, closes the outer door, and bows. His hair, mostly
gray, with a few streaks of raven black, does not stir as he straightens.
  
 “I read your latest report, Bassil.” Kestrin smiles, then shakes his head. “How long have you been
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

writing these reports? Two-score years?”
  
 “A score and six, sire.”
  
 “Since just before the appearance of the sorceress.”
  
 “Just after, actually.”
  
 Kestrin pauses. “Does it not seem strange that she and father died within weeks of each other?”
  
 “Given that they were the greatest rulers in Liedwahr,” Bassil says slowly, “and given that we have a
world ruled by unseen Harmonies, perhaps it was not so strange.”
  
 “Was she that great?”
  
 Bassil pauses, almost imperceptibly. “Greater than that, sire."
  
 “Greater than my father?"
  
 “Not in Mansuur, sire.”
  
 Kestrin laughs. “Father warned me about you, Bassil. He said you would tell me the truth whether I liked
it or not, and that the more questions I asked whose answers I didn’t like, the more I’d understand.”
  
 Bassil smiles, not quite indulgently.
  
 “How great was she?”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Great enough that, had she more years and children, all Liedwahr would be united and at peace.” Bassil
shrugs. “That is but my poor opinion, sire."
  
 “You don’t think much of Lord Robero, do you?”
  
 “He is capable enough that he understood to change his name and that he listens to his sorceresses and
his consort, and they appear most capable. And there are more sorcer-esses in Defalk than in all of
Liedwahr. They train others, as well.”
  
 “So... perhaps the long-departed Lord Ehara was right, that the men of Liedwahr will be ruled by
women?"
  
 “No, sire. There cannot be enough sorceresses to rule that way, and in all lands there are Ladies of the
Shadows who oppose sorcery. Yet even with such opposition, there can be enough sorceresses that it
will be dangerous for lords and holders to abuse women.”
  
 Kestrin nods, “We cannot change that, one way or the other. What of Lord High Counselor Hanfor?"
  
 “He is a most capable man tasked with governing a land that despises ability in anything but intrigue and
plotting. Without your sister, he would have had a much more dif-ficult time.”
  
 “Father and I were glad that worked out. He seems to be a good man, and Aerlya is happy.”
  
 “Your sister was most fortunate.” Bassil waits. Kestrin lifts the short scroll. “I’ve read this several times.
There is one question that remains unanswered. How did an entire company of lancers vanish? Where
did they go?’
  
 The older overcaptain shrugs. “Sire, I do not know. No one knows.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “You’re telling me that a company of Mansuuran lanc-ers stationed on port duty at Hafen just vanished?
And my wretched seers cannot find them?”
  
 “No, sire.”
  
 Kestrin smiles lazily. “What ships ported there?’
  
 “Ah... the port records—”
  
 “—are missing,” concludes the Liedfuhr. ‘The lancers are on a ship, because that’s the only place where
a seer would have trouble finding them. Someone bought them— and their captain—and they want to
make trouble. It has to be the Sea-Priests.” He fingers his chin. “Where? Can’t be Defalk... no ports.
Could be Nordwei... or Neserea or Ebra. Probably not Dumar.”
  
 “Nordwei?”
  
 “Just how would I explain to the bitch traders of Wei that I had no control over my own lancers after
they raided or sacked some outlying port like Lundholn?"
  
 “Dumar is the weakest land of all those bordering Man-suur, Bassil points out
  
 “True enough, although without the sorceress-protector of Defalk, Ebra would certainly be a ripe plum
ready to fall, but...“ Kestrin frowns. ‘With the golds it took, they could have bribed a company in Cealur,
and it would have taken longer far us to learn, and it would have been far closer to Dumar. We will see.
Too soon, I fear.”After a pause, Kestrin adds, “The sorceress is dead less than two weeks, my father
less than four, and the world is chang-ing.”
  
 “Change it will, sire, for they were the two strongest rulers in Liedwahr.”
  
 “Can I be that strong, Bassil?" Kestrin’s eyes fix upon the lancer overcaptain.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “If you work as your father did, sire. If you spend every moment thinking of Mansuur, and not of
yourself.”
  
 “And if I listen... carefully.” Kestrin laughs, ruefully.
  
 Bassil nods.
  
 “See if anyone can discover more about the missing lancers—before they appear in a dispatch I will not
wish to read.”
  
 “I can but try, sire.”
  
 “I know.” As Bassil steps back, Kestrin turns and looks out at the river below, and at the gray clouds
that herald winter sweeping in from the northwest. He does not move as the study door closes behind the
overcaptain.
  
 15
  
 As she stepped into the large workroom, Secca glanced at the harp beside the reflecting pool, noting
absently that the mute bars had not been applied. “You’re the one who didn’t apply them.” She had been
the last to use the pool, since Richina did not yet use it without Secca’s su-pervision.
  
 While it would have taken a powerful sorcerer or sor-ceress to overhear her in Anna’s
workroom—hers, now, Secca realized sadly—it was possible. She turned toward the harp, but before
she could fasten the muting bars in place, the bell on the top of the harp rang—twice. Clayre, rather than
Jolyn.
  
 Secca picked up the lutar, turned to the reflecting pool, and strummed the receiving song.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 "...let me hear,
 in tones so clear...”
  
 The clear water silvered over, then the image of a dark-haired woman with hazel-green eyes appeared.
“How are you doing?’ asked the image, although the words vibrated from the harp strings rather than
coming from the image in the pool.
  
 “It’s hard,” Secca admitted. “I haven’t been sleeping that well. There’s been more to do than I’d
thought, and it’s hard to keep my mind on it.”
  
 “She was more like your mother.”
  
 “She is ... was ... my mother. You know that. I was always an inconvenience to Anientta.”
  
 “I understand that”
  
 Secca nodded in acknowledgment. Clayre’s mother had died at Clayre’s birth, and Clayre had never
seen eye to eye with her stepmother. “How is Birke?"
  
 “Doing well. He always sends scrolls.” Clayre laughed. “He’ll feel guilty to the end of his days. and that
will be good for him.”
  
 “At least he feels guilty.”
  
 “Have you heard anything from Wasle?” asked Clayre.
  
 “Richina hasn’t said anything; there haven’t been any scrolls from Suhl.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “He never was much for writing.” Clayre paused.
  
 Secca waited.
  
 “There’s more bad news,” Clayre said slowly. “From the west”
  
 “On top of Konsstin’s death?”
  
 “This is worse. Konsstin had been ailing for years. Kestrin has been acting as Liedfuhr for the past year,
even if most people didn’t know it”
  
 “What is it?” Secca couldn’t say she was surprised. Anna had been such a force that people were
bound to react upon learning of her death, especially combined with the death of the old Liedfuhr of
Mansuur.
  
 “Hanfor died. Some sort of bloody flux. Jolyn’s con-vinced it was poison... assassins. I’d believe it.
Roberosays it’s just an unfortunate occurrence. What he thinks ... who knows?"
  
 “Who?"
  
 ‘The most likely suspect is someone named Belmar. No one knows much about him, except that he’s a
Nes-erean holder from an old family. He claims descent from the Prophet, and he’s got an ancient castle
over-looking a place on the Bitter Sea called Worlan. We can’t catch him at it, but the Harmonies are
disrupted around him, and he has more armsmen than his holding and lands could support for long. All
the pools show is a good-looking young man with a charming smile. Until two years ago, no one had ever
heard of him. He was making eyes at Annayal, but never enough for Hanfor to reject him outright. But
he’s sharp enough to have gotten the message.”
  
 “And sent one of his own?" asked Secca.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “I’m not sure. There are several others with reasons of their own. Another holder named Svenmer.
Besides Belmar, he’s the closest relative of the last prophet, a cousin of some sort. And then there’s
Chyalar, the son of the holder of Itzel.”
  
 “But this Belmar is special? I suppose he has black hair.” Secca smiled. “And deep blue eyes.”
  
 “What else?” Clayre laughed. “But I wouldn’t trust him anywhere near my chamber. Nor would Jolyn.”
  
 “They didn’t wait long.” Secca took a long breath.
  
 “There’s more.”
  
 “Oh?” Secca could feel her stomach tightening.
  
 “Lord Robero has a scroll from Lord High Counselor Clehar. He’s asking for a consort—one who can
protect Dumar. Lady Ryvyn died two seasons ago.”
  
 “You?” asked Secca. “Doesn’t be know about sor-ceresses?”
  
 “He has three sons and a daughter. His brothers have sons. He’s requested a consortship that will not
re-quire...“ Clayre snorted.
  
 “He’s just doing that to get Robero to reduce Du-mar's liedgeld. Crying poverty, and claiming that he
won’t be as well protected now that Anna’s gone."
  
 “As if we haven’t been..."
  
 Secca raised a finger to her lips.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “I know. I still don’t think the seers of Wei are that good.”
  
 “They probably aren’t, but we still don’t know that much about the Sea-Priests.”
  
 “You think they’re involved?”
  
 “They’ve been quiet for a long time,” Secca pointed out.
  
 “Anna destroyed their forces everywhere in Lied-wahr. But just before... you said they had massed
fleets in the Ostisles. Do you think..."
  
 “Who knows? They kept their secrets well.”
  
 “She stopped them... but only in Liedwahr. I know you do not like to leave Loiseau. . .“ Clayre
ventured, her voice humming as translated by the harp.
  
 “You’re telling me I should visit our Lord of Defalk.”
  
 “He does listen to you.” Clayre paused. “He doesn’t like it, but be does.”
  
 “He’s never liked it, not since I told him he was a bully when he was fourteen.”
  
 “You did?”
  
 Secca let the question pass. “I’m not comfortable... burying Anna, and then just leaving. But... too many
things could happen if I don’t.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “It has to be your decision.” Clayre’ s words were slow and measured.
  
 “I’ll leave in the morning.”
  
  “Who will you bring?’
  
 “A company of lancers, the players, and Richina.”
  
 “Is that wise?”
  
 “She’s seventeen and old enough to travel with me, and she needs to see Falcor again.”
  
 “And what it is?”
  
 “What it is not” Secca added dryly. “I won’t bring the junior fosterlings. Kerisel and Jeagyn are too
likely to be awed by Falcor.”
  
 “And Richina won’t be?"
  
 “That one is wise beyond her years. Perhaps too wise.”
  
 “I’ll let Robero know you’re coming. That way, he won’t be as likely to do something rash.”
  
 “We’ll see.” As she let the image in the pool fade, Secca wasn’t sure she had Clayre’s faith in her own
influence over the Lord of Defalk, and much as she had appreciated Robero’s concerns about her
happiness, the business with Lythner still nagged at her.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Before she stepped over to the desk and the book-cases that surrounded it, with the notebooks Anna
had writtcn and dictated to Secca over the years—notes on music, spells, and what Anna had called
relevant sci-ence—Secca did remember to replace the muting bars on the harp.
  
  
 16
 Worlan, Neserea
  
 "How much longer?” Belmar glances through the heavy--glazed windows of the bluff-top castle toward
the gray and cold waters of the small harbor below, then at the figure who sits languidly in the dark
wooden armchair next to the side table. ‘The winds that bring winter strengthen with each day.”
  
 "Tomorrow or the next day. I would guess. No longer than the day after,” answers the man in
nondescript trav-eler’s gray. "No master would delay in these waters longer than necessary.” He gestures
toward the Bitter Sea.
  
 “Especially not a Sturinnese master, even if he is claiming to be Pelaran,” replies the dark-haired holder.
“You are sure the deed is done, master jerGlien?”
  
 "The Lord High Counselor is already dead.” The man in gray smiles. “And soon Neserea will need a
skilled and strong leader to repulse the adventuresome Liedfuhr, who would annex Neserea under the
guise of protecting his sister."
  
  
 “What the father tried... would not the son?" Belmar laughed. "The scrolls are ready to dispatch as
well—once we act in preserving Neserea.”
  
 “Are your players ready?” JerGlien’s eyebrows lift as he straightens in the chair and takes a small sip
from the goblet on the side table.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “They’ve been ready for a season. Each week, they add another spell. Soon we will have enough for
any condition we might encounter in battle in Neserea.”
  
 “One must still have armsmen.”
  
 “We already have five score fully trained. The sorceress conquered Dumar with less than that.”
  
 “She could risk them all, for she could call upon the levies of Jecks and Birfels,” counters the gray-clad
man.
  
 “And I cannot?” half-queries Belmar.
  
 “No. You cannot. You must be seen as both strong and cautious. No one wishes a firebrand. The
memories of the previous prophets are still too rancid.”
  
 "Thosememories will work to my aid, especially in a Neserea with no real heir, and one where many of
the more venerable holders would like the old customs back.”
  
 “I cannot say I understand the customs of Liedwahr. The eldest daughter of the Lord High Counselor
has no consort, yet the second eldest—what might be her name—she is already consorted to that
youngster in Dumar.”
  
 “You are right. Annayel has no consort. The problem is that there is no one suitable, or none the Lord
High Coun-selor found suitable. Aerfor was consorted to Eryhal early in the fall, a love match, but that
was permitted because no one would accept a younger daughter as Lady High Counselor of Neserea.”
  
 “Perhaps you should offer a suit to Annayal,” suggests jerGlien. “She is pretty, if not ravishingly
attractive, and you are a holder of note.”
  
 “I have made my appearances, and thatwas enough for the time.” Belmar smiles. “I cannot act, not until
others suggest such is appropriate. In the meantime, we need to proceed as we have planned."
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Without replying, jerGlien takes another sip from the goblet.
  
  
 17
  
 The rear courtyard at Loiseau was still gray in the glass before dawn when Secca strapped her gear in
place, making sure that the grand lutar was securely fastened be-hind the saddle, balanced by the
traveling scrying glass. She glanced to the sky, frowning momentarily as she caught the tiny red disk of
light that was Darksong. the moon of misused sorcery and evil. Then, pushing any thought of omens out
of her mind, she took the reins of the gray mare from the head ostler. Unlike Anna, she did not ride one
of the enormous raider beasts—and had no desire to do so. Her words to the ostler caught in her throat
as she realized that she would never see Anna on a raider beast again. She swallowed and said, "Thank
you, Vyren.”
  
 “My pleasure, Lady Secca.”
  
 Secca checked her gear a last time before she swung up into the saddle. Behind her, Richina had already
mounted a larger chestnut gelding.
  
 Palian, chief player of Anna’s—now Secca’s—players, eased her dapple toward the sorceress. "The
first players are ready, Lady Secca.” The gray eyes almost matched the swatches of gray hair amid the
black.
  
 “Thank you. Have you seen Delvor?”
  
 “He and the second players are over by the side entrance to the stables,” replied the graying chief
player. Palian— who had taught Secca all her instmments—offered a wry smile.
  
 “He’s thought up another harmonic variation?” Secca repressed a sigh.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “A new fingering scheme. I believe.”
  
 Secca nodded, ignoring the barely concealed snort from Richina, and eased the gray mare toward the
back of the courtyard. After passing the lancers, she slowed as she came by the special archers. “Is
everyone ready, Elfens?"
  
 “Yes, lady. Perhaps we can bring down some of those big pheasants in the flats.”
  
 “Only while in our lands,” Secca reminded the chief archer. “Lady Herene’ s pheasants are for her
archers.”
  
 Elfens grinned. “But, of course.”
  
 “You’re a rogue, chief archer.”
  
 “One loyal to Loiseau and to you, lady.”
  
 Secca shook her head with a quick smile and eased to-ward the stable where Delvor stood on the
paving stones beside his mount, a lutar in his hand. “If you finger like so—"
  
 “Chief Player Delvor!” Secca called cheerily.
  
 The lank-haired Delvor glanced up from where the lu-tarists had gathered around him. "Lady! We are
ready. I was just showing the lutarists—”
  
 Secca barely held in a grin. “I appreciate your diligence. Perhaps you can show them later. We do have
a long ride before us.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 "Ah... yes, lady.” He bowed.
  
 Secca turned her mount back in the direction of the front courtyard, and the gates where the lancers of
the purple company of Mencha were already mounted in formation.
  
 The painfully thin captain with an equally thin black mustache eased his mount around to wait for the
redheaded sorceress. When she reined up, he inclined his head. “The purple company is ready, lady,”
  
 “How is Filcar, Quebar?”
  
 "Well enough to ride, and use a blade.” Quebar smiled. “He will got be so careless in drills again, lady.”
  
 ‘“I would hope not.”
  
 “Vyren, he said it best. Some horses have to step into deep water before they would swim.”
  
 “And what is he saying that you said?" Secca laughed. Vyren and Quebar were cousins, and each was
always at-tributing some odd saying to the other.
  
 Quebar offered an overelaborate shrug. “Perhaps that the only danger a dull blade bears is to its
wielder.”
  
 Or a dull mind. Secca hoped hers remained sharp, both on the journey and once she arrived in Falcor.
  
  
 18
 Worlan, Neserea
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 In the dull gray morning, a light wind whispers from the northwest, across the cold waters of Bitter Sea.
The wind is strong enough to have carried the merchant vessel bearing no ensign to the long pier, but not
powerful enough to hamper a speedy docking. The customs’ enu-merator waddles up the gangway, then
vanishes into the master’s cabin.
  
 From the flat roofof the baker’s, across the square from the warehouse, Belmar watches. Behind him,
the four play-ers wait, occasionally blowing on their fingers. The two violino players check the tuning on
their instruments, while the woodwind player moistens his reed.
  
 Shortly, maroon-clad troops march down the gangway and south tomake their way shoreward along the
pier.
  
 “It won’t be long now,” cautions Belmar. “Stand ready.” The players take up their instruments. Belmar
watches the far side of the square, and the narrow street beyond where the maroon-clad troops march
quickly toward the warehouse.
  
 Although the lancers have drawn their blades, they move toward the warehouse door quickly, as though
they expect little opposition.
  
 One of the pair of guards by the iron-gated door sees the oncoming lancers, turns, and sprints down the
narrow street away from the oncoming company. The second just stares.
  
 Belmar gestures toward the four players. “Now!”
  
 With the notes of the players comes Belmar’s bass voice.
  
 “Turn each blade to cut its bearer...”
  
 The Mansuuran captain barely has time to yell, “Treachery!” before his own sabre slashes through his
neck.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “But, of course," murmurs the dark-haired sorcerer after be completes the spell.
  
 Other blades perform improbable actions upon those who bare them, so swiftly that but few curses or
cries echo across the square. The body of the single remain-ing warehouse guard also lies before the iron
gate, his neck slashed by his own blade as well.
  
 Belmar looks at the figures sprawled on the cobble-stones before the warehouse doors, then at the
gray-clad figure who has appeared from the shadows of the staircase from the side street below. "That
should do. Now we should inform his Mightiness Lord High Coun-selor Hanfor. We know nothing of
events in Neserea, of course. We are but loyal subjects, protecting our coast from Mansuuran
depredations.”
  
 “Of course,” echoes jerGilen quietly.
  
 Belmar turns to the players, and the half-score guards behind them. “You may go back to the hold.”
  
 The head player nods. The players slip instruments into cases covered with oiled leather, then file down
the narrow steps, followed by all but a pair of the guards in dark green tunics.
  
 Once the roof is clear, except for Belmar’s personal guards, the sorcerer steps to the edge of the roof
and turns to jerGlien. “And the golds?”
  
 “The ship’s master keeps half, remember?”
  
 “I remember, and you retain a third of the other half.”
  
 JerGlien smiles modestly.
  
 “It’s not a bad investment. Sturinn gets back two-thirdsof the cost of bribing the Mansuurans; we kill an
entire company, which reduces the forces facing the Maitre, and everyone thinks that either Kestrin is
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

bent on conquest or can’t control his own land.” Belmar smiles.
  
 JerGlien provides a noncommittal shrug.
  
 “I am sure that is the idea, or something close to it, if not more ingenious.” Bemar’s voice carries more
than a trace of amusement. “However, you did prom-ise.”
  
 “I did, and we do keep our promises. You will recall the small matter of scrolls.”
  
 “Ah... yes. Tomorrow, they will be dispatched. For the moment, I need to inspect the damage below. I
look forward to seeing you then.”
  
 “Until tomorrow.” The man in gray bows, then slips silently to the steps.
  
 With a nod to his guards, Belmar follows the other down to the street, where they proceed in different
di-rections.
  
 19
  
 The wind whistled out of the northeast, chilling Secca as she rode westward out of Sorprat toward
Pamr, and toward the holding of Lady Herene that lay north of the town center of Pamr. Absently, as she
refastened the top buttons of her riding jacket, the sorceress wondered if young Kysar would be there,
or if he were in Fussen with his father, Falar, since Falar was about to turn the holding over formally to
his ward and nephew Uslyn on the young lord’s twentieth birthday.
  
 The death of Uslyn’s older brother, Vlastal, had resulted from another need for sorcery set in the
shadows, but not nearly so visible as the incident of the broken bridge at Aroch, Thankfully, Lord Ustal
had been so unpopular that no one had looked closely into the snapped crossbow catch, and the frayed
cable that had shredded his throat— or the consumption that had claimed Vlastal and had run its course
well before Ustal’s death. Still, luck had aided Jolyn, luck and the fact that no one in Fussen had ever
seen the sorceress.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Secca straightened in the saddle. The gray’s hoofs clopped on the smooth stones of the road, the sound
sharp despite the low moaning of the wind that seemed to fore-shadow a long and cold winter. The cold
haze above the horizon was thick enough to have swallowed the disk of the bright moon Clearsong,
although it would be setting shortly in any case.
  
 Beside Secca rode Richina, silent for the moment, wrapped in a blue leather jacket similar to Secca’ s
green jacket. Before them rode Quebar and Savyn. one of the squad leaders of the purple company. At
the head of the column was a single lancer bearing the blue banner with the two gold musical notes upon
it that signified that Secca was a sorceress of Defalk—the banner that had been Anna’s. Palian and
Delvor followed Secca and Richina.
  
 Secca’ s eyes dropped from the haze above the horizon to the broad road that stretched—straight as a
quarrel— from Sorprat to Pamr. The stones were even and level, and showed no sign of wear, and the
road itself was a constant eight yards wide—enough for the largest wagons to pass side by side. A faint
smile crossed Secca’s lips. The low-land section had been one of the last paved between Men-cha and
Falcar, and it had been the first major sorcery Anna had let Secca do. More than fifteen years later, her
work looked almost new. Then, so did the roads done by Anna, Clayre, and Jolyn. They still hadn’t
finished the net-work laid out by Anna, but there were completed metaled roads running from Falcor to
the borders of Defalk in all the cardinal directions, as well as a few others.
  
 Before long, Secca would be working with Richina on road- and bridge-building, perhaps initially on the
last sec-tion of to road between Mencha and the River Chean bridge. With only six deks or so to
complete, perhaps she and Richina could finish it before summer. The northern section, from the north
side of the River Clean to the Fal River and Elhi, had been one of the first roads paved through sorcery.
  
 “Lady, how much longer?” asked Richina quietly.
  
 “Two glasses, if we’re not stopped in the town.” She smiled. “Kysar may be in Fussen, you know, for
the cel-ebration?"
  
 “He’s not for me, even if mother has a soft spot for Lady Herene,” Richina replied.
  
 “She was your mother’s first warder and tutor.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 ‘They’ve remained friends, and I like Kysar well enough, but he’s too charming.”
  
 Like his father, Secca thought, nodding, reflecting that Anna had been smart to keep Falar from ever
controlling a holding directly.
  
 “Irenia is the one I’d rather see. She’s like Lady Herene,” Richina added.
  
 “I thought she was in Falcor.”
  
 “She left. Her last scroll said Counselor Dythya told her she was ready to work as an assistant
saalmeister. She’s hoping Lord Tiersen or Lord Kinor will let her train in their holds.”
  
 “Something’s headed our way, lady,” offered Quebar.
  
 Secca squinted, trying to make out the object on the road ahead, an object that resolved itself into a
large long-haul trader’s wagon, one moving quickly eastward. Drawn by six rough-coated dray horses,
the heavy trader’s wagon rolled toward Secca’s vanguard. Then, as though the driver saw the golden
notes upon the blue banner, the wagon slowed immediately, and the driver edged it to the left.
  
 “Sorceress.” The bearded driver bowed his bead. “Our respects.” Beside him, the armed guard also
inclined his head.
  
 “Thank you,” Secca responded cheerfully. “A good journey to you.”
  
 “Thank you.”
  
 Even the pair of guards on the rear seat nodded as they passed, and Secca returned the gesture.
  
 The legend painted on the side of the long wagon was simple, gold letters set within a green rectangular
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

frame: "Teryn & Son, Factors in Spirits, Falcor.”
  
 Secca nodded, as behind her the wagon again picked up speed, its iron-bound wheels rumbling on the
hard stone, on its way toward Mencha, the Sand Pass, and then into Ebra. While the road was
stone-paved only for roughly thirty deks into Ebra, the route farther eastward was well-traveled enough
that it had been packed into a hard sur-face—except in the early spring or after heavy rains.
  
 The sorceress shifted her weight in the saddle again, a saddle that was getting harder with each dek she
rode.
  
 20
  
 In the late afternoon, under a still-cloudless sky, Secca reined up the gray mare in the liedburg courtyard
in Falcor. She was scarcely surprised that Lord Robero had not come down to greet her and her party
upon her arrival. The silver-haired Dythya, who had been Counselor of Fi-nance ever since Secca could
remember, stood on the mounting block by the main west entrance.
  
 “Greetings. Lady Secca.” Dythya’ s smile was as friendly as ever.
  
 “It’s good to see you again.” The courtyard was warmer than the open road or the streets of Falcor had
been, and Secca unfastened the green leather riding-jacket.
  
 “Lord Robero is engaged, but he will be free shortly and would hope you would stop by the audience
chamber.” Dythya smiled again, professionally, rather than person-ally.
  
 Understanding, Secca grinned. "I will indeed.”
  
 “I will convey that.” Dythya’ s smile broadened.
  
 Secca urged the mare toward the stables. Just ahead, the dark-haired Clayre stood by the second west
entrance to the main section of the liedburg, smiling and raising an arm to greet Secca as the younger
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

sorceress rode toward the stables.
  
 By the time Secca had unloaded her gear, then waited for Richina to do the same, Clayre had crossed
the damp paving stones to meet them. “You still look the same.”
  
 “So do you,” Secca replied to the taller sorceress.
  
 “You look older.” Clayre added, with a grin to Richina. The apprentice bowed slightly, clearly unsure of
how to respond to Clayre’s pleasantry.
  
 “The older fosterling boys, especially those from the north, will drool, but don’t mind them,” Clayre
added. “They’re still not used to... Falcor.”
  
 Richina nodded, trying to keep from frowning, as the three walked from the stables to the side door and
then up the stairs to the second floor corridor that held the major chambers of the liedburg. Behind them
followed Quebar and two lancers.
  
 Clayre led the way to the chamber that had been Anna’s, in the middle of the eastern side of the
liedburg, where she opened the door. “Lord Robero suggested that it be for the Sorceress of Loiseau.”
Her voice carried a tone of both concern and apology.
  
 “He wasted little time, did he not?”
  
 The dark-haired older sorceress offered a nervous smile. As Quebar cleared his throat, Secca turned to
the lancer captain.
  
 Quebar nodded at the pair of lancers. “Dyvan and Eas-lon will be your guards.”
  
 “I’m sorry. You have other things to do.” Secca inclined her head to Quebar. “I’ll be fine. Thank you.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Quebar bowed, before turnng and heading toward the stairs.
  
 “We need to talk. I will be back in a moment” Clayre nodded to Richina. “Your quarters are in the south
tower, with the other fosterlings.”
  
 Secca watched for a moment as Clayre led the sandy-haired apprentice down the corridor, then looked
at the older and shorter lancer. “Dyvan, I’ll be unpacking until Lady Clayre returns.”
  
 “Yes, lady.”
  
 Secca smiled, then turned and closed the door. She car-ried the saddlebags to the footchest, where she
deposited them, before setting the lutar case on the bed, then unfas-tening the sabre scabbard and laying
blade and sheath on the footchest as well.
  
 The chamber looked little different from what it had before harvest—or a score of years before—with
the high bed, the small desk, the narrow window, and the attached bath chamber.
  
 Clayre had her permanent quarters farther north along the corridor, in the larger chambers that had once
belonged to Lady Essan, who had died almost a score of years be-fore. Robero, of course, had
combined the three southeast corner chambers into a suite for himself and Alyssa.
  
 Secca had hung her riding jacket in the small armoire, washed up, after heating the cold water in the
basin with the elemental spell, and was brushing her hair when there was a knock on the heavy door.
  
 "Come in."
  
 ‘Clayre stepped inside. “I am sorry. About the chamber. But the liedburg grows ever more crowded.”
  
 “You aren’t the one who made the choice.” Secca shrugged. “I know I can’t grieve forever, but..." She
paused. “If I don’t take the chamber. I’ll be seen as petty and foolish.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “He was going to give it to Jolyn. We both protested.”
  
 “Thank you.”
  
 There was another silence. “We do need to talk.” Clayre inclined her head toward the chamber beyond
the door and across the hall—the one that held the reflecting pool cre-ated by Anna’s sorcery.
  
 ‘It’s still shielded?" asked Secca.
  
 “Yes. Whatever she did affected the stones themselves.” Clayre opened the heavy oak door and
motioned.
  
 Marveling and wondering how much of what Anna had done would last well beyond her death, Secca
followed Clayre out and across the corridor. Dyvan followed Secca, while Easlon remained at the door
to Secca’s chamber. Clayre opened the door to the scrying chamber, and both sorceresses stepped
inside. Behind them Dyvan gulped even before Clayre shut the oak door. Secca smiled. Lanc-ers were
not used to sorceresses vanishing from view in plain sight.
  
 “I added a spell to keep words from leaving the cham-ber."
  
 "Ears everywhere?" asked Secca.
  
 "More than I’d like. Anna hated it. I think that was one reason she left Falcon.”
  
 “One of many.” Secca’s voice was dry. “What’s wrong?”
  
 “You know me too well.” Clayre laughed, mirthlessly. “Not only is Hanfor dead, but there’s been an
attack by Mansuuran armsmen on a coastal town in Neserea. The local lord killed all the attackers, but
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

he’s sent bodies and tunics and a few other proofs from Worlan to Esaria.”
  
 “And scrolls here?" asked Secca.
  
 “I assume they’re on the way.”
  
 "This is your friend Belmar?"
  
 "Not my friend,” Clayre protested. “He never was. Good-looking through a glass, but never more than
that, especially not now.”
  
 “It seems rather convenient.”
  
 “All too convenient, but Lord Robero won’t be willing to say that it’s suspicious. There’s no proof. If he
says too much, then he’s viewed as wanting to take over Neserea, and Hanfor’s suspicious death is laid
his feet—or ours.”
  
 ‘Then, you haven’t told Robero? Or Jolyn?"
  
 Clayre shook her head. “I just found out last night, and I wanted to talk to you to see if you knew
anything. Jolyn’s at Elheld. Robero has her rebuilding the stables. There’s no harp there.”
  
 "What did she tell him this time?” asked Secca with a laugh. ‘That the stables were collapsing?”
  
 “Something like that. Except there was the hint that he’d be compared unfavorably to his grandsire.”
  
 “She’ll do anything to get out of Falcor”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Almost anything,” Clayre amended. “Except she won’t take a consort. She claims that she feels more
like an aunt or a mother to anyone her age.”
  
 “With as many lovers as she’s had—all of them a de-cade older—she should know.”
  
 “Jealous?” asked Clayre.
  
 “No,” replied the younger sorceress simply. Somehow ...in some fashion, Secca had always thought
there would be someone, but there never had been. Robero had been far too self-centered, wanting
someone to adorehim, or at least pretend that, while Secca herself had been looking for someone like
her father—or Lord Jecks. And after see-ing the closeness between Anna and Jecks, Secca had never
wanted to settle for a consorting of convenience, especially not if it meant losing her powers—or some of
them—to have children to provide an heir... for what?
  
 “She’s also going to work on the road from Elheld north to Wendel?”
  
 "I did suggest that,” Clayre said with a laugh. “The way things are going, we may need more than one
way north-ward... or in any direction.”
  
 “There’s no new trouble in Ebra,” Secca said.
  
 "No, but Hadrenn’s always been a rotten timber.”
  
 “Not rotten, just weak,” Secca corrected.
  
 "They both give way under weight.”
  
 “With Anna...gone...you think Mynntar will try something ?"
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “You’ve followed him more than we have,” Clayre said. “What do you think?”
  
 “Mynntar won’t do anything directly against Defalk, but he could attack Hadrenn. Even so, he won’t act
unless he can finish whatever it is before we could deal with him.”
  
 “But with trouble in Neserea...?"
  
 “He’ll bear watching.” Secca admitted. “We’d best tell Robero about the Mansuuran attack on
Neserea. Tell him we just found out now, and that it could be a ploy by anyone, not necessarily by
Kestrin.”
  
 “Kestrin couldn’t be that stupid.”
  
 “No. But what if someone wanted to show he didn’t control his land?” asked Secca. “That he is weak
or inef-fectual? Then what?”
  
 Clayre winced. “I don’t like that at all.”
  
 Neither did Secca. “We might as well tell Robero now. I should present myself to his lordship.”
  
 “You still don’t care for him, do you?"
  
 “Robero has always been too impressed with Robero, and I worry that without Anna...” Secca let the
words trail off.
  
 "That we’ll have to go through the same trials she did?”
  
 “Haven’t you thought about it? She was a mighty sor-ceress from the Mist Worlds. How could we
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

know or have the powers she did?"
  
 “They’ll learn,” Clayre prophesied.
  
 “We’d best go."
  
 Clayre nodded, and the two stepped from the reflecting pool chamber.
  
 Dyvan’s eyes widened as they appeared from what seemed to be an empty chamber, but he did not
swallow or gulp as he turned to follow Secca down the steps to the main level and the audience chamber.
  
 Two guards and a page Secca didn’t recognize waited outside the closed doors.
  
 "Lady Secca and Lady Clayre to see Lord Robero,” Secca said quietly.
  
 The two guards inclined their heads slightly, and the shorter one turned and edged the door open. “The
lady sorceresses, Lord Robero.”
  
 After a moment, in which Robero must have gestured, for Secca heard nothing, the guard opened the
door. Dyvan remained in the corridor with the other two guards. The blocky man in the gilded chair did
not rise as Secca and Clayre entered the audience chamber.
  
 Secca bowed, if just enough to convey respect far the position Robero held.
  
 Behind and to the left of Lord Robero’s chair was a smaller chair, occupied by a petite blonde woman,
even more slender and shorter than Secca. Before her consort could speak, Alyssa rose and stepped
forward with a warm smile. “Secca...it’s so good to see you.” She glanced at Clayre. “And you, too, if
but since yesterday."
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Rising belatedly. Robero offered the all-too-familiar boyish grin, then brushed back wisps of his thinning
mahogany hair. “It is good to see you again. He added quickly. “Both of you.”
  
 “It is always good to see you and Alyssa, even when the occasion is sad.” Secca was grateful to Alyssa,
who served Robero as much as loved him, and who, somehow, quietly, managed to keep him from
taking himself as se-riously as he would have liked to do.
  
 “How...?” asked Alyssa. “She seemed strong last summer.
  
 “She was working on something. She hadn’t even tried to cast a spell. I found her collapsed by the
reflecting pool. Usually, when that happened, she would rest and recover. This time... she didn’t.”
  
 “We will miss her.” Robero, surprisingly, sounded as though he would, as he reseated himself leaving
Secca and Clayre—and Alyssa—standing.
  
 Secca had to believe that the Lord of Defalk had actually considered all of what Anna had meant to him
and Defalk.
  
 “Do you think... Hanfor’s death...? He was a good and a strong man," Robero said slowly.
  
 “It could be,” Secca said smoothly. “Clayre and I have just discovered that lancers clad in the uniforms
of Man-suuran lancers attacked a town in Neserea.”
  
 “What town? Were they truly Mansuuran lancers?’ Robero leaned forward in the gilded chair.
  
 “Worlan,” replied Clayre. “Apparently, the local lord slaughtered them all.”
  
 Robero shook his head. “That was most convenient for someone. Who was the local lord?”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “A young holder named Belmar. He had sought the hand of Annayal.”
  
 “He would prove he is worthy. Most convenient.” The balding lord snorted.
  
 “A costly way to prove such worth,” offered Alyssa qui-etly.
  
 Secca held in a faint smile as Robero turned in his chair and raised his eyebrows.
  
 “As you yourself said last week, dearest,” Alyssa continued almost apologetically, “the cost of
maintaining a single company of lancers is dear. This Belmar must have had even more force at his
command to destroy an entire company ofMansuuran armsmen. To maintain such, es-pecially in an
out-of-the-way holding, that could not be without cost, could it?”
  
 “Sorcery, more likely.” Robero looked to Clayre. “Could he have used spellsongs?"
  
 “He has players, lord. Whether they are good and whether he can use them so... we have not seen.”
  
 “Why not?” Robero waved away his own question. “I know. Unless you spend all your time following
but a sin-gle lord or holder, one cannot be certain. But is it likely?”
  
 “More likely than his being able to maintain enough armsmen to destroy an entire company to the last
man,” conceded Clayre.
  
 Secca thought either was highly unlikely of itself, but merely nodded agreement.
  
 “We will have to think upon this. We will talk more tomorrow of it... when you are rested, Secca. And
per-haps when you will have been able to learn more, Clayre." Robero smiled and nodded. “I thank you
for your diligence in keeping us well-informed.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “We look forward to seeing you at supper,” added Alyssa. “You can tell us more about how things are
in Mencha and elsewhere in the east”
  
 Secca bowed, not deeply.
  
 “Until then, ladies?" Robero continued to smile as the two left the audience chamber.
  
  
 21
 Encora, Ranuak
  
 The golden light of late fall angling through the win- dowpanes is warm-colored but weak. At the desk
sits a woman in a pale blue tunic and trousers. She studies the topmost scroll of the pile before her.
  
 Thrap.At the knack on the door, she rises from behind the desk, setting the scroll down. “Come in.”
  
 A second woman enters the study. She has shimmering, short-cut, white hair and is stocky, but not
heavy. Her sea-blue tunic and trousers are simple, yet of silk, and the sole piece of jewelry on her person
is a collar pin that has been passed from generation to generation. The fine gold wires of the pin represent
two sheaves of grain, crossed. Her lined face offers a pleasant smile as she bows. “Matriarch, you
requested my presence. I trust you do not mind that I waited until the Exchange closed. I await your
wisdom.”
  
 Alya laughs, gently. “You have far more experience than I, Dyleroy. That is why I have summoned you.”
  
 “Like your mater. Matriarch, you are modest.”
  
 ‘I trust I understand my limitations as well as she did.” The comparatively young matriarch, whose
blonde hair is but partly silver, smiles self-depreciatingly and gestures to the chairs opposite the simple
desk. “You as Mistress of the Exchange know trade far better than I, and you hear what others fear to
let me know.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Can you blame them?’ asks the Exchange Mistress with an amused smile as she seats herself.
  
 “I do. . . privately, but even if I did so publicly, would it change matters?” Alya sits and eases the scrolls
to one side of the desk.
  
 “Not if you would remain strong,” concedes Dyleroy.
  
 “What did you wish to discuss? Certainly not your cousin Alcaren.”
  
 Alya lips curl into a wry expression. “Need I? Your daughter handled him well enough.”
  
 “For now. But you cannot keep him from sorcery... can you?”
  
 “I have trained him, because the alternative is worse. After all, my father was a sorcerer, though few
knew it.”
  
 “Your father was a modest and most remarkable man. All Ranuak is poorer for his absence. Alcaren
needs must go far even to behold his memory.If I might ask, what will you do?”
  
 “If I can, find him a proper consort, who will check his impulsiveness because he would protect her.”
  
 “And how will you manage that?”
  
 “It does not seem possible, does it?” The Matriarch laughs. “As my mother once said, we must trust the
Har-monies. Trust and watch.” She pauses. “That was not why I requested your presence.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “I had thought not.” Dyleroy smiles.
  
 “We have lost another ship. The pattern is the same.”
  
 “Near a hazard, such as the Shoals of Discord? In dark-ness?’ asks the Exchange Mistress. “Often on
the routes to the Free State of Elahwa?”
  
 “That makes near-on a half-score. Those are the ones I know of.” Alya raises her eyebrows. “I would
suspect that other traders would not disclose such losses.”
  
 “Your suspicions are well-founded.”
  
 “With the recent death of the sorceress, this bears the hidden hand of the new Maitre of Sturinn.”
  
 “The well-hidden hand.”
  
 “The young Liedfuhr has followed his sire’s policy of keeping Mansuur strong and well-armed. The
Council of Wei has built a fleet aswell-equipped as that of Sturinn. . . and we are the weakest of those
who must rely in part on trade and the bounty of the sea. Yet I cannot command that fleets be built,”
points out the Matriarch.
  
 “Nor can I, Matriarch,”
  
 “It would seem there is little I can do,” offers Alya, “save suggest that our traders sail in pairs when out
of sight of land.” Her lips twist. “Most will be loath to do such.”
  
 “You can but suggest, as will I.”
  
 “Young Mynntar has supposedly invested in vessels. He has near-on a half-score—they resemble those
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

of the Stu-rinnese. Hadrenn has none.”
  
 “You doubt the possibility of coincidence?" Dyleroy laughs softly. “Or that they are truly his?”
  
 “Let us say that those of Dolov—and its lords—have never been known for their love of the sea, but
well-known for their opportunism.”
  
 “You believe that those vessels are captained and crewed by those of the Sea-Priests?”
  
 “1 would be most surprised were it otherwise.” the Ma-tiarch replies.
  
 “Has your sister relayed any of this to you?" The Exchange Mistress bows her head. “It is not my
busi-ness..."
  
 “Veria has. That fuels my concerns.”
  
 “And mine also.” Dyleroy moistens her lips, ever so slightly.
  
 “There is yet another matter,” Alya says slowly. “The Ladies of the Shadows.”
  
 “I have heard nothing.” Dyleroy frowns. “You know their goal?”
  
 “Do not most? To prevent the use of sorcery by any means anywhere in Liedwahr.”
  
  Dyleroy chuckles. “Given the horrors of the Spell-Fire Wars, a most worthy goal, if somewhat
impractical in these times.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 ‘They are especially adamant that no man should know sorcery."
  
 “Have they threatened Alcaren?" asks Dyleroy.
  
 “Not directly, but I have received a note expressing their concerns.” Alya shakes her head. “I fear that
we will have little choice in the years ahead.” She smiles faintly. “You can do little with the Ladies of the
Shadows save listen, but I would be pleased if you would do that.”
  
 “I will do what I can, as I can.”
  
 “Thank you. I would ask no more.” Alya rises, gracefully.
  
 “Not at present, at least, Matriarch.” Dyleroy inclines her head as she stands. “I hope you do not have
to request more.”
  
 “That would be best.” Alya nods, and steps toward the study door. “I did want to share my concerns
with the Exchange. I would not wish that the honored traders feel I was less than concerned about their
losses.” She pauses, her hand on the door lever. “Especially when a time of change lies before us all.”
  
 “The Exchange recognizes your concerns, Matriarch, and we will do what we can.”
  
 The two women exchange knowing smiles before they part.
  
  
 22
  
 Clayre looked across the corner of the table in the small dining hall. On her platter were only a few
crumbs of the crusty bread. She took her second apple from the bas-ket and began to slice it. Richina
broke off another chunk of bread, then carefully cut a wedge of cheese. Secca sipped the heavy ale that
neither Richina nor Clayre liked.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Do you know any more... now?” asked Clayre.
  
 “About what?” replied the petite sorceress. “Why would I know more now?”
  
 “I never quite understood all that Anna did out there,” Clayre mused. “Or all that you’re doing. Even
through the pool images, I can sense you’re often exhausted, on the edge of dissonance.”
  
 “I’m just trying to carry on her work. That’s all.” Secca took another chunk of bread, although she
would have to force herself to eat it.
  
 “I won’t press. Still...”
  
 After another mouthful and a swallow of ale, Secca an-swered. “You know about the boiling of water,
and how,if the peasants and trades people do so, then there is less flux. And how cleaning wounds and
the tears of childbirth with distilled winterwine and boiled water..."
  
 “Of course.”
  
  
 “Where does one get the iron to make the kettles in Mencha?” asked Secca. “For there must be
separate kettles in which to boil the water. How does one make sure that the water that goes into those
kettles is clean enough that the boiling works? How does one make sure that the rain-water does not
wash animal offings into the rivers and streams—or the wells?”
  
 The slightest frown crossed Richina’s brow, but the ap-prentice said nothing, for which Secca was most
grateful.
  
 “You do not use sorcery to make kettles. Please don’t tell me that you do,” said Clayre dryly.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “I use sorcery to take the iron from the Ostfels and cop-per and tin from the Silberfels. You know that.
Would you care to try it often?” asked Secca.
  
 “How often?”
  
 “Enough,” replied Secca.
  
 “At least every three weeks,” suggested Richina.
  
 Clayre nodded “I am just as glad our Lord of Defalk does not know that.”
  
 “You do not wish to become a source of metals?"
  
 “Keeping the roads and rivers and bridges, and extend-ing them, is not only tiring enough, but tiresome
as well,” Clayre countered. “Besides, there aren’t any metals close to Falcor”
  
 “And unlike Jolyn, you don’t mind being in the center of things,” Secca pointed out.
  
 “After spending almost half my life in Abenfel? An ancient ruin in the middle of nowhere?”
  
 Richina’s eyes had been flicking back and forth between the two older sorceresses.
  
 “Don’t mind us, Richina,” said Secca. “We always argue about this, Clayre wants me to believe her
childhood was more lonely than mine.”
  
 “Not more lonely. Less valued.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 "Perhaps. Anna rescued me when I was eight; you were near twice that.” Secca took another mouthful
of bread, then a last swallow of the ale—it was easier to get down than bread and helped keep her from
wasting away under the demands of the sorcery, demands that were bound to increase.
  
 We should go.” Clayre said, rising. “Our good Lord Robero’s message did say before the beginning of
his af-ternoon audiences.” She glanced at Richina.
  
 “She should get used to Falcor and Lord Robero,” Secca replied as she stood, noting absently the faint
sardonic tone in Clayre’s use of the phrase “our good Lord Robero.”
  
 “You’re right about that. Anandra still has trouble, and she’s lived here all her life.”
  
 “There are other reasons for that.”
  
 "True,”Clayre strode briskly out of the hall, not waiting to see if Secca and Richina followed.
  
 The three walked northward along the lower main cor-ridor until they came to the main audience hall,
once the large dining hall, but which Robero had had rebuilt after Anna had turned Defalk over to him.
  
 Already, outside the audience chamber doors waited a handful of tradesmen, including a fuller, a
boatman, a miller, from the flour and dust ground into a tunic so deeply that neither fullering nor brushing
was likely to remove either.
  
 The five men all bowed. “Sorceresses..."
  
 Secca returned the bows immediately, followed by Ri-china and Clayre.
  
 “Lord Robero is expecting you,” said Dythya, emerging from the audience chamber.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 As the three stepped into the chamber, before the doors shut, Secca could hear a few words behind
them.
  
 “... when the shadow sorceresses come from Men-cha . .."
  
 "...always trouble...”
  
 "...best you go first, Benan..."
  
 "...be a while, I’d wager..."
  
 “My sorceresses—and a new one, too,” boomed out Robero’s voice. The Lord of Defalk wore a
purple satin jacket over a pale gold tunic. The purple of his trousers did not quite match that of the
jacket. Unlike the day pre-vious, Alyssa was not present, and he was alone on the dais. From the large
gilt chair, he glanced at the young sandy-haired apprentice. “You must be Richina. You’re Lady Dinfan’s
second, aren’t you?"
  
 Richina bowed again before replying. “Yes, ser.”
  
 “Good woman, your mother. Strong lady, too. How do you like sorcery?”
  
 “I have learned much, ser.”
  
 “Good. Defalk needs its sorceresses.” Robero turned his eyes on the two older sorceresses, first Clayre,
then Secca, momentarily, before speaking again, his eyes not seem-ingly looking at any of the three.
“Yesterday, we discussed the happenings in Neserea. I have been considering the matter.” Robero
looked sharply at Clayre. “Have you dis-covered anything else since yesterday?"
  
  "No, Lord."
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “And you, Lady Secca?”
  
 “Nothing that sheds any new light on matters."
  
 “I would think not. Whoever plotted this will wait, knowing you all will be using your reflecting pools.”
Nod-ding to himself, he continued, “I think that Lady Clayre should pay a visit to offer our condolences
and support to Lady Aerlya and her daughter, the heiress of Neserea.”
  
 “You wish that I travel to Esaria?" asked Clayre.
  
 “Someone must represent me, and you are the Sorceress of Defalk, as well as the sister of a noted
member of the Thirty-three."
  
 Secca repressed a smile. Robero avoided using Birke’s name whenever possible.
  
 “What of Anandra?" questioned Clayre.
  
 “I would suggest that she remain here in Falcor. While road-building is ever more necessary, Jolyn
perhaps should return to Falcor, so that a full sorceress remains in residence in the liedburg,” concluded
Robero. “Your Anandra can assist Jolyn, can she not?”
  
 “Anandra is a most capable young sorceress. I will also send Jolyn a message,” said Clayre. “She might
have to wait a day or so, since it would be foolish, if she is already working on a part of the road, not to
finish that section.”
  
 “As you see fit.” Robero turned to Secca, not quite meeting the redhead’s eyes. “I think that you, Lady
Secca, might be well advised to act as my representative to Lord High Counselor Hadrenn.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “If you think that necessary, I would be most pleased to do so,” Secca agreed politely.
  
 “Good.” Robero smiled. “Lady Clayre ... Richina... if you would excuse us, I need a word with Lady
Secca.”
  
 “Of course.” Clayre bowed.
  
 Richina bowed almost as quickly, and the two turned.
  
 Robero waited until the heavy doors closed again. “Have you thought more about Lythner?”
  
 “He was most charming, and, no, I have not, not that much. With Lady Anna’s death... and all these
mat-ters... “Secca shook her head.
  
 “I would that you give the matter some thought.”
  
 “In a short time, I will. Anna was more my mother than Anientta was. If you hear from Lythner, you may
point that out”
  
 “With your permission, I will.” Robero smiled, half- wryly. “There is one other matter to consider.” The
balding lord fingered his chin before going on. ‘Now that you hold Mencha, Secca, have you thought
about an heir for flossbend?” asked Robero.
  
 Secca blocked the question she wanted to offer in re-turn—asking if Robero had thought about naming
another heir for his holding at Synfal—the hold Anna had taken by sorcery and bestowed upon him.
Instead, she frowned. “I cannot say I have given it much thought, not so closely upon Anna’s death. After
all, none of us had expected her to die... and not so suddenly.”
  
 “There is that,” mused the Lord of Defalk. He smiled the false smile Secca had grown up learning to see
through. “Perhaps you should.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “I will give it that thought...although...I've also been thinking that, unlike Anna, I may not wish to practice
sorcery until it spells my end. In that case, Mencha might better go to Clayre or Jolyn. . . or perhaps
young Anandra in a half-score of years or so.
  
 The smile remained upon Robero’s face as he nodded. I can see that might be for the best, but, in time,
you would still need heirs for both holdings. There is no great hurry, for you are young as sorceresses go.
Yet I would not wish to decide where your lands would go... against your wishes.”
  
 “You are most thoughtful, Robero. As always.” Secca smiled pleasantly. “I will consider the matter as I
return to Mencha.” She paused. “You have not said what you wish me to convey to Hadrenn.”
  
 “I leave the words to you. The message must be that times may become difficult, but that he must
support De-falk.”
  
 “And not someone like Mynntar?”
  
 “Exactly.”
  
 "I will convey your message.” Secca bowed her head, very slightly.
  
 “There is one last matter.” Robero cleared his throat.
  
 Secca waited.
  
 “Liedgeld. If matters continue as they have, and usurp-ers raise forces in Ebra or Neserea, we may need
to raise more armsmen and lancers, and that will require raising the liedgeld.” Rabero smiled
apologetically.
  
 Secca nodded. She understood the troubles that would cause. She also understood the message behind
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

the information. If the sorceresses of Defalk did not support Robero in oneway, they would certainly
have tosupport him moredirectly against those traditional lords still holding lands in Defalk.
  
 “We will havesome appropriate gifts for you to convey to Hadrenn. By tomorrow, or the next day, so
that you could leave an the day following.” Robero stood. “I know it is a troubling time for you, for Anna
was close to you, but we cannot squander what she gave us by failing to act."
  
 Secca understood that, she suspected, far better than Robero, as she bowed before departing the
audience cham-ber.
  
  
 23
  
 As the two sorceresses stood beside the reflecting pool in the liedburg of Falcor, Clayre’s voice filled
the chamber.
  
 “Show us now, and as you can,
 the acts of Belmar, lord and man..."
  
 The waters of the pool rippled, then silvered before presenting an image. The dark-haired young lord
stood in a chamber, apparently an audience hall that had been emptied, with six players behind him.
Secca squinted to make out the room. Then her eyes focused on the pair of players to the left side of the
group.
  
 “That’s a dancing hall... or it was,” Clayre said. “Just like the one that once was atAbenfel.”
  
 “Two of those players are using small thunder-drums,” Secca said. “I can’t tell how, but that would
allow him to mix Clearsong and Darksong.”
  
 After a moment, Clayre released the image and turned to the younger sorceress. "It’s a good thing I’m
taking the players from Falcor.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “You keep checking on him. You don’t want him sneaking up on you. You know what trouble Anna
had with drums and Darksong. And he comes from a heri-tage where drums and dancing run in the
blood. That is not good.”
  
 “I will bevery careful. He is a sorcerer.
  
 “He’s probably very sneaky because he’s not that strong. If he were strong enough to wrest gold or
silver from the earth, we would probably know it from dis-ruptions in the Harmonies.”
  
 Clayre raised her eyebrows.
  
 Without answering, Secca thought for several mo-ments. then lifted her own lutar.
  
 “Show us now, whether near or far,
 who pays and stands behind this Belmar...”
  
 The water shivered, then silvered over, then presented two separate circular images that barely touched.
The first was a thin figure in gray, who stood at the railing of a ship. The second showed a man with a
blonde beard seated at a writing table in a lamp-lit and paneled library of some sort
  
 “He could be any holder anywhere that we don’t know,” offered Clayre.
  
 “He’s probably Neserean,” Secca suggested. “Only Kinor and Robero have libraries like that in
Defalk.”
  
 “That looks like a Sturinnese vessel.” Clayre pointed at the ship and the figure on the deck. “You don’t
even look surprised.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Who else besides Sturinn?" asked Secca. “The Council of Wei likes the stability a strong Defalk
pro-vides. They wouldn’t cause trouble in Neserea. Belmar can’t possibly pay for armsmen and all those
players. We know the Sturinnese have always wanted a foothold in Liedwahr. Why would they change
now?” She cleared her throat and sang the release spell.
  
 “Let this scene of scrying, silver filled with light,
 vanish like the darkness when the sun bright...”
  
 “What about the Ladies of the Shadows?’ asked Clayre as the image in the pool died away. “They
don’t like sorcery.”
  
 “No, but there don’t seem to be many in Defalk.”
  
 “That we know of,” Clayre pointed out.
  
  “That’s because Brill was the only sorcerer in the whole land for a generation, and because the Corians
banned sorcery from the beginning—and they won.”
  
 Clayre shook her head. “Why did you think about the second spell?”
  
 “If Belmar happened to be that strong a sorcerer, he wouldn’t need backing from anyone. He isn’t.”
Secca shrugged. “I thought I’d seek his backer, just to see if he had one.”
  
 “Because you can sense disruptions in the Harmonies as far away as Worlan?”
  
 “Sometimes I can. Can’t you?"
  
 “You know I can’t. I don’t know why you’re merely the Sorceress of Mencha.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca laughed gently. “You couldn’t stand the quiet of Loiseau. Anna knew that.” Just as she had
known that leaving Secca in the same liedburg as Robero would have created too much friction.
  
 “You and Robero don’t do well together, either,” Clayre acknowledged. “Redheads seldom do, and
Robero’s more stubborn even than Birke and Lysara put together."
  
 Secca didn’t comment.
  
 “I heard he introduced you to Lythner.”
  
 “How did you find that out?"
  
 "I have my ways.” Clayre grinned.
  
 “Lythner didn’t seemthat interested. He was most polite.”
  
 “How could he be otherwise? He’s very handsome, and all say he was most kind and loving to
Cynelya.”
  
 “You, too?”
  
 Clayre shrugged.
  
 Secca wondered. Did all of Defalk think she was mis-erable? Or somehow needed a man? Almost any
man? “What do you plan to do with Belmar?"
  
 “Whatever I must, I suppose.” Clayre lifted her shoul-ders, then let them drop in a gesture that was not
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

exactly a shrug.
  
 “He’ll be waiting for you.”
  
 “He would not try a sneak attack on a mere sorceress, do you think? He is, after all, a Neserean holder
and a direct descendant of the Prophets of Music, the most rightful heirs to Neserea,” said Clayre
mockingly.
  
 “How do you know he’s in the line of descent?” questioned Secca, an amused tone in her voice.
  
 “Besides his claim? I don’t, except that I understood all holders in Neserea claimed to be descendants
of the Prophets.” Clayre grinned. “In some ways, I worry about the man in the study more. When I get to
Esaria, I’ll call up that image for Aerlya and Annayal and see if they recognize him. Someone has to
know who he is.
  
 “You’d best be careful getting there.”
  
 “I will be. I’m insisting on two companies of Rob-ero's best lancers. He must be worried. He didn’t
even quibble.” Clayre looked at the blank waters of the re-flecting pool, then at Secca. “It must be nice
to have your own lancers."
  
 "It’s still hard to believe they’re mine. Paying them amounts to most of the rent coins. Five companies do
not come cheaply.” Secca hating hedging the answer, but Anna always had, and seldom had following
Anna’s example hurt Secca.
  
 “That must be why she kept Loiseau so small,” offered Clayre.
  
 “It’s one reason.” Secca gave Clayre a wry smile. “Also, it makes it less attractive for those with large
entourages to come and visit.”
  
 “Birke has observed that, but he’s the lord of Aben-fel, and that comes with having the largest liedburg
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

in Liedwahr. Every time Robero visits, Reylana begs ser-vitors from her father.”
  
 “Do you know how Gylaron is doing?”
  
 “He’s getting weaker. Gylan takes his father’s guid-ance, but he really runs Lerona on a daily basis.
Reylana has been traveling back and forth since summer. She usually takes one of the children on each
trip.”
  
 “I always liked her,” Secca said.
  
 “Birke was very fortunate, but then, father let him wait for a suitable consort. It irked Fylena greatly.”
  
 “She never had to worry. Your father was very tra-ditional.” Secca understood that. As Clayre’s
father’s second consort, Fylena had pushed to make sure that both Clayre and Lysara had been
consorted quickly and in a fashion that would not threaten her sons’ inheri-tance of Abenfel. Fylena still
worried about the uncon-sorted Clayre and the power she held in Falcor as the Lord’s Sorceress.
  
 “Anna wasn’t.” Clayre began to replace her lutar in the case.
  
 Both sorceresses laughed.
  
 Secca knew they had more scrying ahead, but trying it immediately would offer nothing new and tire
them both. She lowered her own lutar into itscase.
  
  
 24
  
 Although the noonday sun beamed through a cloudless sky, its weak light was not enough to offset the
chill wind that blew out of the east and into Secca’s face as she rode past the dekstone on the east side
of the road town of Zechis. Hoping it would not be too dark before they reached Pamr, Secca glanced
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

up as Richina cleared her throat.
  
 “Is Lythner as handsome as they say?” asked the younger sorceress.
  
 Secca shook her head, wondering what Clayre had planted in Richina’s thoughts. Or had it been
Alyssa?
  
 “He is not?"
  
 “No. He is very handsome, and very charming. Some say that he is intelligent, loving, and kind—and no,
I am not considering consorting to him.That is a decision that must wait until after our trip to Synek."
  
 “Our trip? I can come?"
  
 “You had best come. You trust too much in the words of others, even mine.” Secca laughed.
  
 “I could not help but overhear your words with the Lady Clayre, before you went to see Lord Robero.”
Richina eased her mount closer to Secca’s.
  
 “I am most grateful for your discretion.” Secca paused, then asked, “What do you think of Falcor?”
  
 “I would rather live in Loiseau or even Suhl.” Richina frowned.
  
 “Why?’
  
 “I could not say, save I feel all watch in Falcor, and none would care should any slip upon a stone step
or tum-ble from a parapet.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “It’s not that bad,” Secca said with a slight laugh. “You must recall that those in Falcor must balance the
wishes and the needs of all of the Thirty-three, and never can a ruler satisfy all. Many who walk the
corridors there, while not wishing ill directly upon others, may not be all that displeased at misfortunes
falling on others.”
  
 “And the Lady Clayre contends with such daily.”
  
 Secca nodded. “So does Jolyn. That is why she is will-ing to undertake road-building and arduous
sorcery anywhere away from the liedstadt.”
  
 “You did not tell Lady Clayre, yet she is also a sorcer-ess, Richina pressed
  
 “Nor did Anna, and, as you will come to see, nor should any sorceress who holds Loiseau.”
  
 “There is that much difference in how a sorceress in Falcor and one in Loiseau views Defalk?”
  
 “No. There is much difference in how each would use the knowledge of Loiseau. You will see, I
promise you.”
  
 Another long silence followed, a stillness broken only by the low moan of the fall wind. Secca adjusted
her jacket again.
  
 “Lady, why did she stay so much in the shadows?” asked Richina abruptly. ‘The Lady Anna, I mean.”
  
 Secca leaned forward slightly in the saddle and raised her voice. “If you would allow us a few moments
in the van and some space, Quebar...?”
  
 “Yes, lady.” With a knowing smile, Quebar reined his mount to the left edge of the dusty stone road, and
Savyn eased his mount to the right.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 The red-haired sorceress waited until a good ten yards had opened between her mount and Quebar’s
before she gestured, and then turned her face to Richina. “Why did she stay in the shadows, you mean,
when she could have ruled far better than Robero?”
  
 Richina nodded.
  
 “One must not only rule, but prepare for those who will follow you. Anna had no children here in
Liedwahr, nor could she summon them from the Mist Worlds without risking their death, and she could
have no more children here. Robero was the heir. Could she have done aught otherwise?’
  
 “But why... did she not...?” Richina broke off, ges-turing almost helplessly.
  
 Ignoring the implied direct question, Secca pondered for a moment before answering. “She kept Defalk
and most of eastern Liedwahr safe, and she found a lord she could love, and a holding she appreciated.
Would that all of us were so fortunate.”
  
 “Lady, please do not avoid my question.”
  
 Secca fumbled with the topmost button on her jacket. “When she was first regent...how did she rule?”
  
 “She ruled well.”
  
 Secca shook her head, shifting her weight in the saddle. She feared the afternoon would be long.
  
 “How?"
  
 “By sorcery. She destroyed the Black Monks, and killed the evil Prophet of Music, and cast down the
rebellious Lord of Dumar, and—”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “With each action, she created the need for more action, did she not? Until she had to use her sorcery to
replace almost half the Thirty-three and destroy armsmen across all of Liedwahr?"
  
 Richina’s brows furrowed in puzzlement. “We have had no wars and little fighting since.
  
 “Do you think that all the men and women in Defalk suddenly changed, that they would so quickly stop
their plotting and fighting?"
  
 “But they did,” Richina protested.
  
 "The fighting stopped. Lady Anna saw to that, but long before Robero became Lord of Death. Do you
remember the story of the broken bridge?”
  
 “When the bridge over the Mittfal collapsed, and flung Lord Klestayr and his eldest into the river?’
Richina nod-ded. ‘That was how young Dostal became Lord of Arock.”
  
 “And what happened? Or did not happen?’
  
 “His armsmen cast down their arms and did not proceed against Lord Kinor.”
  
 “Would Lord Kinor have lost?’ Secca pressed.
  
  
 “He had more armsmen, and armsmen better trained. He should not have had difficulty.”
  
 “But he would have lost armsmen, would he not?”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Richina nodded.
  
 “Now ... had I been there, or Clayre, or Anna, and called forth the flame arrows, could Kinor have
lost?”
  
 “Of course not.”
  
 “How many of the armsmen of Aroch would have died? And then, when he became Lord of Aroch,
how would Dostal have raised 1evies?”
  
 “Seldom have the levies been raised.”
  
 “True enough. But the armsmen are there to command the levies. Often they were not, not when Anna
came to Defalk. Far too many died in skirmishes between lords, If Defalk is to remain strong, lords must
not fight against each other.”
  
 “The bridge collapse wasn’t an accident?” Richina said slowly.
  
 “There is more than one way to use socrery, child.” Secca paused. “Folk forget that because of the first
years of the Regency.” She laughed without mirth. “That is all for the best. Anna had no choices when
first she came to Defalk. She had power, and little knowledge of the people and the land, and no time to
learn either. Nor were women or sorceresses respected. For many years, all that those in Liedwahr
respected was the power that they could see. Many rebellious lords had heard of the destruction of
oth-ers, yet would not believe until it befell them. It took many years before Anna could be assured that
she could leave Falcor, and all believed that she would again raise the fire arrows or the floods, or cause
the land to sink under those who would not support Lord Robero,”
  
 “That is why you fear the days ahead?”
  
 Secca nodded. “All of us are considered pale shadows of Lady Anna.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “You? With all you have done?”
  
 “Me, most of all, for I have indeed stood in the shad-ows.”And I fear the glare of an unforgiving sun,
and what may need to be done.
  
  
 25
 Narial, Dumar
  
 Darksong stands high in the clear night sky, and Clear-song has set more than two glasses earlier.
Several trading vessels are moored in the deeper part of the harbor, but two tall-masted schooners are
tied up at the deep-water piers on the western side, just south of the main part of the city of Narial. The
night is still, with not even a whis-per of wind.
  
 The only sounds in the harbor are the gentle lapping of night-dark water against the piers and the hulls of
the ves-sels, and the occasional reports of the Harbor Watch, words vanishing into the night unheard
except for those standing duty on the vessels in port.
  
 Beyond the harbor, beyond the horizon, well out of ear-shot from the fleet of warships there rises the
sound of tlunder-drums. The skies darken, near instantly, clouding over the bright points of the stars and
of Darksong, and there is a rumbling from deep beneath the sea.
  
 A swell of water rises to the north of the warships, a hillock perhaps three yards high that disappears
into the darkness as it races northward. The hillock swells with each furl it moves toward the shore, yet,
before it with a sucking, hissing sound, the sea recedes out of the harbor, seemingly before the rising
water can reach the land.
  
 The half-dozen vessels drop onto the harbor mud, their masts tilting at various angles. Yells and curses in
a handful of languages fill the night air, but only for a handful of moments before a darkness looms out of
the south, a darkness that rises swiftly into a wall of water more than thirty yards high. The wall of black
water races northward across the exposed mud and sand, far faster than the swiftest of horses, engulfing
the beached vessels, then the piers, before crashing nearly a dek inland.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Among the structures flattened are the barracks of both the Harbor Watch and the coastal guards.
  
 When the waters recede, the only structure left intact within a dek of the harbor is the single stone bridge
across the Falche, a structure dating back nearly three decades.
  
  
 26
  
 With the dull anguished chord that seemed to echo through the night, Secca sat bolt upright in the bed of
the guest chamber at Pamr. Her eyes were gummy, and every muscle in her body protested, but the
anguished chord seemed to reverberate on and on, intensifying the aches and the muscle strains caused
by the riding she had done, riding whose extent was more than she had been used to doing recently.
  
 Her first thought was that she was suffering a nightmare but she could smell the scent of the perfumed oil
she had rubbed into those muscles, and in the dimness of the room she could see The lutar case on the
table, and her belt wallet beside it. And her muscles hurt.
  
 Slowly, she slid from under the heavy covers, her feet touching first the woven rug beside the bed, and
then the cold smooth stone of the floor beyond. Her right hand grasped the dagger on the table by the
bed, slipping it from its sheath.
  
 She cocked her head to one side, listening, but the hold at Pamr was silent, the stone cold and
reassuringly solid beneath her feet.
  
 One-handed, she used the striker to light the bedside lamp. As the glow grew, she looked around the
room. Nothing looked different.
  
 But what had been that awful anguished chord?
  
 She glanced around the room again.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Something had disturbed the Harmonies mightily, but where?
  
 Secca took a deep breath. There was little she could do. The ride to Pamr had been long, so long it had
been well past sunset, into the second glass of the night, when she had slowly dismounted in the
courtyard, and well into the fourth glass before she had pulled the covers in this strange guest chamber
over her.
  
 Even trying to search out the cause of that disruption would not be wise, not until she had more rest, and
more food.In any case, there was little enough that she could do. Perhaps when she returned to
Loiseau...
  
 Still, she checked every corner of her chamber, and the latch bolt to the room, before she returned to
her bed and blew out the lamp.
  
 And...tired as she was, she found sleep was a long time returning.
  
  
 27
  
 Standing just back from the archway to the large practice room of the domed building that lay almost
half a dek to the south of the walls of Loiseau. Secca listened as the second players worked through the
spellsong.
  
 Their copper-tipped finger guards struck the metal strings of the lutars with a precision that it had taken
Anna—and Secca—years to develop. Then the three sizes of lutars had also taken years of effort to
design and make. Finding a way to draw the wire strings had been the hard-est, since spellsinging didn’t
work nearly so well in rep-ilcating tempered or highly forged objects, such as master blades or wire.
  
 Although Delvor and the second players had accompa-nied Secca to Falcor, neither Secca nor Anna
had em-ployed the second players beyond the lands of Mencha, except for road- and bridge building.
Mainly, they had been used in wresting metals from the hills west of the Ostfels, but always on the lands
held by Loiseau. So far they had not been needed elsewhere and for other uses, although Anna had
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

insisted that the time for their use would come.
  
 Delver nodded in time to the simple harmony, the hard, almost drumlike rhythms of the lutars shaking the
windows in their casements. The lead player’s lank brown hair flopped across his forehead. While his
hair was far thinner than in years previous, it was still as long and brown and unkempt.
  
 Secca smiled. Delvor was a far better lutarist and lutar leader than be had ever been a violino player.
She slipped away, down the corridor to the smaller workroom where Richina was drilling Jeagyn and
Kerisel in the simpler vo-calises. Far a time she stood in the door and listened. At the end of the first
exercise, Richina glanced toward Secca.
  
 “Your mouths aren’t open wide enough,” Secca said. “For a spellsong to carry, you must use all that
you have with as little effort as possible. If your mouths are closed, you have to work harder, and the
spell will not carry so far. In a battle, that could mean you would die under the arrows of archers loosing
shafts from beyond your voice. In working the mines, that could mean more spells... or less iron.”
  
 “Yes, lady,” chorused the three.
  
 Secca smiled and nodded. “You will learn.” Then she continued into the spell-shielded room that held
the scrying pool. She closed the chamber door behind her. Her eyes slipped past the pool to the iron
door of the safe room. Behind the door were the bookcase filled with notebooks and the rows of
overlarge sealed jars on the shelves of the second bookcase, each containing a different substance, finely
ground. There was also a second smaller strong room within the safe room that contained strongboxes
filled with gold bars, coins, and a few other items.
  
 Secca' s eyes dropped to the desk she and Anna had shared in recent years, when Anna had asked
Secca to write down yet more of the scraps of knowledge Anna had remembered from the Mist Worlds.
Secca shook her head, recalling the reason for all the notebooks, remembering the two times when she
and Anna had tried to retrieve what Anna had called textbooks. Both times, the volumes had arrived as
flaming masses, accompanied with ugly disso-nant-chords, and both times, Annaand Secca had been
prostrated.
  
 Dissonant chords—with that thought, Secca lifted the lutar case and opened it. She needed to find out
exactly who had been manipulating the Harmonies two nights be-fore. She should have checked earlier,
but she had hesi-tated to push herself. She’d seen too often what that had done to Anna.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Still... both the power and the ugliness alarmed her, and she couldn’t imagine that it had been Clayre’s or
Jo-lyn’s doing. After tuning the lutar, she concentrated on the reflecting pool and the scrying spell.
  
 “Show me now and in great detail
 the source of that night’s deadly wail...”
  
 Asthe image filled the silvered waters of the pool, Secca swallowed in spite in herself.
  
 The harbor, for it had been a harbor, lay devastated— and she was seeing it after two days. The heavy
timbers of the piers had been snapped as if they had been basket withies ground under enormous wagon
wheels and then scattered carelessly. Ship timbers of various lengths and colors floated on the muddy
water, as did other objects, including white specks that might have been bodies. The buildings around the
harbor had been reduced to heaps of stone and bricks or snarled and twisted piles of wood. In the
distance, she could see a single solid stone bridge—untouched except for the rubble heaped under and
around it.
  
 The bridge looked familiar, and she smiled wanly. The harbor had to be that of Narial.
  
 She released the spell, singing a second version.
  
 “Show Narail and in great detail
 the results of last night’s deadly wail...”
  
 The scene was almost identical, except the silvered waters showed more of the shoreline, with a greater
number of piles of shattered structures.
  
 The third spell was to find who created the damage. That revealed a fleet of nearly two score
ships—war-ships of Sturinnese design, sailing in formation, north-ward, from what Secca could tell from
the lighting. With no land in sight, there was little way for her to determine just where that fleet was
headed, except that it meant ill for some land.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “An invasion fleet...” She shook her head. Clayre was somewhere enroute to Neserea. Jolyn was
traveling back to Falcor, if she hadn’t deliberately mislaid or “misunderstood” the messages sent to her.
  
 What about Hadrenn and Ebra? And the troublesome Mynntar? First, Mynntar.
  
 The next image in the pool was that of at all and broad-shouldered and clean-shaven blonde man,
wear-ing a burgundy tunic, riding at the head of a very long column, a smile on his face.
  
 Somehow, Mynntar’s smile seemed even more dis-honest than when Secca had studied him earlier.
Was that because of the open honesty of Lythner’s smile? Secca shook her head. Lythner might be
honest and warm, but those qualities were not enough, and she hoped she would not find herself settling
for such.
  
 It took her several more attempts to scry enough of the column to determine that the lancers were riding
westward along a river, and that at least five companies were clad in the white tunics of Sturinn. Almost
as dis-turbing were the dozen wagons following the lancers.
  
 After releasing the last scrying image, she poured the orderspelled water prepared by Richina into the
goblet and took several long swallows. There was no way to reach Clayre, but she owed Robero a
message with the news. It might arrive scorched on his conference table, but arrive it would.
 She sat at the desk and began to write on the heavy parchment. When she was finished, she scanned the
lines.
  
 Most noble Lord of Defalk...
 ...the harbor of Narial lies in ruins, de-stroyed by a giant wave raised through Darksong ...Darksong
undertaken by Sea-Priests...A fleet of near-on two score vessels sails north-ward toward Liedwahr...
  
 ... Mynntar leads a large force of armsmen toward Synek... Inasmuch as you have already requested my
travel to see Lord Hadrenn... as Protector of the East, I will do as I can to support Lord Hadrenn...
ensure that Dolov remains a holding loyal to you ...
  
 She reread the scroll, then rolled it and sealed it. Then she placed it in the copper traveling tube, the tube
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

lined with the fuzzy mineral Anna had called asbestos.
  
 With a long deep breath, she picked up the lutar.
  
 After dispatching the scroll, she found her entire body shivering. But then, that was expected. Parchment
had once been living and even sending it was a form of Darksong, although it was encased in metal. A
minor form, but Darksong, nonetheless—although many forms of sorcery bordered Darksong, and the
line between Clearsong and Darksong was far less distinct than even most sorcerers or sorceresses
would admit.
  
 Secca sank onto the hard surface of the wooden desk chair.You haven‘t done that much scrying in
seasons. Not in so short a time, at least, and the message scroll hadn’t helped. Then, everything
associated with sorcery had its costs—as Anna had so often emphasized.
  
 She sat for a time before the small desk drinking water from the pitcher and slowly eating the hard
bis-cuits, that Anna had always insisted be kept in the tin by the reflecting pool.
  
 Finally, she rose and walked down the corridor, stop-ping at the door of the first players’ practice room,
empty except for the chief player.
  
 Palian turned. “What’s wrong?”
  
 “Everything. The Sea-Priests have raised a giant wave that has destroyed Narial, all except for the
bridge Anna built. They have an invasion fleet somewhere south of Liedwahr, and Mynntar has raised
armsmen and is riding toward Synek. There’s plotting and a pos-sible uprising being planned in Neserea,
and the old Liedfuhr of Mansuur died less than half a season ago, and there are probably plots against
Kestrin as well.”
  
 “And Wei?”
  
 “The Council won’t make trouble for Defalk, but I can’t see them helping much either.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Do you still plan to go to Synek?”
  
 “More than ever. We’ll take all the players and all but one company of lancers. We can do something
about Mynntar. I don’t know that I can do anything about a Sturinnese fleet.”
  
 “Where will they strike? The Sturinnese?”
  
 Secca spread her hands. “Dumar is not so strong as it should be, and with Narial destroyed, Dumar
would be easiest at first. But the Sturinnese have disliked the Matriarchs of Ranuak for generations, and
they could also attack the Free City of Elahwa to support Mynn-tar.”
  
 “Ranuak or Dumar,” Palian suggested. ‘They gain little from Elahwa.”
  
 “We will see.”
  
 “I will refresh the players with the battle spells when they return.”
  
 ‘Thank you.” Secca offered a smile to the graying chief player before she turned.
  
 Outside, in the blustery gray afternoon, she mounted the gray and rode back toward the open gates of
Lo-iseau, followed as always by four lancers in green. Si-lently, she rode upon the stones of the side lane
to the main road leading to the gates, then through the gates and the north courtyard to the stables. There,
she dis-mounted.
  
 “You’d be looking grim, lady,” offered Vyren as he took the gray mare’s reins after Secca dismounted.
“I’d be wagering it not be the weather.”
  
 “You’d be right.” Realizing the grimness of her tone, she added quickly, “I’m sorry, Vyren. I hadn’t
planned on all that has happened. It will be a hard winter, and a harder spring.” She forced a smile.
“We’ll do what we can."
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Vyren nodded sagely. “One doesn’t lose a great lady often.”
  
 “No. Her loss is greater than any realized.” That was certainly turning out to be true.
  
 From the stables, Secca walked through the open iron gate into the rear bailey—the one she and Anna
had added with sorcery ten years earlier—and toward the large structure set before the westernmost
wall.
  
 The dull impact of a hammer against hot metal filled the chill air of late fall as Secca stepped into the
smithy. She stood well back from the forge, watching as Belan turned hot iron on the anvil and, with deft
hammer blows, fullered the circular shape into a thinner and broader form.
  
 Only when he had taken the tongs and replaced the cooling iron in the furnace did she speak. “How
goes it, master smith?”
  
 Turning to the sorceress, Belan blotted his brow with the back of his forearm. “Would that I were a
sorcerer, Lady Secca. Would that I were..."
  
 “Sorcery does not work well for what you do. The Lady Anna tried, and so have I.” She shrugged. “It
takes hard work to forge what will change Defalk.”
  
 “I’d be knowing that. The parts, they be straight enough, but the seals... fitting them so that the steam
does not burst forth...“
  
 The smith gestured to the model of the engine upon the rear work shelf—the one that lay in pieces.
“Even from it came steam.”
  
 “I know. We did tell you that you would be paid well—because the work would be hard.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 ‘That you did, Lady Secca. That you did.” Belan laughed. “I have had to learn casting, and casting iron
such as this...“ He shrugged. After a moment he added. “We will need more iron soon.”
  
 Secca nodded. “We’ll go to the Sand Pass mine on the way to Synek. You can bring back what we
take from the hills. You may have to use some of it for the special arrows and same for blades.”
  
 “Folk are talking about fighting. Not in a score of years..."
  
 “There will be fighting,” Secca admitted. “We will try to keep it from becoming war.”
  
 “You sorceresses will?”
  
 She nodded.
  
 Belan looked toward the iron in the forge, then back at the redhead, questioningly.
  
 “Liedwahr will still need engines such as those, per-haps more than we thought.”
  
 “Be seasons yet, lady.”
  
 “I know.” Secca smiled gently.
  
 When Belan turned to the forge once more, Seeca slipped from the smithy.
  
 As she walked back toward her room to ponder all that was happening, thoughts swirled through her
head. She needed to review the spells to use against thunderdrums and Darksong, and all sorts of other
spells Anna had developed, spells unused in years. She couldn’t count on there not being a Sea-Priest
with the Stuin-nese lancers.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 She also needed to think about how far she dared to go. Anna had been regent when she had fought in
Ebra, and Secca was far from a regent. She was Protector of the East, which allowed her to support and
defend Hadrenn, but then what?
  
 Would she have any choices? Would she recognize them?
  
  
 28
  
 Wearing the heavy leather trousers, the padded leather tunic, and carrying the cumbersome practice
helmet, Secca walked under a leaden gray sky toward the small walled courtyard beyond the lancers’
barracks. From the worn brown leather belt at her left side hung the battered scabbard that held her
unedged practice sabre.
  
 As she neared the archway to the practice yard, she could hear the sound of metal an metal, the scuffing
of boots on the stone pavement, panting, more than a few grunts, and an occasional mutter.
  
 “Lady’s coming, Easlon said. ..“
  
 "... get one of the new ones to spar with her..."
  
 "... don’t want any bruises, Gorken?”
  
 "...can’t win. Hard to touch her...strikes hard... and if you do hit her... then what?”
  
 “She laughs.... tries harder... better ‘n a lot of lords.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Secca smiled and stepped through the archway. Almost a score of armsmen were practicing, half that
number paired off and sparring with each other. Two were stood under the overhanging eaves in front of
the armorer’s shop, watching the ancient Albero while he used the pedal grind-stone, sharpening one of
their sabres.
  
 Everything stopped, and the lancers turned toward Secca. Secca didn’t see any of the officers, but she
often didn’t if she came later in the day, since most had consorts.
  
 “Lady?’ asked Westl, one of the senior squad leaders, who had clearly been instructing a younger
lancer.
  
 “I need to sharpen my very rusty skills with a blade, Westl. We are leaving tomorrow.” Secca smiled.
“I’m sure there is someone here who won’t mind.” She looked across the lancers who had been
sparring, then nodded toward the dark-haired Gorkon, who reminded her vaguely of Lyth-ner.
“Gorkon? Would you spar with me?”
  
 Gorkon bowed slightly. “As you wish, lady.”
  
 Secca could sense the suppressed laughter. She was al-ways amazed at how often people were
surprised when she said something based on what she had overheard, thinking that she had somehow
used sorcery instead of her ears.
  
 She smiled pleasantly. “I realize I offer a smaller target than you seek.” She shrugged expressively. “But
since everyone is larger than I...”
  
 That drew a few smiles, even from Gorkon.
  
 She pulled on the practice helmet—her one concession to sorcerous practicality, since a blow to her
throat or face would have consequences that she couldn’t really afford, especially with the tasks before
her. Then she stepped for-ward into the nearest empty practice circle and drew the sabre, setting her
feet. The blade felt heavier than usual in her hand. Was it tiredness? That was something she also couldn’t
afford.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Goon,” Secca suggested to the lancer.
  
 Gorkon’s first move was little more than a halfhearted feint, as if he really didn’t wish to strike at her.
  
 Secca slammed the edge of her shorter sabre against his, then forced his blade down, and thwacked the
bigger man across his right shoulder with the flat of the sabre, letting her blade return to a guard position.
She tried to remember to keep her weight balanced.
  
 His next moves were neither feints nor weak, and Secca had to fall back parrying the furious slashes,
waiting... until Garkon overextended himself. Her blade slammed down on the back of his practice
gauntlet, and he lurched backward, barely holding on to his blade.
  
 As Secca stepped forward, her boot skidded on the sandy surface of the stone. Instead of trying to
catch her balance, which would have gotten her spitted in a real fight she ducked into a roll, and came up
to the side with the sabre ready.
  
 Gorkon’s mouth was still open when she slammed the side of his arm with the flat of the sabre once
more. His blade clanked on the stones.
  
 “You’re too kind, Gorkon. What would you do if you had to fight a woman trained by the Matriarch, or
the Trad-ers of Wei?"
  
 The lancer rubbed his arm before bending to retrieve the blade. “I be remembering that, lady.”
  
 A few more murmurs whispered from the watching lancers.
  
 "...like a cat...”
  
 "... wildcat...red hair and all...”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 She ignored the words and gestured with the sabre. “Would you like a turn, Rukor?’
  
 “Begging your pardon, lady... but I fear you be far better than me.”
  
 “I doubt that, but you won’t improve sparring with someone worse.”
  
 For all his protestations, Rukor was good with the blade, and his weapon was a good span and a half
longer than Secca’s sabre.
  
 Still... she managed to avoid all but a few blows, but those would be bruises by evening, as would be the
shoul-der she’d bit on the stone rolling when she had slipped. She bruised all too easily, but there wasn’t
anything she could do about that.
  
 By the time she was tired, and felt she had had the exercise she needed, despite the coolness of the day,
and the chill wind out of the northeast, her hair was plastered flat with sweat and her undertunic was
dripping.
  
 After pulling off the practice helms and sheathing the sabre, she inclined her head to Rukor, and then
Gorkon. “Thank you both. I needed the practice and the exercise.”
  
 “Our pleasure, lady,” offered Rukor, then Gorkon, a mo-ment later.
  
 Secca listened to the hint murmurs as she turned and began to walk toward the archway, and back to
the main building of the keep—for a bath before she dealt with the other problems she had to clear up
before leaving Loiseau.
  
 "... know any other sorceresses—or ladies—spar with their lancers?”
  
 "...why she do it?”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 "...a fool, Nyrtal.. . She goes into battle... only do so much sorcery, you know... needs to be able to
defend herself... All the lords do... why not her?"
  
 "... seems. . . strange.. ."
  
 It didn’t seem strange to Secca. She could still remem-ber Lysara and Ytrude using blades to defend her
when Hoede and Lord Dannel’s armsmen had attacked Falcor. If Anna hadn’t had them trained with
blades, Secca would have died. On that night, Secca had made up her mind that she would master both
blade and sorcery. While she would never be a true master blade, she wouldn’t be an easy target, either.
And neither would Richina or the other ap-prentices, for Anna hadn’t stinted on their training, and Secca
intended to carry on that example as well.
  
  
 29
 Mansuus, Mansuur
  
 The Liedfuhr stands at the closed window, looking out into the gray afternoon where ice pellets bounce
off the railings of the balcony beyond. The chill of the day seeps through the windows. At the knock on
the study door, he turns.
  
 “Yes?’
  
 The graying Bassil steps through the door and bows. “You had summoned me, ser?”
  
 “Has Overcaptain Tein arrived in Mansuus yet?’
  
 “What do you plan, sire?” Bassil’s eyebrows lifted. “If I might inquire.”
  
 “I don’t know if the man is guilty, or innocent and incompetent, but he should have had same idea of
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

what the problems were in Hafem”
  
 “Oh?’ Bassil’s voice is neutral.
  
 “We lost a company of armsmen. Someone paid off the captain, or promised to, and probably the men
as well. Then they were murdered through sorcery in Neserea, and all of Liedwahr is thinking I’m either
making a power play or so ineffectual that I can’t control my own armamen. It reeks of the Sea-Priests,
but there’s not a single bit ofproof, and there won’t be, as we both know.”
  
 “You do not think that the overcaptain can provide such?"
  
 “I doubt it. The stupidest overcaptain wouldn’t remain in Mansuur if he were a party to something like
this. And if he’d found out, he would have fled or let me know. So I doubt he knows anything. But he
should. If the over-captain doesn’t know his officers well enough to anticipate that, it can only mean two
things. Either the promised payoff was extraordinarily high or the morale of themen was very low.”
  
 “A high payoff to the captain doesn’t make his superior officer incompetent or guilty, sire.”
  
 “Oh?” asks Kestrin. “Would you ever have been able to afford that summer cottage in Cealur without
the golds from your consort’s parents’ bond? Or would you have bought that matched pair of grays if
you’d lost that wager to Commander Grymm? Or would your consort have silk outfits if her sister
weren’t consorted to a cloth factor?”
  
 Bassil smiles. “You have a point, like your sire. A su-perior should know the officers under him.”
  
 “I think you had best have Commander Latolk report to me.
  
 Clearing his throat gently, Bassil says quietly. “I already took that liberty, sire. He is waiting in the
anteroom.”
  
 Kestrin laughs, a booming, self-deprecating sound. “And if I hadn’t thought of it, you would have set it
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

up so that I thought I had.”
  
 “One docs learn after a few years, sire.”
  
 “What else have I missed, then?" Kestrin studies the older overcaptain. “I’m young enough to have
missed something.”
  
 Bassil tilts his head. “I may be aging...but on this, I think not.”
  
 “There’s something else, then.
  
 “Yes, sire. Your seers report that the Sturinnese are at-tacking Dumar. They have used sorcery with the
ocean to destroy most of Narial.”
  
 “When?’
  
 “Several days ago.”
  
 “And they did not find out until now?” Kestrin’s voice rises.
  
 “You have but two that are well, sire, and they have been seeking the causes and those involved with the
miss-ing lancers.”
  
 Kestrin nods slowly. “We have much to discuss—after we deal with the commander.” He motions to the
door. “Have him come in.”
  
  
 30
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 In the dim gray predawn light of the late fall morning, Secca looked at the notebooks on the one
bookshelf, then at the rows of the oversized jars with the substances she and Anna had gathered over the
years. Her eyes dropped to the single saddlebag that held small stoppered jars of ingredients taken from
certain of tle jars. Then she closed the iron door to the safe room and its iron-lined interior walls, and slid
the bar into place.
  
 Picking up the lutar and accompanying herself, she be-gan the spell.
  
 “Within this iron, keep safe and under seal...”
  
 As the words died away, Secca stepped back at the momentary flash of heat She studied the bar
welded to the door and the iron frame. The notebooks and all her notes were behind the iron. While the
door and store-room were not proof against metalsmiths with hammers and chisels, even those would
take time to break into the room. The spelled iron would stop any sorcerer or sorceress less powerful
than she was. For the moment, that was all she could do. She never left Loiseau without sealing the safe
room and had no intention of ever doing otherwise, especially with two curious and only partly trained
apprentices remaining at Loiseau.
  
 She disliked leaving Kerisel and Jeagyn, but liked even less taking the two with her or sending them to
Falcor. So she had handed each a small stack of books, asked them to read and write notes on each,
and given them the notations for several simple spells.
  
 After checking the spell-weld a last time, she re-placed the lutar in its case and lifted the saddlebag onto
her shoulder. She closed the chamber door behind her as she walked out to the waiting gray mare for the
ride back across the hill to the lancers and wagons that were assembling in the north courtyard of
Loiseau.
  
 Her guards followed her silently as she rode through the gray of the glass before dawn.
  
 31
  
 The breeze that had barely ruffled hair at the Sand Pass fort had turned into a chill and steady blast at the
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

backs of Secca and the lancers—and the wagons for the iron and their drivers—as the column rode
back westward to the road that would lead to the red rock escarpments from which Secca would pull
the iron Belan needed. While Secca could have tried the sorcery late the day before, after worrying
about the effect on tired men and mounts she had decided against it and had the force ride directly to the
fort for the night. That meant that, while they would be better on the day’s ride after her sorcery, she
would not be. Nor would the players.
  
 The side road to the red rock escarpments turned south from the main paved highway between Ebra
and Mencha just two deks east of the old Sand Pass fort. The side road, while half the width of the main
thoroughfare, was stone-paved as well. Anna had insisted that she didn’t want heavy-laden wagons
mired in the mud. But then, Secca thought Anna had been insistent on road-building throughout
Defalk—road- and bridge-building—and Secca had done more than her share of both. Would she ever
see a stone bridge in Defalk without thinking about Anna?
  
 In the orangish light of the moments just past dawn, Secca turned the gray onto the narrower way to the
mine, following Wilten and Dymen, a young standard bearer she barely knew except that he had come
from Synope to serve in her lancers. Beside Secca rode Richina, wearing a new blue leather jacket
Secca had given her two nights before at Loiseau. The apprentice’s lutar was strapped behind her saddle
and on top of her saddlebags, just as Secca’s was.
  
 The south road angled up the slope at a steady grade, running almost two deks before leveling out on the
sorcery-flattened hilltop before the jagged red hills that sig-nified the western edge of the Ostfels, the
natural border between Defalk and Ebra.
  
 Secca glanced back, taking in the players, and, behind them, Elfens and his half-score archers, and even
farther back, the four companies of green-clad lancers, and well behind them, the wagons that would
carry the iron back to Loiseau.
  
 After Secca reached the artificial plateau and had ridden to the eastern end, a hundred yards short of the
gaping pit filled with black water, the red-haired sorceress reined up the gray mare and brushed back the
hair from her forehead, readjusting the green headband that was supposed to keep it out of her face. She
turned in the saddle to check on the riders behind her—and the wagons still moving up the long
incline—then glanced at Richina. “If you would please let me know when the wagons are here?”
  
 “Yes, lady.”
  
 Secca dismounted, handing the gray’s reins to Richina, and turned to study the skies to the north,
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

relieved that they were clear. Then she began to run through the warm-up vocalises.
  
 Behind her, the players had all dismounted and were beginning to tune their instruments.
  
 Secca had finished three vocalises, and the tuning and warm-up melodies were fading away, when
Richina spoke.
  
 “Everyone is here.”
  
 Secca glanced at Wilten. “Are your men ready?"
  
 “Yes, Lady Secca. They have their mounts reined in, and have been warned.”
  
 Sceca glanced next at Palian, and the first players, then at Delvor.
  
 “We stand ready,” replied Palian.
  
 Delvor nodded his readiness.
  
 “Begin,” Secca ordered.
  
 ‘The mining spell...on my mark,” Palian called. “Mark!”
  
 The first three bars were all violino, before the wood-winds and falk-horn joined. Then came the massed
chords of the lutars of the second players.
  
 Seeca concentrated first on matching her voice and words to the accompaniment of the two groups of
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

players and then on visualizing the iron being pulled from the red rocks of the escarpments and being
formed into the ingots that Belan—and Defalk—needed.
  
 “Form, form, form the iron strong,
 into ingots made pure by song,
 verily, verily, verily...”
  
 As usual, well before the end of the spell a low rum-bling rolled out of the skies that had filled with a
gauzy haze, a haze quickly thickening into interlinked thun-derclouds. Spider lightning came next, bright
enough that Secca had to force herself to concentrate even hard-er on finishing the spell.
  
 With a single harmonic chord of the kind that only sorceresses or certain players heard, the ground
shiv-ered, then rolled ever so slightly. Secca shifted her weight and waited. A blast of hot air raked
across her and the players, followed by one almost equally chill.
  
 Another, longer, peal of thunder rumbled over Secca and the players.
  
 Ignoring the burning in her eyes, she slowly looked at the ground between her and the gaping pit before
and below the red cliffs, a pit now larger than it had been a glass earlier. The dark ingots of iron, each
one weighing nearly two stones, lay in rows on the red-sand soil between the sorceress and the pit.
  
 “Lady...” Richina extended a water bottle.
  
 Flashes—daystars—flickered before Secca, as she took the water and began to sip slowly from the
bottle.
  
 “You need to eat,” urged the apprentice.
  
 Secca took a small mouthful of the bread that would get crustier with each day of travel, then a bite of
the white cheese, then more bread, and another swallow from the water bottle.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Murmurs drifted from some of the ranked lancers.
  
 "...they all like that?”
  
 “...small...big voice...”
  
 "...early storm ... all we need, going through the Sand Pass...”
  
 Fine droplets of rain cascaded round Secca and then across the lancers, players, and the wagons that
Belan had brought to carry the iron back to Loiseau. Almost as quickly as it had come, the rain stopped,
and the sky began to clear under the chill wind out of the north.
  
 Secca’s eyes drifted northward, to the road, and to the Sand Pass fort, barely visible against the red
stone cliffs. Only a squad of lancers from Loiseau maintained the fort, and they were rotated every two
weeks. These days the fort served more as waystation for traders and travelers, who were grateful for
the stark accommoda-tions and the small copper per bead charge.
  
 “You need more, lady,” Richina reminded Secca.
  
 Dutifully, Secca took another mouthful of bread and cheese, aware that the dayflashes were beginning to
fade.
  
 She studied the sky, especially to the northeast, from where the worst storms came, but there were but a
few scattered clouds, if moving swiftly westward. While it was not winter yet, not for a few weeks, late
fall could still bring ice rain or snow.
  
 Was traveling into Ebra so late in the season wise? Possibly not, but letting Hadrenn fend for himself
against Mynntar and Sturinnese lancers was even less so. And the reflecting pool had shown that Synek
was safe, at least so far.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Secca took another sip from the water bottle.
  
  
 32
 Encora, Ranuak
  
 A man holds a stringed instrument, his eyes fixed on a small ingot of copper, a short bar of iron, and
some strips of tin, all set on a polished circle of marble perhaps two spans in diameter. He sings, his
fingers deft on the strings of the instrument.
  
 "... a rose, in bronze and hued to the white,
 itspetalsin ovals and catching the light,
 it seem both firm and arched iniron so dark..”
  
 As the notes of the song die away, a circle of blue light enfolds the marble and the objects upon it. Then,
with the faintest of chords, unheard except to the singer, all the objects vanish to reveal a perfect white
bronze rose upon an iron stem, lying upon the marble.
  
 The door opens behind the singer, and the Matriarch enters, alone.
  
 The man bows.
  
 She steps forward and studies the rose. “It is truly beautiful, Alcaren.”
  
 “I am glad that it pleases you, Matriarch, seeing as little that I do is pleasing these days.” The man who
holds the small instrument, larger than a mandolin, yet smaller then the lutars introduced by the sorceress
of Defalk, is broad-shouldered but narrow-waisted, too short for his breadth to be handsome, but not
exactly stocky either. His hair is a nondescript brown, cut short,
 as if he were a lancer, which he is not. His eyes are gray-blue, penetrating, but not piercing.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Certainly, the self-pity of your words is less than pleasant,” counters Alya.
  
 "What would you have of me?” Alcaren lowers the instrument.
  
 “What do you call it—the instrument?”
  
 “A lumand, I suppose. It’s between a small lutar and a mandolin.”
  
 “Are there others like it?”
  
 “I do not know, but I would doubt such. It is made for my voice.”
  
 “You have a voice both pleasant and true, and most effective. Yet you seem to lack the wisdom as to
when it is wise to use it.”
  
 Alcaren waits, not replying.
  
 “Using sorcery to enchant the daughter of the Exchange Mistress was scarcely wise.”
  
 “I did not use sorcery. I sang her some songs. I wrote them most carefully. There were no suggestions,
and no commands. One was about a rose.” Alcaren gestures toward the white rose on the marble. “But
not sorcery as you just heard.”
  
 “When a sorcerer sings, it is considered sorcery. Alya’s voice is dry. “Whether it be so or not You
should have known better.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “A mere man, and I am supposed to know such?”
  
 “A cousin of the Matriarch, raised in this family and taught all we know, and you refuse to use that
knowl-edge wisely or acknowledge it.” Alya shakes her head gently. “What am I to do with you?"
  
 Alcaren shrugs. “I am good with a blade, and I ride well. You would not let me be a lancer.”
  
 ‘The men’s companies will not accept an officer who is a sorcerer,” Alya points out.
  
 “And the women’s won’t accept a man,” Alcaren fin-ishes. “I know. Why did you train me, then?”
  
 “I had no choice. You were already making up songs and spells. You could have hurt yourself or
others.”
  
 “Better you had killed me.”
  
 ‘The Harmonies have a use for you.”
  
 “What? In more than a score and a quarter years, I have not seen such.”
  
 “Be patient.”
  
 “You came to tell methat?”
  
 “No...I came to tell you that you are to be one of my personal guard chiefs. As you said, you are skilled
with a blade, and I will give you leave to use two or three spells to protect me, as and if necessary.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “You are more accomplished than I, Matriarch.”
  
 “The times are changing, and I fear that the demands of being the Matriarch will mean that I can no
longer be as watchful of myself as before.”
  
 “The Sturinnese will maintain their blockade?" A glimmer of interest appears in the gray-blue eyes.
  
 “More ships have left Sturinn, and they carry far more armsmen and lancers, and those of ours in the
harbor are not armed to take the fight to those already arrayed to the south”
  
 “And you trust in the Harmonies?”
  
 “Not totally.” Alya smiles. “Best you gather your be-longings. I have a wagon.” After a pause, she adds,
“Do not forget the rose. You may need it.” She turns.
  
 Alcaren glances from the departing Matriarch to the rose, frowning, then slips the lumand into its boiled
leather case. After a long moment, he lifts the rose.
  
  
 33
  
 The day before, snow had blown out of the west, in sheets thrown almost hodzontally by a wind so
fierce and cold that Secca’s back had been numb for deks. The sky had been clear that morning, with no
sign of a storm, not even a wind, when the column had begun the ride through the Sand Pass to reach the
eastern side of the Ost-fels—and Ebra.
  
 They had found some shelter in a waystation, and waited out the storm through the night.
  
 Now, on the morrow, as they rode eastward toward Ebra, the sky remained gray, although the snow
had stopped, and the wind had died away. Secca glanced over her shoulder, but the bulk of the Ostfels
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

and the eastern end of the Sand Pass lay shrouded in clouds, perhaps five deks behind the end of the
column of riders. On the left side of the narrow road—half the width of that in Defalk, but still
paved—were grasslands, seemingly like those around Mencha, if covered with a thin layer of the heavy
snow.
  
 By contrast perhaps five deks to the south lay a long beige ridge of sand untouched by the snow—the
western-most part of the Sand Hills, The air above the dunes was filled with a shifting fog from the snow
that had fallen and immediately melted.
  
 As she studied the Sand Hills, Secca shivered inside her leather riding jacket. Supposedly, more than a
generation before, the sand had blocked both ends of the Sand Pass, so much so that it had spilled out of
the pass above the Sand Pass fort, and isolated Ebra from Defalk. The sand had remained until the dark
Evult had shifted the dunes so that he could move his Dark Monks into Defalk and begin his conquest of
the rest of Liedwahr. Then Anna had ar-rived, and everything had changed.
  
 Secca frowned. Someday, would the sands shift again? There were stories about how the Sand Hills
had been created by ancient Spell-Fire Wars between Ranuak and the vanished Mynyan lords, but
legends only—not one word in any book she had ever seen.
  
 She dropped back to ride beside Palian and Delvor. “How are the players doing?”
  
 “Since none have embarked on such before, save the two of us,” Palian said with a crooked smile, “they
still listen when we say that they are fortunate.”
  
 ‘They do not believe us,” Delvor added, “but they lis-ten.”
  
 The three laughed.
  
 “Was it this bad with Lady Anna?” Secca asked.
  
 The two exchanged glances. Finally, Palian spoke. “It was far worse in Dumar, for the rain never
seemed to stop from the tine we entered the land until we passed the Falche. In Ebra... the weather was
better.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “But not the battles,” offered Delvor. “Bertmynn had thunder-drums, and the sorceress knew it not. We
lost many in the first encounter, and I thought I would not walk again, so exhausted was I.”
            -
 Secca nodded somberly. That was a side she had not heard... or perhaps not listened to when it had
been told. “We have spells for thunder-drums, and for other possi-bilities.”
  
 “It will be different when you go into battle, lady. Let what you have learned sing for you.” said Palian,
not un-kindly.
  
 Left unspoken was the reminder that Anna had been older and wiser, and fought battles in two worlds.
  
 After a nod to the two players, Secca urged the gray mare forward, past Richina and up beside Wilten.
“How are the men doing?"
  
 “Cold and wet, and muttering under their breath, as have lancers ever.” Wilten also offered an off-center
smile. “This was an early storm. It passed quickly, and they will forget.”
  
 “I used the glass to check the road, and there are no lancers or armsmen ahead.” Secca paused. "The
stone pav-ing ends only a few deks ahead. The road doed not look muddy, but...“
  
 “After four companies of lancers pass, it will become so, and doubtless the local peasants will call down
disso-nance upon us.”
  
 “So long as none use sorcery, we’ll be fine.”
  
 "Aye...."
  
 Secca’s eyes drifted to the left, at the fog-veiled Sand Hills, then back to the road ahead, the long road
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

to Synek and beyond.
  
  
 34
  
 By midday two mornings later, Secca and her force had traveled far enough east that only the top of the
road was damp, the clay only slightly slippery, so quickly had the late fall storm swept out of the Ostfels
and then dis-sipated. The sky remained slightly hazy, and the sun of-fered little warmth. A thin layer of
slushy snow covered any area where there was grass or low vegetation, but the spots of bare ground and
the tree limbs were barely damp.
  
 Richina rode on Secca's left, the side closest to the River Syne, a thin line of blue water between and
below the low hills. The hills were covered mostly with snow-dusted brown grass. Smaller woodlots
were dotted across the hills, generally close to the cots that appeared scattered almost randomly.
  
 “What is Lord High Counselor Hadrenn like?’ asked Richina.
  
 “I have never met Lord Hadrenn. I have seen his image in the reflecting pond, but he preferred to deal
with either Lady Anna or Lord Robero. He is said to be well-mannered and would like to do the best he
can for Ebra. His arms commander is named Stepan, and Lady Anna said Stepan was most capable.”
Secca smiled. “He was once a most handsome man, Stepan was.”
  
 “How did you know him?”
  
 “He is from Synek, but when the Evult conquered that land, Stepan fled to Defalk and served my father.
After my father’s illness, and when Hadrenn reclaimed his patri-mony, Stepan and Gestatr returned to
Synek.”
  
 “You know him well, then.”
  
 I was but eight the last time I saw him,” Secca said with a laugh. “Doubtless he remembers me as but a
child.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “It sounds like Stepan is the reason Hadrenn has re-mained Lord High Counselor,” ventured Richina.
  
 “I have had surmises along those lines,” admitted Secca, “but we shall see.” Not that they had much time
to see, she feared, since her use of the glass that morning had shown that Mynntar was almost at the end
of the road bordering the River Dol and within twenty or thirty deks of the River Syne road that led
westward to Synek.
  
 When the riders reached the next hill crest on the slip-pery clay of the road, Secca could not help but
smile at what she saw—a stone bridge with a level roadbed sup-ported by a graceful arch that spanned
the narrow River Syne, with a style that could only have been created by the sorcery of a single
individual.
  
 Richina glanced from the bridge to Secca, and then back to the bridge, before asking, “Did you know of
this?”
  
 “No. She must have done it in the early years, when I was still in Defalk. I can see why she did.” Just
how many other bridges, buildings, and accomplishments would Secca find in the years and deks before
her? And how long before the emptiness within her healed?
  
 “So that any forces she had to send would have an easy crossing?"
  
 Secca nodded. “There won’t be others to the east of here, I don’t think. They could be used by anyone
oppos-ing Hadrenn.”
  
 Both glanced up at the sound of hoofs coming over the low rise on the road ahead. One of the lancers,
who had earlier been sent out as a scout rode back toward the col-umn. With him was another rider,
wearing a dark green sash over his riding jacket, and a shoulder harness for a blade far longer than the
sabres used by Secca’s lancers.
  
 As Secca stood in the stirrups, she could see a half-score of riders farther back along the muddy road.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Welcome!” called the Ebran lancer, “Sorceress- Protector. Lord Hadrenn bids you welcome.”
  
 “Our thanks to you and to Lord Hadrenn!” Secca called back.
  
 Half bowing in the saddle, the young brown-haired lancer pointed toward the bridge. “Lord Hadrenn’s
hold lies beyond the great bridge, and to the north.”
  
 “You may lead on,” suggested Wilten. "The way has been damp, and we would welcome a dry
holding.”
  
 Dry and welcome you shall be,” called the young lancer, grinning mostly at Richina.
  
 As Hadrenn’s lancer turned his mount, Secca glanced at her apprentice. “He was looking at you.”
  
 Even from more than a yard away. Secca could see Ri-china flush.
  
 “Enjoy it. Just don’t take it too seriously.” Secca looked over her shoulder at the oiled case that held her
lutar, then at Palian.
  
 ‘We will be ready, lady,” answered the chief player.
  
 Behind the second players, Elfens stood in his stirrups and grinned at Secca. Secca grinned back at the
irrepres-sible and cheerful head archer, then turned her attention back to the front of the column where
the Ebrans rode. None slowed as they neared the stone-paved causeway leading to the bridge.
  
 Once beyond the bridge, the road began to climb gently and followed the riverbank, more westward
than north. Be-low, along the river, was a thick growth of bushes and trees, a few still bearing traces of
tattered yellow leaves.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 A good glass passed before Secca finally saw Synek to the northwest. Smoke rose from the chimneys
of the town. From the dwellings on the river and from those on the hills above, Secca judged it to be
perhaps a third the size of Falcor, and yet older, with no new structures that she could discern.
  
 “We near Lord Hadrenn’s hold!” called one of the Ebran lancers.
  
 Secca looked from the town to the right, past a small orchard. The hold for theLord High Counselor of
Ebra sat an a gentle rise, surrounded by a low wall constructed of ancient yellow bricks, no more than
two yards high. An iron gate was set in the middle of the wall, and the lane running from the hold to the
gate stretched almost a dek, Secca judged. The structure itself seemed to have been built at two different
times, with the left side, of tan stone and yellow brick; seeming far older than the more smoothly dressed
marble of the right side. Even so, the entire structure seemed only slightly larger than Loiseau. Out from
the hold—more of a hulking mansion than a liedburg—stood a double handful of outbuildings of
as-sorted sizes, some built of yellow bricks, some of a tan sandstone, and several of brick and wood.
  
 As Secca and her escort neared the gate, a full company of Ebran lancers rode down the cobble-stoned
lane from the hold, splitting into two lines and turning their mounts to present an honor guard to Secca
and her lancers.
  
 A fanfare from a single trumpet echoed across the af-ternoon. The Ebran lancers held ranks until all of
the Defalkan lancers had passed, then swung in behind the last of the column.
  
 Secca, Wilten, and Richina reined up in the paved court-yard at the rear of the main structure.
  
 The man who stood on the balcony above the rear court-yard was blocky, bald, and beamed down at
Secca from above a large paunch. A purple scar ran from the side of his nose to below his right ear.
Secca recognized Hadrenn from her efforts at scrying him.
  
 “We welcome you, Sorceress—Protector of the East.”
  
 “We bring greetings and aid from Lord Robero of De-falk,”Secca replied.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “His and your greetings are even more welcome than your assistance, although we are grateful for both.”
Had-renn gestured toward the entrance below him. “Once you have taken care of your mounts, I would
meet you below.”
  
 “We will be most pleased.” Secca offered a smile she hoped was warm enough.
  
 35
 Encora, Ranuak
  
 Standing in the formal receiving room, the silver-and- blonde-haired Matriarch glances toward the clear
blue crystal chair of the Matriarchy, set upon the low dais at the far end of the long room half-walled with
floor-to-ceiling windows. Then she looks back at Alcaren, who waits just inside the doorway, and
speaks. “A lady in a black cloak will be arriving shortly. You will wait outside the door and announce
her. You will not escort her inside, but let her enter by herself. You will let no others in to see me, should
they accompany her. If she will not enter by herself, she may not enter.”
  
 “Should I not...” Alcaren stops. His eyes drop to the blue stone floor. “I am sorry.”
  
 “You are right to worry about me, but this is one room where I am secure by myself.” A wry smile
follows the words. “Unless I must face more than one other.”
  
 “You are the Matriarch.” Alcaren inclines his head. ‘I am still learning. Yet.... might I ask? One of the
Ladies of Shadows?"
  
 “Yes. I am certain that they wish to warn me about something sorcerous. I may already know it, or I
may not, but it is better to listen and hear again what one knows than to ignore the request and fail to
learn something that I should know.” Alya nods. “You may go and take your position without.”
  
 “Yes. Matriarch.”
  
 Once the door shuts, and the Matriarch is alone, she walks to the dais, where she seats herself in the
crystalline chair, upon the blue cushion that is the sole softness within the formal receiving room. She
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

straightens herself and waits, thinking, oblivious to the cold autumn sunlight that angles through the clear
glass of the closed windows and falls upon the shimmering blue stone floor.
  
 Before long, there is a knock on the door, followed by Alcaren’s voice. “A Lady of the Shadows to see
you, Ma-triarch.”
  
 “Show her in.” replies Alya.
  
 The door opens. In walks a figure of height neither small nor exceedingly tall, but wearing a black cloak
that covers all from the crown of the head down to just above the tops of the mid-calf black boots. The
door closes. The hooded cloak of black shadows the face ofthe figure standing in the receiving room, but
the shadows are not deep enough to conceal the gray hair and the age-sharpened jaw. Nor is the cloak
bulky enough to disguise that the caller is a woman.
  
 The Matriarch sits erect upon the clear blue crystal chair of the Matriarchy. “You requested an
audience?”
  
 “I did, Matriarch.” The woman bows gracefully. “We appreciate that you are willing to hear us.”
  
 “What did you wish to bring to my attention?"
  
 “We understand that two sorceresses of Defalk are trav-eling eastward into Ebra to deal with the
rebellion of Lord Mynntar, and that a third is in Neserea. Further, there is a renegade sorcerer in
Neserea who has been partially trained by the Sturinnese. He has already used sorcery to slaughter a
company of Mansuuran lancers.”
  
 “For women who abhor sorcery, you know a great deal.”
  
 “We have never opposed sorcery for knowledge and communications, only its use as a tool for changing
the world and weather or for warfare.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 The Matriarch waits for the Lady of the Shadows to speak again.
  
 “Last, you have trained a man in sorcery, armed him as one of your guards, and set him before you.”
The dark eyes under the hood fix on the Matriarch.
  
 “That is true. He is where I can watch him, and he can protect me in these disturbing times.”
  
 “Not in generations have there been so many sorcer-esses—and sorcerers—in Liedwahr trained for
war.” The Lady of the Shadows pauses. ‘There are two other sorcer-esses yet in Falcor who may yet
bring their evil arts into play, and several apprentices.”
  
 “All that is known.”
  
 “Matriarch, we exist because of the horrors of the Spell- Fire Wars. We would not see sorcery such as
that ever unleashed again.”
  
 "Ranuak would not be here today without the Spell-Fire Wars,” Alya points out. “All our ancestors
would have died under the yoke of the Mynyan lords.”
  
 "That was a price we cannot pay again, Matriarch, and well you know that. Ebra is yet a blighted and
poor land, and Wei remains so, and cold as well. We must trade, for much of our land remains boggy
and wet, and far too many of those bogs poison the land around them.” The shadow lady waits within the
black cloak.
  
 “All that is true. What would you have me do? I have trained none in battle sorcery, nor have I used
such sor-cery. Yet the Sturinnese have used sorcery to flatten most of Narial. Their vessels swarm
around the coast. They are blocking our trading vessels, and they support the rebel Mynntar in Ebra.
Defalk sees itself threatened.”
  
 “You must insist that Lord Robero turn from sorcery.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  The Matriarch laughs, ruefully. “Defalk has perhaps thirty full companies of lancers. Dumar has less than
that— or had less than that. We have twenty. The Maitre of Stu-rinn can bring ten times that to our
shores, should he wish. Do you think my words will sway either Lord Robero or the Maitre?’
  
 “Then close the Exchange to the Defalkans and their allies. You must. This poor land cannot bear
another set of scars like those of the Spell-Fire Wars.”
  
 “We am already losing trading vessels to the Sturinnese. Before long, few or none will port here. Then.. .
we will need trade from Defalk and Ebra far more than they will need it from us. Do you wish me to
condemn our people to starvation?"
  
 “Better that than death in fire and flame.”
  
 “It has not come to that. It may well not. I will do as I can.”
  
 The Lady of the Shadows bows. “Thank you, Matriarch. We have offered what we know, and what we
fear from another excess of sorcery. We have warned you.”
  
 “I do hope that is not a threat,” Alya says.
  
 "The Ladies of the Shadows do not threaten, Matriarch.”
  
 “I have heard you.” The Matriarch smiles coldly, for-mally. “As always, I must act far all in Ranuak.As
always, I will not use battle sorcery. But...” She pauses, then utters the next words slowly and
deliberately, “I will not stand by and let all that the pain and suffering of the Spell-Fire Wars produced
vanish from Erde because of fear. Suf-fering—and sorcery—are to be preferred over slavery.” Alya’s
eyes blaze before the fire in them is shielded once more, and she speaks her last words to the figure
before her. “You may depart.”
  
 Once the door to the formal receiving chamber closes, another kind of darkness passes over the
Matriarch’s face. a face that has become more angular with the years, like that of berfather, rather than
round as her mother’s had been. She looks toward the door, not seeing it, her eyes fixed somewhere
else, and her face is drawn.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
  
 36
  
 Secca carried her lutar case in her right hand and the saddlebags over her left shoulder as she stepped
up the stairs and in through the marble archway of Hadrenn’ s palace, for it was far more a palace than a
walled liedburg capable of withstanding an attack or a siege. The entry hall was perhaps a third the size
of that of Loiseau, and the ceiling was less than a yard above Secca’s head.
  
 Flanked by two guards in green, blades still in their scabbards, Hadrenn bowed in greeting to those
entering, although his eyes did not leave Secca.
  
 “Welcome, sorceress. Your grace and beauty have been understated,” offered Hadrenn. “Most
understated.”
  
 “As has been your hospitality and warmth.” In a damp riding jacket, hair tied back, with road mud
splattered all over her, Secca had strong doubts about her present beauty. “Might I introduce those who
have accompanied me.” She motioned. “My chief of the first players, Palian. My chief of the second
players, Delvor, and my overcaptain of lanc-ers, Wilten. This is my assistant sorceress. Richina.” She
paused as the long-faced Elfens stepped forward and bowed deeply. “And my chief of archers, Elfens.”
  
 Elfens managed to look suitably somber as he stepped back.
  
 “We are most pleased to see you all. We appreciate your support of Ebra in this time of change.”
Hadrenn bowed his head slightly. “But now is not the time for such serious stuff. You have traveled far
and swiftly and need refresh-ment.”
  
 "I also bring gifts from Lord Robero, and will have them unpacked and ready for you shortly.” Secca
inclined her head.
  
 “For such graciousness on your part and that of your lord, I am most thankful, and we will look forward
to beholding such.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 A thin, harried figure slipped out from a side corridor in response to Hadrenn’s beckoning finger. ‘Thsis
Fren-gal, the assistant saalmeister. He will show youto your chambers, and once you are refreshed, we
shall dine.” Hadrenn beamed even as he gestured a second time, and a lancer stepped forward, an older
man with hair half sandy, half silver, and a crinkled smile. “You may recall my arms commander.”
  
 “Stepan!” burst from Secca’s lips. She couldn’t help of-fering a wide grin to the former armsman from
Flossbend.
  
 The arms commander laughed. “You are older, Lady Sorceress, and more beautiful, but not much
larger.”
  
 “And you are older, and more handsome,” Secca re-plied.
  
 The arms commander grinned, then shook his head.
  
 "Stepan will help your overcaptain settle your lancers.” Hadrenn nodded to the arms commander. “Your
chief players and their players shall have rooms in the north wing. Frengal’s assistant will see to that.”
  
 “You brought what...four companies?” asked Stepan.
  
 “Yes. They’re mine, not Defalk’s”
  
 “I had thought such from the green tunics.”
  
 Secca inclined her head slightly. “How many companies have you raised here?”
  
 “We have ten companies, and some levies from the holders—two companies worth.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 The trace of a frown flitted across Hadrenn’s face, but vanished so quickly Secca could have imagined
she had not seen the expression. The heavy lord said smoothly, “Frengal... ifyou would see that everyone
is settled?”
  
 "Yes, lord."
  
 Secca and Richina--and two of Secca’s lancers—fol-lowed the slender assistant saalmeister up the wide
stone steps that curved up off the entry foyer. Frengal continued along the corridor a good forty yards,
halting before a set of half-open double doors.
  
 ‘There are chambers to each side of yours. Lady Secca, for assistants.”
  
 “Richina is my only assistant.”
  
 “Then I would suggest the chamber to the left, lady. But let me show you your chamber first, as your
assistant should be familiar with it as well.”
  
 Secca nodded, and the two followed the functionary into the chamber. The two lancers—Dyvan and
Easlon—sta-tioned themselves at the door.
  
 The guest chamber was comparatively luxurious for Liedwahr—despite the seeming modesty of
Hadrenn’s holding—and far more elaborate than anything in Falcor.
  
 A large desk was set before two wide windows, the glass comprised of leaded diamond-shaped panes.
The window casements were draped in green velvet hangings, tied back with golden velvet ropes.
  
 Secca set the saddlebags on the chest at the foot of the broad bed, but continued to hold the lutar as she
followed Frengal through the arched doorway beyond the desk.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “And...here is the bath chamber.” As Frengal spoke, two serving women in gray eased into the room
with heavy steaming kettles, pouring the water into a tiled tub built into a dais in the rear corner of the
bathing chamber. “The previous sorceress... suggested it.”
  
 “She and I appreciate that,” Secca said quietly. Frengal bowed. “If you need aught, there is the
bell-pull.” He pointed to a narrow crimson hanging running down from the ceiling on the wall beside the
headboard of the canopied bed.
  
 “Thank you very much, Frengal.”
  
 “My pleasure, ladies. My pleasure.”
  
 With a bow, the man departed.
  
 The young lancer and standard bearer Dymen stood in the doorway with a leather-covered bundle.
“Lady?”
  
 “Thank you, Dymen. If you would just set that on the desk."
  
 “Yes, lady.” With a bow the young man crossed the room and set the bundle on the desk, then bowed
again before slipping out and closing the door.
  
 “You said I was your assistant,” murmured Richina.
  
 “Apprentices are assistants,” Secca murmured back. "That was for your protection and to let Hadrenn
know how seriously we take this.”
  
 “Will you let me do sorcery?"
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “If necessary and it is something you can do.” Secca smiled. "Now... go get cleaned up. I’m sure you're
as hungry as I am.”
  
 “Yes, lady.” Richina bowed and slipped out, carrying her own gear and lutar.
  
 Secca walked around the room—dusty and not so clean as she would have liked despite its opulence,
then stopped to look out the windows. The sky remained clear; she hoped that would continue.
  
 After taking out the lutar, and using a spell to clean and reheat the bathwater, which had already chilled,
she slipped into the tile tub for a bath that was brieferthan she would have liked, but welcome all the
same, Dressing for dinner was not a problem, since all she had was the not-quite-clinging high-necked
deep blue gown that offset her hair. It was the only non-riding habit she had brought and one that rolled
into a compact cylinder.
  
 She was bushing her hair—always unruly, long or short, not quite straight, but wit not enough curl for
that fashion, either—when there was a knock on the door.
  
 “Lady Secca?”
  
 “Come in, Richina.”
  
 The apprentice slipped into the room. Richina wore a gown similar to Secca’s in cut, but of a rich green
more suited to her unfreckled fair complexion and sandy hair. “Do you need any help?"
  
 “I doubt that even the most forbidden sorcery could do much.” Secca laughed. “We might as well go
down. I’m famished. Then, I was famished when we unsaddled our mounts.”
  
 Some functionary must have been watching, Secca de-cided, because Hadrenn was waiting below. So
were Wil-ten, Stepan, Palian, and Delvor, as well as several others from Hadrenn’s household or retinue.
  
 Easlon was the guard who followed the two sorceresses and who carried the leather wrapped gift from
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

Robero.
  
 Stepan favored Secca with a knowing smile, even as Hadrenn stepped forth and motioned toward the
dining hall. Through the open double doors Secca saw a long room paneled in age-darkened oak, and lit
inadequately by candles in wall sconces.
  
 “Before we eat, here are Lord Robero’s gifts.” Secca motioned for Easlon to step forward.
  
 Hadrenn did not quite frown as he took the bundle and slipped off the leather covering. Under the
covering was an ebon-black chest, chased with inlaid silver arcs and curlicues. He glanced at Secca.
  
 “There is more inside,” she said.
  
 Secca did not peer, as did those around Hadrenn, for she had already seen the heavy gold chain with the
pale green stone, and the golden seal ring circled with small dia-monds.
  
 The Lord High Counselor of Ebra did smile as he saw the objects on the blue velvet inside the chest
“Your lord is most generous. Most generous.”
  
 Secca had thought Robero had been far too generous. “He is known for that, especially for those who
have been fast friends.”
  
 “We have always endeavored to be such.” Hadrenn pre-sented another smile.
  
 “Lord Robero recognizes that.” Secca inclined her head slightly, but did not bow.
  
 “Ah..." Hadrenn paused, as if he had forgotten some-thing, then turned to the woman in green silk gown
and jacket beside and slightly behind him. ‘This is my consort, Belvera,” Hadrenn said. “Dear, this is the
Lady Secca, Sorceress-Protector of the East.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “I am most pleased to meet you,” Secca offered.
  
 “And I you, Lady Sorceress.” Belvera did bow to Secca.
  
 Hadrenn led the way into the dining hall and the long table, where Secca found herself at Hadrenn’s
right, across from his consort. Wilten was beside Belvera, and Stepan to Secca’ s right. Then came
Richina, Palian, and Delvor.
  
 The gray-haired and ample woman in the shimmering green tunic smiled warmly across the table at
Secca. “It’s so good to see you.” Her smile broadened. “You are a mite of a thing for such a large title,
but then, your predecessor was as thin as a twig, and it made no difference there, either.”
  
 “It is hard for sorceresses to be other than thin,” Secca said with a laugh. “No matter what we eat and
how often.”
  
 “So I’ve heard. My father said that Lord Brill was a slender fellow too, and all the drawings of the Lady
Asen-tar show her as thin.”
  
 “Asentar?” asked Secca.
  
 “Ah... yes. She was the grandmother of that evil man, the Evult. It’s been said that he buried her alive in
her tower, but we’ll never know, not since all of Vult lies yet under steaming rock. You know, the
Zauberinfeurer yet pours molten rock over the valley. A shame. It was once a pretty place.”
  
 “Dear..." Hadrenn coughed.
  
 “Oh... I suppose you want to offer an invocation so that everyone can eat. I’m sorry. Please do.”
  
 Hadrenn cleared Ms throat again, them intoned in a voice an octave lower than his speaking voice,
“May Harmony grace this table and all those around it, now and in the days and seasons to come.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Aye, Harmony.” came the murmurs from lower on the table.
  
 When Hadrenn looked up, his eyes met Secca’s for a moment, and she noted that his orbs were deep
and brown, almost cowlike except for the dark rings around them and the intentness they held. “Let us be
served!”
  
 Serving girls, each wearing a green apron trimmed in yellow, appeared with large platters, and with
baskets of bread. A youth stepped to the table with a ewer like pitcher, but the contents were a golden
wine which he poured first into Hadrenn’s pewter goblet.
  
 Hadrenn leaned toward Secca, ignoring the goblet. “Having learned some of the habits of sorceresses
over the years. I will not long defer to meaningless chatter.” A bright and false smile followed the words,
indicating to Secca that Hadrenn would have preferred a more leisurely approach
  
 “Were times more settled, Lord Hadrenn. I would wel-come such,” Secca said politely. “Perhaps upon
my next visit.”
  
 “I sense as much. Your presence and that of your lancers bears an urgency not mentioned in the
message I received from Lord Robero announcing your imminent anival. Ah ... but a moment” Hadrenn
looked up and waited until the youth serving the wine had filled the goblets of Bel-vera, Secca, and those
at the head of the table before lifting his own. “To our most honored guests.”
  
 Secca took the slightest of sips, knowing she dared little else until she had eaten. The wine was passible,
better than what the vineyards around Mencha produced, but not so good as the barrels she regularly
had carted from Floss-bend.
  
 “I do wish Haddev could have been here tonight,” of-fered Belvera. “He always says that sorceresses
must be ugly old women.
  
 “Your son?” asked Secca.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Our eldest. He will reach his score at the turn of spring. He and his brother Verad are visiting my
parents’ hold. It is strange, in a fashion, for I grew up not so far from your holding.”
  
 Something tugged at Secca’s memory, but she could not remember, and smiled encouragingly.
  
 “Being the youngest daughter at Silberfels ... so much younger than Selber—that was strange, too.”
  
 Belvera was Lord Selber’s younger sister? Then, Hadrenn would have had to have taken a consort from
a lordly holding in Defalk. Where else could he have gone? “I was the youngest, also,” Seeca said.
  
 “For a sorceress, does it matter, dear?”
  
 “Ah. . . lady.. .“ Stepan said gently. “Lady Secca holds Flossbend by birth, and Mencha by right of
sorcery.”
  
 Belvera smiled. “So... she is doubly-landed, and beau-tiful. Haddev will indeed be regretful.”
  
 “You may convey my best,” Secca offered her own smile before taking another small sip of the wine.
  
 “Your urgency?” prompted the Lord High Counselor of Ebra, an almost amused tone in his voice.
  
 “Lord Mynntar has assembled twenty-score lancers or more. He rides westward toward Synek.” Secca
broke off a chunk of the crusty and flaky warm bread, taking a quick mouthful.
  
 “I had heard tales that he might, and Stepan has already raised some of the levies, and readied our own
lancers. How soon might he arrive?"
  
 “I would guess four days, if he presses and we remain here.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 A server eased half a fowl of some sort onto Secca’s platter, then ladled a golden glaze over it, while the
second server added what looked to be potato dumplings.
  
 “You do not sound as though you wish to remain near Synek”
  
 “Synek is not the best place to fight,” interjected Stepan gently. “As I have suggested, ser. Even a day’s
ride east would provide better terrain, especially for a sorceress.”
  
 Hadrenn nodded. “It is true. You have said such. So did the great sorceress when she was regent, and
she destroyed Bertmynn.” He shrugged. “I am not one to challenge suc-cess, and I am not an armsman.
So I will leave the details to you two, saving I wish to know the how and reasons therefore.”
  
 ‘We will be most certain to offer our plans.” Stepan’s eyes twinkled for a moment.
  
 “Do try the squab, dear,” suggested Belvera to Secca. “After all that sorcery and riding, you must be
famished.”
  
 “A bit,” acknowledged Secca, taking Belvera’s suggès-tion and slicing off a chunk of the bird. The
pearlike glaze helped cover the slight dryness of the meat. Secca hadn’t realized exactly how hungry she
was until she found her-self looking at a small pile of bones.
  
 Balvera gestured, and before Secca could demur, a sec-ond squab and glaze appeared on her platter.
  
 “Hungry these sorceress are.” Hadrenn nodded, and then bent toward his consort to murmur, “You
were right about the honeycakes.”
  
 Stepan leaned toward Secea. “Could you tell me how fare Markan and Fridric?”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Markan remains as the arms master of Suhl, where he is greatly respected.” Secca nodded toward
Richina. “Ri-china is the daughter of the lady of Suhl, but is better suited to sorcery. Her elder brother is
the heir. She could tell you more, since she has seen Markan far more except in the last few years.”
  
 “Fridric?”
  
 “He was killed when his mount put a foot in a marmot hole, perhaps eight years ago. Many mourned his
death. He was a good man.”
  
 “I had not heard.” Stepan fingered his chin. “You have no consort, it is said. Is it true that sorceresses in
Defalk may not consort?”
  
 “There is no reason I could not. Were I to bear children, for a time, at least, I would not be so effective
as a sor-ceress.”
  
 “But...the Lady Anna.”
  
 “She had children in the Mist Worlds, and she raised me, as well.”
  
 Stepan nodded. “I had wondered.”
  
 “What do you know about Mynntar?" Secca asked, cut-ting off another chunk of squab.
  
 "Little save through the words and tales of others."
  
 Secca raised her eyebrows, but continued to dismember the second squab, listening.
  
 “...said to be most generous to those he favors...ac-cepts the Free City most grudgingly... . has spent
much of the golds from his lands in hiring and training armsmen....Like his sire, vengeful... but unlike him
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

in that Bert-mynn was calculating, while Mynntar has been known to fly into black rages...will not ask
any man to do what he will not do, and all his officers and lancers and armsmen know such... said that he
and his brother be close…”
  
 As Stepan talked, once again. Secca realized how little she knew. Still, Mynntar had not faced battle
sorcery, and she could but hope that her spells and players would be enough.
  
 37
  
 Secca glanced at the road ahead, a road half-filled with puddles of icy water, then at the dark gray
clouds that had rolled in out of the north in midmorning. For the last glass or so, the rain had come and
gone in gusts, drizzle followed by sheets of water, but the darkness ahead and the steady downpour
looked like it was not about to let up. Again, she wiped the water off her forehead and blot-ted it out of
her eyes with the back of her sleeve.
  
 ‘With this much rain, the players will be useless, even the lutars,” said Richina.
  
 “Unhappily.” Secca urged the gray forward toward the two officers riding directly in front of her.
  
 Wilten and Stepan eased their mounts apart.
  
 "Traveling in this is foolhardy, and we certainly cannot do battle in this weather,” Secca looked at Stepan
“Is there someplace nearby that would afford us shelter, yet where we would not be surprised?"
  
 Stepan shook his head. “There are just hills and fields and hedgerows. Not until Rysl, and that is another
fifteen deks”
  
 Out of the rain came one of the scouts, his mount’s hoofs spraying water and mud.
  
 Secca didn’t like the man's haste. In the rain, it augured for nothing good.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
  “Sers.... Lady Secca... the lancers of Dolov are riding toward us. Mynntar’s vanguard is less than five
deks to the east—on this road.”
  
 "They're in the rain?’ asked Secca. “And riding toward us?”
  
 “Yes, lady. Twenty companies, mayhap more.”
  
 More than twenty companies against sixteen and some levies, and with no sorcery possible—or little,
since she couldn’t fit all the players into the single small tent. Even Elfens’ archers would be useless for
more than a shaft or two.
  
 ‘We’ll have to retreat,” Secca said, almost shouting to make herself heard over the wind and rain. ‘We
can’t do sorcery in this weather.”
  
 Stepan nodded. “The rain cannot last forever, but men lost in a poorly chosen battle do not fight again.”
  
 “I will tell our captains,” Wilten forced his voice over the rain and the wind.
  
 Secca glanced ahead, but could barely make out the road. Why was Mynntar riding through the muck
and the rain? To try to surprise Hadrenn? Or because he knew that Secca’s sorcery would be greatly
limited by such weather? If so, how had he known she was on the road, unless he had seers or sorcerers
himself?
  
 As she turned her mount, Sceca tightened her lips.
  
 38
  
 Therain had continued throughout the night, and re-mained cold and steady the next morning as Secca’s
force was gathering itself together on the south side of a hillside meadow below a woodlot where they
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

had been able to find some shelter for men and mounts-- little enough, but the best they had been able to
do, given the rain and the exhaustion of men and mounts the day before.
  
 Stepan, Wilten, Palian, and Delvor had joined Seeca and Richina in the small tent-- leaving almost no
room for any of the six to move. Outside, the rain continued to fall through the grayness that had never
broken.
  
 “According to the scouts,” Stepan said slowly. “Lord Mynntar broke camp early and is riding west once
more on the main road. They are doubtless less than five deks from us, perhaps closer to three.”
  
 “They seem to be doing better in the rain. Do we know why?” asked Secca.
  
 Both the Ebran and Defalkan officers shook their heads. “His men are wearing oiled leathers,” Stepan
mused, “not winter jackets. Perhaps he had hoped for rain. Or the Sturinnese drive the rain with their
drums.”
  
 Not liking the implications of that idea at all, Secca looked through the narrow opening in the tent flap at
the still-falling chill rain, then at the road. After a moment she asked. “Stepan. . . what would happen if
we tried to leave the road?”
  
 Even through he tried not to react, the wince of the older arms commander was obvious.
  
 ‘Would that be true of Mynntar as well?
  
 "Yes..."
  
 “Isn’t there a dip in the road, and a small bridge another one or two deks back toward Synek?”
  
 Wilten and Stepan exchanged glances.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 ‘Well...if there were no road, and that were turned into a swamp?’ asked the redheaded sorceress.
  
 That got a slow nod from Wilten.
  
  
 “We could not move eastward after the rain lifts,” pointed out Stepan.
  
 “I’ve used sorcery to build many roads and bridges.” Secca laughed mirthlessly. “When we rebuild it, it
will be better than before.”If you get the chance.
  
 “You are the sorceress.” Stepan’s tone was measured.
  
 “We need to break camp and ride west, beyond the bridge. Then, we’ll gather the best players under
this tent…” Secca glanced at Palian. ‘We will have a single spell to do, and it must be done quickly. The
short building spell.”
  
 “If we are out of the rain, we can do it,” Palian affirmed.
  
 “Delvor, you need to go back with the lead lancers. We’ll need the second players later, and I don’t
want any-one hurt or getting left.”
  
 “Yes, lady.” Delvor pushed back the overlong lock of damp and limp brown hair, using the same gesture
as he had ever since Secca had known him.
  
 As she mounted the gray mare, Secca was still trying to work out the last of the words for the spell. “...
move the rocks and ground . . .turn to mud all around...“ she mur-mured as she rode through the
downpour.
  
 The bridge Secca remembered seemed much farther than the one or two deks to the west she had
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

recalled, but that might well have been because she was unused to riding wet and sloppy roads. Most of
the major roads in Defalk were now stone-paved, even if it had taken Anna and the three sorceresses
she had trained more than a score of years. The first road completed had been the route between
Mencha and Falcor.
  
 Riding through the mud and muck, Secca was getting a new appreciation of why Anna had insisted so
much on paving roads in Defalk.
  
 Already, the small creek that ran beneath the small tim-ber bridge was almost to the base of the roadbed
as Secca, and the last of the column crossed and began to climb the gentle slope, a slope that had gotten
slippery with churned mud. Secca concentrated on riding until she was almost to the top of the rise, when
she guided the mare to the north side of the road.
  
 “Up there... on the grass just above!” Secca motioned to the two lancers who were leading the pack
horses with the tent.
  
 “Keep moving!” called Wilten. “All but the purple com-pany. The rest of you, keep heading back to
Synek!”
  
 On the slope just above where she wanted the tent, Secca turned the mare; squinting into the rain, then
pointed. “Just the canopy and side walls. Leave the front open,” she told the two lancers struggling with
the wet silk and canvas of the tent.
  
 Because most of the force had been behind Secca when she had decided on the retreat, only the purple
company and the players were left and Wilten waiting for the tent to go up.
  
 Secca kept glancing eastward, but she could see nothing beyond about half a dek, and certainly she
heard nothing.
  
 Despite the thick green fell hat she wore, Seeca felt soaked all the way through, but she watched. and
hoped, and began to warm up, hoping the vocalises would work amidall the rain and chill. Anna hadn’t
mentioned doing sorcery in the rain, Secca reflected.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Lady Secca! The tent is up!" called Wilten. “Players, into the tent and quick tune!” ordered Palian.
Secca dismounted and handed the gray’s reins to Richina. “Just listen and watch."
  
 “Yes, lady.” The apprentice wiped more water off her face.
  
 Secca finished another vocalise before Palian tapped her on the shoulder.
  
 “We are ready with the short building spell, lady.”
  
 “So am I.” Secea moved slightly to the side, so that she could see, peripherally, the players.
  
 “Oh my mark... Mark!”
  
 Secca waited through the unused first bar, then launched the spell.
  
 “Move, move the rocks and ground..."
  
 The wind began to pick up with each bar of the spell. Before Secca finished the last words, a bolt of
lightning flashed through the falling water, followed by a hiss of steam. Deep slurping sounds came fast
after the light-ning, and the damp ground rolled under Secca’s feet. One of the younger violino players,
Bretnay stag-gered and went to her knees, but kept her violino up and out of the rain, which now
thundered down in sheets. White fog rose from where the small bridge had stood.
  
 “Pack up and remount!” Secca ordered Palian.
  
 Before Secca could reach the gray mare, the sheets of water and gusts of wind buffeted the tent,
threatening to rip it out of the unsteady ground. Secca struggled back to help the lancers.
  
 Wilten rode along the shoulder of the road, even closer to where Secca and the two lancers struggled to
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

re-roll the soggy tent sections, As the overcaptain reined up beside them, he called out, except he was
yelling at the top of his voice to make himself heard over the wind and rain, “Lady Secea...you and your
players need make haste, for the road is washing out even in the lower spots to the west of us.”
  
 “Palian! Take the players and ride!” Secea snapped. still holding the end of the wet rolled cylinder as the
taller lancer struggled with the damp hempen rope.
  
 ‘We have it, lady,” the lancer said.
  
 “Thank you.” Secca slogged through several yards of mud to where the gray mare waited, and pulled
herself into the saddle, banging the sabre on her leg as she did, but ignoring the dayflashes before her
eyes.
  
 After she had turned the mare, she glanced back in the direction of the swampy lake that had begun to
cover what had been a bridge and road, but she could not even see that quarter of a dek through the
heavy downpour. Until the rain ended, neither force was going to charge into battle. At least that was
what she hoped.
  
 She urged the mare closer to Wilten. ‘We might as well go all the way back to Hadrenn’s hold. At least
there, everyone can dry out”
  
 “Yes,lady,” Wilten replied.
  
 What had she gotten herself into? Was this what war was all about? Riding back and forth, trying to find
a place to fight where she might have some slight advan-tage? Where the land and weather could be
enemies as well?
  
 Secca kept the frown to herself.
  
  
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 39
  
 Outside the windows of the first-floor study in Had-renn’s palace, fat and moist flakes of snow drifted
out of a gray sky, flakes that melted the moment they struck the soaked and far warmer ground.
  
 Inside, as Hadrenn, Stepan, and Wilten watched the scrying glass laid on the table, Secca fingered the
chords on the lutar for the third spell of the morning.
  
 “Mirror, mirror, where on the ground, show us where Mynntar’s scouts are found...“
  
 The mirror on the broad table silvered, then showed four lancers riding along a lane beside bare-limbed
trees.
  
 Seoca glanced at Stepan.
  
 “They are scouting the lane they may use once the rain end snow stop,” Stepan observed.
  
 “That won’t be long,” suggested Hadrenn. “The sky is lightening with every glass.”
  
 “The roads are still mud-clogged, and they must find a way around Lady Secca’s swamp.”
  
 “So must everyone,” retorted Hadrenn.
  
  Secca ignored the bitterness in the Lord High Coun-selor’s words. “Do we know where this lane he
scouts may be?”
  
 “Can...might you see if he scouts through peach orchards?” asked Stepan apologetically.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Secca released the image, and thought, finally coming up with a modified spell.
  
 “Mirror, mirror, where peaches arebytree,
 show usMynntar’s scouts and what they see...”
  
 The image was almost identical to the first.
  
 Stepan smiled. “I can show you where they are on my maps.”
  
 Secca released the spell. Richina moved the glass, and both sorceresses waited while the silvering arms
commander unrolled a cylindrical map and laid it out over the table.
  
 “You see. Your glass showed his camp there, and his scouts here. He is looking for a way to avoid the
swamp.”
  
 Secca was far more worried about why Mynntar had pushed so far westward than about replacing the
road through the swamp lake she had created. What was hap-pening elsewhere that Mynntar felt
confident enough to ride out of Dolov and into Synek?
  
 “...and he will try to move his lancers swiftly back to the road.” Stepan looked up.
  
 “There’s one other matter we should look at,” Secca said quietly. She took the mirror warm to the touch
and set it gently on the map, then picked up the lutar and offered another spell song.
  
 “Show me now as best in sight,
 where else the Sturinnese may fight…”
  
 The mirror flickered, then settled on a harbor, empty except for a single trading vessel.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca frowned, partly because her head was begin-ning to throb and partly because she’d never seen
the city or the harbor. From what she could tell, it faced south-- but most did. Still, it wasn’t Narial or
Encora. She’d scried them enough before. “Do you think that might be Elahwa?"
  
 Stepan pursed his lips. “It is not Encora, nor Sylwa.”
  
 Secca released the image.
  
 “Why matters this?” asked Hadrenn.
  
 Secca was beginning to understand why Anna had been less than praiseful of the Lord High Counselor.
  
 “He has at least five companies of Sturinnese lancers. He is riding fairly far from Dolov, and he has
decided to ride against me—and you in the rain. I’d like to know why.”
  
 “And a harbor shows that?"
  
 “If the Sturinnese are about to attack Elahwa, the FreeWomen aren’t about to come to your aid, even to
hold off Mynntar,” Secca pointed out.
  
 "They have little love of me,” Hadrenn said.
  
  “They have far less love of Sturinn or Mynntar. They would at least defend their borders against
Mynntar and perhaps raid his lands to help you.”
  
 Hadrenn nodded slowly, as if not totally convinced of Secca’s logic. Then, he glanced at the red-haired
sor-ceress. “All you have used your sorcery for is to destroy a road?”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Yes,” Secca admitted. “If I had not, they would have overrun us, and whether we had won or not, we
would have lost too many lancers.”
  
 “But had you won..."
  
 “It would have been a victory worse than many de-feats,” Stepan inteijected. “Mynntar has fifteen
compa-nies of his own and five companies or more of Sturinnese lancers. If we cannot use sorcery to
destroy Mynntar’s forces and preserve most of our own, then who will stop the Sea-Priests?"
  
 “Best it be that way, then.” After a last nod, Hadrenn turned.
  
 Secca watched as the Lord High Counselor walked from the study.
  
 Wilten glared at the departing Lord High Counselor, then at Stepan.
  
 “He is most worried,” said Stepan.
  
 “I’m sure he is,” Secca said. “But he’d be in much worse shape if we weren’t here.”
  
 “I fear, Lady Secca,” Stepan pointed out gently, “that such is of little consolation to rulers... as you may
well know.”
  
 Secca could not help but smile at the gentle and ironic reminder. “We will have to ensure he has less to
worry about.” She looked at Richina. “You’ll have your part to do.”
  
 “Yes, Lady Secca?” A puzzled look crossed the younger woman’s face.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Secea smiled. “Who do you think is going to rebuild the road and bridge?"
  
 "But..."
  
 “You know the spells; you’ve watched me do it. It’s a simple bridge. And...you need to do it because
the lancers will need me fresh to deal with Mynntar’s forces.”
  
 Stepan nodded.
  
 “You will need to spend a little time with the players to make sure they don’t play anything too high.
Your voice is lower than mine.
  
 “Lady...." Richina’s voice was tentative.
  
 “Bring your lutar and come up to my room. We’ll go over it there.” Secca inclined her head to Wilten
and to Stepan. “If you will excuse us... best we be ready on the morrow of the day after.”
  
 Both officers nodded.
  
 Secca reclaimed her own lutar before leaving the lower level study. A glance out the window showed
that the light snow had slopped.
  
 Once upstairs, Secca sat on the footchest beneath the canopied bed and looked at Richina. “You’ll need
a sketch. . . so that you knew exactly what you want to visualize. This is a simple bridge—one arch, and
make it small-- and the road above can just be packed gravel and dirt and rock. Don’t worry about the
swamp. If you do the spell and concentrate on a solid rock base for the arch, the road and bridge will
hold.”
  
 “Why did you decide I could do this now?" asked Richina.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 ‘When I realized that Anna had done me no favors by not taking me into battles.” Secca shook her
head.
  
 “That’s not fair. There were no battles by the time I was your age and that far along in my training.” She
cleared her throat. Despite its opulence, and the dampness out-side, the room was dusty. ‘We need the
road replaced. That way, we can strike Mynntar with some advantage because he will not expect us
there. I will need every-thing I have for dealing with Mynntar’s forces. That is because, just like you, I am
not experienced in full bat-tles.” Secca looked directly at Richina. “Do you under-stand?”
  
 Richina nodded gravely.
  
 “I am asking much of you, earlier than I would like, but if I ask too much of myself..."
  
 “Then all could be lost,” Richina said.
  
 “All would not be lost for Defalk. There are other sorceresses, but I would rather not prove that Lord
Rob-ero could survive without us.” Secca offered a wry smile. “Now... go write the spell you wish-- but
use a building spell, and then let me see it. Then you will seek out Palian. After you practice... just the
notes, not the words, you should start your sketch.”
  
 Richina nodded and stood. “By your leave, lady?”
  
 “By my leave.”
  
 Once Richina closed the door, Secca walked to the window closest to the bed and looked out across
the wet grounds. She stood there, thinking, hoping, plan-ning. . . and worrying.
  
 40
  
 In the midafternoon, Stepan gestured at the map spread on the study table. “Mynntar has scouted the
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

back roads that circle the swamp where the road used to be. He is camped here on this hilltop. The one
to the south is higher, but he would have to backtrack to reach the roads. As soon as the ground dries
enough to support his horse, he will take this road past these orchards and either come back to the main
road or continue on this lane and strike here. With the warm wind from the southwest, that could be
soon. Already, the fields here are drying.”
  
 Secca studied the map. “If we repair the road, and then follow this... we would have the high ground.”
  
 “If...” Stepan said. “There is brush on the hillside. It would prevent a charge...“ He cocked his heads
“But low brush is no barrier to sorcery, is it?”
  
 “No.” Secca hoped not.
  
 “Then they would have to circle...if the sorcery did not complete the task.” Stepan looked to Secca.
  
 Wilten nodded almost imperceptibly.
  
 “How long before he can move?"—asked Secca.
  
 “The ground is drying, but it won’t be firm enough for two or three days,” offered the graying arms
commander.
  
 “What about the main road?”
  
 “Two days.”
  
 "Then we should repair the swamp bridge on the morn-ing after next, and take the hill overlooking his
force and strike from behind.” Secca studied the map once more. "Is not this ridge harder ground?”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “So hard that it will not grow trees. Some say it was once a hold, generations into the past”
  
 “The wind has been blowing out of the southwest, in-stead of from the east. So we should get drier and
warmer air, and on that ridge the wind will be at our backs, or mostly so.”
  
 “So it will carry your spells?” asked Wilten.
  
 Secca nodded.
  
 ‘What if there is more rain?’ questioned the over-captain.
  
 "Then we wait. He won’t be able to move either,” Secca pointed out. She just hoped she was right.
Then, she was hoping far more than was wise.
  
 41
  
 Under a clear sky, a strong and warm breeze blew from the south. The air was almost spring-like as
Secca and Richina rode eastward, near the head of the column of lancer companies from Loiseau and
Synek. The day smelled clean, fresh, and Secca could not help but compare the brightness of the sky and
the sunlight to what she wor-ried lay before them.
  
 “How do you feel?" she asked Richina.
  
 “Good, but uneasy.”
  
 “You are just going to repair a road. That’s all. That’s one of the things you’ve been trained for. You will
do well. I wouldn’t ask you if I did not think you would.” Seeca kept her voice light and cheerful.
“You’re ready for this.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Yes, lady.” Richina did not quite meet Secca’s eyes.
  
 Stepan eased his mount up beside Secca’ s, riding on the shoulder of the road, far narrower than any
major roads remaining in Defalk. “The scouts say that Mynntar has not broken camp, but that the lancers
are sharpening blades.” He smiled. "I know your glass showed that earlier, but I am an old armsman, and
I prefer to confirm what I cannot see myself.”
  
 “He had planned to move tomorrow, you think?”
  
 “I would guess so, although, if he finds we are riding, that all could change. And most suddenly.”
  
 "Best we repair the road and move more quickly,” Secca said.
  
 “As you can, sorceresses,” Stepan replied, “there is no hurry until the road is replaced. Then, speed
becomes most necessary."
  
 As if on cue, the sandy-haired assistant sorceress began a soft vocalise.
  
 Inbetween her own vocalises, Secca went over spells in her thoughts as they continued to ride through a
morning that seemed too bright and too fresh for the battle that lay ahead, First, they needed to repair the
road, then deal with Mynntar. She pushed back the thought that the battle with Mynntar might well be
only the first of many, if indeed the Sturinnese had decided to attack and conquer Lied-wahr. She could
only fight one battle at a time.
  
 In less than a glass, Secca and the column had reined up and looked eastward from the hilltop. Fifty
yards down-hill, the old track, now corroded with miniature gullies from the rain, ended in churned mud,
and ten yards below that the brown water of the small lake began.
  
 To the east the hilltop where the road resumed was empty, showing not even a scout.
  
 “They have no scouts near here,” Wilten said.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “That may be,” offered Stepan, “but if the sorcery works, then there will be no swamp to stop them, and
we must be ready to ride quickly.”
  
 “Our lancers are ready,” Wilten affirmed.
  
 “As are those of Synek.” Stepan glanced to Secca. “Once your assistant is done..."
  
 “The road can be used at once, but the players will have to pack their instruments and remount,” Secca
pointed out.
  
 Richina dismounted near the top of the road crest. She handed the chestnut’s reins to Albar, the young
lancer Wil-ten had detailed to care for her mount and Secca’s while they were engaged in sorcery.
Richina walked downhill several yards. studying the ground and the swampy lake below before turning
and walking back to her mount, where she extracted a sketch from the top of her saddlebag.
  
 While Richina studied the sketch, comparing it to the land, to the south of her, the players dismounted,
and shortly the discordant sound of tuning began.
  
 Secca kept studying the eastern side of the ravaged road cut, but could see no scouts. The wind
remained steady from the southwest. Finally, she dismounted, also handing the reins of her mount to
Albar, before walking forward, so thatshe stood perhaps three yards uphill from Richina.
  
 As the tuning died away,Palian looked directly at the younger sorceress. “We stand ready, sorceress.”
  
 Squaring her shoulders, Richina offered afaint smile, then cleared her throat “You may begin, chief
player.”
  
 “On my mark.... Mark!”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Standing behind and to the south of her apprentice, Secca forced herself to take a slow deep breath as
she watched Richina and listened to the younger woman’s spellsong.
  
 “...replicate the earth and stones.
 Place them in their proper zones...
 Set all firm, and set all square,
 weld them to their pattern there...“
  
 While the last words of the spellsong faded, an in tense bluish glow blossomed over the swampy lowland
that had once held road and bridge, a glow so bright that Stepan and Wilten looked away, as did most of
the players.
  
 The glow faded, revealing a causeway, one with a single archway for the stream, and faced with stone
rip-rap and paved with the even stones of Defalk. The newly created causeway barely dipped between
the two hills, while a deeper gorge had appeared between the hills and the arch of the bridgelike
causeway.
  
 Secca blinked. The hilltops on each side were lower, and the roadway was definitely stone
 paved. She turned to Richina.
  
 Abroad smile crossed the sandy-haired young woman’s face,“I...did it.” Then, her face went blank and
she began to crumple.
  
 Secca rushed forward and grabbed Richina, managing to keep her from pitching forward despite the
younger woman’s considerably greater height and weight.
  
 Richina was breathing, but she was pale. Stepan and Wilten had their mounts beside Secca al-most
immediately.
  
 Secca glanced at Wilten. “She did more than was necessary. SheWill be all right if she has rest I’ll need
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

someone to take care of her. She’ll need water and bis-cuits as soon asshe wakes..."
  
 Wilten opened his mouth as ifto complain. “She saved more men than will be needed to care for her!”
Secca snapped.
  
 “My personal guards will serve her, lady,” offered Stepan.
  
 “Thank you.”
  
 “My Lady ... I meant no ill,” Wilten pleaded.
  
 “I’m sorry, Wilten,” Secca apologized. “I was wor-ried about her. She did more than I wanted because
she wanted to make sure it was right.”
  
 Secca hoped she hadn’t upset the overcaptain too much.
  
 Even before Secca could turn, two armsmen in Ebran green had appeared, apparently in response to a
gestureStepan had made and Secca had not even seen.
  
 ‘We needs must ride now, Lady Secca,” Stepan said.
  
 As the two guards carried Richina to the side of the road and laid her on a cloak of some sort, Secca re-
mounted, glancing back to see another pair of Stepan’s guards riding up behind the exhausted
apprentice.
  
 “They will keep her safe,” Stepan said to Secca.
  
 “Thank you.” Secca turned to Wilten. “Are your lanc-ers ready?
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Most ready, lady.”
  
 “We are almost ready to ride,” called Palian. “A mo-ment only.” Her head turned. “Move, Bretnay!”
  
 Asthe errant violino player scrambled into the sad-dle, Palian nodded in the direction of both Stepan and
Secca.
  
 “Where are the special archers?’ asked Secca.
  
 "Here,lady.” The lead archer, Elfens, raised a gray- gloved hand from his mount on the shoulder of the
road behind the mounts of the players. “We are ready to let fly any and all shafts that you require.” The
twinkling in his light brown eyes belied the somber tone of his words.
  
 ‘We may require many shafts, Elfens. Stay close to the players.”
  
 “Yes, lady.”
  
 Even before Secca, Wilten, and Stepan reached the causeway, four scouts had quick-trotted out before
the van and were riding swiftly eastward. One turned north and began to cross a brown-grassed
meadow, while the others followed the road, drawing away from the main force.
  
 The clop of hoofs on the stones of the causeway seemed almost reassuring.
  
 “A solid road,” Stepan said. “Would that we had more.”
  
 “You can see what it takes out of a sorceress,” Secca pointed out, glancing to Wilten. “Had you seen
such before, Wilten?”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “No, Lady Secca.”
  
 “Did she...Was that because she is not experi-enced?" asked Stepan.
  
 “She lacks experience. That is true, but we all have to start somewhere.”
  
 Stepan nodded. So did Wilten.
  
 The standard bearers and then Wilten, Secca, and Ste-pan came to the end of the new causeway and
continued eastward.
  
 “Another half-dek,” Stepan called. “We take the lane past the apple orchards to the north, and along the
ridge line."
  
 The lane was but wide enough for three riders abreast, and that with the shoulders of the outside riders
brushing the bare twig-ends of the tree limbs.
  
 Stepan glanced ahead. Wilten glanced back. Secca began a vocalise.
  
 Outside of the breathing of mounts moving across damp ground, and low murmurs, the air was silent,
and even the wind seemed fainter.
  
 At the sound of hoofs on the damp ground, the two officers stiffened, and Secca broke off the second
vo-calise.
  
 A scout rode toward the officers and the banner, rein-ing up.
  
 “They must have seen us, sers,” panted the bearded Ebran scout. “Like an anthill turned by a plow,
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

every-one’s yelling and trying to mount. They’ll be riding out real short like.”
  
 Secca turned in the saddle. “Palian! Delvor! We need the players ready to play when we reach that
ridge ahead.”
  
 Stepan motioned to a lancer. “Have the first company forward. To me.”
  
 “Yes, ser.”
  
 Secca and Stepan had not traveled more thena hun-dred yards farther when, from the north, came the
sound of mounts, and charging uphill were a good score of lancers in white, although they were still half a
dek away, and barely visible because of the carve in the lane.
  
 “Lady Secca.. . . best get your players in place.” Ste-pan turned his mount and rode to the side of the
lane. “To me! First company!”
  
 Ebran lancers formed and simultaneously charged downhill after Stepan. Mud flew into the air,striking
mounts, grass, ground, and tree trunks.
  
 “Players! Players after me!” Secca urged the gray mare toward the open ridgeline that lay less than fifty
yards ahead. “Players!”
  
 Riding alongside Secca was young Albar, bearing her banner.
  
 Secca reined up and turned in the saddle as the mounts of the players appeared behind her.
  
 Palian was already out of the saddle, uncasing her violino with one hand and motioning players into place
with the other.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Not far behind were Elfens and the archers, and they were scrambling to string bows and uncover the
quivers that had shielded their shafts from the weather.
  
 “Here!” snapped Secca. “Stand and play! The short flame song!”
  
 The dissonance of tuning rose, and then fell. Downhill to the north, and even to the sides, Secca could
hear yells, the sound of metal on metal, horses crashing through underbrush. She cleared her throat, trying
to call up the spell, facing toward the enemy camp a good two hundred yards below and to the north, her
back to the wind—or to what had been the wind.
  
 In the distance, thunder rolled. Secca glanced up, saw the sky was yet clear, and realized that the low
rumbling was from the Sturinnese thunder-drums. The wind, which had been blowing out of the south,
began to die away with the rising volume of the rhythmic drums.
  
 A gust of wind whipped through Secca’s hair—cold but dry, and from the north-- blowing hard and into
Secca’s face. She turned. "Chief players?”
  
 "Ready!" answered Palian.
  
 Delvor merely nodded.
  
 Secca waited for the second bar, and then began the spellsong.
  
 “Turn to fire, turn to flame
 all Ebrans who follow now Mynntar’s name.
 Turn to ashes, turn to dust...”
  
 As the sounds of the players rose, so did the wind, whistling, and seeming to carry Secca’s words back
at her.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 A thin line of lightnings flashed out of the cloudless sky, but only at the base of the ridge, just beyond the
underbrush, cutting through a score or so of the burgundy-clad lancers, but those behind, and those in
white, kept fighting, moving toward the side approaches to the ridge, and to Secca and the players. More
lancers from Loiseau surged in behind Stepan’s companies, but the enemy forces continued to push
uphill, if more slowly.
  
 The rolling thunder of the Sturinnese drums intensi-fied, and a greenish haze began to creep across the
sky.
  
 “The arrows, lady! The arrows!" Elfens’ voice barely carried to Secca, so strong was the wind, for all
that he was less than five yards behind her.
  
 The arrows? What arrows?Secca blinked, trying to connect the words to what she was supposed to do,
attempting to think as the thunder from the drums buf-feted her and the players.
  
 "The arrows. For the drums!” Elfens yelled.
  
 For the drums?
  
 Below and to the north, the groups of burgundy-clad lancers, untouched by either Defalkan blades or
those of Stepan’s lancers, or by Secca’s spells, began to cut their way through Stepan’s first company.
  
 Arrows whistled toward the hilltop.
  
 Secca shook her head. Her thoughts were as con-gealed as molasses in midwinter, but she turned to
Palian. “The arrow song. The arrow song.”
  
 “The arrow song on my mark. On my mark...”
  
  “Archers! To the sorceress! Nock and fire from right behind her!” Elfens voice was barely a whisper
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

against gale that seemed to sweep out of the greenish northern sky.
  
 The melody was ragged, but the pounding beat of the lutars of Delvor’s second players seemed to
steady the strings and horns, enough so Secca could think and sing.
  
 “Heads of arrows, shot into the air,
  strike the drumskins, straight through there,
  rend the drums and those who play...
 for their spells and Darksong pay!”
  
 Even before Secca finished the last syllable, Elfens’ voice burst forth from right behind Secca.
  
 “Again, lady! Again!”
  
 “The arrow song once more!” Secca ordered.
  
 “As many shafts as you can loose while she sings!” demanded Elfens.
  
 The repetition of the arrow spell was stronger.
  
 Abruptly, or so it seemed, the thunder died away... and so did the wind.... only to resume with gusts
from the south, from behind Secca.
  
 “The flame song! Strong as you can make it!"de-manded Secca.
  
 “The flame song!”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 As the players began the fourth spell, another set of arrows whispered by Secca. She heard a dull thud,
but concentrated on the spellsong, knowing that shemust finish the spell strongly, above all else.
  
 “Turn to fire, turn to flame,
 all Ebrans, who follow now Mynntar's name...”
  
  
 This time, lightings flashed all across the lower land below the ridge, so many that, momentarily, Secca
could not see. Her legs were shivering, and dayflashes sparked all through her vision. She slowly sank to
her knees, hop-ing she had done enough. She could see at least two players worn down, but whether
they were wounded or prostrated from their efforts she could not tell.
  
 Someone was urging water on her, and she drank slowly. The figure in green was an Ebran from Synek,
but it didn’t matter as she took another swallow and then a mouthful of dry biscuit. After a time, she
slowly stood, and surveyed the ridge area.
  
 Numbly, she looked down, to see Albar, the young standard bearer, his eyes open, unmoving, a heavy
war arrow through his chest. One of the Ebran guards was easing a shaft from the arm of a comrade.
  
 Elfens was kneeling beside a fallen archer, and Secca tottered several steps, her sabre striking her leg,
so un-steady was her gait. The chief archer looked up. “His leg. Won’t be dancing soon, but with the
alcohol elixir, he’ll recover.”
  
 ‘Thank you,” said Secca quietly. “For the reminder about the arrrows.”
  
 A brief smile flitted across the long face. “Be a poor archer who didn’t know when he was needed,
lady.”
  
 “But a wise one to know when to speak.” Her smile was as fleeting as his.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Secca turned. Below, beyond the brush, the only moving figures were those in green.
  
 “Lady?’
  
 Secca glanced up as Wilten reined his mount to a halt.
  
 “They are riding away, like the wind.”
  
 “After all that...?"
  
 “When the drums fell silent, all those in the rear of Mynntar’s force turned and fled, as if hot irons had
been applied to their mounts, especially those in white."
  
 “The Sturinnese.” Secca nodded.
  
 “Your fires. . . they slaughtered more than five com-panies of the enemy,” Wilten said slowly. “And the
thunder-drums are no more.”
  
 “Have them burned—the drums—or what remains of them.” Secca paused. “How many did we lose?”
  
 “More than a company’s worth, Lady Secca.”
  
 Secca winced. She wasn’t supposed to lose one part in four of her own force in the first battle.
  
 “Arms Commander Stepan. . . he turned them back...or they would have overrun the ridge from the east
before you could use your spells. Two companies came and circled behind us.” Wilten shook his head.
“Fought like demons, they did, but we pushed them back”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Wilten...I appreciate deeply all you have done. Had you not held our rear, all would have been lost.”
Secca hoped this would help against her earlier outburst.
  
 “I fear I still have much to learn, and I appreciate also your patience.”
  
 “I could not have stood before all those shafts with naught but a song, lady. We each must do as we
can.” Wilten nodded, both accepting and dismissing her words. “Still. . . without Commander Stepan...”
  
 “It took all of us.” Secca paused as the older arms commander rode tiredly onto the ridge and toward
Secca and Wilten.
  
 Stepan slowed his mount and then halted before the sorceress. His trousers were smeared with mud,
blood, and other stains. He wore a grim smile. “They have turned back, and they ride eastward, taking a
lane back toward the main road. We should move to hold the road at the causeway.”
  
 “So they don’t get behind us and have an open course to Synek?” Secca began to trudge toward her
mount.
  
 “Aye. They have half again as many lancers as do we, and with half they could hold the causeway.”
  
 “I understand.” Secca forced herself to climb into the saddle. “Players! Prepare to ride!”
  
 “Prepare to ride!” echoed Palian, and then Delvor.
  
 Secca watched for a moment, as several players had to be helped into their saddles. Elfens simply lifted
his injured archer into the saddle of his mount. Then she eased her mount back along the trampled track
her force had rutted into the damp ground, riding silently beside an equally silent Stepan.
  
 Her first battle, and another like it would be her last. How had Anna done it?Ithad sounded so easy. She
had sung spells, and the enemy armsmen had died. Secca had known it wouldn’t be that easy...but the
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

sheer confusion and speed of what had occurred still had left her numb.
  
 It was yet before midday, and close to fifteen score lancers from both forces were dead. Richina was
ex-hausted. Secca was exhausted, and few of the players would be able to play in even rough tune or
rhythm before the morrow.
  
 Then... she had no commanders who had ever fought a pitched battle. She had never been in one. Only
Stepan had that experience, and without his calm, and that of Elfens, she doubted that they would have
man-aged the victory they had, such as it was
  
 42
  
 The silken walls of the tent billowed in a brisk morning breeze as Secca handed a soft apple, a wedge of
cheese, and a chunk of stale bread to Richina, who sat, pale and shivering, on the small cot in the tent she
shared with Secca. Secca took another apple and began to eat, alternating between fruit and bread, with
an occasional bite of the cheese she disliked but knew she needed to keep up her strength.
  
 The younger sorceress ate the bread and some of the cheese, slowly, followed by several swallows of
water, be-fore speaking. “I feel so weak. All I did was one little spell,” Richina murmured. “Just one little
spell, and..."
  
 “It wasn’t such a little spell. You built a solid bridge and a causeway, and created and paved almost a
half dek of roadway. Do you see why I wanted you to keep the visualization simple?” Secca asked.
  
 “Yes, lady.” Richina massaged her forehead. “It still throbs so much. Does your head ache?"
  
 “A little.” Secca lied. Her head was splitting, and every-where she looked, she saw dayflashes, or, at
times, nothing at all, or scenes with huge holes in them.
  
 “You ought to eat more.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Rather than admit she needed more sustenance, Secca broke off a chunk of bread and chewed it,
ignoring the dryness and the lack of taste. By the time she had gone through several more chunks and a
wedge of cheese, she could feel the worst of the headache subsiding, and the dayflashes were gone.
  
 “You still need to eat more, lady,” said Richina.
  
 “I was worrying about Mynntar, and it’s hard to think about eating when I'm worrying.”
  
 “You will have more to worry about if you cannot call upon your sorcery,” Richina pointed out with the
practi-cality that recalled the younger sorceress’s mother to Secca.
  
 Secca smiled briefly. "There is that.” She extended an-other wedge of the dry white cheese to Richina.
From out-side the tent came low murmurs, and Secca repressed a sigh.
  
 “It was a good bridge and causeway, wasn’t it?"asked the sandy-haired young woman.
  
 “Itis very good, perhaps too good for Lord Hadrenn, and once he sees it, he will complain that he has
none such.”
  
 “Was that why..."
  
 “No. You saw what it did to you. You still do not know how much energy a spell can take from you.”
  
 Richina nodded slowly. “It felt good...until after-ward.”
  
 “As do many things unwise in life.” Secca stood. “Fin-ish the bread and cheese. I hear a few voices.”
She stepped from the small tent.
  
 In the morning light, Palian, Delvor, Stepan, and Wilten were all standing outside the tent when Secca
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

emerged.
  
 “Mynntar remains bivouacked ten deks east of here,” Wilten said immediataly, inclining his head to
Stepan.
  
 Secca felt guilty that she hadn’t used the glass to find that out, but the way her head had felt the night
before she wasn’t sure she could have called up her own reflection in a mirror, much less discovered
what the rebellious Ebran lord was doing. "He's probably waiting for another rain-storm.”
  
 "The wind has shifted, and there are clouds forming in the northeast," Wilten pointed out.
  
 “How many lancers has he?’ Secca asked warily.
  
 “The scouts think seventeen companies—thirty-four score,” offered Stepan.
  
 Nearly half again what Sceca and Stepan had between them, and that was after losing pethaps four or
five com-panies to Secca’s flame spell.
  
 “Still?" blurted Secca. “I had not realized so many had escaped."
  
  
 “He had far more lancers than the scouts saw,” Stepan replied calmly.
  
 With seventeen companies, and if another rainstorm like the last arrived... Secea shook her head, then
asked, “How are the players?”
  
 Palian and Delvor exchanged glances.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “They could play one or two spells-- if everything went perfectly?” the small sorceress pursued.
  
 “Bretnay and Elset cannot play,” Palian said. “Tomor-row, perchance.”
  
 “Woryl is unlikely to offer much,” Delvor added. “Nor Hyell.”
  
 Secca nodded slowly. “I suppose the lancers are tired.”
  
  "They will fight as they must," Stepan said
  
 “Your lancers will support you with all they possess,” added Wilten.
  
 Secca bestowed a crooked smile on the overcaptain and the commander. ‘What you say is that they will
fight, but they cannot do their best, and we are outnumbered.”
  
 “There is that,” admitted Wilten.
  
 “I need to get close to Mynntar’s camp,” Secca finally said. “There may be something that I can do.”
  
 “He has scouts and pickets everywhere,” Wilten pointed out.
  
 “Not that close—just within a half-dek, or even a dek.” Secca glanced to Stepan. “Your scouts know
this land best. Can they get me within a half-dek of Mynntar’s camp, perhaps on a hill or across a
gully—sometime just before sunset? Being close is more important than being able to see.”
  
 “You plan some sorcery?’ Stepan frowned.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Some small sorcery, with the lutar, not the players,” admitted Secca. ‘Perhaps it will give us some small
ad-vantage.”
  
 “Itmay be possible. Best I talk to the older scouts. If you would excuse me, Lady Secca?" The Ebran
arms com-mander stepped back bowed, and turned.
  
 “Would practice hurt or help the players?” asked Secca.
  
 “Help, if we support no spells.” replied Palian.
  
 “Unless we are attacked, I plan no spells for the play-ers.”
  
 Both Delvor and Palian nodded.
  
 “It has been long since Defalk has sent armsmen to fight battles such as this,” Secca said. “Or players.
But I do not think that this will be the last battle, nor will the next. Nor the one after that.”
  
 “Nor I,” observed Palian. ‘We stand ready to do what we must.”
  
 Secca only hoped she was as ready as Palian and her players.
  
 43
  
 The late afternoon sun hung barely above the hills on the southern side of the River Syne. its light
diffusing through the silken walls of the tent, when Secca glanced at Richina. “Could you get me some
bread and some cheese? I’ll need to eat before I go.”
  
 “Of course, lady.” The sandy-haired young woman, who was learning to be more than an apprentice,
with so much more to learn before she would be a full sorceress, slipped from the small tent.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca’s wry smile was for herself. She was discovering that there was much yet that she had to learn
about apply-ing sorcery to battles. She could but hope she understood how much and what before it was
too late.
  
 She lifted the second saddlebag the one without clothes, but which contained a score or more of small
bot-tles, and other items taken from the sealed storeroom. After unfastening the bag and laying out
almost twenty bottles, she studied them. Then reordered them, leaving five bottles filled with yellow-green
tinted crystals on the top where she would be able to reach them easily. Then she refas-tened the
saddlebags and laid them on the foot of the nar-row cot.
  
 Next came the lutar. She checked the strings and the tuning, strumming several chords before replacing it
in its case.
  
 The tent flap opened, and with it came Richina and a gust of dry and cold air that reminded Secca that
winter was fast approaching. Through the momentarily open flap, Secca had seen that the sun had set.
  
 “Here you are, lady.” Richina extended an entire loaf of bread, and a large wedge of white cheese.
  
 "Thank you.” Using her belt knife, Secca sliced off the layer of green mold on what had been the outside
of the cheese wheel.
  
 “You plan sorcery tonight, do you not?"
  
 “I do. I wish it were not necessary, but I cannot risk any more losses in open battles. There is a
Sturinnese fleet sailing northward to create more mischief-- probably at Elahwa, but possibly at Narial or
even Encora. The glass does not show where those vessels go. Neserea may be on the brink of a civil
war. If that fleet goes to Narial, Jolyn must go to Dumar. That means that we will see no lancers coming
to reinforce us, nor other sorceresses.” Seeca broke off a chunk of cheese and took a bite from it.
  
 "What will you do?” asked Richina.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Secca finished the mouthful of cheese and some bread, washing it down with a swallow of water before
she re-plied. ‘"What I can. What I must.”
  
 “Might I help?’
  
 “Study your spells, the battle spells. You may have to use them before we are done. Sooner, if I cannot
do what I plan.”
  
 Richina frowned.
  
 Secca smiled faintly. “What I plan is easier than battle spells, but one never knows.” She continued to
eat al-though she had to force the last of both bread and cheesedown. Yet, if what she tried tonight
failed, she would need all the strength she possessed on the morrow. Even if her planned sorcery
worked, she might be called upon.
  
 After she finished eating, Secca began a vocalise. She couldn't very well warm up her voice anywhere
close to Mynntar's camp.
  
 Her throat and cords felt slightly raw, and she coughed up mucus on the second vocalise, something that
usually didn't happen to her.
  
 “Should you do this. . . tonight?” asked Richina when Secca took a long swallow of spelled clean water
to clear her throat.
  
 “If I do not act tonight, then more will die tomorrow.” Secca took another swallow, then corked the
bottle and began another vocalise.
  
 After a time, the rawness seemed to subside. Secca fas-tened the green leather riding jacket and picked
up saddle-bags and then the lutar.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Richina followed Secca from the tent.
  
 Outside in the deepening hush, alerted by Secca's warm-ing up, Wilten and Stepan stood waiting.
Farther away to the east a score or so of Stepan's lancers were mounted and waiting, their green tunics
appearing almost gray in the twilight that was fast nearing full darkness.
  
 Wilten stepped forward. “I would feel better if we ac-companied you, lady?"
  
 “As I told Richina, it is best that we do not hazard all when we need not. Stepan and his men will do
their best.”
  
 A wry expression crossed Secca’s face. "They have far more to lose than do we, and he has more
lancers than do we."
  
 Wilten nodded. “Still..."
  
 “I know, and I appreciate your concern for me. There will be much left, much left, for you and your
men. This is just the beginning. I am most grateful for your care.” With as warm a smile as she could
manage, Secca turned and walked toward the gray. She fastened the saddlebags in place, then the lutar,
and mounted.
  
 “Like this not...“ Wiltens words to Richina carried as she turned the gray mare toward the waiting
lancers.
  
 “Your overcaptain is not pleased,” offered Stepan as he eased his mount beside Secca.
  
 “I know. But I would not hazard both senior command-ers and both sorceresses. And you and your
men know the land far better than do Wilten’s.”
  
 “That is true.” Stepan laughed softly. “But he knows not me, and all officers distrust that which they do
not know.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “You guarded me once, and did so well,” Secca pointed out. She paused. “Did you counsel father to
send me to Falcor?"
  
 “No. That was his decision. I agreed with it, but then I was only a lead armsman in a small holding, and
no one asked me. And you were a girl child to be married off to some old lord when the time came.
Now, you are a pow-erful lady and a sorceress, and I am an old arms com-mander.”
  
 Secca shook her head. “Not so old.”
  
 “Then why do I feel old?’ asked the silver-haired man.
  
  “Because you remember me as a child, but that does not make you old.”
  
 Stepan was the one to shake his head.
  
 Secca smiled faintly.
  
 “Yusar, lead on,” Stepan ordered as he and Secca neared the front of the line of lancers. “No words, no
torches.”
  
 “Yes, ser.”
  
 Secca glanced over her shoulder, back at the camp that seemed so small for an effort tostop a revolt
and whatever else might be brewing. Clearly, she wasn’t the battle sor-ceress that Anna had been. Just
as obviously, she had to stop Mynntar. With the players in the shape they were in, they couldn’t take
another battle like the last-- not soon.
  
 Spell-singing and battle-spell-singing were definitely different.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Yusar led the column along the main road for less than a dek before turning northward on a trail so
narrow that there was barely room for a single mount in the space between an ancient hedgerow and an
empty ditch, partly filled in places with a few patches of slush and dark and stagnant water.
  
 They followed the hedgerow for only about half a dek, before turning eastward again, across a sodden
meadow where each hoof seemed tosquush, but the meadow was narrow. On the far side, there was a
wagon path beside a rail fence that led up a long and gradual incline. A dek farther on, and Secca could
see a dark mass learning to the east.
  
 Overhead, high in the sky by itself, hung the tiny disk of Darksong, surrounded by starpoints of white
that almost seemed redder with Darksong nearby. Superstition or not Secca didn’t care for doing the
kind of sorcery she had in mind under the red moon. Then, perhaps the red moon was chastising her. She
shook her head.
  
 Stepen eased his mount back toward Secca and said in alow voice, "Their camp is on the far side of the
woods, only about half a dek. On all other sides are open fields, and their sentries look down.”
  
 Yusar reined up where the path turned back south beside the woods, and the lancers reined up as well.
  
 “This is as close as we dare go..." Stepan said quietly
  
 Secca dismounted.
  
 The arms commander eased his mount toward Secca and silently took the gray's reins.
  
 Secca unfastened the lutar and set the case on the damp grass beside the narrow path, in front of the
gray, before turning back to her mount She opened the top of the right saddlebag and took out the five
bottles, setting them in a row on the clay and opening each in turn. Then she re-moved the lutar from its
case and checked the tuning, as quickly and as quietly as possible.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Finally, she took a silent deep breath and faced east-ward, toward the camp that she knew was on the
far side of the small forests--or overly ample woodlot.
  
 Two chords to get the feel, and then she sang the spell, trying to visualize what she needed to happen.
  
 “Seek and carry through this night’s air
 crystals strong to Mynntar, camped o’er there.
 Take this heavy stuff, infuse through song,
 within the blood and sinew strong,
 within the brain and heart to dwell
 so no other battles will he live to tell…
  
 Then distribute all the rest
 through the blood of his captains best...”
  
  
 As the words and chords died away, Secca swal-lowed, then quickly recased the lutar in the darkness.
She could hear nothing, nor had she felt either harmony or dissonance. She bent down and glanced at the
bottles, lifting one in her gloved hand. It felt lighter. Leaving the bottles, she remounted.
  
 ‘We can go.” she whispered to Stepan.
  
 “Good. . . hear voices coming,” he hissed back.
  
 Secca wasn’t sure that she did, but was more than happy to ride back down the path, and then along the
hedgerow until they were on the main road, headed westward toward their encampment.
  
 A good half-glass passed on the return ride before some murmurings of the lancers who escorted her
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

were loud enough for Secca to discern.
  
 “What she do...?"
  
 “Doesn’t seem happy..."
  
  “Mayhap.... didn’t work..."
  
 “Mayhap it did... and tomorrow we’ll be paying for it..."
  
  Neither Secca nor Stepan spoke until the lights of the cookfires of the camp were again visible. “Might I
ask...?" ventured Stepan.
  
 “I used sorcery to try to slay Mynntar and his cap-tains. The spells took far less effort than calling forth
flames or lightnings or directing arrows against thunder-drums”
  
 “If it works... then his lancers might retreat.” Stepan sounded dubious. “Or they might attack from
anger.”
  
 “One way or another, it should help, if only to re-move good leaders.” Secea hoped for more than that,
knowing the players would not be at their best on the morrow.
  
 “His brother might follow the same course, a season hence.”
  
 “We’ll have to go to Dolov, one way or another,” Secca pointed out.
  
 “You would slay both?’
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “If need be,” Seeca admitted. “If I can.”
  
 “You seem displeased, Lady Sorceress.”
  
 “I am. Not at you, but because of what I must do.”
  
 “Ever always was war such,” Stepan replied. “And failing to act soon has always meant more who die
and more who suffer.”
  
 “So it is said.” Secca wondered, but did those who began wars, like Mynntar, or his father before him,
ra-tionalize their actions in the same way?
  
 Was war always like this? Where each side used what it could, Mynntar pressing and slaughtering under
weather that inhibited sorcery, and she, using sorcery and poison under the cloak of night?
  
 Did it have to be? In Anna’s later years it had not, but had that been because she had used such
overwhelming force in the early years that none wanted to displease her and provoke her to call forth
such again?
  
 Secca took a deep breath.
  
 Stepan glanced at her, but did not comment.
  
  
 44
 Mansuus, Mansuur
  
 The snow drifts past the study windows, almost lazily, and so infrequently that none has collected on the
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

rail-ings without, nor on the meadows or barn fields across the gray waters of the Toksul River from the
palace. Chill radiates from the glass panes, and heavy maroon hangings have been drawn across all of the
windows, except for the two wide frames behind the Liedfuhr’s desk
  
 Kestrin stands before the desk, and the papers on it, reading the scroll that Bassil has just placed in his
hands.
  
 “What does your sister write that no one else will?" asks Basil after a time.
  
 “How—because there would be no one else who would wish me to know the morass in Neserea?"
  
 “Exactly, sire.” Bassil bows slightly.
  
 When he finishes rereading the lines again, Kestrin shakes his head. “She suggests that this Belmar
bribed the armsmen, and then he ambushed them, to prove the need for a strong Lord High Counselor...
or, more likely, a return to a Prophet of Music. There are rumors that he knows sorcery, but no one is
willing to say such.” He turns and looks out at the intermittent snow flakes. "Belmar him-self cannot have
the golds to bribe an entire company and two levels of officers. . . and that means the Sea-Priests. What
a disaster...”
  
 “And what of Captain Cyrn and Overcaptain Tein?"
  
 “I can’t believe that they thought I wouldn’t find out.”
  
 Bassil clears his throat.
  
 “They knew that I would, and they still. . .?" Kestrin swallows. “They don’t think I will punish them
because they think it will look like I’m covering up my own in-competence?’
  
 “Captain Cyrn is dead. You cannot punish him more,” Bassil points out. “And if you punish Tein..."
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “All my offlcers will think that I’m making him the scapegoat. If I do nothing, then it will appear as
thought am weak-willed." Kestrin smiles coldly. “Better I be con-sidered vicious and spiteful than weak.
Continue with the plans for a public execution. Oh... and even if we have to plant the coins, make sure
someone finds a hoard of golds somewhere in the overcaptain’s possessions.”
  
 “I think we can do that, sire, and it is probably the best that can be done at present” Bassil bows and
waits.
  
 “So..." Kestrin draws out the word. ‘We have the Sea-Priests trying to weaken me, and to foment
discord and rebellion in Neserea... and who knows what else in Lied-wahr. The lord holders of Neserea
are petitioning that Annayal consort to someone suitable—immediately. They fear that if she does not, the
rule of Neserea will go to a scion of Dumar... or worse, that I will move armsmen into Neserea, and that,
in time, I will annex the land.” Kestrin snorts. “As if any of the three sorceresses would allow it.”
  
 “Are they strong enough to stand against Mansuur?" asks Bassil.
  
 “Who knows? That is not the question, and you know it, wise overcaptain Bassil. How many lords of
Defalk have died of accidents, strange fluxes, or otherwise in their beds, who went to sleep in the flush of
health?”
  
 “You think they have stooped to such? Those most hon-orable ladies?” Bassil’s eyes contain a grim
glint.
  
 “Honorable? That is such a noble-sounding word, and it conceals more violence and dishonesty than any
other. As for them, I doubt there is little to which they would not stoop to save Defalk-- and Liedwahr
from a bloody and prolonged war.” Kestrin smiles. “Just as you—or Iwould find it difficult not to do the
same were Mansnur so threatened.”
  
 “And what will you do?”
  
 “What I must. As will you.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Bassil nods slowly.
  
 Outside, the first flakes of snow that foreshadow winter drift by the glass.
  
 45
  
 The sound of a trumpet echoed through the thin silk panels of the small tent. Secca bolted upright, barely
managing to keep from tipping over the narrow cot on which she had been sleeping, fitfully and far from
easily.
  
 She blinked, rubbing gummy eyes. Outside it was barely light, a good half-glass or more before dawn,
she judged, as she fumbled for tunic and trousers and boots.
  
 “Lady...that was the alarm.” Richina said.
  
 “I know. Get dressed.” Secca finished throwing herself into her riding clothes and green leather jacket
After belt-ing on her sabre, she scrambled from the tent, past the pair of lancer guards.
  
 Wilten was half-running, half-scurrying through the grayish gloom toward her. “The Ebrans...those under
Mynntar, that were under Mynntar...they’re forming up and preparing for battle..." stammered the
overcaptain.
  
 Forming up? How could they, without officers? Secca’s hand went to her mouth, recalling the exact
words of the spell. She had killed the best of Mynutar’ s officers, not all of them. While she had, wanted
to spare as many as pos-sible, the effect was likely to be the opposite.
  
 “How did you find out?”
  
 “Arms Commander Stepan’s scouts.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Richina staggered from the tent into the predawn gray, glancing at Wilten, then at Secca.
  
 “Richina.. . find Palian and Delvor, and tell them we need to have the players ready to ride and play.”
  
 “Yes, lady.”
  
 “Don’t forget your sabre!”
  
 Richina nodded and turned.
  
 “You intend to give battle?” asked Wilten.
  
 “Why not? It will take them a glass or more to reach us, and we can take the hill to the east long before
that. The wind will be at our back.”
  
 "Then why do they attack now?” questioned Wilten.
  
 “To catch us by surprise, I’m sure. It isn’t even dawn." Palian and Delvor walked swiftly toward Secca
and Wil-ten. Trailing them was Richina.
  
 “They are attacking, lady?” asked Palian.
  
 “It looks as such,” Secca admits. “Are your players able to play a strong flame song?”
  
 “Once, perchance twice.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “That may suffice.” Secca turned to Wilten. “If you would form up our lancers. Leave the camp. Just
form up.”
  
 “Yes, lady.”
  
 Secca ignored his dubious tone, turning to retrieve her luar in case more was needed than the players
could pro-vide. Then she hurried to the tieline behind the tent where she began to saddle the gray. When
she had finished, and as she was mounting, Richina scurried up with cheese and bread.
  
 “You must eat as you ride, or you will not have the strength you need.”
  
 “Thank you.” Secca looked down. “Get some for your-self and then join me. But eat.”
  
 Richina grinned and held up another loaf. “Yes, lady.” Secca smiled, then glanced to the south where the
play-ers scurried to and fro, almost like ants.
  
 “Just your instruments!” snapped Palian. “Now!” The chief player glanced up. “Lady?”
  
 “Join us at the banner when you are ready.”
  
 Palian nodded, then turned to her players. “Lances and shafts don’t wait until you’re ready! Mount up
now.”
  
 Secca eased the gray forward toward the column where Stepan’s lancers seemed to be forming. Behind
them, In less ordered array, were the lancers of Loiseau. Secca frowned, but said nothing as she rode
along the column toward the standard bearer, another young lancer. This one she knew, although it took
her a moment to come up with the lancer’s name. “Good morning, Achar.”
  
 “Good morning, lady?’ Achar bowed his head.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Greetings,” offered Stepan. “I see your players are pre-paring to follow you.”
  
 “And you,” said Secca as she reined in the gray, who promptly side-stepped before halting. “Thank you
for the warning."
  
 Stepan nodded. “I set scouts last night”
  
 “You thought this would happen, didn’t you?"
  
 “I had fears.” Stepan looked through the gray light. “Those armsmen who have no qualms about striking
a man down from behind in battle muster great anger when they see their officers and comrades struck
down by what they cannot see.”
  
 Secca paused, not sure what to say for a moment, before replying, “Each side says its cause is just, and
that justifies any weapon and tactic, but it is unfair for the other side to use such tactics and weapons?"
  
 “Of course,” Stepan said dryly. He glanced back at the lancers forming up. “You think this is wise?"
  
 “No battle is wise, I’m learning.” Secca shifted her weight in the saddle. “Some are less unwise than
others. Whoever is leading their forces is doing it to try totake command of the forces or for revenge.
He’s also not going to be their best commander.” At least, Secca hoped that had been the result of her
spellsong of the previous night “It’s dry, and the wind will be behind us, and we can take the high
ground.”
  
 ‘If they do not attack?"
  
 “Then we wait and see.”
  
 Stepan nodded slowly, then turned and stood in his stir-rups. "First company forward!” He reseated
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

himself. “Best there be a van.”
  
 “You have more experience than do we, and I defer to you."
  
 Stepan laughed. "Most of it is more than a score of years behind me.”
  
 “Better than none,” Secca suggested.
  
 “You will have more than you wish before this is over, I fear.”
  
 “So do I.”
  
 Stepan glanced over his shoulder. “Your players are rid-ing this way.”
  
 ‘Palian has experience. She was with Anna through all the early wars.”
  
 “She sounded like a most irate officer.”
  
 “Players do have a feeling that they are . . . not com-mon,” Secca ventured.
  
 “In battle, all are common.” Stepan gestured. “Hold for the players, then follow!” He turned back and
eased his mount, a gelding that was neither smooth-coated nor shaggy like a raider beast, forward
toward the road.
  
 Secca looked back, but Palian and Delvor led the players behind Secca and her four guards. As the
entire column began to move, a single figure cantered along the shoulder of the road. Richina slowed her
mount and eased into the column behind Secca and Stepan.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 The combined forces of the players, Secca’s lancers, and those of Stepan were formed up in an arc on
the rise to the south of the main road in less than half a glass from the trumpet alert. In the center of the
arc were Secca, Richina, and the players.
  
 Palian and Delvor had the players running through warm-up melodies, while Secca and Richina worked
on vocalises. After finishing a vocalise, Secca paused and cleared her throat, then took a swallow from
her water bottle.
  
 Stepan rode across the low crest of the hill and reined up.“They are less than a quarter of a dek to the
east, just beyond the curve in the road.”
  
 “Will they attack immediately?”
  
 The older arms commander shrugged. “I would not. What this officer will do, I could not say.”
  
 “I will try to use the spells before your men must use their blades...”
  
 “I understand, lady, but they cannot stand and wait, not against a full charge.”
  
 “How far...?”
  
 “No less then a hundred yards.”
  
 “I will do what I can,” Secca promised. She turned. “Chief players!"
  
 “Yes, lady?"
  
 “Have your players stead ready. The flame song.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “The flame song,” Palian acknowledged, her voice strong but flat.
  
 Secca watched as the burgundy-clad lancers appeared, then rode forward and wheeled off the road,
smartly mov-ing into three masses—one opposite the right side of the rise where waited Secca’s forces,
one mass for the center, directly downhill from Secca and the players, and one for the left.
  
 “Stand ready!” Secca called.
  
 “Steed ready” echoed Stepan and Wilten, Stepan on the left, Wilten and Secca's lancers on the right.
  
 “A direct assault up the hill and against the wind,” mannered Richina, “Stupid... against sorcery.”
  
 Only if such an attack failed, thought Secca. “The flame spell!”
  
 Palian swallowed, then repeated the command. So did Delvor,
  
 “At my mark!” Secca watched, then, as a trumpet call bugled across the orange-lit dawn, the burgundy
lancers charged, three masses moving together. Secca dropped her arm and waited for the notes to rise
through the cool crisp air, air that would carry her words over the advancing lanc-ers.
  
 “Mark!” echoed Palian.
  
 Compared to the efforts in the rain and of the night before, the flame song seemed almost effortless, the
wind at her back, the rising sun to her right.
  
 “Turn to fire, turn to flame
 all those who stand against our name,
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 turn to ashes, turn to dust.. .“
  
 Even halfway through the words, lightnings began to flare across Secca’ s vision, line after line of flame
and fire. Thin streaks of black greasy smoke stretched north-west, almost in straight angled lines.
  
 As the music of the players and Secca’ s words died away, the hillside ground rumbled once, then again,
and Secca had to shift her weight to keep her balance. A single chime, harmonic but harsh, reverberated
through her, a chorded chime that only she and Richina and perhaps a handful of players might have
heard.
  
 Not a figure stirred on the browned and blackened grass and damp clay below the rise. The thin lines of
black smoke continued to rise from the heaped and blackened figures that lay strewn everywhere
Secca’s eyes looked. Her stomach twisted upon itself with just the hint of the stench of burned
flesh—only a hint be-cause the wind remained at her back, the wind that had carried her words and the
accompaniment of both first and second players.
  
 Then... why did she smell anything? She swallowed again.
  
 The dark cloud that had momentarily shrouded the sky above the battle already had begun to dissipate,
torn apart by the brisk dry wind out of the southwest.
  
 Secca turned toward the players. “You may stand down.” Her voice was suddenly hoarse, suddenly
rough, but not because of overuse. This. . . this was not like the first battle, where the deaths had fallen
on both sides, and been concealed by rain and thunder-drums and brush and trees. Nor like her stealthy
efforts of the night before, where she had seen naught of what she had wrought.
  
 Her eyes went back to the blackened corpses of men and mounts. A few moments ago, all had been
alive, and vital. Now… they were dead. Yet, two days pre-vious, they and their Sea-Priest drummers
had attempted to do the same to her and her forces.
  
 She shook her head, swallowing back bile.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Alter a last look at the sudden carnage, Secca walked slowly back toward her mount. Rchina, pale and
almost green-looking, handed back the reins to the older sor-ceress wordlessly. Just as silently, Secca
took them and slowly mounted the gray.
  
 Both Stepan and Wilten rode from the flanks of the lancers who had never even needed to charge.
  
 “None survived, lady,” Wilten said slowly.
  
 Stepen rode up, nearing and reining up to the left of Secca somewhat later then Wilten. “I must also
ask... what spell did you use, Lady Secca?”
  
 “A spell that flamed all disloyal to Lord Hadrenn and Defalk,” Secca admitted.
  
 Stepan took a deep breath. “Your spell flamed a score of my lancers, lady.”
  
 Secca bowed her head. “For that I am sorry, arms commander, but last night, I tried to spare those who
were not to blame. This morning, I could not risk spar-ing any who might prove disloyal.”
  
 “More than sixteen score lancers and officers lie dead on the hillside,” Wilten said. “Surely... some...
might have..."
  
 “That would have been Darksong. What would you have me do?" she replied tiredly. “Have the rest of
our lancers slaughtered in the next rain or snowstorm? Or lose more lancers when we must still take
Dolov?"
  
 “Dolov?" Stepan’s eyebrows rose.
  
 So did Wilten's.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “He has a younger brother, has he not? If we do not finish this business, what is to keep the Sturinnese
from doing the same a season or a year from now? Secca laughed, without mirth. "We can spend a day
or two making ready for the trip, but we cannot tarry longer.” She looked at Stepan. “Lord Hadrenn
always wanted to be uncontested lord of Ebra. If we take Dolov, that he will be.
  
 “He did not wish that so much as he wished no other to be lord above him,” Stepan suggested.
  
 “Whatof Haddev?”
  
 “He will be a stronger lord.”
  
 Secca wasn't certain whether that would be good or bad. Then, there was little about which she was
certain, save that any sorcery that would allow her to prevail would create more deaths—or that any
Sturinnese foot-hold in Liedwahr boded great ill and dissonance.
  
  
 46
 Wei, Nordwei
  
 Snow has fallen across Wei, but the sun is out, and be-yond the window, the light is corruscatingly
brilliant. Ashtaar must squint as she looks down the hill toward the river and the harbor piers she cannot
actually see. After a moment, she draws the shutters to reduce the glare, but leaves them positioned so
that the remaining light falls across the straight-backed chair facing her and the desk. Then she reseats
herself at the desk, picking up the first scroll from the pile on the left side.
  
 She has read four scrolls when there is a knock on the study door. “Yes?’
  
 “Escadra, Leader Ashtaar.”
  
 “Came in.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Escadra steps inside the door and immediately bows. “You asked for reports. . . some matters of
interest.”
  
 Ashtaar gestures toward the chair across the table desk from her, set at a slight angle.
  
 The chunky seer eases herself down into the chair and into the line of sunlight that strikes her face. The
seer squints against the glare.
  
 “Go ahead," prompts the older woman.
  
 “You may recall that Lord High Counselor Clehar was killed in the battle east of Narial...?"
  
 “That was last week. Is there something new?’ Swal-lowing as if to stifle a cough, Ashtaar picks up the
large square of green cloth from the desk, holding it in her left hand. “Something that affects us?"
  
 “His brother Fehern has assumed the title and position of Lord High Counselor,” Escadra announces.
“Without even notifying Lord Robero, from what we can scry.”
  
 "In a time of invasion and trouble, that is understand-able,” Ashtaar replies dryly.
  
 ‘We do not believe that the Sturinnese killed Lord Cle-har. There is a partly trained sorcerer who
remains close to Fehern all the time.” Eacadra moistens her lips ner-vously. “His demeanor is like unto
that of the Sea-Priests. Fehern consults him often. Since the death of his brother, Feharn avoids battle,
and towns in Dumar are falling quickly to the Sea-Priest”
  
 Ashtaar nods. ‘What else?"
  
 “Yesterday, the Sorceress-Protector of the East de-stroyed Mynntar and his forces, and close to ten
companies of Sturinnese lancers. They were marching toward Synek. She also used a smaller sorcery the
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

night before?"
  
  “Do you know what that was?”
  
 “No, your Mightiness.”
  
 Ashtaar frowns.
  
 Escadra shifts her weight uneasily in the hard straight-backed chair.
  
 "I have yet another charge for you, Escadra.”
  
 ‘Yes, Leader?” The seer’s voice is somehow subservient yet wary.
  
 Ashtaar laughs but once before she speaks. “I am not that unobservant, even approaching my dotage.”
  
 Escadra waits.
  
 “As you can, watch the Lady of the Shadows and her followers.”
  
 The seer’s eyebrows lift.
  
 Ashtaar coughs, harshly, then covers her mouth with the dark green cloth. After several more violent
coughs, she sets the cloth by the black agate oval and takes a slow deep breath. Finally, she speaks.
“We have a Sea-Priest sorcerer in Neserea, aiding or teaching a Neserean holder who claims descent
from the Prophet of Music. There is another Sturinnese sorcerer in Dumar. There are thunder-drums in
Ebra, and two Sturinnese fleets. There are three powerful sorceresses in Defallk, and they have at least
two strong assistants.” She pauses. “And Lord Robero cannot best the Sea-Priests without those
sorceresses.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “That is most likely so, your Mightiness.” Escadn shifts her weight in the chair, as if trying to escape the
glare without seeming to do so.
  
 “What do the Ladies of the Shadows most oppose? Is our Lady of the Shadows any different?”
  
 “I understand, Leader.”
  
 “Good. I need not tell you more. But do not neglect the Sorceresses.”
  
 “No, Leader Ashtaar.”
  
 “You have done well.” Ashtaar smiles, then nods as she picks up the scroll she had been reading. “You
may go.”
  
 Escadra stands and bows, then turns and slips from the study.
  
 Once the door is closed, Ashtaar turns and closes the study shatters all the way, cutting off the glare
from sun and snow.
  
  
 47
  
 Secca took another bite of the hard white cheese as she sat on one side of the table in the dining hall of
Had-renn’s palace and listened to Palian. A single set of candles in a double sconce offered the only
illumination in a room seemingly as chill as the cold and clear day beyond the dark wood-paneled walls.
  
 “Yesterday...it was a blow to some of the players. Bretnay woke sobbing this morning, and Rowal
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

would speak to none,” Palian said.
  
 Secca glanced at Delvor.
  
 The chief of the second players nodded. “More of mine are like stunned bullocks. It is one thing to see a
pit open in a hillside, and another to see scores upon scores of men and mounts turned into charred
flesh.”
  
 Behind Delvor’s shoulder, Richina winced at Delvor’s words, then took a long swallow of the light and
bitter ale that Secca had trouble drinking, but was swallowing slowly because she didn’t wish to spend
the effort to sing a spell to provide clean water. Although Secca did not voice it, the sights and smells of
the carnage had indeed forced a relocation back to Hadrenn’s palace, both for a day or two of rest and
re-supply, and for some better plan-ning for the campaign that lay ahead. All were clearly needed.
  
 After the battle—or slaughter-- Secca understood why Anna had preferred shadow sorcery. Fewer
died, and usu-ally the guilty, while in a battle all too many died who were at most but guilty of following
the wrong leader. Yet people thought she and Anna were cold-blooded? What was kind and
humane—or honorable—about sending scores upon scores to certain death in massed battles?
  
 At a cough from the door, Palian turned, then stood as Hadrenn walked into the hall. So did Delvor and
Richina. Out ofform alone, so did Secca.
  
 “Frengal said that you might be here, Lady Sorceress.”
  
 “We are here,” Secca replied
  
 Hadrenn glanced atPalian, then Delvor.
  
 Secca nodded at the players, then at Richina, and the three slipped out of the hall, leaving the Lord High
Coun-selor and the Sorceress-Protector of the East by themselves in the dimly lit hall.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Stepan informs me that your sorcery cost us a score of lancers.” Hadrenn’s voice was bland.
  
 “It did. That was the less than a battle would have.”
  
 “And ensured that none survived who would be hostile to Defalk?"
  
 “That was not the intent,” Secca pointed out, “although I doubt that Lord Robero would be greatly
troubled by it, nor should you be.”
  
 Hadrenn frowned, fingering his chin, then, studied Secca for a long moment. “You are much like the
Lady Anna.”
  
 Secca waited to see if Hadrenn would add more.
  
 "If my lancers do not accompany you, will you still travel to Dolov?" asked Hadrenn
  
 “I must, if only to assure Lord Robero that Dolov re-mains loyal.”
  
 “You do not believe it will. Nor do you believe I will do what is necessary to ensure that?" Hadrenn
offered a single short bark of a laugh. “And you would he right. Synek, even after a score of years
without wars, remains poor. In just Synek, I rule a demesne nearly a third the size of Defalk, and yet
perhaps twelve companies of lanc-ers are what I can muster without prostrating the merchants end
peasants.” Hadrenn tilted his head “What say you to that?"
  
 Sacca laughed gently. “That it behooves you even more to send your lancers with me, for you can
display your power with far less cost than in any other fashion.”
  
 “You are so like her, though you look not in the slightest the same.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Like Anna? Secca strongly doubted that.
  
 “A strong north wind would seem to blow you into the next holding, yet the wind passes, and all is
changed, and you remain.” The heavy-set and balding Lord High Coun-selor of Ebra fingered his chin
again before speaking. “The new part of the road…it makes what was there before seem poor indeed. I
had heard that you sorceresses had created stone roads all across Defalk and for but a short way into
Ebra. Would it be possible...?" Hadrenn did not finish the question.
  
 “There are only so many sorceresses, Lord Hadrenn,” Secca said tiredly. “Richina replaced and paved a
section of road that was perhaps a half a dek in length. It took all her effort, and she will not be able to
do much sorcery for another day or so yet, perhaps longer. That was all she could do for a week, and
she is a strong, young sorceress. There have been four full-fledged sorceresses in DefaIk, and we have
been working on the roads there for more than a score of years. We now have perhaps one highway in
each direction from Falcor to the borders of Defalk. You are more fortunate than other neighbors, for
Lady Anna esteemed you,” Secca exaggerated, “and used her sorcery to pave the road through the Sand
Pass and for another fifteen deks into Ebra.”
  
 “Your roads benefit you more than others, for now trad-ers flock to use your roads,” Hadrenn pointed
out.
  
 “That is true, but however it benefits us, a sorceress can only do so much sorcery in a day or a week,
and sorcer-esses are called upon to do more than build roads. Anna did also build you the bridge across
the Syne to the west.” Secea smiled. “Once we have settled the current...situ-ation...perhaps, if there is
another bridge..."
  
 “If there were one across the Syne, perhaps thirty deks to the east...that would save much travel, and
make the folk on one side closer to those on the south.”
  
 “We will see, and I will not forget.”
  
 “Neither did she, for good or for evil.” Hadrena laughed. “And you are much like her.”
  
 Secca offered a smile she wasn’t certain she felt.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 48
 Encora, Ranuak
  
 The man and the woman sit across from each other, platters empty but still on the table. In a smaller and
higher chair sits a daughter, with the blonde hair of her mother. The Matriarch sips a glass of an amber
wine, while her consort glances at their child.
  
 The child leans forward in the chair to take one of the glazed almonds from the dish on the table.
  
 “Just a few,” says Alya.
  
 “Yes, Mother.”
  
 A half-smile crosses the man’s face before his eyes re-turn to Alya. “You are disturbed by the news
from Sy-nek?"
  
 The Matriarch frowns. “I would have been surprised if Mynntar had prevailed, oven with the aid of the
Sturinnese. I worry greatly about the use of Clearsong to poison Mynntar.”
  
 “Did he not deserve it?” asks Aetlen.
  
 “He did...That is not the difficulty. I fear we shall see much more and different uses of spellsongs in the
seasons ahead. Now is not the time for shadow sorcery. Not with the Ladies0f the Shadows visiting me,
and recalling the horrors of the Spell-Fire Wars.”
  
 “You worry about them?"
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Their worries are the same as mine—but they will not see that the evils of not using sorcery may be
even worse than the horrors of using it.”
  
 “You expect the new Sorceress-Protector to abandon what has worked so well for more than a score
of years?” asks Aetlen.
  
 “No. She acted then as she needed, but I fear she will yet try more subtle shadow sorcery,” replies the
Matriarch, smiling at her daughter even while she eases the dish of almonds out of reach of her youngest.
  
 Alcaren wearing the pale blue of the Matriarchy, but with insignia neither of an officer nor a ranker-- sits
in the straight-backed chair by the door, eyes flicking from the Matriarch to her daughter and then to her
consort He stands and slips to the second-story window, studying the way below, then the dark clouds
beyond the harbor. His fingers curl around the hilt of the sabre, then uncurl, as if willed to do so.
  
 “Because she does not understand that shadow sorcery is fully effective only after great power has been
dis-played?’ Aetlen’s voice is dry as he brushes back white-blonde hair that shows neither the white nor
the silver of aging.
  
 The Matriarch nods.
  
 “Mother?” asks the girl, who would stand perhaps to the Matriarch’s shoulder, “why couldn’t you bring
another sor-ceress from the Mist Worlds, the way they once did in Defalk? One who had great power?’
  
 Alya frowns. “It is not that simple, Verlya. Knowledge is a form of Harmony. The great sorceress Anna
was not a sorceress when she came to Liedwahr. She was a singer of songs, for songs do not have the
power in the Mist Worlds that they do here. Even so, she was most fortunate to have survived the trip.
Such a trip would kill a knowing sorcerer or sorceress.” The Matriarch smiles. ‘We were most fortunate
that she was who she was. I would not gamble on such. I could not.”
  
 “Are the other sorceresses like her?”
  
 “No. No person is like unto another. Nor are sorceresses. There are three, and they are all powerful,
but most dif-ferent. The eldest is the Sorceress of Delalk, and she is most like the sorceresses of old, and
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

finds herself in a world where such is most dangerous. The second would be a sorcerer, for she uses men
as men have used women, and she feels the currents of power among the lords. The third, and the
youngest, she is the shadow sorceress, much as the great sorceress was, and should she ever emerge into
the full light of Harmony, she also will change Lied-wahr, perhaps far more than the great sorceress. Yet
she would hug the shadows close.”
  
 “Why does she stay in the shadows?’
  
 “Because for many years, the shadows have allowed her and the one who taught her to shape the future
of Defalk and of Liedwahr unseen and more gently.”
  
 “I would not like my future changed from the shadows,” states Verlya. “Not by a sorceress.”
  
 “That will change, for a time.” The Matriarch sighs. “It wth change so much that all will yearn for the
shadow days.”
  
 “I won’t,” avers the girl.
  
 ‘We shell see,” temporizer the Matriarch.
  
 “Indeed we shall,” adds Aetlen.
  
 By the window, Alcaren frowns, ever so slightly, as hIs gaze returns from surveying a harbor far too
empty of ves-sels.
  
  
 49
  
 Secca walked to the window, where she stared out into the cool and clear early morning, a day bidding
to be warmer than those just previous: How long would the weather hold? Did she dare cross Ebra to
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

Dolov? Did she dare not?
  
 A dull thump filled the room, and both Richina and Secca turned.
  
 On the desk where Secca had been studying the maps was a tarnished bronze cylinder. From it rose the
odor of hot and oiled metal and the smell of parchment being heated.
  
 “Who sent it? asked Richina. “Lady Clayre?"
  
 Secca pulled on the leather riding gloves that she had laid on the corner of the dressing table, then swiftly
lifted the bronze tube off the maps, but not before a rectangular browned shape had darkened the
parchment.
  
 Quickly, the small sorceress pried open the copper tube, and extracted the parchment, and then a
second sheet, sealed in blue, and a third with its seal and blue ribbons slightly scorched. All three were
browned from the heat, but not so much that she could not read the words of the unsealed one.
  
  
 Dearest Secca
  
 I would not send these such were matters not most amiss. Clayre already has been required to use the
flame sorcery against one rebellious holder in Neserea in order to support Annayal. Many of the
Neserean holders have pledged to restore the Prophet of Music yet without re-vealing their names...or
who they would in-stall as prophet.
  
 There are two fleets from Sturinn. One has al-ready landed lancers and armsmen in Dumar, east of
Narial, and they are moving toward Du-maria. As you know, Narial itself lies prostrate from the massive
wave we think the Sea-Priests created through sorcery...
  
  
 Secca shook her head, recalling the anguished chord that had awakened her in the night. Why hadn’t she
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

used the reflecting pool sooner to seek out the cause? Because she’d been so exhausted? It had only
been a day later, and she had sent a message to Lord Robero. She moistened her lips, hoping her
carelessness would not come back to plague her, not any more than it al-ready had.
  
  
 Lord High Counselor Clehar is raising all his armsmen and lancers. There is no way I can reach Dumar
in time, and you and Clayre are already well away from Defalk. So Lord Robero has requested I remain
in Falcor...
  
 The second Sturinnese fleet appears to be sail-ing toward Elahwa. Lord Robero would suggest that you
offer your assistance to the Free-Women, once you have dealt with the last of the threat from Mynntar.
He and I feel that Ebra cannot stand if Elahwa falls to the Sea-Priests...not unless all of us go
eastward...With Sturinnese lancers landing in Dumar, and rebel-lion in Neserea...
  
  
 The writing seemed to blur for Secca, but she knew the letters had not blurred. She looked blindly
toward the closed window, as the dark wooden walls seemed to press in upon her.
  
 “Lady! What is it?’
  
 Rather than speak, Secca extended the message to Richina.
  
 While Riehina read the first, Seoca unsealed the sec-ond, the one with her name on the outside, and with
Roboro’s seal.
  
  
 Most honored Sorceress-Protector of the East,
  
            The Assistant Sorceress of Defalk has in-formed me that a Sturinnese fleet is nearing the Free
City of Elahwa. She has also informed me that you have removed the vast majority of the would-be
usurper’s forces. Therefore, I would request that you ensure the loyalty of Dolov, as you see fit to do so,
and with the support of the Lord High Counselor Hadrenn. I have enclosed
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 a sealed scroll strongly suggesting that he offer you all support within his power.
  
  
 Secca’s lips turned up in a faint smile. That wording read of Jolyn’ s not-so-light hand. The half-smile
van-ished with the next words she read.
  
  
 Upon completing that task, I would suggest that you offer your assistance to the FreeWomen of Elahwa,
should they still be resisting the Stu-rinnese. If the city has fallen, it might be best to see what can be done
to dislodge the Sea-Priests before they can reinforce their position...
  
  
 In short, approaching winter or not, bad weather or not, she was headed eastward in an effort to stop
matters which were already less than wonderful from turning into a complete disaster, if they had not
already.
  
 “I should have known. I should have used the glass more.” Secca shook her head. “Yet looking at the
mem-ories of reflections will not suffice.”
  
 “What are you going to do?’ asked the younger sor-ceress.
  
 "Take Lord Robero’s scroll directly to Lord Hadrenn.”
  
 “He will not be pleased.”
  
 “I’m not sure Lord Hadrenn has ever been pleased.” Then, she reflected, in his position, she supposed
she would not have been either. Hadrenn was a local lord who was not fitted for more, in a time when a
greater man would have been welcome. Except all those who would have been greater had opposed
Anna, and now Secca had to find a way to rescue a weak land with a weak lord. Without sorcery and
without Stepan, it would have been impossible from the beginning.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca picked up the scroll, then glanced at Richina. “You need to practice the vocalises, the ones with
the ‘eees,’ because you’re still swallowing your voice too much. I hope I won’t be long.”
  
 “Yes, lady.”
  
 Secca stepped from the guest chambers, and Mureyn, an older lancer, followed her down the corridor.
Duryl, the other lancer, whom Secca did not know except by name, remained at the door.
  
 The pair of guards standing outside Hadrenn’ s study stiffened as Secca marched toward them.
  
 “Lady Sorceress...” The taller guard began.
  
 “Tell Lord Hadrenn that what I bring him will not wait long.”
  
 The two exchanged glances, then the taller guard rapped on the door, and cased it open a fraction.
“Sire...the Lady Secca. She says that it requires much haste.”
  
 Apparently, Hadrenn said nothing, but only gestured, for the guard opened the study door, bowing to
Secea as she stepped inside and closed the heavy oak door behind her.
  
 Hadrenn did not stand from behind the ornate and ancient desk, its wood so darkened by age that it
ap-peared almost black. The dark green velvet hangings framing the tall windows behind the desk were
drawn so closely together that only a slit of light passed into the study, and the four branched candelabra
on the cor-ner of the desk dropped only a small pool of light across the ledger before the Lord High
Counselor.
  
 “I was reviewing the liedstadt accounts. There is little to spare. It was not the best of harvests, and the
need to use the lancers has cost more than we had set aside. Then there are the death golds for those
men you flamed..." Hadrenn gave a dramatic sigh.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “You will need to find more golds, I fear, Lord Had-renn” Secca extended the sealed scroll.
  
 Hadrenn studied the blue wax of the seal and the blue ribbons, whose edges were browned by the heat
of its sorcerous transmission. “How did you come by this? And why did you not present it sooner?” He
scowled.
  
 “It was sent by sorcery,” Secca stated. “In a bronze tube lined with special fabric. It appeared in my
room moments ago.”
  
 “You can send such? Why then do any use messen-gers?” Hadrenn shook his head.
  
 Secca took a slow breath. “It takes a sorcerer or a Sorceress. Sending one small tube will take all the
sor-cery she can muster for a day, perhaps two. Would you prefer the battle won? Or the road built?”
  
 “For such as you do, we would do better with more sorceresses,” Hadrenn offered, not quite growling.
  
 “Defalk has more sorceresses than ever it has had, and we have worked hard, but four could not send
all the scrolls a ruler would need, and then we could do little else.”
  
 “So... this scroll is most important?”
  
 “I would judge so.”
  
 “You know what it states?”
  
 “Not the words, Lord Hadrenn, but I believe Lord Robero makes a request for your support against the
Sturinnese and in securing eastern Ebra under your con-trol.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Hadrenn studied the scroll again, stll not breaking the seal. “It has been scorched.”
  
 “That happens when sent by sorcery, even within bronze. Some messages, if sent when a sorceress is
too tired or sent too far, arrive as little more than cinders.”
  
 “Sorcery..." After a brusque headshake, Hadrenn broke the seal and began to read, his lips mouthing the
words. Finally, he looked up, his head outlined by the light from the windows, but his face in shadow.
  
 “The Sturinnese are about to attack the Free City---or so your lord says,--- and I am to offer all that l
can in your support, excepting levies.” The Lord High Counselor lifted his hands. “I am recalled as to
why I dread the visits of sorceresses. What choice have I? If I support you not, then I will have neither
the backing of Defalk nor my lands. Yet... in supporting you, at the least I impoverish my folk and risk
losing what it has taken long years to build.
  
 Secea could not find much sympathy for Hadrenn within herself, even as she spoke. “We of Defalk did
not, foment this, Lord Hadrenn. Nor does Lord Robero desire your lands.”
  
 “Both I know. Both I understand. Yet. . .” The bald-ing lord twisted the scroll in his hands then glanced
down at the desk, before looking up at Secca. “Stepan and the lancers will accompany you until you
need them not, and you may request aught that you need from Frengal and him.” A ghastly pale smile
crossed the Lord High Counselor’s face. “Let us devoutly hope for the support of the Harmonies as
well.”
  
 "Thank you.” Secca understood how little Hadrenn wished to be where he sat. She doubted he
understood how little she wished to be where she stood. "We will depart tomorrow, the weather
permitting.”
  
 “As you will, Sorceress-Protector. As you will.”
  
 “As we must,” Secca replied, bowing slightly before she turned and left.
  
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 50
 Encora, Ranuak
  
 The mother and the father and two daughters sit around the oval dining table that could seat at least
another four people. The table is lit but by a single candle. Outside, the cold rain pelts on the windows
and the roof.
  
 “You’re worried about Veria?” asks Aetlen, finishing the last bite of a stew that had filled but half the
small bowl before him.
  
 “Veria... and Encora,” replies the Matriarch. “We know that the Sturinese will lay siege to Elahwa, yet
we’re still losing trading vessels. Even ships from Wei are no longer porting here. Prices of all goods are
going up, and there are some grain futures that the Exchange will not trade, at any price.”
  
 “Mother, why will you not send more lancers to help the FreeWomen?” asks the thin and older
dark-haired girl.
  
 The blonde daughter Verlya pauses in lifting a gob-let. Her eyes flicker from her mother to her older
sister.
  
 ‘We have already sent ten companies, Ulya. What am I to do if the Sturinnese turn their ships south and
sail to attack Encora? They can reach us in less than a week if the wind is right, and if their fleet is in the
channel. The lancers will need to ride back and it will take almost twice that for them to return. And they
will not be fit for battle for another week if they make such haste.”
  
 “You could send Alcaren,” Verlya says. “The SouthWomen would go with him.”
  
 Alya’ s mouth opens, if for but an instant. “Where did you hear that?”
  
 Verlya flushes. “I shouldn’t say, I guess. Should I?"
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “You overheard Alcaren talking to someone?"
  
 “No, mother. It wasn’t Alcaren. He wouldn’t do that.”
  
 “I’ll bet it was Scyda,” suggests Ulya. “She was com-plaining the other day that the SouthWomen could
make a difference.”
  
 AIya cocks her head, as if in thought, then glances at her consort.
  
 “Do you know what the Sorceress-Protector will do?’ asks Aetlen.
  
 “Whatever is best for Defalk, I am sure. That may not be best for Elahwa or us.” Alya’s lips twist. “Then
it may be, but it is not something we can count upon, not in these times."
  
 “She will not harm us, will she?’ questions Verlya.
  
 “That is most unlikely, but she is young, as sorceresses go--"
  
 “Like Alcaren?’ interrupts Ulya.
  
 Alya laughs. “In a way. In a way. But he would rather use a blade or a lance, while she prefers indirect
spells.”
  
  “That’s why he’s the head of your guard,” Verlya an-nounces.
  
 Aetlen and Alya exchange a quick glance before smiling at each other.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Alya laughs, ruefully. “Why not? If the SouthWomen would have him... then..."
  
 Aetlen nods. “One way or another... it will solve the problem. Or one of them.”
  
 The brief light fades from Alya’s face as she looks at Aetlen’s somber countenance. She forces a smile
as she turns back to her daughters. ‘We do have a little rice pud-ding.”
  
 “It’s been sooo... long since we had sweetcakes,” Ver-lya says.
  
 “That’s because the ships haven’t come with molasses and sugar,” UIya points out. ‘We’re lucky to
have rice pudding. Most people don’t have that”
  
 “I know.” Verlya sighs.
  
 Aetlen rolls his eyes at the dramatic statement and sigh, but manages to keep a straight face.
  
 “I could give it to someone else,” Alya suggests. “Please don’t, mother;’ Verlya says quickly. Then she
pauses. “Perhaps you should, if it’s someone who doesn’t get any.”
  
 “You may have some,” Alya says. “I aleady had most of it given to some of the families of the lancers of
the third company.”
  
 “The ones in Elahwa?" asks the older daughter.
  
  “One of the companies in Elahwa. There was only enough for four families, but they have children your
age." Alya stands and slips from the dining chamber.
  
 “I can eat mine, then.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Yes, you can,” Aetlen says with a smile. “Your portion is small enough that you may enjoy it.”
  
 The Matriarch returns with two dishes, one for each child, each portion but two small bites. Neither child
leaves a grain of the rice or sauce.
  
 Neither parent smiles.
  
  
 51
  
 In the entry hall of Hadrenn’s shabby palace, Secca ad-justed her leather riding jacket, and then the
heavy green felt hat. Lifting her saddlebags again, she prepared to step out into the clear but windy dawn,
when there was a cough behind her.
  
 Secca turned.
  
 Wearing a green tunic thrown on askew and above pur-pie trousers with dark splotches, Hadrenn stood
and looked at the redheaded sorceress. “I wish you well, Lady Secca, in this venture...for the sake of all
within Defalk and Ebra. Particularly for Haddev.”
  
 “Perhaps, when he returns, you should send him to join us,” Secca found herself saying. “He might find
the jour-ney to be useful.”
  
 “Perhaps I should.” Hadrenn cocked his head. ‘Perhaps I will.”
  
 “I do not know if I will be returning this way,” Seeca said after another period of silence, “but I thank
you for your hospitality and support, and especially for the use of Stepan and your lancers.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Your sorcery and that of your predecessor has made possible the restoration and preservation of my
pat-rimony. For this, I thank you, and wish you well.”
  
 "Thank you. Lord Hadrenn.” Secca inclined her head, then straightened with the warmest smile she
could muster before turning.
  
 Mureyn followed her, carrying the portable scrying mir-ror.
  
 The gray mare was standing by the doors when Seeca stepped into the courtyard, the reins held by a
lancer. Ri-china was already mounted, waiting for Secca.
  
 “Thank you, Duryl,” said Secca to the lancer who ten-dered her the gray’ s reins.
  
 “My pleasure, lady.”
  
 Secca fastened her saddlebags in place, then the mirror and lutar, before mounting.
  
 Once mounted, she eased the mare toward the south side of the courtyard to where she spied Palian.
  
 The chief player nodded as Secca reined up. “Lady Seeca.”
  
 “Palian. How fare you and the players?"
  
 “All are ready. The respite has done them well,” Palian replied.
  
 “Good.” Secca hoped the respite hadn’t cost them too dearly in dealing with Dolov, but particularly with
the Stu-rinnese.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Lady Secca,” called Wilten, easing his mount around Delvor, who was adjusting the straps holding his
lutar be-hind the saddle of his mount, “the lancers stand ready.”
  
 Behind Wilten, Stepan merely offered a nod that his men were also ready.
  
 “Then best we ride,” said Secca.
  
 Slowly, order emerged from the chaos of milling mounts and players, and Secca rode down the lane
toward the main road.
  
 While the sun of previous days had melted away the thin layer of snow, the cold night had frozen the
ground almost as hard as the stone of the highways of Defalk. Every rut in both the lane and the ground
beside it was sharp-edged, and often outlined in frosty rime.
  
 Once beyond the stone gates, the column turned east ward toward the bridge that led to the south side
of the River Syne and the main road eastward toward Dolov
 and Elahwa.
  
 "I was a little nasty,” Secca confessed. “When Lord Had-renn thanked me for ensuring his patrimony
and Haddev’s. I suggested that Haddev might be well-advised to join us.”
  
 Richina grinned. “Do you think he will send Haddev?"
  
 “I do not know.”
  
 “He will,” offered Stepan, easing his mount up beside that of Seeca. “The Lady Belvera will protest, for
she would protect Haddev from all. But Lord Hadrenn is not unperceptive. Haddev will spend many
years dealing with you two, and it would not be wise for him to be perceived as less than brave.” Stepan
laughed. “You fight his foes, Lady Sorceress, standing as you do but to the lord’s shoul-der, and with an
assistant who is most young, and you ride out to battle, asking naught of him or his heir personally. If
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

neither he nor his heir should take the field..."
  
 “Haddev will have trouble in later years?’ asked Secca. “Also… few battles are safer than those with a
sorcer-ess on one’s side,” Stepan pointed out.
  
 Secca doubted that.
  
 “And he could well use the understanding and the ex-perience,” Stepan continued, adding dryly. “Young
Had-dev will gain much renown by fighting for his land."
  
 “What is he like?’ asked Secca.
  
 “He is much like I imagine Lord Robero was at his age, though I but saw your lord when he was
somewhat younger.” Stepan smiled blandly.
  
 Secca managed not to wince, and offered a smile as innocuous as that of the arms commander. "Then
we will but follow the example set by Lady Anna.”
  
 “I thought as much, and so would Lord Hadrenn, within his heart.”
  
 Both Stepan and Secca smiled and nodded, near-simultaneously. To the side, Richina suppressed a
frown.
  
  
 52
 Encora, Ranuak
  
 In the formal receiving room, the Matriarch sits upon the clear blue crystal chair of the Matriarchy. The
room is empty, save for her and Alcaren, who stands just before the dais. Gray light seeps through the
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

long windows.
  
 “You have often wished to use your blade as well as your sorcery,” the Matriarch says deliberately. “Do
you still desire such?”
  
 “Only if it serves a good cause, Matriarch,” replies the young chief of guards.
  
 “Would you be willing to be overcaptain of two com-panies dispatched to Elahwa to help the city
against the Sturinnese?”
  
 “I might be.” Alcaren studies the Matriarch. “Even if the Sturinnese threaten to overwhelm such an effort
from its inception with their dissonance and thunder-drums.”
  
 “You had asked,” Alya points out.
  
 Alcaren laughs, if softly. “Now you would trap me by my own words.”
  
 “I would not trap you.” The Matriarch smiles, if faintly. “You wish what in return?”
  
 “Ifwe are successful in breaking the Sturinnese, by whatever means, I would wish to remain an
overcaptain in a useful position.” He squares his shoulders, as if expecting a denial.
  
 “I can only offer a useful position of stature.” Alya pauses. “The companies are those raised and trained
by the SouthWomen.”
  
 “You cannot send them under their own captains?”
  
 “Under their own captains, yes, but not without an Over-captain known to be loyal to the Matriarch.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “And one whom the men of the Free City would ac-cept?" asks Alcaren.
  
 “Ranuak cannot afford to have it said that it would use any stratagem to strengthen ties between the Free
City and the SouthWomen. A man as overcaptain, and one known to my sister as a possible sorcerer,
would certainly dispel that notion.”
  
 “Especially one known to have strong views?"
  
 “That will not hurt.”
  
 “And you will be sending me away from the Ladies of the Shadows.”
  
 Alya raises her eyebrows. “But out of my control, and that will trouble them.”
  
 “What about the Sorceress-Protector of the East?” Al-caren inquires. “She may pursue those Sturinnese
lancers in Ebra into the lands of the Free City.”
  
 “I would not oppose her doing so. She is the child in soul of the great sorceress, who forced Hadrenn to
accept the Free City. The younger sorceress may not choose to help Elahwa, but she will not harm it. not
unless it has already fallen to the Sturinnese.”
  
 “Do you think she will come to the aid of Elahwa?"
  
 Another faint smile plays across the face of the Matri-arch. For a time, she does not speak “My mother
always said to trust in the Harmonies... but not without working to create one’s own harmony. So long as
the young Sorceress-Protector follows the Harmonies, who knows what may happen?"
  
 "You think she might?"
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “I do not know. Whatever happens, Elahwa will need all the aid we can send. Even the young
Sorceress-Protector may need aid, for sorcery can exhaust the strong-est. That is why you carry the
brew packets. Should you chance to fight with her forces, you may offer aid such as the brew packets.”
Alya nods at Alcaren. “But you are not to attempt any battle sorcery, or any sorcery at all where it can
be seen. You are not to tell anyone about your abil-ities. While many in Encora know of them, few
elsewhere do. It should remain that way.” Her eyes chill as she be-holds him. “Do you understand?”
  
 “I understand.” Alcaren bows.
  
 "I am most certain you do.”
  
 He bows again before speaking. “These two companies are all you can afford to send, because of the
Sturinnese fleets?’
  
 Alya nods again... once.
  
 “I will go. Matriarch, trusting in both you and the Har-monies.” Alcaren inclines his head.
  
 “You leave in the morning. We have two fast coastal schooners of shallow draft; and the winds are out
of the southwest. They can take you and some mounts to the north end of the Sand Hills. There, other
mounts will be waiting. When you leave here, you will go to meet with Arms Commander Wyendra. She
will provide all you need.”
  
 Alcaren raises his eyebrows.
  
 The Matriarch ignores the implied question, instead standing to signify that she has said what she will say.
  
 Alcaren conceals a smile and bows deeply. “At your will and command, Matriarch.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “And with my best wishes, Alcaren.”
  
 “Thank you, Matriarch.”
  
 The Matriarch shivers slightly, but not until the door has closed behind the new overcaptain and she
remains alone in the formal receiving chamber.
  
 53
  
 The afternoon was quiet, the road empty, and but a handful of cart tracks marked the clay of the road
that ran along the south side of the River Syne. Stepan rode to Sécca’s right, Richina to her left. Ahead
rode Wilten, with the standard bearer Dymen, and immediately behind the sorceresses rode Delvor and
Palian.
  
 After nearly a glass of silence. Stepan cleared his throat. “More than a score of years ago, since last I
traveled these roads with so many armsmen.” He chuckled. “One would think that times change, but
betimes I wonder if only we change, and each of those who follows us must discover anew what we have
found.”
  
 “Some don’t, it appears,” Secca pointed out, shifting her weight in the saddle, then reaching up and
adjusting the green felt hat.
  
 “Each generation has its fools, though I was young and foolish then, as well.”
  
 “You seemed wise enough in battle. That was what Lady Anna said,” Secca prompted.
  
 “In battle, and in training lancers, in advising Gestatr and Lord Hadrenn.” A twisted smile crossed
Stepan’s lips. “Two consorts I lost to being headstrong, and almost a third. Not that you young women
wish to hear of an old warhorse’s foibles.” He glanced overhead at the clear sky, marked by but a single
wisp of a white cloud to the north.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 "Too fair a day to talk of foibles and war and the evil that well-meaning men can do.”
  
 “There is always malice among those in power,” Secea temporized.
  
 “Why have those who opposed you and the Lady Anna been so filled with malice and so foolish?”
asked Richina. “Even Lord Hadrenn and Lord Robero are less than pleased. From the foot of the table,
that I can see.” Abruptly, she flushed and turned to Stepan. “Begging your pardon, honored arms
commander.”
  
 Stepan laughed, generously. “No offense taken, sorcer-ess. What you have seen so have many others. It
is scarce a secret.”
  
 Secca decided not to speak, but glanced at Stepan.
  
 “Malice?” mused the older man. “I think not. Those who opposed the Lady Anna acted by their beliefs
and to pre-serve their power.” He raised his eyebrows. “Would you wish to be bartered off to whatever
lord pleased your sire, for perchance a promise of friendship, some kegs of good wine, and the thought
that another lord would be pleased to accept your daughter in the same fashion?"
  
 Richina glanced down at the mane of her mount.
  
 Secca smiled briefly, then asked. “Would you, Richina?”
  
 “No… you know that.” Richina’ s face screwed into a puzzled expression.
  
 Stepan nodded. “Because of Lady Anna, you and your mother have some say over your body and your
life. You would not give that up willingly, would you?”
  
 “Of course not.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 ‘Would you use your sorcery and all at your beck to hold to the right to defend your control of your
own body?” pursued Stepan.
  
 “Yes.”
  
 “Well... before Lady Anna, the Lords of Delalk had the right to control all women within their demesnes,
and they saw what she did as taking away their rights, and they fought with all at their beck to keep their
rights. What is the difference?"
  
 “It is not fair... to ask of a woman what they will not ask of themselves.”
  
 Stepan did not speak, and Secca realized he would not push the matter. “What is the difference?" she
asked Richina.
  
 “It’s... different..."
  
 “Is it, do you think?’ Secca asked Stepan. “Different?”
  
 “Different...that is a matter that men and women will argue over in all times and all worlds.” He shook his
head. “‘This I will say. Those who opposed Lady Anna were neither foolish, nor were they malicious.
They would have said--- they did say--- that the lady was the malicious one. She took away many of
their powers, and gave some to women, and some to sorceresses. They said she was fool-ish, for
women could never wisely hold such.”
  
 Richina shook her head. “I do not understand how any-one could think so.” She paused, then looked at
Secca. ‘What do you think? Were they right by their lights?”
  
 Secca laughed harshly. “I would say not. They tried to kill me when I had less than half a score of years.
Yet one must understand why people act as they do. Why do the Sea-Priests attack all of Liedwahr? Is
it because they are stupid? Or thoughtlessly evil? And why do they so do in this season of this year?"
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Richina shrugged.
  
 For several moments, the only sounds were those of hoofs on the road, the breathing of mounts, and the
low murmurs of the lancers and players in the column behind the three.
  
 “I would hazard,” Stepan said slowly, “that it is because what the Lady Anna began, if not halted, will
change all of Liedwahr, and perhaps the world. The ladies of Defalk were servants of their lords.
Perhaps some still are. But they were far less constrained than those in Ebra or in Mansuur, and never
were they chained by custom, as in Sturinn. Nor had they their tongues removed if they es-sayed
sorcery.”
  
 Richina shivered.
  
 Secca frowned the business with tongue-removals was not something she had heard.
  
 “Yet the Sea-Priests believe such is the way all should live,” continued Stepan. “To see a woman
unchained, to know that a woman practices sorcery--- to them, those are abominations far worse than
dancing or Darksong. They believe, as do most folk, that the world should live as do they. Unlike most
folk, they have the sorcery, and lancers, and fleets of ships, to try to make the world live in the way they
think best.” The arms commander shrugged. "The Lady Anna once told me, when I was not a great deal
older than the young sorceress, and I protested, as you now protest, that seldom is power ever
surrendered willingly, and great power surrendered even less willingly. The Lords of Defalk had great
power and privilege, and they did not wish to lose such. You two—and I as well have less power, but far
more than most folk in all of Erde. We will fight to hold that. We can also tell ourselves that it is better
that we hold power than others. Is it?’ Stepan laughed, once more ruefully, yet gently. “We judge
our-selves more kindly than might others judge us when we speak of our honor and duty.”
  
 Judge ourselves more kindly? Seeca frowned.
  
 “Each man—or woman—does as he senses best,” Ste-pan said. “Few indeed set out to do what they
see as evil. We—or others—may see it as such. That is our judgment, but they may see what we do as
evil to their way of thinking.” He laughed. “What I say is simple. So simple any child could grasp it, and
yet…generation after genera-tion, lands and men fight because they cannot agree on what way of life is
good.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Somehow, with Stepan’s gentle words, the afternoon felt even colder, although no clouds covered the
sun, and the wind remained less than a vagrant breeze.
  
  
 54
  
 In the late afternoon, standing before a tent fluttering in a cold but light wind, under a sun whose fading
light provided little heat, Secca glanced at Richina, then at Ste-pan and Wilten, and finally at the two chief
players. She felt as though each waited for her to speak, and as though whatever she said would be
faulted, if silently.
  
 Secca moistened her lips before beginning. ‘I’ve been worrying about what the Sturinnese are doing.
There wasn’t much point in following them day by day until we had to decide. Stepan tells me that late
tornowow or early the next we should reach where the River Dol and the River Syne join together. We
can go south to Elahwa or north so Dolov. Before I decide, I'm going to try to see what faces us in each
place."
  
 Wilten nodded, as did Palian and Richina. Stepan's face was impassive. A faint smile creased Delvor’s
lips.
  
 Secca picked up the lutar and began the spell.
  
 “Show me now and in this glass
 what in Elahwa has come to pass,
 with ships of Sturinn on the sea...”
  
 As the last notes of the spell died away, Secca looked down at the mirror, where an arcing line of ship
masts appeared in the silvered surface. Two ships were moored at the stone pier in the foreground, but
there were no figures on the pier, and apparently not on either ship.
  
 Secca frowned, wondering why the Sea-Priests were blockading the port, and why they had not used
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

sorcery to flatten Elahwa. Was there a reason why sorcery would not work in the eastern part of
Liedwahr?
  
 After a time, she released the spell.
  
 “You say the Sea-Priests raised the waves to destroy Narial?” asked Stepan.
  
 “They did.”
  
 “Yet they have not done so in Elahwa,” pointed out Wilten. ‘Perhaps they wish the port?”
  
 “Narial is a far better port. The waters are shallow off the Shoals, and the channel is narrow and goes on
for deks through those shallows.” Stepan frowned. “And the FreeWomen will fight to the death, perhaps
be-yond.”
  
 “Why would they have ships so close to the port, if the channel to deep water is so long?’ asked Palian.
  
 “Smaller boats, perhaps?’ suggested Delvor. “They wish to starve the city?”
  
 Secca nodded slowly. That sounded like what she had heard of the Sturinnese.
  
 “They are blockading the city. They must have lanc-ers somewhere,” suggested Stepan, glancing at
Secca. “If we could see...”
  
 That made sense to Secca, but she had to think for a time before she came up with the spell words she
needed.
  
 “Show us now and as you will
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 if and where lancers battle still
 near Elahwa and by the city’s sea...”
  
 The mirror showed a battle—or a skirmish.
  
 A line of lancers in white charged up a gentle incline. Another force met them a third of the way down
the in-cline. Most of the defending lancers were women who wore tunics of a brilliant crimson. Scattered
among them were other lancers—both men and women whose col-ors were a pale blue.
  
 “The blue--- those are the colors of Ranuak,” Richina blurted.
  
 As she spoke, the attackers fell back, but not before leaving bodies in crimson and blue strewn on the
hill-side.
  
 ‘Would one expect less?” asked Stepan. “The Free City is supported in part by the Matriarch, and it is
said that one of the councilwomen is her sister.”
  
 ‘They are losing,” offered Wilten.
  
 Stepan nodded, and Richina looked to the over-captain.
  
 “The defenders have repulsed this attack, but they have lancers from three units together,” Wilten said.
“One does not mix lancers from different companies in a battle unless none have enough to stand alone.”
  
 “The Ranuans have companies of male lancers and women lancers, but they do not mix them. The
women are the armsmen and sailors of Elahwa, while the men are the artisans and crafters,” Stepan
added. “Here all three groups fight in the same place.”
  
 Richina looked at Secca, as if to ask what the planned.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca released the second scene. She felt tired, almost light-headed, and one or two more quick sciying
spells were about all she was ready for without eating and refreshing herself. “Let us look at Dolov,” she
tempo-rized. Perhaps she should leave Dolov until later.
  
 “Show us now and show us fair
 the keep atDolov and lancers there..."
  
 The mirror split into two images, one displaying a keep on a bluff overlooking a river, the other side
showing lancers in white in thecourtyard. In fact, the entire rear of the courtyard held tents with white
banners.
  
 ‘They must have landed off the coast and ridden overland,” Wilten said.
  
 “They could have landed just beyond Elahwa and taken the road on the east side of the river north,”
sug-gested Stepan.
  
 Secea shook her head. There looked to be at least ten companies of Sturinnese lancers garrisoned yet at
Do-lov, and that didn’t even count whatever lancers Mynn-tar had left in reserve, lancers that his brother
might well use against Secca and Stepan’s forces.
  
 After a moment, as dayflashes appeared before her eyes, she released that image.
  
 She had enemies in both places. Which way should she lead her forces? And why?
  
 Somehow, she had the feeling that either decision would be wrong. Four or five days upriver, possibly a
battle and sorcery, and then five or six days back to Elahwa--- if the weather held, If Wilten and Stepan
were right... She looked at Stepan. “The FreeWomen can-not hold for two weeks.”
  
 “Not if that battle shows their strength.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 ‘They cannot last...“ Stepan murmured. “Not with-out reinforcements.”
  
 Robero had ordered Secca to secure Dolov—except he hadn't. He'd requested. That meant that it was
all on her head. If she went to Dolov, then she’d face an en-trenched enemy by the time she returned to
Elahwa and one doubtless reinforced by the blockading ships.
  
 “We’ll have to go to Elahwa,” she finally said.
  
 The hint of a momentary frown passed across Wil-ten’s, forehead.
  
 Stepan said quietly, “If you attack the Sea-Priests from the north, the city forces can help you. If you go
to Dolov, then you must face both enemies without aid.”
  
 At that, both Wilten and Palian nodded.
  
 Secca could only hope she was making the right de-cision.
  
  
  
  
  
 55
 Encora, Ranuak
  
 The tall and muscular woman who steps into the Ma-triarch’s formal receiving room wears the hooded
cloak of black that shadows her face, as with all the Ladies of the Shadows, and the black trousers and
calf-length boots. Despite the winter gloom and the cloak, her dark brown hair and clean hard jaw betray
that she is neither in first youth nor old, and that she is a different lady from the last who had visited Alya.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “You wished me to see you?" The Matriarch’s voice is pleasant, but not warm, as she looks down from
the blue crystalline chair on the dais.
  
 ‘We did. We offered a warning before, and you have chosen to ignore it.”
  
 “I took your warning, and I did not ignore it. I have not used socrery, save for information. There is
nothing against what you believe in dispatching lancers to support Elahwa.”
  
 “We are deeply concerned that you have sent... that you have sent a...” The brown-haired woman
shakes her head as if she cannot bring herself to utter the next word. “...a sorcerer to Elahwa.”
  
 “He is not a sorcerer, not like those you have in mind. He was trained in sorcery, as well you know, so
that he would not misuse those talents.” Alya offers a scornful snort. “What would you have me do?
Murder every child who shows the ability to truly sing? Or lock them away in a prison?"
  
 “You could have sent the SouthWomen without him. There are other overcaptains.”
  
 “Who would you have had me send? There are no others of ability that Elahwa could spare, not that
either the Free City or the SouthWornen would accept as ovexcaptain.”
  
 “Those who receive aid should not be that choosy, Ma-triarch.”
  
 Alya’s lips tighten, and for a moment she is silent. Then she takes a slow breath and smiles, almost lazily.
“As I understand your words, and those of the lady who came earlier, you feel so strongly about what
you believe that you would risk the destruction of Ranuak and the sacrifice of all those who died in the
Spell-Fire Wars to hold to your beliefs. Yet you think that the FreeWomen should relinquish their beliefs
for two companies of lancers?’
  
 It is the turn of the Lady of the Shadows to be silent for a time. Finally, she replies. “It is not the same.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “It is the same,” Alya replies, adding more gently, “Be-sides, the overcaptain does not know battle
sorcery. He has never been trained in such, and there are no players to support him."
  
 He is a sorcerer, and a man.
  
 “Sorcery is like any other tool,” Alya points out. “It can be used or misused. Without the Great
Sorceress of Defalk, we would have the Sturinnese as our neighbors already, if not as our masters.”
  
 “The great sorceress was a woman, and she had suf-fered. She was older, and she had some idea of the
powers of sorcery and what they could do to our world. As she discovered her powers, she used them
less, not more. Even as an outlander, she had some understanding and remorse. Your overcaptain is a
man, barely more than a child, and no man in this world has ever restrained such powers.”
  
 “What would you have me do? Recall him? Tell the Free City that because you fear the disasters of the
past, in which he took no part, they may not have his abilities?”
  
 The Lady of the Shadows shakes her head within the dark cloak “If, if all is as you say, and if he acts as
an overcaptain should, then all will be acceptable... but only because of the respect we have for the office
of the Ma-triarch.”
  
 “You wish Ranuak to fall into the hands of the Sea-Priests?” Alya’s voice remains low, almost gentle.
  
 "It will not come to that. The Harmonies will not let that occur, not unless we fail in our duties to restrain
the evils of song-sorcery.”
  
 “The Harmonies do not seem to be restraining the evils of the thunder-drums, nor of the Sturinnese
song-sorcery. Nor did they restrain the sorceries of the Mynyans.”
  
 ‘That is because Liedwahr has not rejected its evils,” replied the Lady of the Shadows. “How can the
Harmonies protect us when we embrace evils such as song-sorcery?"
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Alya nodded politely, although the nod war scarcely of agreement, but of resigned acknowledgement.
‘We will see."
  
 “Indeed we will, Matriarch, and we will be watching. We cannot ever accept the dissonance and
destruction of song-sorcery. Not ever again.” The woman in the black cloak bowed. “By your leave,
Matriarch?”
  
 “By my leave.” Alya nods once more.
  
 The hooded figure bows a last time, turns, and departs. Looking to her left, toward the closed windows
that hold out the wind and the cold winter mist, Alya shakes her head, slowly, sadly.
  
 56
  
 A lancer rode almost to where Secca stood with Richina as the two sorceresses were adjusting the ties
on the tent that they had helped set up on the knoll to the south of the river road. Secca had tucked the
green felt hat into her belt, because it kept threatening to blow away, and brushed back a strand of red
hair disarranged by her efforts and by the light, but occasionally gusty wind that remained cold, but not
quite bitter.
  
 She waited as the lancer inclined his head.
  
 “Lady Secca, Overcaptain Wilten sent me to tell you that young Lord Haddev is nearing. He is less than
a dek away.”
  
 “Thank you, Duryl. We will await him here.”
  
 The lancer nodded and turned his mount back toward the road.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “So Hadrenn did send him,” mused Secca, retying one of the tent’s tie-strips.
  
 “I wonder what he looks like,” added Richina.
  
 Secca glanced at the younger sorceress. “I doubt you’d be happy in Synek, especially with your powers
to do sor-cery greatly diminished. And they would be, with the need to produce heirs quickly.”
  
 Richina flushed.
  
 “Sometimes, love does triumph. But usually, it’s lust, and that’s a defeat for most women.”
  
 “Most?” Richina raised her eyebrows. “Were you think-ing of someone in particular, lady?”
  
 “Not necessarily,” evaded Secca, since she had been thinking of Jolyn, who seemed, from Secca’s
vantage point, to use men as some men used women.
  
 “Do you think a sorceress can ever truly love, lady?” ventured Richina.
  
 “Lady Anna did.”
  
 “But Lady Clayre hasn’t, has she?"
  
 “I don’t know,” Secca confessed. “Clayre and I are friendly, but... she came to Falcor when I was
barely nine. She was more than six years older and trying to avoid being consorted to anyone who was
available. By the time I was just a few years older than you are, Lady Anna brought me to Loiseau.
Clayre and I have spent more than ten years apart from each other except for a few weeks a year, and
we have seldom talked about such matters.”
  
 "Oh..."
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca smiled faintly. “Very few lords anywhere—or their heirs--- wish a consorting with a woman more
pow-erful than they.”
  
 “But there aren’t any sorcerers left in Defalk--- not since Lord Brill died.”
  
 ‘There is one in Neserea.
  
 “Is that why Lady Clayre...?"
  
 “No.” Secca shook her head. “Lord Belmar is not her friend. I fear he is in league with the Sea-Priests.
At best, he wishes to use sorcery to become the Lord High Coun-selor of Neserea.”
  
 “Or the Prophet of Music?’ asked the sandy-haired young sorceress.
  
 “That is possible.”
  
 After a slow nod, Richina slipped into the tent to brush her hair and make herself more presentable,
Secca sus-pected.
  
 Rather than worry about that, Secca rummaged through her provisions bag and finished off the last
chunk of stale bread and some white cheese that was getting soft. Swal-lowing it took several healthy
swigs of water from her bottle.
  
 Before long a column appeared on the road to the west, consisting of perhaps a company’s worth of
lancers not in the green of Ebra, but in mottled black tunics. At the head rode Stepan, along with a
younger, clean-shaven man. The column turned off the road and halted, and Ste-pan and Haddev rode
slowly past the tethered mounts to-ward the single tent that was Secca’s.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Haddev was taller than his father, and had a full head of reddish-brown hair. His smile was warm and
friendly as he reined up and dismounted simultaneously with Ste-pan.
  
 “Haddev,” Stepan said warmly. “this is the Lady Secca. She holds both the lands of Mencha, as her
right as Sorceress-Protector of the East, and those of Synope, as her birthright.”
  
 The tall young heir bowed deeply and directly to Secca, then again, not quite so deferentially, to Richina.
The smile as he rose was definitely for Richina.
  
 In a way, that both reassured and troubled Secca.
  
  
 Haddev returned his gaze almost immediately to Secca. “My grateful thanks, and those of my sire, for
your efforts to protect Ebra, gracious lady and sorceress.” He paused. “Lady Sorceress, I joined you as
soon as I was able. I also brought another company of lancers, although they are from Silberfels... a
token from my uncle.”
  
 “We welcome your presence, and the lancers. They are certainly more than a token, and I owe great
thanks to Lord Selber.” Secca also wondered why, after years of reticence, and almost isolation, one of
the Lords of Silberfels was actually providing lancers. Was Selber that worried about the Sturinnese?
  
 “I had hoped to reach you before you dealt with the rebels at Dolov, and it appears that I have.”
  
 “You will have time for that,” Secca said easily. “How was your journey?”
  
 "Cold but clear. There was a light snow through the Sand Pass, and much snow on the road until we
were well into Ebra.” Haddev paused as if Secca’ s words had struck belatedly. “You do not intend to
deal with the rebels?”
  
 “We have another more pressing problem that will not wait,” Secea replied. “The Sturinnese are about
to take Elahwa. They have close to ten companies in Dolov. If we ride to Dolov first, we could be caught
between two Sm-rinnese forces, If we attack those besieging Elahwa, we have the support of the Free
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

City.”
  
 Surprisingly, at least to Secca, Haddev nodded. “They take some of the casualties, and you obtain
support and gratitude and risk less of your and our lancers.”
  
 "Thatis the plan.”
  
 Haddev’s eyes strayed to Richina once more, and he offered another warm smile as the eyes of the
younger sorceress met his. Abruptly, he replied to Secca. “I will do what I can to aid you, for the
sorceresses ofDefalk have always been friends to Synek.”
  
 “Indeed they have,” offered Stepan, stepping up beside the heir. “Now. . . perhaps we should see to
your lancers, for you have had a long and a hard ride, and tomorrow will not be easy either.”
  
 "That is most true.” Haddev offered his warm smile to Secca and bowed once more. “Until later, Lady
Seeca.”
  
 “Until later, Haddev.” Secca returned his smile with one of her own.
  
 The two sorceresses watched as the tall young man re-mounted and rode with Stepan back toward the
waiting lancers of Silberfels.
  
 “He is most charming,” said Richina.
  
 “Charming... yes, he is. Andhe is far brighter than his sire,and most able to wield any tool to his own
ends.” Secca’ s voice was dry.
  
 “You do not like him, lady?’
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “I like him very well. He will be a good lord of Synek and a good Lord High Counselor of Ebra”Hejust
won’t bevery good for you, Secca wanted to add. She did not, knowing that the younger woman would
scarce listen, not with the glow in her eyes.
  
 “You did not seem totally pleased.”
  
 “I'm thinking about tomorrow... and what lies before us,” Secca replied. After a moment, she added,
“You will need to help with the scrying. We will need some rough maps of where the Sturinnese forces
are.”
  
 “Yes, lady."
  
 Richina smiled, but her eyes flicked toward the road, and Haddev.
  
 Seeca repressed a sigh. At least, when she had been young, and in love with love, Robero’s faults had
been so obvious that she had not beentempted.
  
 57
 Nesalia, Neserea
  
 Two men sit on opposite sides of a square table set in the bay window of a large study. The window
over-looks a small walled garden. The table is inlaid and contains a set of game pieces. One set is gold,
and each figure is smoothly carved. The other set is bland and each figure has sharp and jagged edges.
  
 Belmar takes a sip of the amber-tinged white wine. “A very good vintage, Svenmar. From your lands?"
  
 “The hills to the west.”
  
 The dark-haired visiting lord looks down at the inlaid game board and the pieces upon it. “That is an old
set. You don’t see the gold and black onyx these days.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “It has been in the family for too long to trace.”
  
 “Old families. . . they’re important in Nasasea, even these days. Old families and lineage.” Belmar takes
a sec-ond sip of the wine. “Good vintage.” He holds the crystal goblet almost carelessly. "You're a
distant nephew of Lord Behlem, aren’t you. . . or some such, anyway?"
  
 “You only ask the question to raise the point that your lineage is the more direct, I would wager.” Humor
tinges Svenmar's voice. "What did you have in mind?if I may ask?”
  
 “These really are beautiful pieces.” Belmar picks up the black sorcerer and studies the lined face, carved
centuries ago, before setting it back on the inlaid wooden table. “What do I have in mind?’
  
 Svenmar nods politely, then sips from his own goblet, his eyes not meeting those of Belmar, though not
seeming to avoid the younger man’s.
  
 "Lord Rabyn disgraced the proud heritage of Neserea, would you not agree?’ Belmar’s voice is warm,
yet almost indolent.
  
 “He thought he fought to hold his patrimony.” Sven-mar’s tone is cautious.
  
 Belmar laughs, almost a deep guffaw, humorous and sardonic.
  
 Svenmar’s eyebrows lift.
  
 “To this day, peasant mothers tell comely daughters that the shade of Rabyn will come for them if they
raise their eyes too high.” Belmar says smoothly. “In less than a year, more than a score of beautiful but
poor girls were sold into his service, and most vanished into unmarked graves, and Rabyn scattered
golds to their families.” He shrugs. ‘Pleas-ures are one thing, but open contempt purchased with golds is
neither wise nor seemly.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “That was more than a score of years ago. Belmar.”
  
 “Ah . . . yes . . .I can see that my words follow a well-worn tract, one you have pondered so long it is
most fa-miliar, so familiar that. . . but I digress..."
  
 “Usually… you are more direct, my friend. You must have had a long journey.”
  
 “It is never a long journey when those who support you are at its end.” Belmar lifts the goblet once more
and seems to take another swallow, a swallow that is barely a sip.
  
 “All too true.” Svenmar waits.
  
 Belmar sits more erect, not suddenly, but gracefully. Yet the change is if a dog had become a wolf, yet
without changing its coat or markings. “You have seen the tall man in gray, have you not?’
  
 "The one who seems like a shadow?’
  
 “He is a Sea-Priest.”
  
 “You talk of Rabyn’s evils.” Svenmar shakes his head. “The Sea-Priests have not the good of Neserea
at heart, if hearts they have at all.”
  
 "They do not have our good at heart, with that I agree. But their enemy is Defalk, and the sorceresses
who com-mand its lord from the shadows. And…well…one must use the tools at hand. One must also
learn from the past.”
  
 Belmar smiles again. “I have not made the mistakes that did... say, the Lord of Dumar. Master jerGlien
is the sole Sturinnese ever to set foot in my holding, or anywhere in Neserea at my beck. All my lancers...
did you know that I now have fifteen companies?’ The dark-haired lord pauses.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “No. I cannot say that I am surprised.”
  
 “Ah.. you are perceptive. You would not be. As I was saying, all fifteen are solid Nesereans. No
mercenaries. No Sturinnese. And they have been trained by the best, not for a season or so, but at least
a year. and for the finest, almost five. I did not bring my archers, for this is a friendly visit, nor all of my
players, nor my small corps of thunder--drums...Oh...I do have trouble following a single thought.”
Belmar smiles broadly. “But then, I have thought long and hard for many years about what may transpire
if, perchance, young Annayal were to follow the example of Ranuak.”
  
 “Why don’t you suggest that you would make a most desirable consort?" Svenmar smiles. “You are not
ill--favored, nor ill-landed. Or do you worry that the Lady Aerlya did not hesitate to call in the demon
sorceress against Hureln?”
  
 “You call her lady?”
  
 “Unlike the sorceresses you dislike, she does come from a long and noble line and has not usurped lands
rightfully belonging to a brother or uncle.
  
 “As do you,” Belmar points out.
  
 “Almost as long and distinguished as yours. Belmar.”
  
 “Distinction must be, alas, often supplemented.” Belmar again picks up a figure from the board this time
the gold sorceress. He smiles, if faintly.
  
 “Supplemented? A rather odd word, my friend.”
  
 “If a noble bolder such as you were to offer a suggestion that consorting were to find favor with the
noble holders of the south..."
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Ah. . . and what of Chyalar?"
  
 Belmar shrugs. “He has no sorcerous abilities, and his sire is ailing. With but three companies of lancers.
Even you have more than he.”
  
 “Come now.” Svenmar laughs. “You cannot bring arms to bear against us all.”
  
 “I would not do that to you, my friend.” Belmar sets the sorceress back on the board. “Of course, if a
certain letter were made public, about closing the wagon road to Sperea...but that was years back. And
some other scrolls, per-chance...” There is the briefest of pauses before he asks, “How is your dear
consort Twyla?"
  
 “Perhaps a letter might be just as well in these troubled times.” Svenmar forces a smile. “And the lancers
of Wor-lan might be able to spend far more time, say, near Itzel?”
  
 “They might indeed.” Bélmar smiles and lifts the goblet. “This is indeed a remarkable vintage.”
  
 “I am glad you find it so.” Svenmar lifts his own goblet and touches its rim to his lips, but does not drink.
  
 58
  
 A fine cold mist drizzled out of formless gray clouds, clouds that made it seem still like dawn, though it
was a good glass past that and time for the sun to have risen. There was only the slightest touch of a
breeze, and that was out of the south. Secca studied the clouds, but could see no movement.
  
 “Richina... I’ll be back in a moment." Hoping that the drizzle would lift, Secca walked away from the tent
that Richina and the lancers were striking. The two younger lancers, Dyvan and Achar, followed her.
  
 As Secca neared the archers, Elfens stepped forward and offered a deep bow. "Lady Secca.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Elfens. I just wanted to see how you and your archers were doing. There was one who took a shaft in
the thigh..."
  
 "Weald is riding, and can use his bow. Sore, that heis.” Elfens cocked his long face. “You will need us
against the Sturinnese in Elahwa?"
  
 I would think so. They will have thunder-drums.” Secca flashed a wry smile. “I might even be able to
re-member the need for the arrow spell.”
  
 ‘We will be ready, lady.” Elfens offered another of the sweeping bows that would have been a mockery
from any-one but the long-faced archer.
  
 Another thirty yards past the archers, close to a small copse of bare-limbed birches, Secca found
Stepan talking to several of the Ebran captains.
  
 The sandy-and-silver-haired arms commander stopped and turned toward Secca. "Lady. We are almost
ready to ride."
  
 “Finish what you must, arms commander. I need but a moment.”
  
 As she waited for Stepan, Secca’s eyes traversed the camp, noting that Wilten had the lancers from
Loiseau froming up, as did Haddev the company in motley black from Silberfels. The tall heir made a
striking figure in the saddle, she had to admit.
  
 “Lady?’ Stepan stepped toward the red-haired sorceress. “It may seem odd, for the moment, but I
wanted your opinion.” When everyone else is so busy they aren’t lis-tening, she added to herself. ‘What
is Verad like?
  
 “Verad?” The surprise was evident in the older man's voice.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Isn’t that Haddev’s younger brother?"
  
 The older arms master shook his head, almost as if still puzzled.
  
 “You do not have good feelings?”
  
 “It is not that” Stepan smiled ruefully. “It is so seldom one asks about the younger son.”
  
 “I need to know.”
  
 ‘When a sorceress asks a question such as that. . .” He paused, then said, “Verad is sixteen, and he is
diligent. He will never be so skilled at arms as Haddev, for he is a span shorter and more slight of build,
but he rides well, and can hold his own with a blade. I am told he writes well, and is more skilled with his
calculations. He is the one who has come to assist his sire with the accounts.”
  
 “Do people like him and trust him?’
  
 “After they come to know him. He is less outgoing, and slow to warm to those he does not know.”
  
 Secca nodded. She understood that. “I will not ask why you inquire.”
  
 “It’s not that important.”Yet, Seccaadded to herself. “I have met Hadrenn and his consort, I have
exchanged a scroll or two with his consort’s brother, but about Verad I know nothing, and, as
Sorceress-Protector of the East, I thought I should. Lady Anna greatly valued your judg-ment, and so do
I.”
  
 “Lord Hadrenn is fortunate to have two sons so able,” Stepan pointed out.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Does he have any daughters? I didn’t see one?’
  
 “That you might not have. Seryla is but nine. She also is said to be favored by the Harmonies, but only
have I seen her ride. She rides well for one so young.”
  
 “And Haddev?" she finally asked.
  
 Stepan shrugged. “You have seen him. He smiles easily, rides well, and is well trained in the blade and
with a bow. He speaks with a fair tongue.”
  
 Secca laughed softly. “I see.”
  
 Stepan raised his eyebrows. “Perchance you do.”
  
 “He may make an effective lord, but not precisely one like. . . say, my father or Lady Anna?’
  
 “Well said, Lady Sorceress.”
  
 "Let us hope this journey will offer him new insights.”
  
 “I fear his eyes are on other conquests”
  
 “I have noticed that, too.”
  
 Stepan laughed. “I have noted your notice. You missed little as a child, and you miss less now.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “You’re still a most charming man, Stepan.”
  
 “Charm counts for little in battle or in planning for one.” Stepan glanced toward his lancers, who were
mounting and forming into a column.
  
 “Or many,” Secca added. “But we have one more day. That’s what the glass shows.”
  
 "Will they see us in their glasses?”
  
 “They may,” Secca admitted, “but we have not turned south.”
  
 “Until a glass from now.”
  
 “I will watch what they do,” Secca promised. “I’d best leave you to your men and duties. Thank you.”
  
 “Once we are in formation, I will join you.” Stepan bowed, then turned.
  
  “Thank you.”
  
 Secca walked quickly through the mist, a mist that seemed finer, and perhaps lifting, back toward where
Ri-china waited with their mounts.
  
 “The tent is on the pack horse, lady, and we are ready to ride,” said the sandy-haired younger
sorceress.
  
 “Thank you, Richina. I was checking with Elfens and Stepan.” Secca picked up her own saddlebags.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Ah... lady?”
  
 “Yes?’
  
 “Haddev would ask your leave to accompany us for a short time, before he returns to his lancers.”
  
 “He may, for a bit.” Secca nodded. “You may tell him.”
  
 “Thank you, lady.”
  
 Secca watched as Richina swung into the saddle of her mount with a long-legged grace. Secca’s legs
were far too short for such grace, except on a very small mount, and Secca envied those who possessed
it, as she had once en-vied Anna’s grace, for all of Anna’s protestations that she was not graceful.
  
 For but a moment, Secca’ s eyes burned, and she felt empty inside.
  
 Then, she shook her head and straightened. She watched Richina ride toward the lancers in black
motley, and a faint smile crossed the lips of the older sorceress, a smile of amusement tempered with
concern...and regret. Then she began to strap her own gear in place behind the saddle of the gray mare.
  
 59
  
 In the late afternoon, Secca and her unofficial council clustered in a circle on a low hillside in the center
of the camp. The smoke of cook-fires drifted across the group, along with the smell of mutton roasting,
sheep purchased all too dearly. Secea was thankful she’d recalled Anna’s observation that wars required
coins. Yet she wondered if those she had brought, seemingly enough for a liedburg treasury, would even
last another three weeks.
  
 She forced her attention back to the mirror on the ground and the spell that held .the image that
shimmered on the silvered surface.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 "Those are picket lines, and they have cut limbs and woven them into fences.” Stepan pointed.
  
 The image that Secea had called up in the glass also showed earthworks, spaced at intervals along the
woven fir-limb fences, behind which were tents and mounts on tie-lines, and cook-fires. Secca studied
the image, as did Ste-pan, Wilten, Palian, and, not quite indifferently, Haddev. Richina studied Haddev, if
covertly, but obviously enough that Secca could feel it.
  
 “Those are to the north, are they not?’ asked Haddev.
  
 Stepan nodded.
  
 ‘The city is on the east side of the river...to the south,” Secca pointed out. “They have circled it.”
  
 "They don’t have any forces on the other side?” asked Haddev.
  
 ‘There’s little point to that,” replied the arms master.
  
 “They want the port. Once they take the city, they care not if the FreeWomen flee. There is but a single
narrow bridge, and if the Sea-Priests destroy it, then they cannot be easily attacked. Their ships hold the
Gulf.”
  
 “They do not fear reinforcements coming across the bridge?”
  
 “Who would come?" asked Stepan. "The Ranuans have sent what they can. We cannot reach there
easily, not from the north with the river cliffs there.”
  
 “Oh. . so that is why the bridge stands yet?’ asked Haddev. “Because it is difficult for the Sturinnese to
reach, and affords little more aid for the defenders?’
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca decided she wanted to reprimand Haddev like an apprentice who tried to show off. She didn’t,
but sang the release spell gently, then looked up, first at Wilten, then at Stepan.
  
 “What do you suggest?’
  
 "The Sturinnese have the hills to the north and east of the port,” Wilten said slowly, “but there are low
rises that surround the city itself.”
  
 “So to get to the defenders, they have to ride down and then up?” asked Secca. “That’s why they
haven’t broken through yet?”
  
 “I would judge so.” replied Stepan.
  
 Wilten nodded.
  
 “The glass shows that there are rocky hills farther to the east,” Secca offered.
  
 “It would be hard to circle the barriers and to attack from the east or the south,” Stepan pointed out.
  
 “Coming from the north, we could get close enough for sorcery, though,” Secca said. “if we had the
wind behind us, and their fences would make it almost as hard for them to attack us.”
  
 "Perhaps...“ Stepan fingered his chin.
  
 How far are we from their camp?
  
 “Twelve to fifteen deks, I would say.” Stepan frowned. “A half-day’s ride to a camp from which we
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

could attack?
  
 “I’ll check what they’re doing in the morning,” Secca said. “We should meet again then.”
  
 “That would be best.” Stepan paused. “They do not look as though they had been fighting today, or
even yesterday. Yet they had no scouts sent to the north.”
  
 “They do have mirror glasses similar to ours, I think,” Secca said.
  
 ‘We must do what we can, but I like that not.”
  
 Neither did Secca. As the days went by and winter ap-proached, there was more and more she
disliked. Yet... if the Sturinnese had an entire winter to fortify Elahwa---and Dolov--- the problems she
faced now would be insig-nificant compared to those of the next spring and summer.
  
 60
 Elahwa, Ebra
  
 Five figures stand on the low tower of logs, hastily constructed on the northeastern-most corner of the
equally hurriedly created defense works. They all look out into the early morning haze that clings to the
edge of the hills, and is dark gray and thick farther north, filling the lowlands to the north like a dark
ocean.
  
 “Why do they not attack?’ asks the square-faced over-captain, a stocky woman in a crimson tunic
splattered with mud and blood. “Surely, they would not halt their assaults because we received another
two companies oflancers, SouthWomen or not.”
  
 The taller councilwoman, whose black hair is streaked with silver and cut short, laughs, then nods
toward Al-caren. “No. While the good overcaptain is more than wel-come, his arrival is not what has
given the white pigs pause. The Sorceress-Protector of Defalk is riding south with close to fifteen
companies.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “The sorceress died half a season ago,” points out the other and more junior Elahwan overcaptain.
  
 “This is the shadow sorceress, the one she trained.” Veria continues to study the hills to the north and
east.
  
 “How will she help?’ asks the overcaptain of the Rant-uan companies. “She is young.”
  
 “She has already destroyed more than fifty score—thirty of the eastern lord’s men and twenty score
Sturinnese.” Veria pauses. “She looks yet a child but holds more than a score and a half of years.”
  
 “Another unaging one?” asks Alcaren.
  
 “No. She will age.” A quick smile flits across Veria’s lips. “As will we all beforethis is done.”
  
 “She does not come with the eager blessing of Lord Robero, I would wager,” suggests the Ranuan
 overcaptain.
  
 “It matters not, so long as she comes and attacks. They fear her.” Veria gestures toward the heavy
ground fog. “Or respect her power. That fog is not natural.”
  
 “They did not fear an entire city. . .yet an untried sor-ceress with half their numbers? The senior
FreeWoman overcaptain’s voice carries a touch of disbelief.
  
 “You might recall that her mentor was untried, too,” replies Veria evenly. “I raised the same questions
you now do. I was wrong. I survived because I was.”
  
 The muscular overcaptain’s eyes elude Veria’s. So do those of the other women overcaptains.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Alcaren nods. “Do you wish us to hold and wait?’
  
 “Yes. This sorceress is strong, but she is inexperienced and untried in such a large battle. The Sturinnese
have prepared and learned. They are wily. They will try to force her to exhaust herself so that she cannot
attack them. They will attempt to keep her from giving any support to her lancers—and then they will
attack. Perhaps then, we can also attack, with Overcaptain Alcaren's companies leading the way.” Veria
inclines her head to the younger over-captain.
  
 ‘When?’ asks Alcaren.
  
 “Not today,” replies Veria. “They cannot attack through their own fog. They seek time to prepare spells,
and per-haps to wait until the white companies at Dolov can ride to attack the sorceress from behind.”
  
 Alcaren glances to the north, his eyes narrowing ever so slightly.
  
 61
  
 Secca held the gray mare reined in on the edge of the rocky ridge that overlooked a valley more than
two deks wide—a valley filled with fog. The hills were mainly forested, mostly with white birches and firs.
To the far southwest, she could see the glint of sunlight on water, on the arm of the Gulf of Discord that
formed the shallow harbor serving Elahwa. The city itself was but a blur of light and dark splotches, and
the river bridge was out of sight presumably on the western side of the hilly part of the city that Secca
could barely make out.
  
 Even in the mid-afternoon, under a run that gave little warmth, Secca's breath was a white fog, and the
same white fog issued them the nostrils of the mounts, blown gently southward over the valley.
  
 Stepan pointed at a nearer hillside, close to three deks to the south. “You see... their encampment lies on
the hills above the fog. The white banners..."
  
 From her earlier looks at the Sturinnese encampment, Secca didn’t recall any fog, or lakes that would
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

create such fog. “How would we best attain a position high enough to use sorcery?” She paused and
added, “If the fog lifts.”
  
 “There is a wind out of the north. It will get stronger at night,” Wilten said. “That should blow out the fog
by morning.
  
 Stepan studied the valley, then drew out the maps he had drawn from Secca's scrying of the area.
Finally, he pointed. “The higher ground leads to that ridge to our left. If we follow it west . . .there. . .we
will be on the rise to the north of their encampment . . . there . . where the trees show out of the mist.”
  
 “If the wind holds,” Secca mused aloud, “then our spells will carry to them. Even so, with their drums,
we’ll have to use the arrow spell first.” She glanced back at Palian, reined up several yards to the north.
  
 The chief player nodded.
  
 ‘We can hold a charge, perhaps two, Lady Secea, but they have many more lancers than do we,”
pointed out Wilten.
  
 “I know.” Everyone has more lancers than does Defalk, thought Secca. All Defalk has is three
sorceresses and a few assistants... and far too many stubborn lords even yet. More lancers would have
been better. Secca still wasn’t certain she agreed with Anna’s insistence that the liedgeld not be raised
too much at any one time, or Anna’s concerns about what she had called infrastructures, rather than arms
and armsmen "We will have to sing the spells quickly.”
  
 “I will have the players warm up before we ride,” Palian said. “That will help them be ready sooner.”
  
 For a moment longer Secca looked out across the foggy valley and the hills before looking back at the
older arm commander. “You’ll post scouts here?” Secca asked Ste-pan. ‘We can’t keep using the glass
if either Richina or I have to use sorcery tomorrow?’
  
 “I will have many scouts,” Stepan said with a smile that faded as be added. “And so will they, I would
wager.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca nodded, then eased the gray around, to start back to the adjoining high meadow where her forces
had set up camp. She ignored, for the moment, the looks passing between Richina and Haddev, though
she would talk to the girl before evening. Well before evening.
  
 62
  
 Before dawn, Secca woke with a start at hearing distant thunder, except the sound wasn’t thunder, but
some-thing far more regular, more rhythmic.
  
 “The drums..." she murmured to herself as she scram-bled upright and pulled on her riding clothes, and
jacket, and her sabre.
  
 Not once as Secca dressed in the darkness did Richina stir.
  
 Secca shook her head. The younger sorceress thought Secca had not heard when she had left and when
she had returned. While Secca had cautioned Richina before they had eaten the night before, obviously
the young woman had dismissed the cautions. Just as obviously, she had de-cided to try not to let Seeca
know.
  
 By the time Secca was out of the tent, Stepan was al-ready walking toward her through the darkness
that was beginning to show faint graying above the firs to the east. The sound of the thunder-drums had
already faded away.
  
 “Do you know---" she began.
  
 The older man, his face drawn and haggard, shook his head. “Fog... the thunder-drums have created a
wall of fog. It fills all the valleys around their encampment. It is like a wall of darkness."
  
 “Your scouts?"
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 ‘They can see if anyone leaves the fog, but no one has. Otherwise, they are useless."
  
 Secca nodded abruptly. “Let me get my glass.”
  
 When she returned to the tent, Seeca did not make any attempt to be quiet.
  
 “What... is it, lady?" asked Richina sleepily.
  
 “If you hadn’t been so besotted with Haddev and gotten some sleep last night, you’d know,” Secca
replied tersely, just short of snapping. “As I told you before, he doesn’t understand you. He just sees you
as a prize, and if you give yourself to him, you won’t be. You’ll either bear more heirs than you can
stand, or, if he’s wise, he’ll discard you. Eitherway, it’s going to hurt. If you care for him,it will hurt even
more.” She paused in the entrance to the tent. “Oh . . . the Sturinnese have used the thunder-drums to
stop the wind and create more fog.”
  
 She stepped outside, carrying the lutar she had not bothered to uncase and the mirror, realizing she
shouldn’t have been so curt with Richina—and also realizing that she should have started the younger
sorceress on scrying the Sturrinese. She shook her head. Once again, her nature had gotten in the way of
what she should have done.
  
 Stepan’s face was grave as Secca neared. He took the mirror from her, but he did not speak, although
his eyes flicked to the tent.
  
 “I suppose I was harsh, but she doesn’t understand, and he certainly doesn’t.” Secca laughed, without
joy or mirth. “She will think I neither understand nor care."
  
 The arms commander nodded. "Few could consort with a sorceress. Fewer still should.”
  
 The two walked through the damp chill to the campfire. To the south, wisps of dark fog swirled lazily
into the graying sky, but the wind was even lighter than the after-noon before, despite Wilten’s prediction
that it should have strengthened
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca’s fingers felt clumsy as she tuned the lutar, and it took her longerthan usual—or it felt that way.
Before she -finished a pair of vocalises, Wilten, Palian, and Delvor had joined them. Haddev stood well
back. Richina did not ap-pear.
  
 The scrying song was short.
  
 “Mirror,mirror, on the ground,
 show us where Sturinn‘s forces may be found...".
  
 The mirror obliged with an image of the Sturinnese camp from above, a camp strangely quiet, given the
drums of earlier. Cook-fires were blazing with the early high flames that indicated a time before food
would be cooked and served. Mounts remained unsaddled and upon tielines run from posts to trees.
  
 Secca quickly tried another spell, one seeking the thunder-drummers. But they were clustered around a
cookfire, warming their hands.
  
 A third spell got her a Sea-Priest looking at a mirror. As she released the last spell, all too aware of the
daystars flashing before her eyes, she wondered if the Sea-Priest were watching her in his mirror. Her
fingers shook on the lutar as she lowered it.
  
 “You ate not this morning, did you?” asked Palian, Secca shook her head, squinting against the flashes
of light.
  
 The chief player stepped away from the campfire. “Lady... they wait, and they must have a reason for
such,” offered Wilten.
  
 “Either they wish to force us to attack in poor con-ditions, or they expect aid,” Secca suggested. “Or
both."
  
 “How---"
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “In a few moments, I will try the glass again,” Secca said tiredly.
  
 “Lady. . . here is some bread.” Palian stepped for-ward.
  
 “Thank you.”
  
 After eating several chunks of bread and some yellow cheese just short of molding, and drinking nearly
half a water bottle, Secca stood and lifted the lutar.
  
  
 “Mirror, mirror on the ground,
 show us what aid for Sturinn may be found,
 whether by ships upon the sea
 or lancers riding from where they be..."
  
 The mirror silvered, then displayed a line of lancers riding down from a hold on a bluff. A misty fog rose
from the heated surface of the glass, momentarily dis-torting the image presented in the cold predawn
light.
  
 “The Sturinnese lancers at Dolov,” murmured Stepan, “Still, they are six days away, perhaps a week.”
  
 “But they do not expect more help from the ships,”Palian pointed out.
  
 “We have a little time for the fog to lift or be blown out,” Stepan said. “If it will..."
  
 “Let me think,” Secca said slowly. As well as Stepan, she knew that the Sea-Priests could hold the fog
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

for days if the weather remained calm.
  
 She recased the lutar, and picked up the traveling mirror, then walked slowly back toward her tent.
  
 Richina stood before the tent, fully dressed. She bowed. “I am sorry I displeased you, Lady Secca.”
  
 The formality of her tone showed more anger than contriteness to Secca. The older sorceress motioned
for Richina to follow her into the tent. There Secca slid the lutar and mirror onto the ground cloth under
the cot. She straightened, then sat slowly on the cot, before ges-turing to the younger woman to sit on her
own cot.
  
 After a moment of quiet, Secca sighed and looked at her charge. “Richina...” Her voice was soft, gentle,
sad. “Do you think that I am not a woman? Do you think I have never felt what you feel? Do you think
that I do not see how comely Haddev is? Or how warm was the smile of Lythner?"
  
 Richina did not reply. Her eyes were bright with un-shed tears, but Secca was uncertain whether those
tears were more of anger or of unhappiness.
  
 “Do you think I do not care about you?" asked Secca.
  
 “You sounded so angry.”
  
 “I suppose I was. I wished to spare you from what will happen with Haddev, and you did not listen...
but we do not spare ourselves. Sorceresses and women do not.” Her laugh was half-gentle,
half-ironically self-mocking. “Why should you be any different from me, or from Lady Anna? Or
Clayre...or Jolyn?”
  
 “You...I thought...”
  
 “You think I do not favor men?’ Secca shook her head. “I do not favor men who would use me, or hide
their fear of me with a smile. I do not favor men who seek me only to provide an heir or lands they could
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

not get otherwise. And for me...then whom does that leave?"
  
 “Oh. . . lady...“ Richina swallowed. “You sounded so cold... I am sorry.”
  
 “You think it not, but I would spare you what I can. I suppose none of us can spare another, not as we
would wish..."
  
 “He is gentle, lady, and has asked nothing of me.”
  
 “That may be.” Secca hoped that was true, for all of their sakes. “You cannot afford to give of yourself,
not until we have done what must be done. Remember what one road spell cost you.”
  
 Riehina paused. “I know.”
  
 “He is handsome, but there is more to life than hand-some.” Secca paused, massaging her neck for a
mo-ment.
  
 The younger sorceress asked, “What of the thunder--drums?”
 Secca leaned forward from where she sat on the edge of the cot. “They have used them to build a wall
of thick fog around their encampment, and they do not prepare for battle.”
  
 “What will you do?"
  
 “For the day, we will wait and watch. Our lancers and players and mounts can use the rest.”
  
 “If it continues...?"
  
 “I worry about that. I worry greatly.” Secca massaged her forehead. "Their Sea-Priest at Dolov has
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

seen what we do and is sending those lancers south. They cannot reach us for nearly a week, but...“
  
 “But?” prompted Richina.
  
 “If the weather remains mild, then they can continue to hold the sorcerous fog. If it should storm, then we
will be at a great disadvantage. I will need your assis-tance in scrying and perhaps in much more. Much
more.”
  
 Richina fell silent, her eyes not meeting Secca’s. The redheaded sorceress, who suddenly felt far older
than she was, stared sightlessly at the time and travel-worn silk side panels of the tent.
  
 63
  
 From the saddle of the gray mare, Secca looked out across the valley, again in the early dawn, once
more at another thick layer of fog that separated her forces from the Sturinnese encampment. Behind her
were Stepan, Wil-ten, Haddev, Richina, and the two chief players. All were mounted and looking
southward across the gray that blanketed the valley below. If the valley were narrow—-like a river
gorge—Secca might have considered building a bridge, but no sorceress could song-build a structure
span-ning nearly three deks—and even if she could... she and the players would be exhausted and
worthless for weeks.
  
 “The fog is thicker than before,” Wilten said. ‘We can-not wait and wait”
  
 “Not for long,” agreed Stepan. “Yet to attack through it would be foolhardy. Even scouts would lose
their way, and could be slain or captured by any Sturinnese waiting there”
  
 Above Secca, the sky was cloudless, the air still, but cold. Clearsong’s pale white disk was at the zenith,
while Darksong would be at its zenith near midnight. Secca glanced again at the fog that shrouded the
valleys to the south. With such weather, she feared the Sturinnese could create and hold their fog for
days, if not weeks. All the scrying glass showed was that the Sturinnese forces maintained their sentries
and picket lines, practiced arms and thunder-drums.... and waited.
  
 “Let us see where the Sturinnese lancers from Dolov are. Then we will see what we must do.” With a
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

nod at Wilten and Stepan, she turned her mount and rode the gray back along the ridge and toward her
tent.
  
 Once back in the encampment, she dismounted and ex-tended the reins to the lancer guard. “Achar... if
you would... I wont need her for a while.”
  
 “Yes, lady.”
  
 “Thank you.” Secca offered a smile, then hurried into the tent to reclaim lutar and mirror. She brought
out the mirror and began to retune the lutar, going through a vo-calise as she did so, hoping to be ready
by the time the others had taken care of their mounts.
  
 Still, the others had gathered and were standing in a semicircle around the mirror as Secca finished her
third vocalise. She cleared her throat and launched into the short spell.
  
  
 “Mirror, mirror, on the ground. . .“
            
  
 As her words died away, the glass turned a blank silver, then misted over before the swirling mists
dis-solved and revealed an image. The white-clad lancers who had been at Dolov were breaking camp,
forming up into columns once more. On the left side of the im-age was a river.
  
 “The river is not so wide there. I would judge another four days, three if they ride hard, before they
reach the River Syne” Stepan said.
  
 “How long can they hold that fog?” asked Wilten.
  
 “For days,” Secca replied, “if the weather remains as it has.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 ‘There is no sign of change,” observed Delvor.
  
 For a time, no one spoke.
  
 Finally, Secca said, “There may be a way. I will work on it and let you know.” She smiled at Stepan,
and then Wilten. “If your scouts will keep us informed...“
  
 “That we will.”
  
 “Yes, lady.”
  
 After all had left but Richina and the lancer guards, Secca recased the lutar.
  
 Richina picked up the mirror and carried it into the tent behind Secca, replacing it in its case and sliding
the case under the narrow cot.
  
 Secca slid the lutar beside the mirror.
  
 “Can I help, lady?” asked Richina.
  
 “If you would get me some water...I need to think.”
  
 Richina nodded and slipped out of the tent.
  
 Secca sat on the cot, in the middle, where she wouldn’t tip it over.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 The problems were simple enough. The lowlands that were filled with fog were too wide for her spells to
carry across and too deep for casual winds or breezes to dis-perse. So she couldn’t sneak up in the night
the way she had with Mynntar. She couldn’t get the archers close enough to attack the drums or
drummers without going into the fog itself.
  
 So... she had to get rid of the fog...somehow.
  
 Wind? Could she raise a wind to disperse the fog? She got wind when she did the mining spell.
  
 She pulled out several folded sheets of paper and the grease pencil and began to jot down phrases.
  
 64
  
 In the grayness and almost still air before dawn, Secca and Richina—and Wilten, Stepan, Haddev, and
the two chief players—looked out from the high ridge at the fog below. That fog had begun to thin
enough thatthe higher ground, such as the tree-lined rise below, was intermittently visible, although the
hillside opposite them, more than a dek away, remained swathed in the heavy gray mist.
  
 Haddev glanced at Richina, then at Secca. Richina did not look at the heir to Synek.
  
 “If... if the wind blows away the fog...” Secca glanced to Stepan, “can we take that rise there quickly?’
She gestured.
  
 “It is closer to us than to them, if they are not wait-ing...“ Stepan shrugged.
  
 “The glass shows that they remain in their encamp-ment,” Secca replied.
  
 “That is lower than their camp, but it is the highest ground. We could charge from there if they tried to
at-tack.” Stepan looked at Secca.. “Your players will need to be ready to play.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “They can play a spell here, and then remount and ride down,” Palian affirmed. “It will not take long.”
  
 Delvor just nodded at Palian’s words, then brushed back the lank brown hair that always seemed to fall
across his face. His eyes were clouded, Secca noted, as if he were considering a fingering, or a chord
progression, the way he did before he came up with something new for his lu-tarists.
  
 ‘There is little fog on this side of the ridge” Stepan said. “Will it harm us or disrupt your spell if we begin
to ride down?”
  
 “No. It could get windy, but that’s all.”
  
 “Wind we will take, if we can gain position.” Stepan glanced at Haddev. “if you would use your lancers
to guard the sorceress and the players?”
  
 “That we can do.” Haddev nodded, then turned his mount back toward the black-clad lancers of
Silberfels.
  
 “We will follow Stepan, if you will permit,” added Wil-ten. ‘We can offer greater protection if we are
well before you.”
  
 “Thank you, Wilten.” Secca offered a smile she did not feel and dismounted, handing the gray’s reins to
Achar.
  
 She cleared her throat then stepped forward to the most open point of the ridge.
  
 “Dismount and quick-tune!” commanded Palian as she dismounted, and then unstrapped her violino
from behind her mount.
  
 “Dismount..." followed the order from De1vor. The first players formed a core, and the second players
drew up in an arc around them.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Only the faintest hint of a breeze flowed from behind Secca, scarcely enough to matter, one way or the
other. The vagrant breeze died away even as she began a quick vocalise.
  
 Behind her rose the sounds of tuning. To her left, the double column of riders began to angle down a
narrow way that was more animal track than trail.
  
 When Secca finished the first vocalise, Richina extended a water bottle.
  
 “Thank you.” Secca took a swallow, then glanced at Palian.
  
 ‘We stand ready, lady.”
  
 Secca glanced across the valley, then at the lancers de-scending. All she could see moving were her
forces. She looked back at Palian and nodded.
  
 “Prepare to play. The second building spell,” com-manded the chief player.
  
 “Prepare to play,” echoed Delvor. “The massed harmony for the building spell.”
  
 The first bars of the accompaniment echoed out past Secca, somehow almost eerily in the lightening gray
that preceded dawn, and then it was time to sing the spell, against the bright melody and the deeper
chords of the heavy lutars of the second players.
  
  
 “Bring us wind both fierce and strong,
 to sweep this fog to the south along...”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 A low grumbling reverberated from the ground, then passed, even before Secca was well into the
words, but the sky began to darken immediately, and the wind be-gan to build behind Secca’s back.
  
 Within moments, the light gray of the sky had turned blackish, and the wind was whipping Secca’s
jacket around her and her hair against her forehead and cheeks. The gusts of wind, ever growing,
seemed to rip at the gray fog in the lowlands below, tearing chunks away. A faint pink-orange light began
to creep from behind the trees to the southeast.
  
 Secca stood there for a moment, half-amazed that the spell had worked. It should have, for it was pure
Clear-song, but she had not known if it would.
  
 “Lady,” suggested Richina, “we need to ride.”
  
 Secca shook her head and turned to Achar, taking the gray’s reins from the young lancer and mounting.
As Secca settled herself in the saddle, Richina ex-tended a chunk of bread and a wedge of cheese. “Eat
as you ride.
  
 Secca took the bread and cheese.
  
 ‘Players!” ordered Palian. “Remount and ride! Fol-low the sorceress.”
  
 “Silberfels!” came Haddev’s order above the sound of the still-rising wind. "Follow the players! Blades
at the ready. Watch the sides of the trail.”
  
 Secca and Richina were almost at the head of the second column, with only Achar and Dymen riding
be-fore them on the trail that angled downward. The wind was cold, and it half-moaned, half-howled
around Secca’s ears as she rode and tried to chew and swallow the dry bread and hard cheese.
  
 Once in the birches and firs, Secca could only catch glimpses of Stepan’s and Wilten’s lancers. She
swal-lowed, hoping that she could reach the rise on the far side of the valley before the Sturinnese could
gather. The descent seemed to take a glass or more, with the wind moaning and howling and misty fog
shreds ob-scuring her view, and then passing, with yet another segment of the disintegrating fog bank
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

taking the place of the last... and again passing.
  
 By the time she had finished the bread and cheese, the section of the trail, which she followed had eased
into a gentler decline, and most of the fog seemed to have cleared from the valley.
  
 “lt’s longer than it looked,” said Richina quietly.
  
 “Yes.” Too much longer, thought the older sorceress. “We’ll have to hurry when we get to the rise.”
  
 As soon as Secca was out of the trees and on the grassy flat, she urged the gray forward, into a quick
trot. She didn’t need to be caught on low ground. Neither did the players.
  
 As she rode, she swallowed again. She hadn’t real-ized just how much lower the valley was. Yet... if she
turned, she’d be abandoning Stepan and Wilten and their lancers. Better that she do her best from the
low rise ahead. Changing even a poor plan in midstream would probably be worse than carryrng it out.
That’s what you hope, she told herself.
  
 A glance to the south showed no Sturinnese... not yet.
  
 As she rode up the gentle slope onto the rise, running through a vocalise to keep her voice ready, Secca
could see that the entire north slope of the hill she faced was nearly bare of the concealing fog. She could
also see movement at the top of the hill, figures in white, she thought, although the firs obscured any clear
images.
  
 A series of trumpet commands rang out from the south, echoing off the ridge behind the Defalkan and
Ebran forces.
  
 Secca glanced around the ridge, then turned in the saddle, looking back at Palian, before gesturing. "The
knoll there. Set up and ready the players.”
  
 Stepan had clearly marked the area, because his lanc-ers had left a semicircle there, and a clear path.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 The sorceress reined up the gray and swung down out of the saddle, walking quickly onto the slightly
higher ground on the south side of the rise.
  
 A dull rumbling rose, and then died away.
  
 “Dismount! Quick-tune!” Palian’s voice cut through the morning air.
  
 The players reined up, and at that moment, the sun seemed to rise over the eastern side of the valley,
flood-ing it with an orange light. The last shreds of fog rose into the sky, dark blots that thinned and then
vanished.
  
 White specks appeared among the birch trunks, white splotches that moved downhill, almost like a
breaking wave.
  
 “They are less than a half a dek away, lady," Stepan called.
  
 Secca shook her head, forcing her thoughts back to what needed to be done, calling up the spell she
needed to use.
  
 The quick sounds of tuning died away, and the red-haired sorceress turned toward Palian.
  
 ‘We stand ready?’
  
 Secca looked back to the south, where two hundred or so yards of brown grass separated the bottom
of the rise where she and her forces waited from the trees on the north slope of the hill held by the
Sturinnese. The brown meadow remained empty of lancers or mounts.
  
 Secca waited.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 The fog had vanished, but wind was lighter, as if the effects of her spell had died away.
  
 Another series of trumpet calls issued into morning air from the south, then echoed from the hillside
behind the players and the lancers. Mounts whuffed, and some one coughed, but the air became even
more still. The brown meadow to the south of the rise remained vacant.
  
 Secca swallowed, still waiting.
  
 Abruptly, like a thunderclap, the roll of drums began, a triplet of trumpet notes sang forth, and a sea of
white-clad lancers charged from the trees, forming into four wedges as they galloped toward Secca.
  
 Secca swallowed, then ordered, “The arrow spell!”
  
 She shouted to Elfens. “Make ready with your shafts!”
  
  “The arrow spell!” echoed Paliam “Mark!”
  
  “Stand ready to nock arrows!” Elfens’ voice trumpeted over the howling moan of the winds.
  
 “The arrow spell! At my mark. . .“ ordered Pahan.
  
 “Mark!”
  
 Singing as strongly as she could, yet trying to be open and not to force her voice, fighting the urge to
push and strain against the thunder-drums, the spells they carried, and the wind, Secca sang the spell.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Heads of arrows, shot into the air,
 strike the drumskins, straight through there,
 rend the drums and those whoplay...“
  
 Even toward the end of the spell, strong as her voice felt, she could hear and feel the pressure of the
thunder--drums, a pressure that tried to contain, to push back the impacts of her words and the music of
her players. With that pressure came a strong wind, blowing out of the south, carrying the scent of damp
and moldy meadow grass to Secca, a wind seemingly directed at her, grit flaying her face and eyes.
  
 As she finished, she watched open-mouthed as more than half the heavy arrows curved, fighting against
the wind, and perhaps against sorcery, before diving into the damp grasses of the meadow near the
woods.
  
 There was a lessening of the drums, a raggedness, and a momentary faltering, but the drumming
contin-ued.
  
 Secca glancedat thewave of white-clad horsemen thundering toward her too-small force. A second
arrow spell might stop the thunder-drums totally, but would she have any lancers left?
  
 “The flame spell!” Secca ordered.
  
 “The flame spell! At my mark. . .“ ordered Palian. “Mark!”
  
 The tone from the players remained strong and true, and the heavy-chorded harmony from the second
players was solid.
  
 Secca sang:
  
 “Turn to fire, turn to flame,
 all those who stand against our name,
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 turn to ashes, turn to dust..”
  
 The drums and the wind rose, along with the pound-ing hoofs of the Sturinnese mounts, now less than
fifty yards from the base of the rise, yet when Secca’s last words died away, the sky flashed, and the
flame light-nings flared—but only across the first tines of the charg-ing Sturinnese. Horses and men went
down in charred heaps, and the scent of bunt flesh flowed back to Secca, seemingly instantly. Nor did
the lightnings reach all of that first rank.
  
 The white wedge of riders to the west, toward the river and farthest to the right, seemed almost
untouched as the lancers surged up the rise—and were met by Stepan’s lancers, who had managed a
short charge downhill.
  
 The lightnings died away, and from the hillside to the south, the pounding of the thunder-drums rose once
more, not quite so loudly. With that rhythmic thunder-ing came fiercer winds, howling, ripping at Secca’s
jacket and hair, pelting fine grit into her face and eyes.
  
 She squinted out across the lowlands. Through her watering eyes, she could see that the remaining
Sturin-nese lancers had turned their mounts back toward thecover of the birches and firs. Even those
who had at-tacked Stepan’s lancers on the flank were falling back and turning their mounts. But though
they had turned, the pounding of the thunder-drums continued.
  
 “The arrow spell! Again!” Secca turned and shouted to Elfens. “Make ready more shafts!”
  
 “The arrow spell!” echoed Palian. “Mark!”
  
 “Nock arrows!” Elfens’ voice again rose above the winds.
  
 Secca turned into the grit bearing wind again, squareing her shoulders, then trying torelax her body. As
the first bar of the players’ spell-tune echoed across the low-lands between the rise and the firs and
birches that the lancers had retreated into, the dull rumbling of the drums intensified once more.
 Secca offered the second arrow spell.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Heads of arrows, shot into the air…”
  
 With her words, the wind rose, seemingly directed at her, more grit slashing across her cheeks and
toward her eyes—and once more, the majority of the heavy arrows were turned by the winds. Not
all—some must have struck a drummer or two, because the drum-beat faltered... but only for a time.
  
 Secca could barely stand, daystars flashing across her vision, but the drums continued to beat, and
heavy fog began to form in the lowest and dampest part of the meadow below the rising, streaming
upward even as Secca watched through her dayflashed vision.
  
 "Lady!” An Ebran captain in green rode toward Secca. "The arms commander would have us ride back
to the high ridge.”
  
 “Back to the high ridge,” Secca shouted back. “We will join forces there.” She stumbled toward the
players, stopping short of Palian. “Remount.. . we must ride back to the high ridge before they regroup.”
  
 ‘Players mount. . .back to the high ridge. Reform there!” ordered Palian.
  
 “Remount! Now!” followed Delvor’ s commands.
  
 Secca staggered toward the gray mare, using what felt like the last of her strength to mount. Richina,
already mounted, eased her mount next to Secca’s. The younger sorceress extended a water bottle.
  
 “Lady, you must drink...and eat as you ride."
  
 With a nod, and a trembling hand, Secca took the water bottle. She drank as she rode at a fast trot
back down the rise, glancing back over her shoulder. Behind her, Seeca could hear the near frantic
pounding of the thunder-drums, and feel the cold wind die away once more as she crossed the stretch of
damp and brown -grassed meadow between the rise and the trees on the south side of the ridge which
she had ridden down such a short time before.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Once back amid the trees and riding up the trail, Secca could see patches of fog appearing, oozing
up-ward out of the ground itself, near-instantly.
  
 Richina offered some bread, and Secca wolfed that down. While the daystars did not vanish from her
vi-sion, they did diminish in frequency and intensity.
  
 “What a dissonant mess...” murmured the redhead under her breath between bites of the bread. She
glanced over her shoulder. All she could see through the trees were patches of fog and trees.
  
 By the time she was halfway up the ridge trail, the drums had died into silence and the lowlands were
again covered with fog.
  
 Once back on the ridge, the sorceress reined up the gray mare, and surveyed the lowlands and the hills
to the south. It was as though she had done nothing except destroy a few of the enemy and lose who
knew how many of Stepan’s lancers.
  
 She just kept looking at the swirling fog that had refilled the valley that separated her forces from those
of the Sturinnese.
  
 Stepan eased his mount up beside her.
  
 Secca shook her head.
  
 “It felt worse than it was,” offered the silver-haired arms commander. “We lost less than a company.
They lost close to three companies, perhaps four.”
  
 “They have twice our number, and they will have more soon,” Secca replied, “if I cannot find a way to
stop this fog,”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Stepan looked down for a moment, not quite meeting her eyes, before he looked at her “That is true.
We cannot hold our position, not if we are attacked from the north.”
  
 Secca nodded.
  
 After a moment, she said, “I must think.” And eat ...so she could think.
  
 65
  
 Just past noon, when she stepped out of the tent into the cold calm air under a sky that held but a trace
of high haze, Secca thought she had a workable plan. She had best, she knew, for the mirror had
revealed that the Sturinnese lancers front the north were no more than three days’ ride away.
  
 “Richina...I'll be back in a few moments. I need to talk to Elfens. Then we need to talk."
  
 “Yes, lady.” Richina’s voice was polite, but abstracted, as she glanced toward the east end of the
Camp.
  
 “He’ s all right. He' s just worried."
  
 "Who?” Richina flushed, adding quickly, “His lancers weren’t attacked, were they?”
  
 “No. Like all of us, he’s worried about the battle that will have to come.” Secca said, before walking
toward the higher end of the camp area. Quietly, Achar followed her. Secca could only hope that Richina
would see Haddev for what he was before the younger sorceress did something truly foolish.
  
 Secca found the chief archer on the west side of the camp, working with a pot of glue, refletching some
arrows on a flat stone.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Lady... if you would wait but a moment…”
  
 “Go ahead.” Secca smiled faintly. “We will need every shaft.”
  
 After several moments, the chief archer set down the glue pot and the knife and stood. “Your wish,
Lady Secca?"
  
 “Elfens... . . you still have arrows with the large iron heads?
  
 “But, of course.”
  
 “How many do you have?”
  
 “Not many . . . perhaps three score,” admitted the chief archer.
  
 “That will be enough...if you can get them all into the air while I do a spell.”
  
 “That we can.”
  
 “We will need them before dawn--- well before dawn." Secca’s eyes fixed on the longefaced man. “Can
you keep your archers together in darkness and a thick fog?’
  
 "Ah...that I can do...but how will they know where to place their arrows?’
  
 ‘That is my task.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 ‘We can get our shafts high, so that you can do the rest.”
  
 “That is all I ask”
  
 “We will be ready.”
  
 “I will let you know more later, after I have worked out the details with Wilten and Stepan.”
  
 Elfens bowed, his long face somber.
  
 Secca walked quickly back across the camp toward the single tent, her breath still a fog in the cold air,
her boots crunching on the half-frozen ground. The ever-colder nights were yet another reason why she
needed to act.
  
 As she apprpached the tent, Richina stepped forward. "Palian... she and Delvor were here a few
moments ago. So was Stepan. They looked most worried.”
  
 “I am most certain that they are.” Secca offered an off…center smile. “I’ll need your help, Richina.
More than ever before.”
  
 “Another building spell, lady?’ Puzzlement colored the younger sorceress’s words.
  
 Secca shook her head. “The flame spell.”
  
 Richina swallowed.
  
 “You know the melody,” Secca said. “I’ll write out the words for you. Best you study it a while this
afternoon and tonight”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “But . . . you are the stronger sorceress.”
  
 “I doubt I will be by the time we join battle tomorrow.”
  
 "Thefog?"
  
 “If I do what I must, there will be no fog, or little enough by morning. If there is, then I will disperse it,
and you will use the flame spell against the Sturinnese.”
  
 “Will they then attack?”
  
 “It matters not. We must if they do not We cannot sur-vive a battle where we are attacked from both
sides, and if we retreat and leave eastern Ebra in the hands of the Sea-Priests, we will see women in
chains across the east for generations to come.”
  
 “You do not think we could dislodge them?"
  
  Secca raised her eyebrows. “Hadrenn is hard-pressed to raise twelve companies of lancers. Lord
Robero would be hard-pressed to raise twice that in additional lancers. Few of the levies in Defalk could
stand against the Sturinnese, and there are already more than fifty companies of Sturin-nese in Ebra,
counting those we destroyed near Synek, if they take Elahwa and hold Dolov, do you not think we will
see more? And more thunder-drums?”
  
 “We will,” Ricbina agreed.
  
 “And with sorcery against sorcery, then what?’
  
 “Many will die.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “If we fail now... many more will die.” Secca shook her head. “I will write out the two spells you must
use. Then we will see Palian, and you will go over the words in your mind while the players play..."
  
 As Secca explained, Richina nodded.
  
 The older sorceress could only hope that the younger understood...before she saw what would happen,
were she successful.
  
 Secca tried not to consider what would happen if they failed.
  
 66
 Sperea, Neserea
  
 Belmar nods to the two guards as he steps into the white-walled private study, but the pair remains
stationed on each side of the door, inside the study. Their eyes never leave him as he steps toward the
man who awaits him.
  
 In turn, Belmar bows politely to the holder with the iron-gray hair. "Cloftus, it is good to see you once
more.” As he straightens the fingers of his right hand pass the empty scabbard at his belt. In his left hand,
he carries a leather case five spans in length, large enough for a small instrument.
  
 “I must say that I was most surprised at your appear-ance--- not at the force which accompanied you,
however.” Cloftus smiles, but does not return the bow. “You were wise to leave them well back of the
walls. And know you cannot take Sperea--- not without siege engines and far more armsmen than even
you can afford.” The taller and older holder remains standing beside the desk. The sabre in the scabbard
at his side threatens to bump the pedestal leg of the desk, a leg carved to resemble a climbing rose upon
a circular trestle.
  
 “I have no intention of wasting siege engines on Sperea—even if I had any to waste.” Belmar laughs
easily. “Besides. I have a proposition. It might be of interest to you."
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “It might. I cannot imagine why, but if you are so con-vinced that I would be that you would walk in
unarmed...I should at least listen." A wintry smile accompanies the light tone of Cloftus’ words.
“Especially given . . . our history.”
  
 “What do you think about the daughter of the late Lord High Counselor succeeding him? Does it appeal
to you?"
  
 “You obviously do not care for that, or you would not have asked,” points out Cloftus. “As for me . . .“
He pauses and smiles. “Let us just say that we could do better and we could do worse. What have you
in mind that would be better?"
  
 “The restoration of the Prophet of Music in Neserea, the independence of our land from Defalkan
domination.” Belmar shrugs. "I cannot Imagime you enjoy being under the domination of foreign
sorceresses.”
  
 Cloftus frowns, fingers his chin. “I cannot say I have ever liked anyone trying to dominate me, Belmar.
But little of that have I seen in the past score of years. Do you think wewill see such in the years ahead?"
  
 "When a land controls not its own destiny, that is bound to happen.”
  
 “I see. What have you in mind? Your proposition?"
  
 “I seek your support in becoming the successor to the last Prophet” Belmar delivers the words easily.
  
 Cloftus laughs, ruefully, but not mockingly. “As I recall, one sorceress destroyed the last Prophet, and
there are three now.”
  
 “And all three together have not her power or her wit. One foreign sorceress cannot stand against
three-quarters of Nescrea, not with but a mere girl as Counselor and her mother acting as a Mansuuran
puppet.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “I would not call Lady Aerlya a puppet, Belmar. Nor a tool. Strong-willed, even a bitch, but never a
puppet.”
  
 “What we call her need bear no relation towhat is.” Belmar laughs gently. “Surely, you would not begin
to quibble over words. I believe you called me.. . what was it.. . the legitimate offspring of an extended
line of un consorted minor holders?" Belniar shakes his heads “Your words were even less pleasant, I
fear.”
  
 “Did you come all this way to insult me?” Cloftus smiles, his eyes going to the guards, his fingers
dropping to the hilt of his blade.
  
 “Dissonance, no.” Belmar smiles. “I brought something you should see..." He gently and slowly opens
the leather case to display the instrument within.
  
 “A small lutar, it would appear... a lady’s toy.”
  
 Belmar adjusts the strings. “It’s most similar to the one used by the Sorceress of the East. It has a
beautiful tone.”
  
 “What has this to do with your proposition?” Cloftus raises his eyebrows.
  
 “Everything.” Belmar’s fingers run across the strings.
  
 “Everything. You see. . .“ He pauses and clears his throat, then smiles, before beginning to sing in a
strong baritone.
  
 “With their own blades, slay all here but me...with their own...”
  
 Cloftus lurches forward, yanking his sabre from the scabbard so violently that it bangs back into the
desk.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 The two guards, after a momentary hesitation, draw their own blades and edge toward the younger
holder.
  
 Belmar, still smiling, finishes the double couplet and leaps back toward the closed windows to the corner
balcony
  
 The looks of surprise on the faces of the three armed men are short-lived as their blades take on a life of
their own, and then take their owners’ lives as well. After a short time, the study is silent, and Belmar
remains the only figure standing.
  
 He walks to the balcony and opens the door, stepping outside into the chill air, where his breath comes
out in white puffs. From within his tunic, he takes a yellow cylinder and unrolls it—a short yellow pennant
attached to a polished wooden rod.
  
 Below the steep wall stands a group dressed in brown drab, almost invisible to the eye.
  
 Belmar waves the yellow pennant, and is answered by a crimson one He pauses, holding the yellow
pennant up, then drops it.
  
 The players in brown begin to play. At the second bar, Belmar begins the spell.
  
 “Within each Sperean breast, freeze each
 arrnsman’s heart...”
  
  
 67
  
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 A cough in the darkness preceded the words Secca dreaded. “Lady? It istwo glasses before dawn.”
  
 “Thank you,” Secca whispered back to the guard outside the tent. She slowly rolled into a sitting
position on the narrow cot, took a deep breath, and began to fumble for her overshirt and tunic in the
darkness.
  
 With a sound half-moan, half-groan, Richina shifted her weight on the other cot, but her breathing
returned to that of a sleeper.
  
 Secca eased into her tunic, pulled on her boots, and then her riding jacket, slowly, for her fingers
fumbled with the clothing in the darkness. The cramping in her lower ab-domen didn’t help, either, nor
the faint nausea that came with it. She hardly needed the additional complications of the proof that she
was a woman right before sorcery and a battle, but there was no help for it, none at all. She decided
against wearing the hat, but stuffed it into the sad-dlebag in case she needed it later.
  
 Finally, she stood, then bent to ease the leather-cased lutar and saddlebags from under the cot. She
carried them outside the tent, then slipped back inside the silken panels to retrieve the water bottle and
the provisions bag.
  
 Back outside the tent, in the flickering light of the single torch, with Achar and Rukor standing back
several paces, on guard, Secea began to eat, mainly the dry bread, with occasional bites of cheese. She
tried to ignore the cramping and nausea, knowing that sorcery on an empty stomach would be a disaster,
and also knowing that eating so early in the day in her present condition would make her even less
comfortable.
  
 When she had eaten all she could force down, she took a last swallow from the water bottle and corked
it. She knelt and checked the small bottles in the saddlebag once again to make sure the stoppers were
firmly in place. She was almost finished when she sensed someone coming, and glanced up as a figure
walked toward her.
  
 Stepan halted a yard away. Even in the uncertain light, Secca could see the circles under his eyes, and
the hag-gardness in his face. She stood, wondering if she looked as tired as did the arms-commander.
  
 “Lady, the lancers and archers are preparing to mount.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “I’m almost ready.”
  
 “Best I lead the archers with my first company,” said Stepan quietly.
  
 “You don’t have to,” Secca protested.
  
 “And if aught happens to you, then how do I tell Lord Hadrenn or your lord?” asked Stepan.
  
 “Your watch will wake the players and Richina in an-other glass?’ Secca asked. “So they will be ready
when I return.”
  
 “That they will.”
  
 "I'm ready.’’
  
 “I will have the men mount.” Stepan turned and slipped back into the darkness.
  
 After another long swallow from the water bottle, the red-haired sorceress picked up her gear and
walked toward the tieline fifty yards behind the tent. There, the gray mare waited, lifting her head as
Secca neared. Achar followed Secca, carrying a pitch torch he had lit from the one burn-ing outside the
tent.
  
 As Secca saddled the gray in the flickering torchlight, she glanced to the east, but all she could see was
the pur-pled blackness of night, and the brightest stars shining through a thin haze. To the west, Darksong
hung just above the horizon. Secca shivered
  
 Once more, there was little wind, although the night was chill. She made sure both saddlebags were
fastened tightly before strapping the lutar in place.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 She mounted and rode southward toward the open sec-tion of the ridge, Achar following on his mount
withthe torch. They reined up at the head of the column, where Stepan waited with a vanguard of a
half-score of guards. Behind Stepan and the van were the archers, and behind them a company of
lancers.
  
 In the dim light, Secca nodded to the older man.
  
 ‘Douse the torches!” ordered Stepan. “Down the trail. No talking. Words carry in the fog.”
  
 Slowly, the mounts of the vanguard began to move, over the ridge and onto the narrow trail. Once into
the trees the fog thickened, so much that Secca could scarcely see more than a pair of yards before her,
cutting off the small amount of light from the stars.
  
 “I’ll have to send scouts out once we reach the bottom,” murmured Stepan, as he leaned in the saddle
toward Secca.
  
 “I know. But the closer to the trees on their hill the better.”
  
 “Not too close. A hundred yards?’
  
 “That’s fine.”
  
 In the clammy heavy grayness, the ride down the narrow trail was slow, far slower than the last time, and
that had seemed to take forever. Secca listened, but all she heard was the breathing of mounts and the
impact of hoofs on hard ground.
  
 Stepan said nothing, but Secca felt she knew what he was thinking, that she risked much with such a
predawn effort in fog where no one could truly see. Yet the risks of not acting were so much greater. She
took a slow breath and resettled herself in the saddle, trying to ignore the dull cramps and nausea that
persisted, and attempting to warm up with a series of softer vocalises she hoped would not carry, or not
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

too far.
  
 In time—how much later, she was not certain---the trail flattened, and then opened onto the browned
and flattened grasses of the lowlands.
  
 Stepan hissed, and eight lancers eased forward from the van and out into the deep gray that swallowed
them before they were three yards away.
  
 “Four will scout the trees, and four will form a line where we should halt. With luck we will find one of
them.” Stepan’s soft laugh was rueful. “One hopes, at least.”
  
 So did Secca.
  
 The meadow grasses were coated with a silvery frost, yet another sign that winter was upon Ebra, and
one that told Secca that she had little enough time to defeat the Sea-Priests’ forces, if indeed she could.
She cocked her head, but the valley was silent except for thewhuffing of the mounts and the occasional
crackling of the more frozen and stiffer stalks of meadow grass.
  
 Before long, Secca could make out the figure of a single lancer, shadowy, appearing out of the mist. He
did not speak until Stepan and Secca reined up. “I am the third, ser. The others are at the trees. They will
call if the Stu-rinnese nears”
  
 As Stepan quietly reordered the lancers, Secca dis-mounted and handed the gray’s reins to Achar, then
un-strapped the lutar and set it on the ground before opening the left saddlebag and extracting more than
half the small bottles, She paused. She could hear nothing but the occasionalwhuff of a mount, or the
creak of a lancer shifting his weight in his saddle. After unstoppering each bottle, she took the lutar from
its case, and quickly ran through the tuning.
  
 Then she began to play and started the first spell—the poison for the officers and thunder-drummers.
  
 “Seek and carry through this night’s air.
 crystals strong toalldrummers, camped up there.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Take this heavy stuff; infuse through song,
 within the blood and sinew strong,
 within the brain and heart to dwell
 so no other battles will they live to tell.
  
 Then distribute all the rest
 through the blood of captains best...”
  
 When the last sounds of the spell and accompaniment died away, Secca paused, straining to see if she
could hear some-thing...anything.
  
 There was not a sound beyond that of the mounts of her force, nothing, not from the encampment up the
hillside, nor from the scouts.
  
 After a moment, she cleared her throat, then called softly, “Elfens?”
  
 The archer appeared out of the misty gray. “Yes, lady?"
  
 “When I begin the next spell, have your archers loose as many shafts as they can, in a high arc toward
the trees to the south—that’s the way I’m facing. Keep loft-ing them up until I stop singing.”
  
 “That we can do. Give me a moment to have them ready.”
  
 “Call when you are ready.”
  
 “Yes, lady.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca squared her shoulders, her fingers touching the strings of the lutar, her eyes looking into the
featureless gray before her, trying to visualize what she wanted the arrowheads to do.
  
 “Archers ready!” came the soft call.
  
 Secca’s fingers touched the strings, and she sang forth the second spell, the one for the drums and
drummers.
  
 “Heads of arrows, shot into the air,
 strike the drumskins, straight through there,
 rend the drums and those who play,
 for their spells and Darksong pay!”
  
 She ran through the same spell twice before lowering the lutar and taking several deep breaths. Then she
quickly recased the lutar and strapped it behind her sad-dle before remounting the gray.
  
 “Are you finished?” asked Stepan.
  
 “For now. From here.”
  
 “Lancers. . . return to the ridge. Pass the order,” the older officer called softly. “Bring in the scouts.”
  
 As the hissed orders passed through the fog, Secca and Stepan led the way back through the fog and
across the brown-grassed meadow, following the traces of their earlier passages.
  
 “You used different spells, but both were directed at the drummers.” Stepan’s words were not quite a
question.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Without the drummers, our sorcery should work.”
  
 “It has before,” Stepan agreed in a low voice. “It must now, for I fear they have more lancers than we
have counted.”
  
 “How many?”
  
 “That...your glass does not show, but the smoke from the cookfires and the expanse of their
encampment...perhaps as many as forty companies.”
  
 In spite of herself, Secca winced. “Why did you not tell me this earlier?’
  
 Stepan shrugged. ‘Would it have made any differ-ence?’
  
 “You were afraid I would leave?” Secca could feel the anger building.
  
 “No. I feared that too many lancers would vanish. I had seen what sorcery can do before you came.
None of the lancers have.”
  
 Secca wasn’t sure she believed Stepan, but, at the moment, as he had said, it made no difference,
except that she would probably have to be ready to perform more sorcery later in the day. Ignoring,
once more, the cramping, she forced herself to eat a few more mouth-fuls of dry bread, interspersed with
the cheese.
  
 After a long silence, Stepan asked, “You have said nothing. Are you angry that I did not tell you?’
  
 “Some,” Secca admitted, “but you were right. It only means we must fight now.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 In the silence that followed, Secca kept listening, but could hear nothing from the south, and that worried
her more than if she had heard sounds of pursuit or trumpets of alarm. She continued to nibble at the
bread and cheese she had brought while she rode upward on the narrow trail. So far, she was not seeing
flashes, but she still had much to do, even more, she feared, from what Stepan had said.
  
 The climb was slower back up the trail, and with each yard that they covered in near-silence, Secca felt
her stomach tightening more. In her condition, she needed that tension not at all. By the time the rocky
edges of the ridge were visible, there was a slight gray-ing of the sky above the trees to the east.
  
 Perhaps a quarter of a glass later, the mare carried her onto the ridge, where in the faint gray light, the
players were lined up, tuning gently. In columns behind them were the bulk of the lancers, headed by
Wilten.
  
 Richina sat in the saddle of her mount---stiffly----in front of the players. As she saw Secca, a faint smile
crossed the younger sorceress’s face, and Secca could see a certain relief. The older sorceress offered a
smile in return. When she reined up beside Richina, Secca inclined her head to the south. “Have you seen
any-thing?”
  
 “Just the lights of cook-fires, lady. There have been no trumpets, and no signals?”
  
 “None at all,” added Wilten, glancing from Secca to Stepan. “The quiet worries me.”
  
 “It worries us all, I think,” replied Secca. “Best I disperse the fog.” She dismounted, handing the gray’s
reins to Achar, and stepped toward Palian.
  
 “Still the second building spell, Lady Secca?” asked the chief player.
  
 "The second building spell,” Secca affirmed. “After I do a vocalise.”
  
 Her voice only cracked once and after the second time through, her cords felt clear. She nodded to
Palian, and then, to Delvor. “I am ready.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “The second building song. On my mark...Mark!” Secca tried to let the song come, flow out with full but
unforcedvolume, riding both the melody and the deeper chords of the heavy lutars of the second players.
  
 “Bring us windboth fierce. and strong
 to sweep this fog to the south along..."
  
 As with the last time she had dispersed the fog, an almost inaudible’ low rumbling issued up from the
ground beneath her feet, then passed well before Secca finished. The sky, whose dark purpled gray had
begun to lighten yet more, immediately darkened, seemingly turning back the time toward night. The wind
moaned, building behind Secca’s back, quickly, ripping at her hair and jacket. Secca thought it was far
colder than the one she had raised three days earlier—far, far colder. Colder---and stronger. Within
moments, the upper lay-ers of the ground fog were shredding like rotten cloth.
  
 She shook herself, trying to forget the intensification of the cramps, and turned to Palian. “Best we mount
up and ride down."
  
 She and Richina and the players were ready even as Stepan rode toward them.
  
 Riding back down to the site of the battle three days previous, Secca was still feeling slightly nauseated,
but forced herself to eat slowly, mouthful after mouthful of dry bread washed down with water. Every so
often, she added a bite of cheese or cold mutton taken from the provisions bag hanging from her saddle.
  
 With each step that her mount took downhill, the day-flashes that sparkled before her eyes were
subsiding, but not totally vanishing.
  
 She could hear Richina warming up, but the notes of the vocalise sounded distant, so distant, even
though the younger sorceress was but three yards behind her, riding beside Wilten, and in front of the
players.
  
 Patches of fog still clung to the lower and more shel-tered spots on the hillside out away from the trail
down-ward, but the frost that had looked a dull gray began to sparkle as the sky lightened. Secca would
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

have appre-ciated the beauty more under other circumstances, and she wondered if Anna had felt the
same way—or if her mentor had ever had to fight fog and huge numbers of Sturinnese. Or were Secca
and the others in danger of failing because they were in a position where they had allowed the Sturinnese
such a foothold?
  
 Secca shook her head.
  
 “Are you all right, lady?” asked Richina.
  
 “I’m fine,” Secca lied. “Just keep warming up. Don’t push it, but you won’t have much time when we
reach the middle of the valley.”
  
 The dawn sun was touching the far western side of the lowlands when they rode from the trees, and a
sec-ond misting fog was rising from the grasses touched by the sun, but that mist, too, was being
whipped away by the chill north wind.
  
 Secca kept studying the tree-covered hillside to the south, the hillside and the intermittent woven fir
barri-ers, but she saw no Sturinnese. It was not until the col-umn neared the rise in the center of the
valley that a series of trumpet calls echoed over the lowlands, faint against the wind, but coming from the
hillside to the south.
  
 Stepan gestured, and two companies of lancers gal-loped by Secca and Richina toward the rise, forming
a line at the southern crest.
  
 Secca turned in the saddle. “Dismount and quick-tune as soon as we reach that knoll. The same one.”
  
 Paliangave a brusque nod.
  
 “Yes, lady,” called Delvor.
  
 While riding along the eastern section of the middle of the rise, Secca glanced southward again. Amid
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

the trees and the shadows, against the angled glare of the rising sun, she could barely make out splotches
of white where there had been none before, and those groupings of white were descending rapidly.
  
 “We need to hurry!” she snapped, easing the gray into a quick trot toward the knoll she had picked out.
The players followed.
  
 Once there, Richina and Secca dismounted hurriedly. The players scrambled from mounts and began to
tune.
  
 Orders echoed around the sorceresses and players as Stepan and Wilten lined up the lancer companies.
  
 Richina stood at the front of the knoll and began a full vocalise.
  
 The lower section of the hillside still in shadow looked as if it were blotched with white snowdrifts un-der
the dark trees. A trumpet triplet blasted out across the morning, and the white began to move, resolving
itself into men in white spurring mounts forward across the shadowed and still-silvered frozen meadow
that sep-arated the trees from the rises
  
 Secca watched...waited.
  
 Richina glanced from Seeca to Palian, then back to Secca.
  
 Finally, when the leading Sturinnese riders were less than two hundred yards away, Richina looked
almost desperately at Secca.
  
 Secca nodded.
  
 “The flame spell!” Richina ordered, her voice firm.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “The flame spell! At my mark...“ rang out Palian’s command. “Mark!”
  
 Strong and direct was the spell melody, with a solid chorded backing from the second players, and
Richina’s voice was unforced and true.
  
 The first of the white riders neared the base of the rise and started up. Secca’s eyes flicked from Richina
to the mass of white lancers charging the rise, then back to the young sorceress.
  
 "...turn to ashes, turn to dust . . .”
  
 Even before the last words, the gray morning sky darkened, and lightnings began to flash out of the sky.
The first riders were within yards of the Defalkan lancers on the eastern side of the rise when, like trees
struck with instant flame, they flared into instantly blackened figures…
  
 With those first fatal lightning strokes, the white rid-ers turned, all but the front-most ranks, and spurred
their horses... seemingly in all directions away from the rise.
  
 A faint and low cheer issued from somewhere on the rise,
  
 “Enough! They’ll be back.” Stepan’s voice rode over the cheer.
  
 Seeing Richina swaying on her feet, Secca stepped forward to be the one who tendered bread, cheese,
and water.
  
 The younger sorceress took a long swallow of water first, then smiled as she looked at Secca. “I didn’t
over do it.”
  
 “Good.” Secca offered a chunk of bread, Stepan rode toward the two sorceresses, then reined up, his
eyes still looking out to the south. “They lost more than five companies, but they are reforming... and
there will be another charge before long.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca looked to Richina. “Can you do it again?’
  
 “Yes, lady."
  
 Stepan glanced at Secca, eyes questioning.
  
 “If she says she can, she can.” Seeca turned to Ri-china. “You need more water.” Then she looked at
Ste-pan. “We will wait this time until they are within a score of yards. That way fewer can flee.”
  
 Stepan nodded. “We will lose some lancers, but it cannot be helped.”
  
 “No...it can’t” Secca’s voice was both flat and firm.
  
 When the second series of trumpet triplets wavered across the lowlands, it seemed as though no time
had passed, although the unseen sun now offered the oran-gish light of the time just past dawn, but that
light did not yet fall upon the trampled grasses of the meadow itself, and shadows covered but the eastern
side of the lowland meadow. Immediately, the mass of lancers in white surged from the trees, and even
from the east and west, as if they were determined to surround the Defalkan-led forces on the rise.
  
 “Hold! Hold your line!” ordered Stepan.
  
 Secca watched as the Sturinnese rode ever closer. Palian looked to Richina, then Secca, ‘A little longer
. . . a little longer,” Secca called. Not until the first of the Sturinnese were less than fifty yards did she
drop her hand.
  
 “Mark!” snapped Palian.
  
 Richina’s first note was tentative, but her voice was strong as she carried the spell out across the
lowlands.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 As Secca had known and Stepan predicted, the first white lancers had to be met by a short charge from
Secca’s forces before the sky darkened and the lightnings flashed. One seared figure crashed into the
brown grass less than ten yards from the players, to the west of the knoll.
  
 The lightnings lasted longer, and left swathes of burned bodies—of both men and mounts—across the
meadow and the slope, but there were still a large num-ber that had turned their mounts. There were also
lanc-ers in green lying at the forward edge of the rise—not many, but a good score.
  
 Richina and Secca watched, but the Sturinnese did not turn and reform immediately.
  
 Then Richina sat down on the ground. . . abruptly.
  
 Secca hurried forward, and offered her water and some bread. “Eat and drink. I will do the next one.”
  
 “Next one?’ Richina’s voice wavered.
  
 “I fear the Lady Sorceress is correct, young sorceress,” said Stepan.
  
 Secca hadn’t seen the arms commander ride up, but she nodded
  
 “They will reform and attack within less than a quarter-glass,” Stepan predicted. “They know that they
must win or they cannot hold eastern Ebra. So they will attack and break, attack and break, until you can
cast no more thunderbolts.”
  
 “Richina cannot cast more for a time.” Secca gestured to Palian and Delvor. “Can you play the flame
song again?”
  
 “We must, must we not?” called back the chief player, with a rueful look upon her lips. “If we are to ride
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

out, that is.”
  
 “Yes,” Secca admitted.
  
 “Then we will play."
  
 "Stronger than before,” added Delvor, pushing a limp lock of hair off his forehead. “We must.”
  
 Secca smiled, then let her voice run through a short vocalise, only enough to ensure her cords were
clear.
  
 She watched, her eyes on the trees to the south, where once again the Sturinnese reformed. Even as she
did, she had trouble believing that they wanted Ebra so badly that they would charge a sorceress again
and again, without even the support of their thunder-drums.
  
 But the trumpet triplets, wavering more than before, echoed across the lowlands, now completely in
morning sunlight, and. from the trees came the white-clad lancers, seemingly as many as in any of the
earlier attacks.
  
 “We stand ready,” called Palian.
  
 “Not until they start to climb the rise,” Secca re-turned. She had a destroy them all on this attack,
because she doubted either she or Richina could handle another spell—and probably the players couldn’t
either.
  
 “Hold your line! Hold till they reach midrise!” ordered Stepan.
  
 The meadow was covered with white-coated lancers, and more appeared from under the trees,
swarming to-ward the Defalkan and Ebran forces, and Secca realized that the first attacks had been as
much to tire her and Richina as anything, with many of the Sturinnese forces held in reserve.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 She wanted to shake her head, thinking about her lack of experience, but it was too late for regrets and
might have-beens. So she watched, slowly raising her arm as the Sturinnese riders neared the base of the
rise and started up.
  
 Then she dropped her arm.
  
 “Mark!” snapped Palian.
  
 The players began, not as strongly as before, but true. The chorded harmony of Delvor's second players
seemed stronger, but that might have been by compar-ison. Secca pushed that thought away and
concentrated, not just on the spell, but on visualizing sweeps of lightnings—from the eastern side of the
lowland, all across the southern hillside and the camp above, and to the sunlit western and lower end of
the valley.
  
 As the last words and notes faded, a crystalline chord chimed through the air, a chord few heard except
Secca and Richina, and perhaps Palian. Then lightnings ex-ploded around them, across the front of the
rise, across the browned grasses before the rise, across the hillside, across the top of the hillside.
  
 Thesky darkened, and the cold wind whipped across Secca and Richina.
  
 From the corner of her eye, Secca could see several players collapsing, and even Palian staggering,
barely hanging on to her violino. Secca just stood there, trying to see through the flashes of light that put
holes in her vision.
  
 “To the rear!” Stepan’s voice boomed out over the wind.
  
 “To the north!” called Wilten.
  
 To the north?Secca shook her head, trying to see past the dayflashes that seemed to mix with the last of
the lightnings.To the north? She turned, shakily . . . to see riders in green swirling past to meet a wedge
of riders in white.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Mount!” snapped Seeca. “Into the saddle!” It seemed to take every bit of her strength to get up onto
the gray.
  
 Richina seemed faster than Secca, but both women mounted quickly and turned their horses toward the
north and the lines of white-coated lancers who charged toward the back of the rise.
  
 Her eyes still flashing with daystars, Secca did what she could, knowing she could use no more sorcery.
She drew the sabre as a Sturinnese slashed down a Defalkan lancer in green and charged toward her.
  
 Somehow Secca parried the first slash, and used the moment of surprise on the Sturinnese officer’s face
 as he realized he was facing a sorceress with a blade— to half-slash, half-thrust, at the left side of his
neck.
  
 More figures in white charged past the thin green line.
  
 Secca ducked as another slashed ather, her arm numb from the off-center parry.
  
 Her attacker fell, cut down from behind by Richina.
  
 Another Sturinnese appeared, glancing from Secca to Richina. Secca thrust, awkwardly, but itwas
enough to make the lancer defend himself, enough that Richina’s sabre cut deeply enough across his
upper arm to disarm him. Secca cut his throat as he opened his mouth.
  
 Secca urged the gray forward, but Richina had needed no aid to dispatch a third Sturinnese.
  
 A wave of black lancers appeared, but there were no figures in white left mounted.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Haddev reined up. “Ladies?’ Worry filled his voice.
  
 Despite the intermittent daystars and the cramping in her abdomen, Secca forced a smile. “We’re fine.”
She glanced at Richina.
  
 The sandy-haired sorceress nodded, if tiredly.
  
 Haddev glanced at Secca, and the blood sprayed across her trousers and vest, and at the still-bloody
sabre in her hand. Then he looked at Richina, who was even more blood-splattered.
  
 “Your guards...?” asked the heir.
  
  “They were busy,” Richina said. “We did all right. Lady Secca killed their captain.”
  
 “Richina was better with her blade. I think she killed three of them,” Secca said, letting the flat tiredness
in her voice show.
  
 Haddev glanced at the heavy sabre carried by the tall younger sorceress, then back at Secca. He started
to speak, then stopped as Wilten rode up.
  
 “Lady Secca?" Wilten’ s voice was low.
  
 “Yes, Wilten?” Secca looked at the overcaptain.
  
 “It’s Stepan. He and his company... they broke most of the assault from the rear, and killed many...
but...”
  
 “But?” asked Richina.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Wilten glanced down. “He ended up fighting four of ‘em. He got three.”
  
 Secca nodded slowly, sadly, feeling another kind of numbness. It had been that kind of campaign, and
prob-ably mostly her fault, or her inexperience. "There was no other like him. He will be missed. Sorely
missed.” More than anyone would know, she suspected. Far more. “More than any would know.”
  
 She straightened in the saddle. “Make sure that the Sturinnese are not re-forming.”
  
 Wilten shook his head. “They rode out. There were but five companies or so remaining. The scouts said
not a one has turned.”
  
 For the moment, thought Seeca. For the moment.
  
 She glanced toward the north where a group of Ebran lancers had gathered, doubtless around the fallen
Ste-pan, and urged the gray forward, squinting through the intermittent dayflashes to make her way
toward the arms commander.
  
  
 68
  
 By midafternoon, Secca could see clearly most of the time, with only occasional dayflashes, but her head
still throbbed. She sat on the edge of the cot in her tent, drink-ing yet more water and trying to eat more
bread and cheese, not knowing when she might have to do more sor-cery.
  
 Richina sat on the other cot, doing the same.
  
 Secca also thought about Stepan, both as the handsome young man she had looked up to as a child, and
as the haggard arms commander who had done his best, perhaps doomed by the inexperience of the
sorceress he had served. She shook her head. She should have thought about the Sturinnese attacking
from the rear. She could have visu-alized that, had she just thought. Had she just thought!
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Was that also warfare, she wondered, realizing that she had not done all she should have, and that others
had died because of her mistakes?
  
 The scouts Secca had sent out had reported back. The Sturinnese camp was empty, and there were no
signs of the Sturinnese lancers anywhere. A rough count had shown that between Richina’s and Secca’s
sorcery and the lanc-ers’ blades, they had slain close to eighty score Sturinnese. Stepan had been
right---more than forty companies.
  
 She had tried a single scrying with the mirror, and be-fore she had almost collapsed, she and Wilten had
deter-mined that the Sturinnese were continuing to ride to the northeast. She shook her head, and wished
she hadn’t as a sharp pain shot through her skull and her eyes watered. That intensified the cramping, and
she just sat stiffly on the edge of the cot for a moment.
  
 “Are you all right, lady?" asked Richina.
  
 “I have felt better,” Secca admitted. It didn’t help that close to five companies, the survivors of those
who had swept in from behind, had escaped. She had the feeling that they would join with those from
Dolov, and once again, she would be facing a force more than twice the size of hers, and without an arms
commander with the expertise of Stepan.
  
 Still. . .there was little she could do at the moment. It would be a day before many of the players could
even ride and longer before Secca could count on them for any in-tensive sorcerous accompaniment.
  
 “Lady?’ called Achar. “Melcar is here.”
  
 Secca slowly stood and stepped outside into the cold and clear air, into the chill of the north wind that
had persisted long after her early morning sorcery.
  
 Overcaptain Melcar was black-haired, perhaps five years older than Secca, with a blocky build and a
square-jawed face. He bowed. “Sorceress-Protector.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Overcaptain.” Secca paused. “I would like to suggest that a half a squad be detached to accompany
Stepan. back to Synek. Perhaps a few more if there are some who can ride but not fight.”
  
 Melcar bowed. “They would be honored.” Secca smiled sadly. “He was a good man.” “Synek will miss
him,” Melcar said slowly.
  
  “We all will, yet... there is more before us."
  
  “What plan you next, lady?”
  
 “To ride north, to destroy the remainder of the Sturin-nese, and then to ensure that Dolov remains loyal
to Lord Hadrenn.” Secca looked squarely into Melcar’s brown eyes. ‘Would you suggest otherwise?"
  
 ‘The overcaptain shook his head. “From what I have seen of your sorcery, that is best for Ebra.” A faint
smile fol-lowed before he added, “And for Defalk. It may not be best for any of us.”
  
 Secea matched his smile with one also faint and ironic. Both turned at the sound of a lancer riding across
the camp.
  
 The ranker reined up. “Lady Secca, Overcaptain Wilten sent me. He is escorting a party riding to see
you. It is led by one of the Counselors of Elahwa.”
  
 “Thank you. We will be ready.”
  
 “I will tell the overcaptain.”
  
 As the lancer turned his mount, Seoca said, “Best you remain, Melcar.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 The overcaptain nodded.
  
 Secca turned toward the tent “You should join us, Ri-china. We’re having some visitors from Elahwa.”
  
 The younger sorceress both shivered inside her jacket and squinted as she stepped from the tent into the
cold brilliance of the day. “They are quick to pay their re-spects.”
  
 "They should be,” said Melcar. He inclined his head to Secca, almost embarrassed. “Excuse me, lady. I
spoke---"
  
 “In haste, and in truth.” Secca laughed, once. “I prefer that to obscurity”
  
 Melcar’s brief smile was one of relief.
  
 At the western edge of the encampment a line of riders appeared.
  
 The three by the tent watched as the party neared, then reined up. Wilten dismounted, and was followed
by two others— a tall woman and a lancer officer in pale blue.
  
 Wilten bowed to Secca, then turned to the two. “This is Lady Secca, Sorceress-Protector of the East,
and her assistant, Lady Richina. Overcaptain Melcar of Synek.”
  
 Melcar bowed. Secca nodded. Richina offered a slight bow.
  
 The counselor was tall, well—muscled. Her dark-brown hair was streaked with gray, and fine lines
radiated from her eyes. Under a brown riding jacket, half-open, she wore a crimson tunic that bore faint
splotches, possibly blood that had not been removed by washing. With her was a lancer overcaptain in
the uniform of Ranuak, broad shouldered, narrow-waisted. and far too short for his breadth of chest to
be handsome. His gray-blue eyes took in Richina, then fixed on Seeca for a long moment, before
traveling back to the counselor he accompanied.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca repressed a shiver at his brief scrutiny, for it seemed as though he had seen to her core.
  
 “I am Veria, Second Counselor of Elahwa. We appreciate your efforts, lady, far more than words can
convey. We must also apologize for not being able toassist you, but . . . we did not dare abandon our
defense posts with so few lancers remaining to us.” Veria bowed. “A fleet and seventy companies of
Sturinnese were more than we had ever expected. Nor had we expected that Lord Robero would
hazard lancers and sorceresses against such a large Sturinnese force.”
  
 Secca hid a frown: Had there been seventy companies? How would she ever know? And if there had
not been that many in the battle... where were the others? “We did what we thought best, Lady Veria---”
  
 “Veria, please. When it is appropriate, please convey our thanks to your lord for your efforts, although
we will cer-tainly do so as well.”
  
 “That I will.” In time, and onlyafter she dealt with Dolov and the Sturinnese. Secca massaged her
forehead, then, absently, tugged the sabre belt back into position.
  
 The unintroduced lancer overcaptain’s eyes followed the gesture, then, almost belatedly, took in the
blood splotches on her sleeves and trousers. The faintest of smiles ap-peared, almost as if of approval,
before vanishing.
  
 “You have blade training as well, Lady Sorceress?" asked Veria, gently, apologetically.
  
 “My....mentor...Lady Anna--- she insisted that all whom she trained be as skilled as possible with knife
and sabre.” Secca’s smile was wry. “I had not quite understood the reasons for a sorceress to know
such, not until today.”
  
 “So you killed some with a blade as well as sorcery?” Veria laughed. “Good.”
  
 The Ranuan overcaptain nodded.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “There wasn’t much choice,” Secca pointed out, abruptly conscious that everyone around her seemed to
tower over her, except for the blue-eyed Lancer overcaptain who was but a head or so taller. “We lost
the arms commander of Synek and many others.”
  
 "There seldom is much choice in such.” Veria’s tone was wry. After a moment, she asked, “What will
you now?”
  
 “Five companies of the Sturinnese are riding northward to meet with reinforcements from Dolov.” Secca
shrugged. “I cannot leave them to ride where they will.”
  
 The Ranuan overcaptain leaned forward and murmured something in the counselor’s ear.
  
 For a moment, Veria frowned, then nodded. She smiled as she addressed Secca “There is little we can
yet offer you, for our stores are few and our losses grievous, and the Sturinnese ships remain yet off the
port. That is, for now at least. Overcaptain Alcaren would offer his two companies of SouthWomen to
aid you in dealing with the Sturinnese as a partial recompense for your willingness to look beyond your
own borders and needs.”
  
 “That is most generous...and welcome,” Secca said immediately, even as she wondered at the reasons
behind the offer—and her own quick acceptances
  
 “They would, of course, be under your direct corn-mand.” Alcaren’ s voice was a smooth baritone, a
voice that carried without effort. “Through me, but under your direct orders”
  
 Secca understood Alcaren’s offer. The South Women would not accept the command of an outsider---
and usu-ally not from any male officer.
  
 Veria smiled, as if she understood Secca’s puzzlement “Alcaren was the chief personal guard of the
Matriarch.”
  
 “Just one of them,” the broad-shouldered officer added apologetically. “We were the last sent from
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

Encora to aid Elahwa. We have suffered far less. We would not wish the Sturinnese to remain anywhere
in Liedwahr.”
  
 .“Neither would we,” Secca pointed out. Veria cleared her throat. Secca turned, waited.
  
 “We can bring some supplies,” Veria said. “We have taken the liberty of sending a few wagons already
so that you will not have to forage or go hungry in following the Sturinnese.”
  
 “We are most grateful,” Secea said. “If the weather permits, wewill begin tomorrow.”
  
 “It should be most clear,” Veria suggested.
  
 There was another period of silence before the counselor spoke again. “There is little else we can say,
except that we are most grateful and that You are always welcome in Elahwa” She bowed slightly. “We
will send what more we can in rations and supplies.”
  
 “Thank you.” Secca inclined her head.
  
 “And Overcaptain Alcaren will brief you on his lanc-ers.” Vena bowed again. “I should go.”
  
 “We thank you,” Secca said again, not knowing exactly what else she could say.
  
 The five watched as Counselor Vena walked back to-ward her mount.
  
 As the counselor rode away, accompanied by little more than a squad of woman lancers in red, Alcaren
turned to Secca. “My lancers are South Women.”
  
 “I understand. Would you prefer to billet them close to me, or on one side of the camp?"
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Alcaren tilted his head slightly, then smiled.“They would be honored to be billeted close to a
sorceress--protector.”
  
 Secca glanced to Melcar and then Wilten. “That will be the wayit is done.”
  
 Both of her overcaptains nodded.
  
 “If you would not mind, I must look to my lancers.” Alcaren bowed.
  
 “Melcar and Wilten will join you in a moment,” Secca said. "That way, you three can work out matters."
  
 Alcaren bowed, letting his eyes linger on Sceca for just a fraction of an instant longer than he might have,
before turning.
  
 Once the Ranuan overcaptain was a good ten yards away, Secca turned to Melcar and Wilten. “You
know that his lancers are all women?”
  
 Melcar nodded.
  
 “Ah . . . yes,” admitted Wilten, as if he had not thought about the matter.
  
 “Pass the word that they are not to be approached, except as allies You might also pass the word that
they are very good with blades of all sizes, and that attempting to force one.” Secca paused. “Most men
lose what they consider most valuable, if not their lives. We don’t need to lose lancers on either side.”
  
 Wilten swallowed.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Melcar smiled. “I think I can make sure that the men understand."
  
 “Ah...yes, lady,” stammered Wilten.
  
 After the two left, Secca turned to Richina. “What do you think?”
  
 “Overcaptain Alcaren is handsome, and he must be good.”
  
 “At what?” asked Secca. “Someone wants him here to watch us."
  
 “You do not think..."
  
 Secca shook her head. “I don’t know what to think. If the lancers weren’t SouthWomen....but they will
cer-tainly fight the Sturinnese. Holding them back may be more of a problem.”
  
 “He likes you,” Richina ventured.
  
 Secca shook her head. “He’s interested. Why—-that’s another question.” She had more than a few
speculations, wondering if the two companies were as much a guard for her and Richina as a thank-you.
As for Alcaren. . . she wasn’t sure what to think, except that she knew she would have to watch him and
consider his role most carefully.
  
 And she was going to miss Stepan. That she knew.
  
 69
 Encora, Ranuak
  
 The Exchange Mistress steps into the small study of the Matriarch. Alya motions to the chair on the
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

other side of the flat table desk, Dyleroy eases into it. “You had requested my pres ence?"
  
 “I did.” The Matriarch smiles. “What do your seers and traders tell you about Elahwa?”
  
 "That the warships of the Sea-Priests remain untouched. They have left the Gulf of Discord and sail
along the north coast. Alcaren and the SouthWomen remain with the Sorceress-Protector.”
  
 “Why the north coast?”
  
 “Either to reinforce the lancers at Dolov... or, I fear, to reclaim them in order to attack us.”
  
 “Because they were defeated at Elahwa? Because the Sorceress-Protector was victorious?” asks AIya,
leaning back ever so slightly in the straight-backed chair.
  
 “It was a costly victory, I fear,” replied the Exchange Mistress. “Even for us. We continue to lose trading
ves-sels, and now...perhaps more.”
  
  
 Alya nods. “The Sea-Priests failed to understand one small matter, the Harmonies be praised.”
  
 An expression of puzzlement flits across the face of the older woman and vanishes. “There may be
much...”
  
 “The new Sorceress-Protector of the East was willing to sharepower and glory and danger with the
younger sorceress. It took two strong sorceresses.” Alya nods. “You are right. That is why they will
attack us next.”
  
 “Because we lack sorceresses such as Defalk?”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Because we have not trained sorcerers and sorceresses for war.” Alya shakes her head. “The wor1d is
changing, and I fear what those changes will be. The Sea-Pigs de-stroyed Narial by combining Darksong
and Clearsong to raise the oceans into a giant wave. The sorceress-protectors are wrenching metals from
the earth and changing the weather. They are using sorcery to poison their enemies at a distance.”
  
 Dyleroy attempts to block an expression of disgust and does not fully succeed. “The Ladies of the
Shadows . . .?"
  
 “Yes. They have been to see me twice. They seemed more concerned about Alcaren or the possibility
that I might try battle sorcery if we are beleaguered. They would be even less pleased if they knew what I
know.” Alya’s lips twist. “I should say... when they know, for they will discover such soon enough.”
  
 “Liedwahr...can we stand another Spell-Fire War?” asks the Exchange Mistress.
  
 “I do not know. I only know that only sorcery will save us from the evils of the Sturiunese, and yet that
sorcery may be almost as deadly as their thunder-drums and chains.” The Matriarch moistens her lips.
“There is much evil yet locked behind the iron of the keep at Loiseau. The great sorceress showed
restraint, and because most feared her power, she and her restraint were respected. None believe her
successors have the power that she did. They do not, although they have more than most will believe. But
there are more of them, and they have the knowledge she amassed. They will need to use it to preserve
what they have created, and all of Erde and Liedwahr will suffer for it.”
  
 “But . . .if no one stops the Sea-Priests..." Dyleroy says slowly.
  
 “Then the suffering will be greater and last far longer. The Ladies of the Shadows do not wish to accept
that. One told me that we would be saved if all Liedwahr rejected song-sorcery.” Alya pauses. “As if we
could ever enforce such.”
  
 Dyleroy offers a smile, partly of sympathy, and partly of condolence.
  
 “As my mother said, we must trust in the Harmonies when it seems that it is most unwise.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “What of Alcaren? Did you give him orders?” asks Dyleroy.
  
 “To deal with the sorceresses?" Alya smiles. “No, if I had given him orders, or even suggestions, he
would have rejected them. With him, too, I am trusting in the Har-monies.”
  
 “That is a dangerous trust, with a sorceress watched by a sorcerer.”
  
 “Not so dangerous as leaving her unwatched. And who knows? Sometimes, two in sorcery are less
dangerous than one.”
  
 Dyleroy nods, but barely.
  
 70
  
 Secca glanced around the cramped tent, which was crowded even with the cots folded up and set
outside, what with two sorceresses, three overcaptains, an heir, and two chief players. The air was also
close and slightly ran-cid, but she ignored that as she laid out the mirror and checked the tuning on the
lutar.
  
 The first day of travel--- two days after the battle north of Elahwa-—had been short, less than five
glasses, rather than the eight to ten that Secca’s lancers had averaged on their wayfrom Synek to Elahwa.
Part of that had been the late start, and part the cold wind and the intermittent flakes of snow blown out
of the high gray clouds. And part had been the mixed nature of those following her. She had to wonder
about the effectiveness of her force--- with Melcar and the Ebrans, her own lancers under Wilten,
Haddev and the company of Silberfels lancers, and now Alcaren and two companies of SouthWomen.
Again, she missed Ste-pan’s quiet way of ensuring all worked together, although Melcar scemed to be
following Stepan’s example.
  
 Secca knew she was pressing her luck, but she certainly couldn’t leave ten or fifteen companies of
Sturinnese lanc-ers, possibly with a Sea-Priest and thunder-drums, behind her. Even if she dared, where
would she go? Back to Loiseau and through the Sand Pass in winter just to turn around or head
somewhere else when Robero found she had returned? She refrained from shaking her head.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Instead, she looked at those around her, meeting each set of eyes in turn. “I’m going to try to see where
the Sturinnese lancers are. All the scouts can tell us is that their tracks are headed to the northeast?’
  
 Without more explanation, she began the spell.
  
 “Mirror, mirror, on the ground..."
  
 The silvered glass showed a campsite, much like the one outside the tent, except it was on a long flat rise
overlooking the Eastern Ocean. Smoke rose from cook-fires, and the darkness of the smoke indicated
something was being cooked--- most likely livestock taken from peasants and holders who would
complain to either Hadrenn or Robero before all was done.
  
 “They are on the coast road,” Melcar said. “Not on the river road.”
  
 “Is the coast road a better road?” asked Secca.
  
 “In winter, it is less likely to receive snow, and it is warmer,” Melcar said. “But once you are more than
a day north of the river junction, it heads in almost the opposite direction from Dolov.”
  
 Secca released the spell and tried a second one, one targeted at the lancers from Dolov. When the mists
cleared, the glass showed the exact same image.
  
 “They’ve joined up,” Wilten said. “They must have arranged this before.”
  
 Secca frowned, then released the spell. She noted that Alcaren was also frowning. Palian looked at
Secca intently, but said nothing.
  
 “Let me try to see where the Sturinnese ships are.” The third image showed a formation of vessels under
full sail. Although it was difficult to tell, the ships displayed in the glass seemed to be sailing northward.
Secca liked that even less. Were the Sturinnese going to land more lancers and thunder-drums to fight
her? Using the weather of winter to their advantage?
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 The fourth scrying spell was for the harbor at Elahwa. From what the glass showed, there were no
Sturinnese vessels beyond the harbor.
  
 Secca released the spell and lowered the lutar. Her head was aching, and daystars had begun to flash
before her eyes.
  
 “You look worried, lady,” offered Richina.
  
 “I should be happy for the FreeWomen, but I have to worry about what the Sea-Priests have in mind for
those ships.”
  
 “Perhaps they go to meet with the other Sturinnese forces,” suggested Haddev, a faint smile indicating
sat-isfaction at determining the reason for such action.
  
 The slightest hint of a furrow crossed Alcaren's brow, but the Ranuan over captain said nothing.
  
 “They may be, but I can’t do any more scrying right now. I’m not sure it would tell us anything more,”
Secca said.
  
 “Perhaps they will reclaim the lancers fleeing us and then sail to Dumar to reinforce their lancers there,”
sug-gested Wilten.
  
 “We’ll have to wait and see.” Secca blinked. “I just wanted you all to see what I did so that everyone
saw the same thing.” That was important, she felt, with all the different overcaptains and forces. “Think
about it, and we’ll talk later, after the evening meal.”
  
 All those in the tent just stood there, shifting their weight from one booted foot to another, or not moving
at all. Secca squinted, trying to read expressions that blurred with the daystars and holes in her vision.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “The Lady Secca needs a moment of rest,” Richina said politely but firmly.
  
 As the small crowd filed out, Secca suspected she needed far more than rest.
  
 71
  
 The wind blew out of the northwest, a cold and steady flow of air that chilled the riders and their mounts.
Secca’s ever more motley force rode northward, remaining yet on the river road. By the next day, she
would have to choose whether to head eastward after the Sturinnese or continue northward to Dolov.
  
 She shook her head. That was no choice at all.
  
 As Secca had been taking time to talk to each of the overcaptains, for the moment she rode beside
Haddev, with Richina and Palian following directly behind.
  
 "...have you always visited Silberfels often?" she asked the heir to Synek, offering a smile that was less
than she felt.
  
 “I was fostered there for a year when I was thirteen, as was Verad three years ago when he was
fourteen. We rode back together this time.” Haddev Iaughed. “That was how we came to have two
companies of lancers. My uncle did not feel one company was enough in these troubled times, and sent
his own."
  
 Secca nodded.          So.... one company of Ebran lancers, unmentioned by Hadrenn, and perhaps
more, remained at Synek. That did not bother her so much as Hadrenn’s insistence that he could raise
but ten or twelve companies. She wondered what else the Lord of Synek had concealed.
  
 She also wondered how much would change with Stepan’s death. “What do you think of Silberfels?”
  
 "It is a holding. The keep is much older than father’s, you know, and the main section is built into the
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

mountain. There are tunnels under the keep, from the old mines. Uncle Selber stores provisions there
now. One is a cistern, with always fresh water. It would be hard to take, I would think."
  
 Secca smiled and nodded again, trying to encourage Haddev to keep talking.
  
 “The older rooms are dark. That is because they were built to stand off the Corians and the
Suhlmorrans."
  
  "I've heardit said that your mother’ s and your uncle’ s line predates both by many generations,” Secca
suggested.
  
 “It could well be, lady,” Haddev replied. “The tunnels are very old and very deep. The back parts were
walled off generations back."
 “What is your uncle like? Lady Auna exchanged scrolls with him, but I never have, nor have I ever met
him.”
  
 “He is built more like Verad than me. He is slender, and his hair is thick and silvered. He rides well, and
has made a practice of mastering all arms. He even can use a morn-ing star.” Haddev shook his head
admiringly.
  
 “Has he instructed you in such?” asked Secca.
  
 “Not the morning star, but in all other weapons. My sire said that would be best for both of us, for he
doubted we would learn from him.”
  
 “Often children have difficulty learning from their par-ents, or so I am told. That is one reason for
fostering. Did you enjoy the time at Silberfels?
  
 “At times. It was lonely at first. Uncle Selber is a man of great skills and few words. . .”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 When Haddev finally eased his mount back toward his company, Secca could not help but notice that
while he smiled at Richina, and inclined his head, he did not pause to share a word with the younger
sorceress. A smile, faintly sad, crossed Secca’s face.
  
 Shortly, a broader and shorter officer in pale blue rode up from the rear of the column. “You requested
my presence, Lady Secca?"asked Alcaren.
  
 “I did,” Secca acknowledged. “I have had little time to talk to you. I do not know you, overcaptain, yet
you vol-unteered to accompany us. Just why did you suggest that you accompany and aid us?"asked the
red-haired sorcer-ess, trying to ignore the chill of the wind. “You made the suggestion to the counselor.”
  
 “There were two reasons. I wished to fight against the Sea-Priests, and I did not wish to return to
Encora and to be aguard captain,” Alcaren replied. "That is almost im-prisonment. Oneis restrained by
the needs of those one must guard”
  
 “I had not thought of it in that way,” mused Secca. “That is most interesting. Do you come from a family
of lancers?’
  
 “Me? Hardly. My mother is a trader, as are many in Encora, and my father is an artisan.”
  
 “Your mother trades in what?”
  
 “Anything she can, but mostly in furs and dyestuffs, sometimes raw cotton and cloths from all over
Erde.”
  
 “You did not wish to be a trader?”
  
 “She had hoped I would be, but I wasnot suited for it” The reserve in the Ranuan’s words suggested a
story there, but she did not think it wise to pursue that imme-diately.
  
  "What kind of artisan is your father?”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “A sculptor, in the main.”
  
 “So how did you become a lancer?”
  
 “How does one become anything?”countered the Ran-uan easily. “I had a skill with blades, and perhaps
because it upset my mother, and because I was unruly and contrary, I pursued it.They did not encourage
it, and it was some time before I was allowed to follow that road…” He shrugged. “And here I am, far
from Encora.”
  
 “Just like that?” Secca raised her eyebrows
  
 Alcaren laughed, a warm and self-deprecating sound. “It took much longer. The Matriarch finally
allowed me to become a guard captain in her household. Most of those in Encora who knew my family
were less than pleased at such a waste oftalent.”
  
 Secca wanted to laugh at the dryness of the over-captain’s tone, instead, she said, ‘What changed the
Ma-triarch’s mind?”
  
 “She said little to me except that she had decided the Harmonies had a use for me.”
  
 “She didn’t give you any idea what that use might be?”
  
 “Not until she sent me to Elahwa.”
  
 Again, with the dryness in Alcaren’s voice, Secca wanted to smile. She did not. “Tell me about Encora,
if you would.”
  
 Alcaren pursed his lips for a moment. “There is much to tell...and little.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Start with the much,” suggested the sorceress.
  
 Alcaren laughed, this time gently. “It is a city based on a harbor that is wide and deep enough for many
trading ships, yet easily defended against the Sturinnese.”
  
 “How can it be both?”
  
 "The harbor is like a basin that is all the same depth, no less than seven yards, no more than ten, but
there are rocky shoals farther to sea, except for the main channel, and that is less than a half-dek wide.
Seaward of the shoals, the water is shallow, no more than three or four yards in depth, often far less, for
another eight to ten deks out to ward the Southern Ocean.” Alcaren shrugged. “A narrow channel is
more easily defended.”
  
 “The harbor at Elahwa is similar, is it not?"
  
 “Both have long stretches of shallow water . . . it is true."
  
  
 Secca nodded, wondering if that might be why the Sea-Priests had been unable to call massive waves
against those ports. “How did you go from being a guard captain of the Matriarch to an overcaptain of
South Women ?"
  
 Alcaren laughed easily. “I had wanted to be a lancer, but the Matriarch preferred me as a guard—until
there were no others to be sent to the aid of the FreeWomen except the SouthWomen, and she would
not send them anywhere beyond Ranuak under their own overcaptain. They have accepted me as
necessary, for they dislike the Sturinnese more than any.”
  
 “They always have, from what I have learned. Isn’t that true?"
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Very true. They dislike any men who would force women to submit to their will.” Alcaren smiled. “I
always give orders to their captains.”
  
 After a moment, Secca said, “Tell me about the Matri-arch. I know almost nothing.”
  
 “Her given name is Alya. She has a consort. That is Aetlen, and they have two daughters. Her mother
was the Matriarch, and she had two daughters as well.”
  
 ‘What does she look like?”
  
 “She was blonde as a younger woman, and her hair is silver and blonde these days. Unlike her mother,
she is most slender, and her voice is higher, more like yours. She is most firm in a courteous but
unyielding fashion.” Alcaren glanced at the road ahead
  
 Thinking of all the rivalries in holdings in Defalk, Secca asked, ‘What happened to the Matriarch’s
younger sister?"
  
 “The Matriarch is the younger sister,” Alcaren replied with an amused smile. “You met her older sister.
That was Counselor Veria.”
  
 Secca blinked.
  
 “The story is well-known in Ranuak,” the Ranuan over-captain continued. ‘When the FreeWomen
revolted against the Lord Bertmynn, Veria joined the SouthWomen against the Matriarch’s wishes and
went to Elahwa to fight. She almost died, but was saved when the great sorceress defeated Bertmynn
and forced Lord Hadrenn to accept Elahwa as a Free City. Veria has been in Elahwa ever since, and is
most respected,”
  
 Secca noted the reference to Anna as the great sorceress, but continued, “And Counselor Veria did not
insist you return to Elahwa?”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “I doubt she would have given her sister the pleasure,” Alcaren said dryly.
  
 For all his ironic tone, and seeming straightforwardness, Secca had to wonder. “What does the
Matriarch gain by having you accompany me?"
  
 “Your good will, I would judge, and any knowledge of you I may choose to provide her.”
  
 “You seem...you are most polite when you speak of the Matriarch,” Secca observed.
  
 “She deserves my respect,” Alcaren replied.
  
 “How did you get to be one of her guard chiefs?" “She respects my abilities, and she told me she refused
to allow me the luxury of self-pity." Alcaren offered a laugh that contained equal parts of humor,
amusement, and irony.
  
 “And you respect her abilities?”
  
 “How could I not? She is a most effective Matriarch.”
  
 “She must be,” Secca said. “You are here.”
  
 “Of course?’ Alcaren could not quite conceal the frown that he tried to smile away.
  
 Again, Secca wondered exactly why Alcaren had volunteered to aid her forces, beyond what he had
said. She definitely needed to know more, but she needed to think before she inquired too deeply.
  
 She also worried that she wanted to like the man, with-out knowing almost anything about him.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 72
 Mansuus, Mansuur
  
 Kestrin paces back and forth in front of the study desk, ignoring the rattling of the windows in their
casements from the northwest wind that hurtles through the clear skies above the hilltop palace.
  
 Bassil’s eyes follow the Liedfuhr for several cycles of pacing before the older man just lets his eyes rest
on the wmdow directly behind the desk.
  
 Abruptly, Kestrin halts before the desk and turns. “Aerlya has asked for support against this Belmar. He
is raising the holders of the south and the west against Annayal.”
  
 “Will you support her, sire?” Bassil’s words are uttered with the barest hint of a question.
  
 Kestrin shrugs. "Not over the protests of Defalk, or not unless he vanquishes the Sorceress of Defalk.”
  
 “If he does, would it be wise to send lancers?”
  
 “Probably not.” Kestrin’s laugh is forced. “These days, nothing is wise. We have a force of Sea-Priests
sweeping toward Narial. There is revolt in my sister’s land, supported by a sorcerer-holder trained by
the Sturinnese. The Sea-Priests are trying to wrest Ebra from the Sorceress-Protector of the East, and
she receives but little aid from the lord whose lands she is trying to preserve. Yet the Lord of Defalk
holds back one of his sorceresses in Falcor, where she can do him no good.”
  
 "The Sea-Priests will not succeed in Ebra,” Bassil pre-dicts.
  
 “Youthink not?”
  
 "The shadow sorceress has broken their force at Elahwa, your seers say, and slaughtered fifty score or
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

more in two battles.”
  
 “But she has not touched their fleets,” Kestrin points out “That is where the power of Sturinn lies."
  
 “The ships cannot be used with great effectiveness against Ebra, though the Maitre may try once more to
sup-port the heir of Dolov, if only to weaken and delay the sorceress.”
  
 “You think that they will hold Dumar?”
  
 “Once they set a goal, the Sea-Priests always attain it, though it may take years.” Bassil remains standing
before the desk, but shifts his weight, as though he does not relish the words he has spoken.
  
 Kesirin purses his lips, then nods.
  
 “You have decided,” Bassil says. ‘What will you do?”
  
 “Send twenty ccnnpanies of lancers to Unduval, and a message to Lord Robero saying that I am doing
so, but only to support Annayal, should she need such.”
  
 “And you think he will believe such?’
  
 “He will doubt it, I am sure.” Kestrin shakes his head. “You will also dispatch another thirty companies
to De-leatur.”
  
 “So that if your sister needs not your aid, you can move all to Dumar?”
  
 “With the south in revolt, one way or another, southern Neserea lies open to the Sea-Priests once they
take Dumar. Iwould rather fight on another’s lands than mine, and I am most certain that whoever may
be Lord High Coun-selor of Dumar will not object to our assistance.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “I foresee great conifict,” Bassil says quietly.
  
 “Do you think I am wrong?” Kestrin raises his eye-browse.
  
 “No, sire. I fear you are right. My only advice to you would be to make sure you have more lancers to
dispatch by summer. And pray to the Harmonies that the sorcer-esses of Defalk are most effective.”
  
 Kestrin frowns, but does not speak.
  
  
 73
  
  
 High and fast-moving clouds had scudded overhead most of the day as Secca’s force had ridden
north-ward. Occasionally light flurries of snowflakes had fallen, flakes that melted with the next burst of
cold sunshine.
  
  By late afternoon, when it was time to stop for the day, Secca and her forces had passed the river
junction, but were still short of where the two roads split. Melcar and Wilten had recommended a
bivouac site on a stream feed-ing the River Dol, one that had eroded away the clay on one side, leaving a
low bluff on the northeastside that blocked the wind.
  
 Once tielines had been set, and lancers organized into their own areas, Secca had summoned the
overcaptains, the chief players, and Haddev. Because the wind was light, if chill, and the tent small, she
propped up the traveling mirror with stones at a slight angle against the outside rear panel of the tent, so
that all could more easily see.
  
 "I'm going to try to see what the Sturinnese are doing. At midday, they were still riding the coast road,
but they weren’t moving that swiftly.” Secca let her fingers run over the strings of the lutar. Then,
abruptly, she glanced up toward Richina, and handed the younger sorceress the lu-tar. “Pethaps you
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

should try, first. You have seen them enough to hold the image.”
  
 Richina nodded gravely and took the lutar, fingering the strings and clearing her throat.
  
 Finally, she began the spell.
  
 “Mirror, mirror, on the ground...”
  
 As Richina finished the last words, Secca realized that while almost everyone crowded around the mirror
watched as the image formed out of the silver mists, Alcaren had not. His eyes and attention had been
totally on Richina, on her words and playing.
  
 Trying not to dwell on that observation, Secca studied the image along with the others.
  
 The picture in the glass wavered at first, but then seemed to steady as Richina concentrated. Most of the
silvered picture showed just a wide beach, but as Secca looked more closely, she could see the ships
apparently anchored in dark gray water that appeared almost glassy. White-coated figures filled several
boats.
  
 “They’re landing more,” said Haddev.
  
 “Look again,” Melcar said. “They’re climbing nets into the ships.”
  
 As the eight watched, another boat rowed toward the nearest vessel, and more of the lancers swarmed
up the nets. Secca squinted, trying to make out the strange craft on the beach, with a ramp on it. She
blinked, realizing that the square boat was a barge bearing a half-score mounts, scarcely a small craft.
While Secca and the others watched, the barge began to move, although there were neither sails nor
paddlers.
  
 Alcaren pointed. “They have a cable, and they are using a winch. They will lift the horses aboard with a
crane.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca had the dismaying feeling that the Sturinnese had done just what she had watched many times
before, and that they could unload mounts and lancers---perhaps even more swiftly than they were
loading both. “They must have used the thunder-drums to still the sea near them.”
  
 “If need be,” Alcaren said, “but that sorcery lasts only a short time, less than half a glass, and cannot be
repeated often,”
  
 The image wavered again, and Secca nodded to Ri-china, murmuring, “You may release it.”
  
 After singing the release couplet, Richina took a long slow breath. Secca smiled.
  
 “They would not be doing such were they planning to stay in Ebra,” noted Melcar.
  
 “Or not near where they are,” said Wilten.
  
 “We cannot reach them before they have loaded all the lancers and mounts,” said Haddev. The heir
flushed, seeming to have realized, belatedly, that he had but stated the obvious.
  
 “Best we hasten to Dolov,” said Secca.
  
 Alcaren raised his eyebrows.
  
 "Twice the keep has rebelled. There will not be a third timed”
  
 “There should not be,” affirmed Melcar.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Haddev nodded.
  
 At Alcaren’s continued faint frown, Secca looked to the Ranuan. “You may recall that Mynntar’s sire
sacked Elahwa, and abused or killed most of the women there. There seems to be little difference in
outlook between those of Dolov and those of Sturinn.” She paused, be-fore adding, “We also may well
be needed elsewhere before long, and we cannot leave Dolov in such unfriendly hands.”
  
 “Elsewhere?’ murmured someone, so low that Secca could not determine who might have spoken.
  
 “Dumar . . . or even Neserea,” Secca suggested. “The Sea-Priests might bring more vessels back upon
Elahwa. So we must act swiftly."
  
 If she could . . . riding against time and winter, with-out the most experienced arms commander, and
without the experience she herself could have used.
  
  
 74
  
 By midmorning, Secca and Richina were riding northwest on the river road, well beyond the fork where
the road to the coast had split off to head due east. The recent hoof-prints in the damp clay of the coast
road confirmed the earlier passage of the Sturinnese, and Secca’s use of the glass in the early morning
had shown that the Sturin-nese had completed loading all the lancers and mounts. The Sturinnese fleet
was sailing southeast, doubtless to skirt the Shoals of Discord. Secca but hoped that she could deal with
Dolov quickly, before the Sturinnese created an-other situation with which she might have to contend.
  
 Richina turned slightly in the saddle of her mount and glanced back toward the rear of the column, her
eyes seek-ing the black pennant that served as the standard for the lancers from Silberfels.
  
 Secca caught the quick search, but refrained from saying anything, though she wanted to offer
consolation. Instead, she reached for her water bottle and took a long swallow. Even in early winter, with
the constant light but chill wind, riding was a thirsty business.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 After they had ridden another dek, Richina eased her mount closer to Secca. “Was it just because he
saw me do sorcery, lady?"
  
 “I would think not,” the older sorceress replied, asking quietly, “What do you feel?”
  
 “He used to find ways to talk to me, if briefly. He used to smile more at me. Now be smiles at me in the
way he smiles at you.”
  
 “He does seem a bit more removed,” Secca said. Richina snorted. “He saw me sing two spells, and
protect myself with a sabre, and I am different?”
  
 "No. What he saw before was what he wished to see,” Secca suggested. “Then he saw you as you are.”
  
 Richina glanced sideways at the red-headed sorceress. "Was that why you never consorted?” She
lowered her eyes. “I am sorry, lady. I should not have asked such.”
  
 Secca smiled gently. “It is difficult for any sorceress to find a consort.”
  
 “Because we are different?”
  
 Because we have power, Secca wanted to answer. She did not, instead pausing before replying
deliberately, “All folk differ, even those in the same family. Is that not true in your family?”
  
 Richina tilted her head before replying. “I had never thought it otherwise, but...“ Her words trailed off
into the slight whistle of the cold breeze.
  
 “The Lady Anna once said,” Secca said slowly, “that a lady in Defalk had to choose between being an
accepted possession or being unaccepted and respected.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “I don’t think it’s like that at all,” Richina replied."
  
  “We are riding to Dolov. The father of the present lord could not accept the idea of the free city of
Elahwa. He sacrificed himself and scores of lancers and armsmen to keep women from being respected."
  
 “But... my mother is a lady, and she is respected.”
  
 Secca nodded politely.
  
 “You’re saying she’s not accepted?”
  
 “I did not say anything,” Secca pointed out ... “except what Lady Anna said.”
  
 “Do you think that was because Lady Anna was an outsider?”
  
 "That she felt that way? Perhaps?’ Secca wasn’t so sure about that. She wondered if Anna had been an
outsider in the Mist Worlds as well. “I don’t see as we’ll ever know.”
  
 “No, I suppose we won’t”
  
 Secca took out the water bottle again.
  
 After another long silence, Richina spoke once more. “Alcaren is handsome, don’t you think, Lady
Secca?’
  
 "I hadn’t noticed,” Except Seccahad noticed the Ranuan.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 She wouldn’t have called him handsome, but striking. He was exceptionally broad-shouldered, with
penetrating gray-blue eyes, and fine brown hair, cut short, but lustrous, almost silky. He spoke little,
except when addressed, and rode so gracefully that young Haddev looked gawky by comparison.
  
 Secca still worried about the way the overcaptain watched her and Richina perform sorcery. Alcaren
had not had the appearance of trying to memorize the spells or melody, nor had he pried or asked
questions. He had not appeared anything but interested He had not tried to ingratiate himself; nor to
distance himself.
  
 Secca shook her head. Not for the first time—nor the last, shesuspected-- - she had to wonder just why
Alcaren had wanted to accompany her. She wondered if she could find out while she still had time to
decide what to do about the Ranuan--- if indeed she would even have a choice. What seemed to be
choices, she was discovering, were often illusions. Had she really had any choice about going first to
Elahwa? Or pushing Richina into sorcery possibly dangerous to the young woman?
  
 “Lady?”
  
 “It is nothing. I was just thinking.”
  
 Had it been any different for Anna? Secca wished now that she had asked more. . . and listened much
more— much, much more.
  
  
 75
  
 For once, the day, although cold, was without wind and felt far more temperate than itactually was.
Riding the gray mare northward on the river road that led to Dolov, Secca felt warmer than she had since
she had left Synek weeks earlier. She turned in the saddle and looked at Ri-china, who was studying the
words on the paper before her, and humming the note values to match them. “How are you coming with
that?”
  
 “It’s not too hard.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “You’ll have to know it well,” Secca said. “We’ll sing it together, and we need to match exactly.”
  
 “Together?” Richina’s mouth opened. “Is that not Dark-song?”
  
 Secea shook her head. “The Evult used massed voices, but it was their use that was Darksong, not the
massing of voices. The Lady Anna studied this much in the last years, and we did some building spells
together. It is tricky, but much easier that way.”
  
 Richina gave Secca an off-center smile. “This spell is not for building.”
  
 “No, but it will be necessary, I fear.”
  
 “You are doubtless right, lady.”
  
 “It is part of being a sorceress.”
  
 Richina nodded slowly, as if to indicate that there were more than a few aspects of being a sorceress
that were not totally to her liking.
  
 Secca concealed a snort. Why did the young always think that a chosen calling meant that all parts of it
would be to their liking?
  
 After perhaps another dek of riding, Richina looked toward Secca “How much longer? Another two
days?"
  
 “Three, probably, from what the maps show,” Secca an-swered, squinting at the oblong object rising out
of the winter-browned grass on the left side of the roads
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “That’s the first dekstone in days,” said Richina, her eyes following Secca’s.
  
 “It’s an old one, probably from well before the Evult.” As the gray mare carried Secca toward the stone
marker, the sorceress could finally make out the worn and simple inscription: “Rielte—4 d.”
  
 Secca turned to Melcar, who rode on her left. “Do you know anything about this town?”
  
 “No, lady,” Melcar replied. “I was born in Vuyoal.” When Secca did not reply, he added, “That is south
of Vult and north of Synek. The town was mostly destroyed by the sorceress’s flood.”
  
 “I am sorry.” As she spoke, Secca wondered why she happened to be sorry. That had been more than
twenty years before, and she’d been less than ten years old at the time. Was it because sorcery always
created hardships? ‘What have the scouts reported?”
  
 “The town is quiet, and most have shuttered their houses.”
  
 “Do you know if anyone might know something about the town?” Secca pursued. “We do have some
golds left, and it might be a better place to obtain some supplies.”
  
 “I will have a messenger inquire.” Melcar inclined his head stiffly and swung his mount away from the
column, and began to ride down the column.
  
 Secca wondered why a simple question had offended the overcaptain, or was it that she had put him in a
position of having to ask something of one of his lancers? If so, that was his problem, and if it had been
his touchiness about the destruction of Vuyoal by Anna. . . well, that was his problem as well. Anna had
been doing her best to save Defalk from the Evult, and, unhappily, in war the less guilty often suffered
with the more gui1ty---and that was another reason why shadow sorcery, cold-blooded as it might seem
to some, was often to be preferred over hot-blooded war that could be justified by cruelties that could
have been prevented by cold-blooded shadow sorcery.
  
 Richina half-giggled.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Secca raised her eyebrows.
  
 “He is like all men. He dislikes not knowing something, and dislikes it even more if he must ask.”
  
 Withthat, Secca nodded and smiled ruefully. Perhaps Richina was right, that it was merely a man’s
discomfort with having to ask for information.
  
 So far, most of the towns through which Secca and her force had passed had been little more than
hamlets--groupings of houses seemingly scattered along the road, with perhaps a few craftshops or an
occasional chandlery that had seen better times. But then, all of Ebra seemed to have seen better times,
save perhaps for the sections of the far west where Anna had built some roads and bridges, and where
Hadrenn had made some limited efforts to im-prove a few towns and buildings.
  
 The ruts proliferated and deepened as they rode closer to the town, but many and deep as the ruts were,
Secca had seen no sign of any riders, or of carts or wagons, or even souls on foot. Was that because
word had spread that the Sorceress-Protector marched northward? She shook her head. What other
reason could there have been?
  
 The road wound between two hills, mostly covered in bare-limbed trees. Those on the upper reaches
were white-barked birches, those lower on the slopes arranged in deliberate orchard-like patterns,
although Secca did not recognize the type of orchard from the road.
  
 Beyond the hills, the road passed through lower or chards--- the apple trees Secca did recognize. Just
past the small orchards there was a set of ancient stone columns, one on each side of the road. Beyond
the columns, the road widened, and there were dwellings, but only on the eastern upslope side of the
road.
  
  "Ah..."
  
 Secca turned in the saddle.
  
 Alcaren had ridden his mount along the shoulder of the road and eased in beside the older sorceress.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

“You were asking about the town, Lady Secca?”
  
 "I was."
  
 “Rielte is the river port for the noctheast of Ebra. I was once here with my mother. In years past, the
trappers would bring in pelts from the mountain woods, and they would sell them to factors here. These
factors would save the best for the traders from beyond Ebra. A good golden cougar hide might fetch
three silvers.”
  
 As they rode past the pillared gates, which bore no in-scription, Secca could see more clearly to the
right of Al-caren a row of larger dweIIings, running perhaps a half a dek. All but one were finished in
red-stained board siding, the exception being a larger three-story dwelling near the middle whose walls
were of a faded golden-brown brick. Most of the roofs were of split-wood shingles, and each window
had both glass and shutters. The shutters on the ground floor windows had all been closed and fastened.
  
 On the downhill and western side of the road was a long expanse of brown grass—surrounded by a
neat stone-wall, slightly more than a yard high. Within the wall Secca could see several circular briar-rose
gardens, and low and trimmed yews and pfitzers. On the far side of the green were smaller dwellings,
cottages, but they too were neat.
  
 Beyond the smaller dwellings on the downhill side of the road were several large wooden buildings.
  
 “Those are the warehouses,” Alcaren said.
  
 Secca could make out one long wharf by the river, and at least one barge with a deckhouse was tied up
to the northernmost section. She gestured to the larger dwellings. "Those belong to factors?"
  
 “They once did. I have not been here in a half-score of years or more,” the Ranuan overcaptain offered
apologetically.
  
 Rielte was perhaps the size Mencha had been when Secca had first come there after Anna had left
Falcor, al-though Mencha had almost doubled in size in the last half-score years.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca studied the brick dwelling as the gray carried her past it. Unlike the other dwellings on the east
side of the road, which were all of two stories, the golden brick structure was of three stories and had a
split-slate roof. It also had a circular carriage drive, paved in the same faded golden brick, which passed
under a roofed receiving area. A brick wall nearly three yards high hid the rear grounds of the tall
dwelling from view.
  
 “Do you know...?” Secca ventured.
  
 Alcaren shook his head.
  
 Secca thought she saw asilver-haired woman at one of the windows on the second level, but as she
looked up-ward, the figure drew a hanging across the window.
  
 “Lady?” called Melcar.
  
 Secca turned and offered a smile to the Ebran over-captain. “Yes, Melcar?”
  
 “Captain Islanar is riding ahead to the large chandlery to see what they have.”
  
 “Good. Thank you,” she added. While she could req-uisition food for the lancers in the name of Lord
Robero, she preferred not to... unless it were necessary, and well it might become, she knew, before she
saw Loiseau once more.
  
 The rest of the dwellings were equally silent as Secca’s force rode downhill toward the center of the
town and the chandler’s warehouse. Although Secca did not look to her right, she was still conscious of
how closely Alcaren rode beside her.
  
 76
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 The farther north Secca had ridden, the more briskly the wind had blown, though not necessarily any
colder, and the road had gotten narrower, with the ruts frozen into stiff ridges that jarred riders and
slowed mounts. The white birches had slowly given way to firs and pines, and to smaller peasant fields
hedged in woodlots that were more like tended forests.
  
 “A fool’s errand,” she murmured under her breath, shift-ing her weight in the hard and cold saddle. The
glass had shown Dolov with but a handful of lancers, certainly no more than two companies. If it were
not for the high and thick walls, Hadrenn would have had lancers enough to subdue the holding.
  
 But the walls were there, and the gates were shut, and there was no help but for having to ensure Dolov
did not revolt again, nor become a staging point for the forces of the Maitre of Sturinn. Secca took a
deep breath, Sorceress--Protector of the East?
  
 At the sound of humming, Secca glanced sideways at Richina. “Do you have it?”
  
 “‘Yes,”
  
  “Sing it far me, using blank syllables.”
  
  “Now?”
  
 “It will only be a glass—more or less—before we reach the hillside south of the hold. That is what the
scouts have reported.”
  
 Richina nodded, then cleared her throat before beginning with the first “la.”
  
 Secca listened.
  
 When Richina had finished, the younger sorceress looked to Secca.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “You have the melody, but you’re swallowing the sound some,” Secca said, “and you’re not putting the
stresses where they will fall when you use the words. Try it again.”
  
 The second time, Secca nodded. “Better. Stronger stresses would help.”
  
 “Do you wish…”
  
 No,” Secca said gently, stopping as she spoke. A pair of riders had appeared over the low crest in the
road ahead.
  
 The pair of scouts---in Ebran green--- rode southward on the road, toward Secca and the blue and
gold standard that preceded her. Melcar and Wilten rode forward of the van to meet the scouts. The four
talked briefly, and the scouts headed back northward.
  
 The two overcaptains turned their mounts toward Secca, then swung them around to ride alongside the
two sorcer-esses.
  
 “The keep is but four or five deks farther. You can see it from that second rise in the road ahead,”
Melcar explained. "The scouts say that the peasant cots are deserted, and that the keep is secured, as if
for a siege. All the livestock is gone, and the granaries emptied.”
  
 “Did they see any sign of armsmen or lancers? And recent tracks in the road?”
  
 “No, lady.”
  
 Secca liked none of it, and she half-wondered exactly the reason for such defiance. Was itgreed for
power that ran through Bertmynn’s family, down unto his sons? Or was the yoke of Defalk and Synek
perceived as too heavy?
  
 She frowned. Hadrenn’s small palace in Synek was cer-tainly not the height of luxury, and from the
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

vantage point of Loiseau, Secca and Anna surely would have seen golds or vast amounts of goods
coming from Dolov or anywhere in Ebra to Falcor. That hadn’t happened, and Robero, while far better
off than Hadrenn, was definitely not loot-ing the lands.
  
 “Lady?” asked Melcar.
  
 “Why would they do that? They have few lancers re-maining, and Lord Robero’s liedgeld is far from
heavy. Nor are Hadrenn’s tariffs.”
  
 Melcar glanced at Wilten. The Defalkan officer looked back at the Ebran. Neither spoke.
  
 “There’s no help for it We’ll press on to see the keep." Again, the two overcaptains exchanged glances.
  
 “Yes, Lady Secca.”
  
 Secca offered a smile. “Is there something I should know?’
  
 After a moment, Melcar spoke. "The liedgeld be not popular, and Mynntar told all that they would live
better were it not for Defalk.”
  
 Secca nodded slowly. That meant Hadrenn was doubt-less saying something similar. it is not true, but
it’s far too late to dispel that feeling. Thank you.”
  
 “Our pleasure, lady. If you would excuse us...?"
  
 Secca nodded, then turned in the saddle as the two over-captains eased their mounts away. “Chief
players!”
  
 “Yes, lady?”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “We will need to run through the first building spell when we reach Dolov. We will need you to play it
several times before we sing the spell."
  
 The hint of a smile cmssed Palian’s face, but she nod-ded.
  
 Secca turned to look at the road ahead as it sloped gently toward the rise. She frowned as she took in
the dark clouds that had appeared on the northwest horizon.
  
 “You think we will need that spell?” asked Richina."
  
 "What the scouts have discovered would say yes,” Secca replied.
  
 “Why... lady?”
  
 “I know, but I do not know.” After seeing Richina’s puzzled expression, Secca continued. “Bertmynn
was fu-rious that the FreeWomen would not accept his rule. Even now, many would rather not speak of
all that he did when he took the city. He used not only drums, but Darksong in opposing the Lady Anna.
His son invited the Sturinnese into Ebra, and the Sturinnese, you know, chain their women. All that, and a
closed keep, do not speak of a lord who will ever keep faith with Defalk.”Or who will respect women.
As the words crossed her mind, she realized that Anna could have spoken them, and Secca was,again,
con-scious of the emptiness within her.
  
 Richina’s eyes flicked toward the rear of the column, then back to Secca.
  
 The older sorceress did not remark upon the gesture. "We will see.” Secca shifted her weight in the
saddle.
  
 It was nearly midday when Secca reined up on the rise a good two deks to the south of the keep of
Dolov. Be-tween the rise and the bluff on which the stronghold stood was an expanse of low fields, bare
brown ground dusted with snow from the night before. The clouds to the north seemed nearer, and
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

perhaps darker.
  
 Secca studied the stronghold, the bluff, and the River Dol to the west. As the glass had shown, and the
scouts confirmed, the gates were closed. As she surveyed the land, the four overcaptains gathered
around on their mounts.
  
 “The peasants have left, or they are within the keep walls,” Wilten reported.
  
 Secca glanced at Melcar, who had just ridden up. The Ebran overcaptain was smiling.
  
 “Lady. . . we have a message. It is from the craftspeople from the town to the south, not Rielte, but the
other one...the closer one.” Melcar paused. “Hanlis, that’s it. They pledge their allegiance to you and
Lord Robero. They even sent a wagonload of provisions.”
  
 “We can use those.” Secca wondered how many wagon-loads had gone to Mynntar or his younger
brother before she had marched up the river. She also realized that she had forgotten the name of
Mynntar’s brother.
  
 Secca took another look at the keep, then looked at Mel-car. “Send a message. All within must
surrender and walk out unarmed within the glass. Otherwise I will pull down the walls around their ears.”
  
 Melcar nodded, too agreeably for Secca. So did Haddev. Alcaren’s face revealed neither approval nor
disapproval.
  
 Wilten looked at Secca.
  
 “Lady Anna gave Dolov back to Mynntar when his fa-ther revolted,” Secca answered the questioning
expression. "These are the thanks Defalk gets for that generosity?"
  
 “It is harsh for those who must follow a lord.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “It is, but it is also harsh for the lancers who have died and need not have perished because a selfish lord
was not satisfied with holding what his father held. It is harsh for the mothers and lovers and consorts of
those who have died and will die. And for what? Because an arrogant lord wants to revenge an evil
father?”
  
 The Defalkan over-captain turned away from Secca’s blazing amber eyes.
  
 “Send a messenger, Melcar,” Secca repeated. “We will ride to the lower ridge beyond bowshot of the
keep walls.”
  
 Melcar half-bowed in the saddle before turning his mount.
  
 Less than half a glass later, Secca, Richina, and the play-ers were dismounting on a rise that was barely
that, where they looked up to the gray stone walls of the keep.
  
 Richina glanced from the keep to Secca and then back to the players, who were beginning to tune their
instruments.
  
 “The wind is not that strong,” Secca observed, walking forward on the rise. “But it will get stronger
before long.” Her eyes flicked to the clouds that now covered all of the lower part of the sky to the
northwest.
  
 “You think we will need to use your sorcery?” Richina’s fingers twisted around each other.
  
 Secca did not reply, instead watching as Melcar and Wilten rode toward her, followed by a squad of
lancers in the green of Synek, a green darker than that of her own lancers.
  
 Melcar and Wilten reined up. Although the Ebran over-captain looked down on the diminutive
sorceress, his eyes avoided hers.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Secca waited.
  
 “Lady...?" Melcar’s voice was almost apologetic.
  
 "They refused.”
  
 “You do not seem surprised”
  
 “No one who has not seen sorcery seems to believe that it exists or that it can cause great damage. That
was some thing Lady Anna told me years ago.” Secca laughed once, without mirth. “I did not believe
her.”
  
 “They tried to kill the messenger with crossbow bolts, and dared you to do your worst,” Melcar replied
slowly.
  
 “They have lost more than ten score lancers, and the Sturinnese have departed. Yet they would defy
you?” Wilten shook his head.
  
 "They did not see their lancers destroyed,” Secca pointed out. “Nor the Sturinnese defeated. At best,
they have heard stories that they did not wish to believe.” She laughed harshly. “Were I more cruel, I
would leave maimed and broken bodies so all could see and hear what sorcery can do.”
  
 “I cannot believe that they would dare a sorceress…” Melcar swallowed, “... to do your worst.”
  
 Richina’s eyes flicked from Secca to Melcar and back again.
  
 “We will do our worst. We cannot risk lancers when we need not.” Secca looked to the younger
sorceress. “Best we act before they attempt something, and before the weather turns upon us.” She had
no idea what those in the keep might try, but she saw no point in allowing them the time. She turned
toward Palian and Delvor. “Players. The first building spell . . .run through it so Richina and I can mark it
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

together.”
  
 Both chief players nodded.
  
 Richina swallowed, then shook her shoulders to relax.
  
 Secca returned to her study of the keep—gray and cold and silent.
  
 “The first building spell,” Palian called out. “On my mark . . . Mark!”
  
 Secca sang with the players, not the words, but just the single syllable “la.”
  
 After several bars Richina joined her.
  
 When the last note died away, the red-haired sorceress looked once more at the taller and younger one.
“You sound ready.”
  
 “Yes, lady.”
  
 A dull and distant rumbling echoed from the dark clouds to the north.
  
 Secca gestured to Palian. ‘When you are ready, Chief Players.”
  
 Palian responded with a curt nod, then lifted her bow.
  
 “The first building-spell . . .on my mark . . . Mark!”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 The sounds of both first and second players melded into the opening of the spellsong.
  
 Both Secca and Richina faced the keep. Secca concen-trated not just on the words, but on the images
of the keep crumbling into rubble.
  
 Richina’s voice was true, if tentative, but by the third measure, both voices meshed and hurled forth from
the low rise toward the silent and hulking keep.
  
 “Break the brick and rend the stone
 leave not a single course alone
 break to rubble and to dust
 all the walls in which they trust…”
  
 The sky overhead began to darken from the first words that the two sorceresses sang, and more dull
rum-blings drifted out of the approaching clouds.
  
 A triplet of chimes cascaded across the lowlands, chimes Secca knew were unheard except by the two
sorceresses and the chief players, and the darkening sky left the sun dimmer and ever dimmer, until it was
lost behind featureless gray clouds.
  
 With the darkness came lightnings, yellowish bolts flashing toward the keep, bright against a purpled
horizon. Then a deep rumbling groan issued from some-where deep beneath the ground. The land
rippled, the waves of soil and earth beginning at the base of the rise and heading northward. With each
ripple, the rise be-neath Secca’s feet shivered, and she had to spread her feet to keep her balance.
  
 Secca felt as though a dull knife had cleft through her skull. She struggled to see the keep of Dolov, but
unseen needles stabbed at her eyes, and tears that burned like vinegar streamed down her cheeks.
  
 Richina’s knees seemed to buckle, and the younger and taller sorceress sat down on the
winter-browned and snow —dusted grass.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Behind her, several players also sat down, involun-tarily, but one— Britnay—simply pitched forward.
Somehow, Palian managed to break her fall and save the violino.
  
 Still squinting through the stabbing pains in her eyes, Secca struggled to watch the results of the
twin-voiced spell.
  
 To the north, the walls of the keep began to tremble, and puffs of dust spurted forth from between the
ancient stones. The walls began to shake with each set of ground waves that rippled up the bluff to the
base of the keep,
  
 Another set of lightning bolts imprisoned the struc-ture in a momentary cage of yellow-white, then
slowly, the walls buckled, stones cascading outward, seemingly in a motion as slow as winter-congealed
molasses, yet as inexorable as the fall of an axed tall pine.
  
 The impact of the stones raining down away from the bluff shook the rise where Secca watched.
Another set of lightning forks flared, so brightly that Secca blinked, and dayflashes blurred her vision.
  
 When she could once more see, only heaps of small stones and gray dust remained on and around the
bluff that had held a keep but a fraction of a glass before.
  
 “...Harmonies save us...” said someone behind Secca, butshe did not turn, as she still looked almost
blankly at the gray devastation. While a few words had not been sung as strongly as Secca might have
liked, the effect had certainly been powerful enough. More than powerful enough.
  
 Thuruummmm...
  
 Atthe long roll of thunder, Secca blinked and glanced upward. The clouds that had been creeping out of
the north were suddenly almost overhead, and gusts of wind far colder than the breeze that had chilled all
the riders earlier blasted across the rise.
 With the wind came fine flakes of snows
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Seeca turned toward Melcar and Wilten. “We need to ride to that town…the one...sent provisions...
need shelter.”
  
 “It is ten deks, lady.”
  
 Secca gestured toward the steaming rubble and the curtain of white that had begun to fall just to the
north of what had been the proud keep of Dolov. “Is there shelter here?”
  
 Dumbly, Wilten shook his head
  
 “Players. . . prepare to ride.”
  
 Secca winced at the tiredness and bleakness in Palian’s voice. In front of the players, Palian blinked, her
face tight with lines of pain. Then Secca stepped for-ward to help Richina stand.
  
 Both sorceresses looked for a long moment through the line white flakes that fell around them, then back
at the lifeless gray dust and rubble that had been Dolov.
  
 77
  
 The snow fell in large fat flakes, just damp enough to cling to leathers, jackets, tunics, and to the skin and
manes of mounts, but not wet enough to turn into slush on the damp clay of the river road. The daystars
that flashed across Secca’s eyes showed no signs of becoming less frequent, despite the morsels of
bread she had choked down, and her headache was, if anything, worse than when she had climbed into
the saddle deks back at the ruins of Dolov. Beside her, Richina rode silently, one hand on the left side of
the low front pommel of her saddle.
  
 Within less than a glass from the time they had left Dolov, everything had become covered with white.
Silence swathed the entire line of riders, the snow muffling even the sound of mounts breathing and hoofs
striking the fro-zen ground. Cold water from the snow that had clung to her hair and neck began to
trickle down Secca’s back, and she wished she had brought a scarf like the one Richina was wearing.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

The worn green felt hat she had, nearly a copy of Anna’s except for the color, was not enough protection
in a heavy snow. Then, she hadn’t exactly expected to be traveling in a snowstorm.
  
 Melear and Wilten rode up beside Secca.
  
 “The lancers can ride for a time, but the wind is rising, and before long, we will need shelter...”
  
 “How far is Hanlis? That is the nearest town, is it not?’ asked Secca.
  
 “Another five deks. That is what the scouts say?’
  
 “We will need to take shelter there,” Secca didn’t like the idea of commandeering a town, but better that
in an area whose lord had rebelled than having lancers die from the cold. At the same time, she knew that
most of the townspeople probably had little to do with the rebellion. “They are not to harm any of the
townspeople, not unless they are attacked. We are taking only shelter. Any food we take, we should
keep accounts.” She wasn’t about to promise recompense, not when what had started as a rebellion was
looking more like a war that might involve all of Liedwahr.
  
 “That wecan do,” said Wilten. “Will you offer pay-ment?”
  
 “Say I will if we can once I return to Defalk.” Secca just hoped she could.
  
 Perhaps she should have tried to craft a spell to extract any coins from the rubble of Dolov. Except how
could she have done so? Half the players had collapsed, and neither she nor Richina had been in shape to
sing a second spell. No matter what outsiders thought, sorcery had its limits. The sheeting snow
concealed her bitter smile as the col-umn continued on through the storm.
  
 How long it was before they reached the town, Secca couldn’t have said, but neither the headache nor
the daystars had subsided in the slightest by the time that she reined up outside the stable of the Copper
Pot in Hanlis. Nor had the snow diminished. It continued to fall in heavy curtains so thick that Secca
could barely make out the half--open stable door and the stable boy who stood there, his mouth open at
the figures of horses and men looming out of the snow.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “How many stalls, boy?’ asked Wilten.
  
 “A half-score. That’s all, ser.” The boy’s voice trem-bled.
  
 “Wilten, Melcar . . .“ Secca’s voice cut out, as if she had strained her cords, and she had to swallow
before she con-tinued. “Take care of the rest of the lancers. We have our guards.”
  
 “I will offer any aid the sorceresses require.” Alcaren eased his mount forward. “My SouthWomen rode
ahead, and they secured a barn.” He shrugged as he dismounted. ‘They have their captains. Under such
conditions, they would prefer I be here.”
  
  “Go ahead, Wilten, Melcar,” Secca said. "Look to your men.”
  
 “I will leave another four guards so that they may take turns in guarding and resting,” Wilten said.
  
 “Thank you.” Secca nodded.
  
 “Dyvan! Easlon, Gorkon..."
  
 As the guards rode up and listened to Wilten’s charge to them, Secca tried to ease herself out of the
saddle, but, in dismounting, she staggered. She had to grasp the lower part of the saddle cantle to catch
her balance, and just stood for a long moment, hanging on to the saddle.
  
 She slowly straightened and looked up to see Alcaren studying her intently. “Are you all right, Lady
Secca?”
  
 “I’m fine,” she said.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Alcaren said nothing. While his face—even seen through the daystar flashes that blocked her vision
inter-niittently—showed nothing but a polite smile, she could sense his disbelief.
  
 “Sorcery like that is sometimes hard.” she added. “With food and rest, I’ll be fine.”
  
 “That will help.” The Ranuan overcaptain bowed.
  
 Secca didn’t mind even that Alcaren walked before her into the foyer of the inn, or that two of the
guards carried her saddlebags, lutar, and mirror. She just concentrated on putting one foot in front of the
other. Behind her, Richina seemed to be doing the same thing.
  
 The foyer was dark, lit but by a pair of oil lamps on each side of the archway that led into an empty
public room to the right To the left was a short counter desk, no more than a yard wide and less than half
that in depth. Behind it stood a graying thin man in a sheepskin vest.
  
 Alcaren stepped toward the man.
  
 “Ah... ser?” The thin innkeeper swallowed as he saw the broad-shouldered overcaptain—and then
caught sight of the six guards who followed Secca and Richina.
  
 “This is the Lady Secca, Sorceress-Protector of the East, and the Lady Richina. They will have your
best room.”
  
 “Ah . . . would not the keep at Dolov...?" stammered the innkeeper. “Not that I would not wish…”
  
 “It might have been.” Alcaren said smoothly, “savefor the fact that the sorceresses leveled it and turned
all the stones into gravel. Such is the price of rebellion”
  
 “Yes, ser.” The innkeeper bowed, once, then twice. “Yes, ser. As you say, ser.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Not as I say,” Alcaren replied. "Either of these two ladies could turn you into dust with a few words,
were they so inclined.”
  
 “Yes, ser. I mean, yes, ladies. Ah ...let me make sure all is well. It must be well...yes, it must.”
  
 “It might be best if you went with him, Achar,” Alcaren said, glancing toward Secca.
  
 While still trying to see and appear alert when she felt anything but, Secca offered a nod to the Ranuan.
  
 “And you, Dyvan,” said Alcaren. “One of you guard the room, and the other come and fetch us when it
is ready.”
  
 When Dyvan returned, Alcaren followed the innkeeper, and Secca trailed Alcaren up the dim and
narrow stairs, unlit except for an oil lamp set in a bracket in the upper hall.
  
 Once in the upper hall, the innkeeper turned to follow the narrow hallway back toward the front of the
building, walking less than ten yards before halting at an open door.
  
 Achar stood by the door. “This is the best for you, la-dies. One other is a mite larger, but…”His nose
wrinkled.
  
 “Thank you, Achar,” Secca said, then turned, “and you, innkeeper.”
  
 “Thank you,” echoed Richina.
  
 The innkeeper bowed, then backed awaywith a second bow.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 The room was not even so large as Secca’s bath cham-ber at Loiseau, and had but two narrow beds,
little more than padded cots, and a single window. Although both the inner and outer shutters were
closed, the inner shutters vi-brated with the gusts of wind buffeting the inn. Secca re-flected that the cots
probably couldn’t harbor too many vermin, and when she felt better, perhaps she could man-age a spell
to kill them.
  
 Once she had stepped inside the room with Richina, she waited for Easlon to set her gear on the floor.
Then she closed the battered door and pulled off the damp and still-frozen oiled leather riding jacket and
hung it on one of the two wall pegs. There was no wardrobe or chest in the room, and not even a row of
pegs for clothing. The sor-ceress shivered, looking at the saddlebags before deciding that nothing in them
would warm her.
  
 Slowly, she eased herself down onto the edge of the narrow bed. Sitting there, Secca cradled her
splitting head in her hands.
  
 In time, she lifted her eyes.
  
 Richina sat on the other cotlike bed.
  
 “Does your head ache?’ Secca asked.
  
 “Not so much now. It ached terribly for a time while we were riding in the snow. I couldn’t see at
times.”
  
 Socca closed her eyes, just trying to ignore the rattle of the shutters in the wind and the coldness that
seeped from them across the bed to chill her neck and back. She thought about lying down, but was too
tired to move and afraid that lying on the bed would be even colder than sitting.
  
 “Lady?" At Richina’s gentle words, Secca jerked herself out of the half stupor, half-dozing state. Richina
stood before her with a large brown mug filled with a steaming liquid.
  
 “Overcaptain Alcaren brought this. He said you should drink it He said it’s a brew that the Matriarch
uses after sorcery.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca sniffed the substance, catching a bitter odor, then closed her eyes and tried to identify the scent.
At the sound of fingers on a lutar, she looked up to see Richina standing there
  
 “If this be poison or unfit for her to sup
 let it turn to dust within its cup.”
  
 Secca gaped, then opened her mouth to protest By then, the younger sorceress had finished the short
verse with a smile—a smile that vanished as she paled, then staggered, barely catching herself on the
back of the spindly chair. The lutar thumped the rear leg. Tears poured from the sandy-haired young
woman’s eyes, and her face was drawn tightly with pain.
  
 Secca looked at the cup, which remained unchanged, then took a sip, then a swallow, before handing it
to Richina. “You need this more than I do.”
  
 In turn, Richina took a swallow, then a second, before handing the large mug back to Secca. The two
sat across from each other, trading the mug until it was empty.
  
 Richina massaged her forehead. “What . . .happened?”
  
 “Darksong,” Secca replied. “All food is living—or was. I tried to warn you, but I wasn’t thinking very
well myself.”
  
 “That’s what happens...?”
  
 ‘No. That is what happens in the beginning,” Secca said gently. “If done often or too strongly, it gets
worse each time, at least for a sorceress. That is another reason why we send few messages by
spellsong.”
  
 Richina winced.“I had not thought..."
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca nodded slowly, even as she wondered about the brcw Alcaren had offered. While he had to have
known that Secca was a sorceress, why would he have brought such a concoction with him? Could the
fabledMatriarch-leaders of Ranuak use their sorcery to see parts of the future? Or had the Matriarch
supplied Al-caren with it, knowing that it might prove useful at some time? And why? Was the Matriarch
looking for the sorcer-esses of Defalk to support Ranuak? Was Encora where the Sturinnese fleet was
headed? And how had the Matriarch known that? Or had she? Or had Alcaren acted on his own? And if
so, why?
  
 The questions swirled around in Secca’s head.
  
 “We need to eat, lady,” Richina said. “They may have something in the public room, might they not?”
  
 “We can but see.” Secca rose to her feet, then stepped toward the door, opening it slowly. The narrow
hall was warmer, if fractionally, and Easlon, Achar, and Dyvan stood stiffly in the narrow space. “Easlon
...if you could see if Overcaptain Alcaren would join us. We'll try to get something to eat in the public
room below. Achar if you would escort us...?” Secca managed to smile, hoping it was not a grimace.
  
 “Yes, lady.”
  
 Easlon nodded and hurried down the steps ahead of the three. Achar followed the other guard.
  
 The first floor foyer was again deserted, with a chill draft from around the front door. Under the
shuttered window beside the door was the faintest dusting of fine white snow. Secca felt as though her
breath was steam-ing, but saw no white.
  
 Richina peered into the public room, seemingly empty, then stepped inside. The small fire in the hearth
lifted some, but not all, of the chill from the long and narrow room.
  
 A serving girl, thin like the innkeeper, and not even so old as Richina, scuttled out from the door to the
kitchen. “There be not much, ladies. . .” The serving girl glanced from Secca to Richina, then back to the
older sorceress.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “What do you have?”
  
 “Just the stew, and bread---the bread be fresh, and ale."
  
 ‘That will be fine. Four stews, with bread and ale.” Secca motioned to Achar, who had followed them,
“You can eat first, then go relieve Dyvan."
  
 “Yes, lady.” Achar grinned.
  
 “Any table . . . you wish, ladies.” The serving girl bowed and scuttled back toward the kitchen.
  
 Secca took the table close to the hearth, pulling up an oak ladder-back chair, stained dark from time
and smoke and grease. Achar took the adjoining table.
  
 The serving girl returned and put two of the large bowls on the table, with oversized spoons, then
returned with another bowl and a basket containing a single long loaf of bread. Achar got the bowl and
Secca and Richina the bread.
  
 “Another may be joining us.”
  
 “Yes, lady." The girl bowed nervously.
  
 “And could you put another log on the fire?"
  
 “Yes, lady.”
  
 Secca took a mouthful of the stew. While there was a faint odor of beef, what she tasted most was
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

heavily salted pepper, that and soggy roots and squishy pota-toes. “It is a hot meal.”
  
 The serving girl struggled back into the public room with two largish logs, levering one, then the other,
onto the hearth, before slipping back to stand by the kitchen door.
  
 The bread was better than the stew, a rye faintly warm and crusty. As Secca ate, she could feel the last
of her headache subside into but a faint throbbing. All too soon, her bowl was empty.
  
 Achar had gulped down his stew, and left, to be re-placed by Dyvan, who was sitting and eating at the
adjoining table when Alcaren stepped into the near-empty public room, brushing the last remnants of
snow and water from his riding jacket. His smooth face was red from the cold, and his brown hair was
damp and plastered to his skull.
  
 “I beg your pardon." The Ranuan overcaptain bowed. “I needed to check with my captains.”
  
 “How are your SouthWomen?” Secca motioned for him to sit at the table.
  
 "They are warmer than they would be riding, and have managed to start a cook-fire in an old hearth off
the barn they have taken.” Alcaren pulled a chair into place, then smiled. “Better than some of the
lancers, I would say, though all are under roof.”
  
 Secca immediately felt guilty, but beckoned to the serving girl who stood by the door to the kitchen.
“An-other stew, please.”
  
 With a bob of her head, the girl vanished.
  
 “I’m curious, overcaptain,” Secca said slowly. “I was most thankful for the brew you sent, yet that is not
exactly something a lancer officer would carry?"
  
 “I had forgotten I had it. The guard chiefs of the Matriarch carry two packets of such. Never had I even
used one.” Alcaren laughed easily. “Did it ease your discomfort?"
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Yes. How did you know?"
  
 “Lady Secca, you have ridden hundreds of deks. You are graceful and poised upon a mount, and then
you almost cannot ride and stumble dismounting.That could but be if you were...not as you should be?"
  
 “I was not, I admit.” Secca wondered if Alcaren had an answer —and a good one--- for everything.
  
 Was that why she felt so uneasy around him? Or because, while he was an overcaptain, he was
probably several years younger than Secca, but seemed far more interested in Secca than the younger
and more attractive Richina? Or because she couldn’t help but feel attracted, and that worried her?
  
 “You are concerned, Lady Secca?"
  
 “I am. I question where the Sea-Priests take their ships. In the morning, when we are rested, then I will
see what we can scry?” She shrugged. “Where do you think the ships will go?”
  
 “Encora or Dumar.” Alcaren paused, momentarily worrying his upper lip with white teeth. “Encora, I
fear.”
  
 “Why?” asked Secca.
  
 “There is already a fleet that lays siege to the rem-nants of Narial, if the white lancers have not already
taken it. Were that the Sea-Priests’ goal, why would they have sent so many lancers to Ebra? Half that
number and no ships and no thunder-drums would have been enough to draw you from Defalk, would it
not?”
  
 “It was enough,” Secca admitted. ‘We did not know for sure that the ships were headed to Elahwa or
that there were any white lancers in Dolov or with Mynn-tar’s forces. Not when I left Loiseau.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Loiseau?” Alcaren looked puzzled.
  
 “The keep in Mencha. It was the Lady Anna’s, but she left it to me.”
  
 “Lady Secca is also the Lady of Flossbend, and a member of the Thirty-three in her own right,” Richina
pointed out.
  
 For a moment, Alcaren was silent, before asking, “Are all sorceresses from the Thirty-three?”
  
 Secca laughed. “Some are, and some are not. I am, and Richina’s mother is Lady of Suhl.”
  
 “There are those who are not?” pressed Alcaren.
  
 “Yes, a number of them.”
  
 “You do not name them.” Alcaren’s eyes twinkled.
  
 “One is the sorceress Jolyn,” Secca admitted. “The others should name themselves.”
  
 The serving girl returned with a bowl of stew for Alcaren and more bread.
  
 “If we could each have another serving,” Secca said. The girl bobbed her head again, and took the two
empty bowls.
  
 The thin innkeeper appeared, immediately bowing, “All be to your liking, ladies, ser?”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Secca smiled politely. “It is as it should be.” The man bowed again, and Secca understood. She fumbled
in her wallet and brought forth a silver, pre-senting it to him. “This may help for now.”
  
 “Yes, lady. . . thank you, lady.” Three more bows followed before he backed out of the room.
  
 “You didn’t have to pay him,” Alcaren said.
  
 “No, but I could, and it is less costly now than later.” Far less costly, she thought.
  
 The serving girl returned with two more bowls filled to the brim.
  
 Secca nodded thanks and began to eat, amazed slightly at her hunger for the over-peppered and mushy
stew.
  
 “Are there any . . . ample . . . sorceresses?” asked Al caren, almost innocently, except for the persistent
twin-kling of the gray-blue eyes that seldom left Secca.
  
 “There may be,” mumbled Secca.
  
 “Not from what I have seen.”
  
 “Oh ... overcaptain, I fear we are the only sorceresses you have seen, save perhaps the Matriarch.”
  
 Alcaren flushed slightly. Somehow, Secca felt better about that, although she could not have said quite
why.
  
  
 78
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Wei, Nordwei
  
 Ashtaar slowly looks from one end of the long dark table to the other, stopping to take in each of the
other counselors. The lamps in the sconces on the wall seem to flicker as her eyes pass by each, and the
room is hushed.
  
 At last, she speaks. "The Maitre of Sturinn has planned exceedingly well, far better than ever I would
have guessed. Dumar lies within his grasp, and before long, the southeast of Liedwahr.”
  
 “The Sorceress-Protector has defeated the Sturinnese in Ebra, and the Sea-Priests failed to take even
EIahwa,” observes a young-faced, but balding, man wearing gold-trimmed brown.
  
 Ashtaar’s eyes flash. “Two sorceresses are caught in a winter storm south of Dolov. Another is mired in
Esaria trying to support the heir to Neserea against a rebellion fomented by the Maitre, and the last full
sorceress and her assistant remain in Falcor, for Lord Robero had not wished to leave his liedburg
undefended. The Sturinnese fleet has blockaded both NariaI and Encora. The Liedfuhr of Mansuur
cannot afford to split his forces, even if he dared send them through the Westfels in winter. He will
choose to stand by his sister and her daughter, if he must choose. Only the sorceresses can stand against
the thunder-drums and the Sturinnese lancers, and none will reach Dumar this winter.”
  
 Again...there is silence in the council room.
  
 The Council Leader’s dark eyes glitter under the silver hair as she looks to the left. “Marshal Zeltaar?
How soon could the first and second fleets reach Dumar?”
  
 “The seas around the Winter Coast have already begun to freeze. Wewill have to sail westward across
the Bitter Sea. The winds are less than favorable most days.” The stocky woman with the iron-gray hair
and square face shrugs. “It could be done in three weeks, butit might be six. Do you wish us to prepare?
If it is to be done, we should leave within the week."
  
 “Or you may not be able to leave at all?” Covering her mouth with, the dark green cloth she carries at all
times, Asbtaar coughs, then waits.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “The winter has come hard and early,” concedes the marshal.
  
 “Why should we send ships against Sturinn?" questions a figure in a black cloak, her face shadowed by
the black hood.
  
 “I am not proposing such,” Ashtaar replies. “Yet in these times, I do not wish our fleets to be frozen in
unseasonable ice. What would prevent them from sweeping in behind the spring melt to catch us
unprepared?" Her eyes sweep the table once more.
  
 The marshal nods slowly.
  
 “Also,” Ashtaar continues, “while our ships roam the seas, the Sea-Priests must also take more care in
how they deploy their vessels.”
  
 “You aid the Defalkans, then?” The voice from the Lady of the Shadows is almost indolent.
  
 “I aid us, without costing us other than provisions.” Ashtaar shakes her head. "Lady of the Shadows, if
you would consider this. If the Sturinnese must leave some vessels to guard their supply lines and their
staging ports, then those vessels cannot support the invasion and con-quest of Dumar. That weakens the
Sea-Priests. If they are weaker, the Dumarans and the sorceresses, if one can reach Dumar—or
Encora—can inflict greater damage upon the Sturinnese. The more they weaken the sea-tigers, the less
we will need to face. Would we not be fools not to take steps to weaken our enemies without fighting?”
Ashtaar’s smile is almost that of a death’s head. “And without the use of sorcery."
  
 “What if they ignore our fleets? Then what?” asks the Lady of the Shadows. “Will you turn your seers
into sor-ceresses? Or offer the sorceresses of Defalk, golds to use their fire-spells to repeat the bitter
lessons of the Spell-Fire Wars?”
  
 “Thenwe attack and sack an undefended staging port in the Ostisles---without sorcery.” Ashtaar
continues to smile. “Make no mistake. Wewill be the next victim if Dumar and Ranuak fall, for we need
the seas to prosper, unlike Defalk and Mansuur, and when the Maitre removes the traders of Ranuak,
then he will have even more war-ships to use against our fleets and traders. Do you wish that? Any of
you?”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 There are frowns around the table, but none will speak to the Council Leader.
  
 79
  
 Secca glanced around the corner of the public room of the Copper Pot, a room guarded by her lancers
and containing only officers, the two chief players, both sor-ceresses, and Haddev. A low moaning
confirmed that the wind still blew, although the snow had stopped falling be-fore it became more than
knee-deep. The scrying mirror lay in the center of a square dark oak table.
  
 The red-haired sorceress picked up the lutar, checked the strings, and began the spell.
  
 “Show us now,for all to see
 where the Sea-Priests’ vessels now may be...”
  
 The mirror's surface flashed a blank and dull silver before clearing to reveal a line of ships with a
coastline in the backgrounds One of the white-hulled vessels was alongside another dark-hulled and
smaller ship.
  
 Secca glanced to Alcaren.
  
 “That is south of the west channel passage,” con-firmed the Ranuan overcaptain.
  
 With a nod, Secca sang the release spell. She had no desire to hold any image longer than necessary,
since she knew she would have to call up at least several more.
  
 The public room remained silent, with everyone looking at her.
  
 “How near are the ships to Encora?" Secca prompted, looking at Alcaren again.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Southwest of Encora, perhaps twenty deks.” Alcaren frowned. ‘They have set up a blockade of
Encora They would find it difficult to take the city, or to use their storm magic against it.”
  
 “Why would they do that?” asked Haddev. “That is, if they cannot take the city?’
  
 “It isolates both Dumar and Ranuak,” Secca found herself replying. “The Ostlels and the Sudbergs are
im-passible in winter. I do not imagine the Westfels are much better. The only way to reach either land is
by sea. There are no sorceresses in Dumar now, and all of us are in placeswhere we are blocked by
mountains or the ocean.” Secca had to wonder if the unseasonably early and heavy snows were the result
of some form of thunder-drum weather magic.
  
 “Do we know for certain that the Sturinnese are win-ning in Dumar?” asked Wilten. “We have had no
mes-sages and no news.”
  
 Someone snorted, Delvor, Secca thought.
  
 Wilten flushed, but kept his eyes upon Secca.
  
 “I can try to see with the glass,” Secca said, lifting the lutar once more.
  
 “Show us now, and inclear sight,
 where in Dumar do they fight,
 those of Sturinn…”
  
 The scene in the mirror showed a single squad of lancers in white in what appeared to be the square of a
small town. Although the imagewas small, Secca could make out at least two figures in red lying on the
muddy ground.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Small forces...not good," murmured Wilten.
  
 Secca understood that. If the Sturinnese could send single squads out without hesitation, in at least part
of Dumar, the Suirinnese had greater control of the land than did the Dumarans.
  
 After everyone had looked closely, she released the image.
  
 “Can we even return to Mencha now?" asked Ri-china, slightly too wide-eyed.
  
 Secca managed to swallow a smile, letting her eyes go from Melcar to Wilten, and then to the young
Had-dev, who had been uncharacteristically quiet ever since Alcaren had joined Secca’s force. “I have
great doubts, but it might be best to view the Sand Pass, so that all could see.”
  
 Wilten nodded.
  
 Sécca cleared her throat, then began the simple scrying melody.
  
 “Showme now and with great care
 the Sand Pass where we would fare.
 the winter’s road we’d dare...”
  
 The mirror offered a view of the eastern side of the Sand Pass. Everywhere was snow—snow on the
ever-greens, snow on the birches, and snow so deep that not a stalk of grass nor a low bush protruded
from the cov-ering of white, snow so deep that theroad could have been anywhere.
  
 Secca let everyone study the image before singing the release couplet.
  
 “I don’t think we’re about to return to Mencha by the Sand Pass at any time soon,” Secca said dryly.
Al-ready, her impetuous decision to bring down Dolov in a heap of stones was looking worse and
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

worse. At least, had she merely slaughtered the inhabitants, she and her forces could have had a place to
winter over while reestablishing some authority across eastern Ebra— some-thing that Hadrenn had been
less than effective in doing, it was becoming all too clear. “And we can do little more in Ebra,” Secca said
slowly, looking toward Melcar, then continuing. “As we can, we will travel south to Elahwa. There we
will see what there is to be done, either to see ifwe can arrange passage to Dumar or await some
message from Lord Robero. We cannot stay here. The town cannot support us for long.”
  
 The Ebran overcaptain swallowed.
  
 “I did not mean to suggest that your lancers would accompany us,” Secca responded. “You and your
lancers have been most helpful, Overcaptain Melcar. Your duties and charges lie within Ebra. You may
remain here or return to Synek as and when you see fit.”
  
 “We would not wish to be seen in any fashion less than supportive,” offered Melcar.
  
 “I understand that, and so will Lord Robero,” Secca pointed out. “Doubtless there will be other
obligations in the future, and I know that Ebra will respond as it always has.” She smiled, hoping it wasn’t
too false, then turned her gaze to Haddev. “Your support has also been most helpful, Haddev, but your
uncle’s lancers should not be traveling so far from Silberfels, and not in what looks to be a cold and long
winter. While I cannot com-mand, I would suggest that you have them return to Synek as you can and
winter over there. Or... you could use them here to hold Dolov.”
  
 “There is no lord in Dolov,” Haddev offered neu-trally.
  
 “That is true. Your father has two sons, has he not?" Secca raised her eyebrows.
  
 “Yes, lady.”
  
 “I cannot command or even recommend, but were both keeps to be held by those friendly to Lord
Robero, he might well let matters stand. At the least, he would be well disposed toward you and your
sire.”
  
 “There is that,” mused Haddv. “Perhaps I should remain, and ensure that all goes as it should. At least,
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

until he receives my scroll.”
  
 Richina glanced to the tall heir, but Haddev avoided her eyes.
  
 "Melcar, Haddev. . . once you discuss matters with your captains, if you would inform me of your
plans?’ Secca offered another smile. “I will be here, discussing our travel.”
  
 Once the two Ebrans had left, Secca glanced to Al caren. “You have traveled here. What can we
expect?”
  
 “The weather will be better in the south along the coast,” Alcaren replied. “The snow does not stay so
long or so deep when one nears Elahwa.”
  
 “Can all the players travel in this weather?” Secca turned to Palian.
  
 “If we have another day or two of rest. Britnay is still fevered and weak, but she is young, and will
recover soon. Rowal’s lip is healing. He can travel now, but he will have trouble playing.” A crooked
smile flickered across the face of the chief player. “I fear we will not soon see Loiseau, will we, lady?”
  
 “I have          my doubts,” Secca admitted. “We—and you—may play for all of Liedwahr.” Her eyes
went to Delvor.
  
 The chief of second players brushed back lank brown hair andgave a smile even more sardonic than
that of Palian. “All my players are tired, but well.”
  
 Secca gestured toward the closed shutters. “You will have at least another day of rest. Perhaps two or
three.”
  
 “Is going to Elahwa wise, lady?’ asked Wilten.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “I have my doubts, Wilten,” Secca replied, “but we can do little good here, and only create more
resentment by remaining. The FreeWomen do have some obligation to us, and should Lord Robero have
some charge for us, we need to be where we can carry it out.”
  
 Wilten and Alcaren both nodded, the former dubiously, the latter knowingly.
  
 Even though she had known Alcaren for but a few weeks, Secca almost wished he were the one
commanding her lancers, but she knew also that such a feel-ing needed to be resisted until she knew
more about the mysterious overcaptain. Much more.
  
  
 80
  
 Light was beginning to seep through the closed shutters of the small and musty room in the Copper Pot
when Secca opened the door and stepped inside. The almost greasy yellow cheese and cold bread that
had been her breakfast sat heavily in her stomach, and the cold water, and the spell to clean it, had left
her feeling slightly queasy.
  
 Richina had left the public room before Secca, without explaining, but Secca feared she knew where the
young sorceress had gone.
  
 Melcar’s scouts had returned the evening before, saying that local traffic had packed the roads
southward, and the wayappeared clear for at least several hamlets. Each day that had passed had left
Secca feeling more and more agitated, although the mirror showed only the same scenes in both Encora
and Dumar. Something was telling her that she needed to be headed southward, and she recalled all too
clearly Anna’s observations on feelings—that they were ignored only to the greatest of regrets.
  
 After Secca’s announcement at dinner, Melcar had decided that he would begin his return to Synek
when Secca departed, accompanying her so far south as to where the river roads diverged. In turn,
Haddev declared he would remain in Hanlis to begin preparations for rebuilding the keep at Dolov. In
turn, Melcar had agreed to leave one company of lancers with Haddev.
  
 With a deep breath, Secca bent to check the leather wrappings on the traveling scrying mirror once
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

more. She moved from the mirror to repacking the saddlebag that still contained a score ofsmall bottles,
bottles she feared would be useful yet.
  
 The door opened. Secca stood quickly and turned as Richina stepped inside, closing the heavy door
quickly be-hind her. The older sorceress waited.
  
 “He didn’t even say good-bye. Not really,” Richina said slowly. “He just smiled. He wished me well. He
said I would be a great sorceress some day. Then he kissed my hand.” After a moment she added, “That
was all.”
  
 “It upsets you?’
  
 “It shouldn’t. You told me this would happen.” Richina sniffed and looked away. “You said it would.”
  
 “That doesn’t make it any easier. It still hurts,” Secca said gently.
  
 “How...“ Richina shook her head. “I told myself this would happen. I could see it. When he looked at
me that day.”
            
 ‘When you used the sabre to save me,” Seeca said.
  
 “His eyes opened, and he saw . . .“ Richina stopped and swallowed. “He saw me, and he didn’t like
what he saw.”
  
 “I know.” Secca’ s voice was low.
  
 “Is that what happened between you . . .” Richina did not finish the sentence.
  
 “No. It never got that far,” Secca replied.It never has. Is that because you have seen too many men
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

back away?
  
 Another silence, cold as a still winter night, filled the room.
  
 “I’m sorry,” Secca said again.
  
 “There’s nothing else to say. Nothing.” Richina bent over the narrow cot bed and folded her spare riding
trou-sers. She slid them into a saddlebag. Then she reached for the shirt she had washed in ice cold
water two days before and foldedit. She did not look at the older sorceress.
  
 Secca smiled faintly, sadly.
  
  
 81
  
 Secca looked southward, her breath white in the chill morning air, squinting against the glare of sun on
snow. The road was already packed in the middle, where the snow compacted by hoofs and feet
followed the contours of the ruts established far earlier. The only sounds were those of hoofs and the
breathing of mounts, and the oc-casional jingle or clink of a harness.
  
 After three days on the road, they were still short of the river junction and the better road toward
Elahwa that they would find there. If the road remained frozen they might make Rielte by the end of the
day, which would provide some better lodging for the lancers—even if within ware houses.
  
 At some point, they would leave the snow behind, be cause the mirror showed the roads into Elahwa
were only damp, not even muddy, but without better knowledge and names, Secca could not use the
mirror to find where that might be, not without exhausting herself.
  
 For the time, Richina rode with Wilten, in front of Secca and Alcaren. Behind Secca were Delvor and
Palian, and then the remainder of the players. Melcar rode farther back, with the Ebran lancers.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “If both sun and chill prevail, without wind, we will be favored by the Harmonies,” offered Alcaren.
  
 “At least until we get out of the snow.”
  
 “I have been told that there is usually little snow south of where the rivers join,” replied the Ranuan
over-captain.
  
 “You seem to know a great deal about Ebra,” Secca said.
  
 "Far more than a over-captain of lancers from Ranuak should?” A light laugh punctuated his words. “Is
that the edge on your blade?”
  
 “Yes.” Secca didn’t feel like verbal fencing.
  
 “I was not intended to be an over-captain. As I have told you, my mother wished me to be a trader.
Such must learn all about the lands where they trade, and she would tell me all she knew, and then ask
me.” Alcaren’s voice turned dry. “Often I ate but bread and water.”
  
 “If you didn’t learn?”
  
 “I was stubborn.”
  
 Secca smiled. “You learned. That is clear. And you are skilled and intelligent. So why aren’t you a sea
captain, or an officer learning to be one?”
  
 Alcaren did not reply, and Secca turned in the saddle. “Over-captain?”
  
 A crooked expression, neither grin nor smile, appeared on Alcaren’s face. “The sea and I . . . we did
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

not agree. No matter how many voyages I accompanied my mother...” He shook his head. “I did not
wish to do what made me most uncomfortable.”
  
 Secca suppressed a laugh. Somehow, the thought of the competent over-captain as a seasick trader was
so incon-gruous. “So... your mother let you become a lancer?”
  
 “No. She turned me over to my father, saying that if I were not fit to be a trader then I could at least
learn to create beauty.”
  
 “He was a sculptor, you said. Did you make any stat-ues?"
  
 “A few. Mostly, I bent chisels and destroyed good blanks of stone. He could scribe a perfect circle with
a stick of charcoal, then cut it perfectly. I could not.” Al-caren shrugged. “I could make neither happy.”
  
 Secca had the feeling, once more, that Alcaren had left much unsaid. Far too much. “So you took up the
blade, then?”
  
 “I had some skill there, and that seemed a better thing to do than attempt to be a miserable trader or an
untalented artisan.”
  
 “I see. What else do you do?” asked Seeca.
  
 “Like most good Ranuan men, I can play some on a mandolin, or my lumand, enough to provide
pleasant din-ner music.”
  
 She laughed politely. Again, true as the words them-selves sounded to Secca, she still felt as though
something were missing. “The more you say. overcaptain, the less I feel I’ve learned.” She paused.
“Have you any brothers or sisters?’
  
 “A younger sister only. She will be the trader. Already, she thinks in terms of casks and kegs and
barrels, and yards and spans, and golds and silvers, and whether there is drought in Ebra or ice
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

monsoons in Pelara.”
  
 “And what do you think about?”
  
 “I wonder now how I find myself talking to a sorceress on a snow-covered road in Ebra.”
  
 “I suppose that is strange,” Secca admitted, “but the Ma-triarch is a sorceress, it is said.”
  
 “She is, but not in the way that you are.” Before Secca could respond, the Ranuan rushed on, as if he
had been waiting for an opening. “That sorcery... what you used to destroy the keep of Dolov. . . I did
not know that two voices could do such.”
  
 "TheEvult used massed voices, a score of years back,” Secca pointed out, certain that Alcaren had been
sent as much spy as ally. “There are even old books about sorcery with many voices.”
  
 Alcaren, surprisingly, Shuddered “The old sorceries...like the evils of the Sturinnese... like the Spell-Fire
Wars.”
  
 “Sorcery doesn’t have to be evil,” Secca said, thinking about the beauty and grace of Loiseau, wishing
she were there, that she could be there. “We don’t have to repeat the evils of the past. Can we not avoid
such?”
  
 "Can we? There are great temptations to makeit so. The Matriarch has told so many that for so long, as
did her mother.” Alcaren’s words were not quite cynical “The Sturinnese offer great temptation.”
  
 “So you’re saying that I’ll be tempted into evil in order to stop them? Or that the other sorceresses of
Defalk may be?”
  
 “Or someone. I suggest that it ispossible. That is because the Sea-Priests did not suffer such as the
Spell-Fire Wars and because they also believe what they do is right, as set forth by their great
Sea-Father.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “And I suppose the Matriarch believes that we should do nothing, rather than risk some evil to stop a
greater evil?” Secca could feel herself getting annoyed.
  
 Alcaren laughed. “No. Hardly that. She would avoid sorcery as she can, for the Ladies of the Shadows
are strong in Ranuak, but she sees her choices are most limited. She learned from her mother, and her
mother said that she had done much she came to regret, but even later could find no other course.”
  
 Secca nodded. She’d heard that enough from Anna.
  
 “Can she not use her sorcery against the Sea-Priests? In some fashion?” asked Secca.
  
 “She is not a sorceress like you.” As if sensing Secca’s irritation athis repetition, the Ranuan added, “She
does not have the ability to meld with the players the way you do, or with drums as the Sea-Priests do.
They can use sorcery on the water only with the strength of the thunder-drums.”
  
 Secca frowned. Were the massed lutars of the second players something like the thunder-drums? Would
they work on or near the water? Could she adapt some spell to reach the Sturinnese ships off Dumar?
  
 "Lady?’
  
 “Oh...I was thinking. Is there a reason why the Matriarch cannot use players?”
  
 “She does not. None of the Matriarchs have done so.”
  
 “That is a most careful answer, overcaptain.”
  
 Alcaren shrugged, almost overdramatically, it seemed to Secca. “A Matriarch would not talk of such to
a lancer, nor about such even around her personal guards.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “It sounds as though the Matriarchs have made a choice not to use sorcery backed by drums or
players.”
  
 “That... I would not be surprised,” Alcaren admitted, “but no one has ever said such near me. Nor near
any I know.”
  
 Those sentences stopped Secca, because the truth rang in every word. But why had Alcaren hedged so
many other words and phrases? She rode silently, trying to sort out what she had seen and heard, and
getting to no resolution, not one she could have voiced.
  
 “You did not follow Lord Robero’s orders, did you?" asked Alcaren, almost absently.
  
 “I had no orders,” Secca replied. “Lord Robero re-quested that I aid Lord Hadrenn and then do what I
could to secure Dolov and assist the Free City.”
  
 “Doubtless in that order of priority,” suggested Alcaren dryly.
  
 His tone brought an inadvertent smile to Secca’s lips. “Would you have done otherwise?"
  
 “No ...but then, I was likely to be one of those thrown against the Sturinnese in desperation had you not
put them to flight. So I am most pleased that you acted as you did.” Alcaren paused. “I would much
prefer to be riding and talking to you than lying in an unmarked grave some where."
  
 “I am gratified that my actions please you, overcaptain.”
  
 “Not so much as I.” responded the Ranuan in a tone that seemed just a shade more than amiable.
  
 Or was that because she wished it so? Rather than reply, Secca studied the narrow fields beyond the
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

road, rather than the woods behind them. Were the grass stalks protruding from the snow an indication
that the snowfall was lighter as they rode south, and that they would be in warmer parts before long? She
hoped so.
  
 82
  
 Two days after leaving Rielte, and a day after splittingaway from Melcar, Secca and her much smaller
force rode through a fine mist that was not quite rain. Although they could not see the sun, itwas close to
midday, and the clouds overhead were almost luminous, as if the sun were trying to break through. The
road clay was damp, but not slippery, and the red-haired sorceress could but hope that the cold mist
would dissipate as they continued southward.
  
 Strangely, Secca had felt relieved to see the Ebrans go, and that bothered her. Melcar was a far better
commander than Wilten. Alcaren, for all that she had tried to get to know him better, and understand
him, remained very much unknown. She had less than half the lancers she had commanded a glass
before. And she felt relieved?
  
 She shook her head and looked at the road ahead. Ac-cording to her scrying glass, the maps, and
Alcaren, they were about a day and a half from Elahwa. Secca rode beside Palian, while Richina rode
with Delvor, before Secca. Alcaren rode at the head of the column, just behind the standard bearers,
with Wilten.
  
 Secca glanced at Palian. ‘What do you think about Overcaptain Alcaren?”
  
 Palian glanced forward, frowned, then lowered her voice. “He has watched the players practice, and
once I thought I saw his lips move to the spellsong.”
  
 “Do you think he would try sorcery?’
  
 “I know not, save he knows more than he reveals. He would offer himself as an overcaptain of lancers
as pay-ment for your rescue of Elahwa. Yet his two companies are South Women, and never have such
been led by a man.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “They’re not SouthWomen?"
  
 Palian shook her head. “They are indeed SouthWomen. The South Women trussed one overbold bravo
like a pig for slaughter and dumped him, gagged into silence, by the cook-fires ...so silent they were that
none saw or heard, and he will not yet speak of it.”
  
 “Hmmmm ...Yet they accept Alcaren’s orders.”
  
 “They accept orders from their captains, who are women. The captains acccept orders from him,”
Palian pointed out.
  
 “He said the same thing,” Secca replied. “He did not hide that, yet it remains strange.”
  
 “He rides well, like a lancer born, yet there is... some-thing.”
  
 “A spy from the Matriarch?"
  
 The chief player shrugged. “I think not. The Matriarch would welcome knowledge. That is certain of any
ruler. He spars with his captains, and they are better than most of our armsmen. He is better than they.
Melcar said that he carried his blade like a lancer, not as a bravo.”
  
 “Someone to seduce me?”
  
 “But why, Lady Secca? It would be far easier to seduce Richina, to learn anything from spells to secrets.
And, though you are Sorceress-Protector, you are not a regent as was Lady Anna.” Palian looks at
Secca. “The man lis-tens not as to flatter, but to learn.”
  
 “That’s why I thought he was a spy,” Secca pointed out. The chief player shook her head again. “I think
not. He watches what I do, but makes no gesture to reassure me, nor to flatter these gray hairs. Nor
does he court you or Richina. He is not here for our purposes, but what purposes he is here for ... those
are deeper, perhaps deeper even than he knows.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “The Matriarch has a plan for him that he knows not?”
  
 ‘That would be my guess. He is a man, and he has been offered a freedom to act few men in Ranuak
receive. She believes that freedom to act will benefit her and Ranuak”
  
 “But will it benefit us?” questioned Secca.
  
 “Over a score of years, the Matriarch has not acted to harm Defalk or Lady Anna. I do not know her
mind, but years of actions speak more clearly than words.”
  
 Secca nodded, considering the other side—the Sturin nese, and the Ebrans of Dolov, whose actions had
always been against Defalk...and women. Perhaps she had not been so wrong to level the keep of
Dolov, or not so wrong as she had felt at the time and afterward.
  
 After a time, Sçcca spoke again. “Yet I worry. There is so much I know not, and so much I have not
seen, and I do not seem to be the only one who has not seen it. The Sturinnese have planned what they
do for years. That is clear. Have the Matriarchs of Ranuak planned their counter for years as well? And
what of the Council of Wei? The Liedfuhr?"
  
 Palian shrugs. “We do not know.”
  
 We do not know--- what Secca had not known had al ready caused her to make mistakes, and those
mistakes had killed all too many.
  
 “I fear we will need far more sorcery,” Secca said. Trite as her words were, they were also true, she
knew.
  
 “That I have already told the players.” Palian glanced over her shoulder. “I can see a disagreement
brewing behind us... if you would excuse---”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Go,” said Secca with a laugh.
  
 “Delvor!” called Palian.
  
 The two chief players rode back along the column, and Richina slipped her mount back alongside that of
Secca.
  
 “Are you angry with me, lady?’ asked Richina.
  
 “Harmonies, no.” Secca paused. “Because I have taken thne to ride with others?’
  
 “I did not know.”
  
 “Palian has much knowledge and experience, and she is one of the few who has been on a campaign
such as this before. I wished to hear what she had to say.”
  
 “Did you talk of Alcaren?”
  
 “Some,” Secca admitted with a smile. “We know little of him, handsome as he is.”
  
 “You admit he is handsome?’ Richina gnnned. “How could I not? But he is also mysterious and
un-known, and that is not all to the good when one must fight alongside such.”
  
 “He will fight for us,” Richina said.
  
 While Secca felt the same, she did notknow it, and that worried at her. Did she feel what she felt
because it was true, or because she wanted to feel that Alcaren was to be trusted?
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 83
  
 The Black Kettle--- the inn in Sudstrom--- was twice the size the Copper Pot in Hanlis had been, and
the inn-keeper had actually seemed happy to see Secca and her guards.
  
 “We heard of your victory, lady, and most pleased we were,” said the beefy, red-faced man.
  
 “I’d wager the girls and I were far happier, Tyras,” added the equally hefty woman who stood to his left.
“Sturinnese kill women like as look at ‘em, and chains are not something any of us would wear with joy.”
She bowed to Secca a second time. “The big chamber... it has a large and a small bed. We would be
honored.”
  
 “Thank you.”
  
 “And a wash stand as well.”
  
 “Richina and I could use that.” Secca looked at the inn keeper. ‘We also need lodging for the players
and the lanc-ers. We have somewhat less than six companies, and the players.”
  
 The innkeeper pulled on his earlobe. “There be ten small rooms, and two other large ones. Be some
room in the barn and the stable. Might check with Afgar... he’s the grain merchant."
  
 In time, Wilten and Alcaren had left the inn proper, with arrangements made for two companies to stay
at the inn, while Secca and Richina had headed up the wide stairs to the second floor, and the main guest
chamber.
  
 Though probably even older than the inns at Hanlis and Rielte, the Black Kettle had one significant
improvement---real glass windows, at least in the chamber where Secca and Richina found themselves.
While Secca greatly missed the bath chamber of Loiseau and even the one in Had-renn’s run-down
palace—-the basin of warm water, water she reheated with a short spell, and the towels resulted in her
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

feeling far better and less bedraggled.
  
 Once Secca was in cleaner riding clothes, while Richina was washing up, the older sorceress opened the
door slightly and called, “Achar?"
  
 “Yes, lady?’
  
 “Could one of you find Overcaptain Wilten and Overcaptain Alcaren and both the chief players—and
tell them we have some matters to discuss at an evening meal with them in the public room here?"
  
 “We can do that.’ The young guard smiled back. Secca closed the door, then went to the window and
opened the shutters enough to study the muddy main street of Sudstrom. As she watched, she could see
Achar hurrying along the boardwalk in the dim light of dusk toward the chandlery, and the grain
merchant’s barns beyond. She took a deep breath, not wanting to think too long or too deeply about the
comparative luxury of her quarters. While she could tell herself that she could not do sorcery without rest
and food, she still fretted and felt guilty.
  
 She closed the shutter and turned. Richina was brushing out her sandy hair.
  
 “Do you feel better?” asked Secca.
  
 “Some. I’m hungry.”
  
 “So am I. We should wait a few moments, though, be fore we go down. I just sent Achar to get Wilten
and Al-caren."
  
 “Do you think we will be welcome in Elahwa?” asked the younger woman, seating herself on the end of
the smaller bed.
  
 “We were told we would always be welcome. How welcome... I do not know. I worry more about
what we must do after we reach Elahwa?”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Because we cannot return home easily?’ Richina shifted her weight on the bed, wincing slightly.
  
 “That is part of it."Secca paused before asking, “You’re sore."
  
  
 “I am raw on the inside of this leg. My riding trousers— they were damp and rubbed.”
  
 “I think I have some unguent.” Secca opened her saddle-bag and, after fumbling through it, came up
with a small oiled leather bag. “Here.”
  
 By the time Richina had used the ointment, and the two had left the upstairs room, the overcaptains and
Palian and Delvor were waiting outside the public room. The only others in the room were an elderly
couple at a table in the corner near the fire.
  
 The six seated themselves around the large circular table set directly before a roaring hearth. Almost
before they had settled in, a serving girl appeared, doubtless the daughter of the innkeeper, for she had
the same round and red face.
  
 “What do you have?” Secca asked
  
 “We have chicken-chased noodles with a paisino sauce or white fish baked in the husk with potato
cakes.”
  
 Never having had either, nor having heard of either, Secca looked at the serving woman. "Which is
better?”
  
 “I like the noodles, lady, but mayhap that’s because we have whitefish so many nights."
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “I’ll take the noodles. Do you have any wine?” asked Seeca.
  
 “Not so as I’d wish to offer it. The amber ale is better.”
  
 “The whitefish,” Richina said, “and ale.”
  
 “Fish and ale,” Delvor added.
  
 “Noodles and the wine, no matter how bad,” Palian said “I can’t take the thought of ale.”
  
 “Noodles and ale,” came from Alcaren.
  
 “The same,” offered Wilten laconically.
  
 After the server scurried toward the kitchen, Secca turned to Wilten. “Are there quarters enough..."
  
 “Not quarters.” Wilten laughed. “But we’ve found spaces dry and warm enough, and provisions. Even
the chandlerwas happy to see us—she was happier to know we’ll be leaving in the morning.”
  
 A series ofthumps punctuated the arrival of the ales, followed by Palian’s wine, a murky yellowish liquid
slosh ing in a pewter goblet.
  
 Secca took a sip of the ale. It was weak, almost soapy, but better than making the effort to clean water
with a spellsong, and from the glance she’d seen of the wine, to be preferred over what Palian had begun
to drink. “We should reach Elahwa late tomorrow, should we not?" She looked at Alcaren.
  
 “That we should, if it does not rain or snow.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “We don’t want to just appear in Elahwa,” Secca said. “While it is part of Defalk, we should let the city
coun-selors know. I’d be unhappy if an ally showed up unannounced with six companies and two
sorceresses.”
  
 “I could dispatch a squad with a message,” offered Wil-ten.
  
 “They are men, are they not?" Alcaren’s tone of voice indicated that his question was more of a
statement.
  
 “All the lancers are men,” Wilten pointed out. "Except yours.”
  
 “Could you spare a squad to go with Wilten’s squad?” Secca asked the Ranuan overcaptain.
  
 “That might be best.”
  
 “I’ll write a scroll tonight” Secca glanced at Alcaren. "Perhaps you should write one as well, for your
lancers to carry.”
  
 “I am not so certain that they are exactly mine, but I will write one.” Alcaren laughed.
  
 Secca nodded.
  
 “Do you have any thoughts on whatyou will do once we reach Elahwa?" asked Wilten.
  
 “I’d like to talk to their counselors,” Secca temporized. “The glass shows that the Sea-Priests continue
to fight in Dumar, and that they still blockade Encora.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “They could not take Encora,” Alcaren said.
  
 “Could they starve it into surrender?’ asked Richina.
  
 “Over several years, perhaps. Some folk might suffer by this coming summer, but the Matriarch has
large granaries, and so does the Exchange. Once winter is over, food can flow from Defalk through the
South Pass.” Alcaren’s lips twisted. “There is enough gold in Encora for that.”
  
 “It would seem that the blockade is more to keep anyone from coming tothe aid of Dumar, then?” Secca
took an-other cautious sip of the soapy ale.
  
 “Until they have turned the land into a garrison for Stu-rinn, I would guess,” Alcaren suggested. “After
that, they will attack Ranuak.”
  
 “Why would they go after Ranuak?" asked Richina. "The best ports in Liedwahr are Wharsus, and
Encora, and then Narial,” Alcaren explained. “The Sea-Priests al-ready hold Narial, and Mansuur has
many, many lancers. They know that the Matriarch cannot use sorcery against them, and few will come
to our defense, except the FreeWomen, and they have few lancers.”
  
 “Especially now,” suggested Wilten.
  
 Alcaren nodded.
  
 “We may just have to wait and rest in Elahwa,” Secca pointed out. ‘We can’t return to Mencha until the
passes clear, and that will not be until spring.” She shrugged. “Then, too, we may be able to find a way to
Dumar. I like not dealing with the Sea-Priests, but with each week that passes, they can make it that
much harder for us to free Dumar”
  
 “Need we free Dumar?” asked Wilten. “It provides little for Defalk, and we have no orders from Lord
Robero.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “You are right about Dumar giving little to Defalk,” Secca agreed, pausing for another sip of ale, and to
gain a moment to think. “Yet, once the Sea-Priests have gained a firm foothold in any land, such as the
Ostisles, none have been able to stop them. As Overcaptain Alcaren has said, once they hold Dumar,
then they will take Ranuak. Could we then stop them from taking Ebra and Elahwa? After that..."
  
 “That would take many years. . . if it could be done...”
  
  Pahan snorted. "Three years at the outside, Wilten,if we do nothing. Then we would have to fight, and
at a great disadvantage. They could attack through Stromwer from the east or the west, or they could use
the South Pass from Ranwa, the Sand Pass from Ebra, the pass from Vult—or they could march north
from Envaryl to take the south of Neserea. By then they will have enough lancers and thunder-drums to
do all of those at once, and we have but three full sorceresses, and two strong assistants. We may not
even have an ally in Neserea, and if we do, that land will be weak.”
  
 Wilten looked down at his ale.
  
 Secca could understand the overcaptain’s concerns; no matter what they did, the possibility of years of
fighting stretched out before them—and she worried greatly that she had heard nothing from Robero.
While she did not see that she could do other than she had, and did not wish to spend her energies on
trying to discover what the Lord of Defalk intended, she worried. Either Robero did not understand the
extent of the danger, or Clayre and Jolyn were so hard-pressed that neither could spare the energy to
send a scroll. Neither of those possibilities was reassuring, not with two Sturinnese fleets and scores of
lancers attacking all across the south of Liedwahr.
  
 She took another sip of the ale, waiting for the noodles.
  
 84
  
 In the bright gray just before sunrise, with the night stars washed out and Clearsong the only light in the
sky,
 Secca stood in the courtyard behind the Black Kettle and strapped her lutar in place on top of the mirror
and saddle-bags behind the saddle of the gray mare. The clear air was cold enough that her breath
steamed, and the tip of her nose tingled with the chill. Once she finished, she also checked the sabre and
scabbard, hoping as always that she would not need the blade, but making sure it would be ready. She
adjusted the battered green felt hat once more.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Farther toward the back of the courtyard, some of the players were beginning to mount.
One—Britnay---seemed to be having trouble buckling the rear saddle girth. Secca shook her head. If it
weren’t one thing with Britnay, it was another.
  
 Delvor dismounted to help the young violino player in her struggles with mount and saddle.
  
 Glad that she did not have to deal with Britnay, Secca mounted easily, aware that she was finally feeling
less ex-hausted. As she turned the gray toward the front of the inn, and the street that would lead to the
road south, Wilten reined up beside her.
  
 “Good morning, Wilten.”
  
 “Good morning, lady.” The overcaptain inclined his head. “Just be wanting you to know that the two
squads left almost two glasses ago. Overcaptain Alcaren and I saw ‘em off.”
  
 “Thank you." Secca smiled.
  
 “Be hoping we’ll get a warm welcome.”
  
 “I’m sure we will.”
  
 “The lancers’ll be forming up in front. I’ll be joining you after I check here.”
  
 “I’ll wait for you there.” Secca eased the gray past the side of the inn and out onto the street where the
green company was already formed up and waiting. Behind her rode Rukor and Achar.
  
 No sooner had Secca reined up on the mud-rutted street before the Black Kettle than Richina guided
her mount out of the courtyard to join her. Then came Wilten and Palian and the first players, followed by
Delvor and the second players, and another company of lancers.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 While none of the inhabitants of Sudstrom poured out onto stoops or porches to watch the column of
players and lancers leaving the river town, Secca felt as though many eyes studied her from behind
window curtains and closed shutters. She felt a very definite relief--- if only from scru-tiny---when they
were out of Sudstrom and traveling the river road beyond the town, a road of gentle curves flanked by a
few fields set between larger stands of trees.
  
 The cold of the night before had left a light frost on the exposed upper side of the needles of the pines
and the firs, and across the bare branches of those bushes that were not sheltered by taller conifers.
Where the rising sun struck the frost, the thin coating puffed into a white mist that drifted upward, and
then vanished. As the sun rose above the woods to the east, it played across the frosted trees, and light
sparkled everywhere for a time. Secca smiled at the not-quite-sparkling light, but light and smile dimmed
as the frost evaporated.
  
 “The sun feels good,” Richina offered.
  
 “It’s a good thing we’re out of the snow,” Secca said. “If it’s as warm there as it looks to be getting
here, the mud will be hock deep there by afternoon.”
  
 ‘With these roads, we’d better hope we don’t get rain,” Richina said.
  
 “You see why Lady Anna worried about roads?” Secca asked. “We could cross Defalk in the time it
takes to go a third as far in Ebra.” She wasn’t sure if that were the exact comparison, but that was the
way it felt.
  
 “It would take years to pave the roads in Ebra.”
  
 “It has taken years in Defalk,” Secca said dryly. “More than a score."
  
 “How many deks of roads are paved in Defalk?” asked Alcaren, as he rode up beside the two
sorceresses, his mount almost on the shoulder of the road.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “I’m not sure anyone has totaled the number,” Secca replied. “Mostly the main roads north, south, east,
and west from Falcor”
  
 “All the way to the borders?” asked the Ranuan.
  
 “Some places a bit beyond” Secca conceded. “The road from Mencha is paved all the way through the
Sand Pass and about fifteen deks beyond.”
  
 “That has to be more than a thousand deks,” Alcaren said slowly. “And that was done with sorcery?”
  
 “There wasn’t any other way. It’s taken four sorceresses a score of years,” Secca pointed out. “How
are the roads in Ranuak?”
  
 “The older roads near Encora are paved, but most to the north and east are not” Alcaren smiled ruefully.
“The first Ranuan lancer companies that went to Elahwa could have used such roads to get from Encora
to Elahwa. The north-ern part wasn’t too bad. It’s always dry as you near the Sand Hills.”
  
 “How long did it take?” asked Richina.
  
 “For them, almost two weeks. For us, a week.”
  
 “You rode that much faster?" asked Secca.
  
 “Hardly.” Alcaren shook his head. “The Matriarch had sent more than ten companies when the
Sturinnese first blockaded the Free City. The only way that many lancers could get there was overland,
and winter had not yet fallen. For us, the Matriarch wagered against luck and weather. She used coastal
schooners to send us to the north side of the Sand Hills. It was but a four-day ride from there.”
  
 Secca managed to keep a pleasant smile on her face as she considered the implications of Alcaren’s
revelations. “She must have felt you would make a difference.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “She could send no more lancers, not without leaving Encora exposed, and she felt that Elahwa might fall
before we could ride that way. She risked losing both ships and lancers, had either the weather turned or
the captains left the shallows.” The overcaptain smiled. “She was right. We did blunt the last attacks, but
the city would have fallen in days if you had not come to her aid.”
  
 “I am glad we arrived in time,” replied Secca. "I was not certain that we would.”
  
 "But you did,” Alcaren said.
  
 Secca nodded, still mulling over what Alcaren had re-vealed. The Matriarch had felt she could send no
more lancers, and only the South Women, but she had gambled two ships of the type that could evade
the deeper-drafted blockade ships to get Alcaren to Elahwa. Or had it been to get the overcaptain to
Secca?
  
 Again, the more that the handsome overcaptain said, and the more that he revealed, the further Secca
seemed to be from understanding him—and Ranuak Or was it that she had so much to learn?
  
  
 85
  
 The sun was low in the western sky, hanging just over the trees on the far side of the unseen river on the
west side of Elahwa. Secca shifted her weight in the sad-dle, trying to present an impression of what a
sorceress should be. Under the gray sky, a damp and cold breeze blew from the harbor to the south,
carrying the faint scent of seaweed and salt air.
  
 Secca and Richina rode down the gray-brick main boulevard of Elahwa, behind Achar and the banner
of the Sorceress-Protector. Behind them rode Wilten and Al-caren, followed by Palian and Delvor, the
rest of the players, and then the lancersof Loiseau. The SouthWomen brought up the rear. At the head of
the column, before the banner, wasan honor guard in the scarlet tunics of the Free City.
  
 Elahwa had no walls or gates. Not that the lack of either was surprising in itself, since the actual towns
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

and cities in Defalk had neither walls nor gates. But from what Secca could see, and from what the mirror
had shown earlier, Elahwa also had no walled keeps or fortresses.
  
 Most of the buildings were of the same gray brick as paved the boulevard, and the roofs were of dark
split slate. Secca took in the weaver’s shop, with its bright blue shut-ters, and a white sign trimmed in the
same blue, a sign showing the outline of a foot-treadle loom. Next to the weaver’s shop was a
cabinet-maker’s, and there the shut-ters were a light brown. The only touches of color were those doors
and shutters—bright green, crimson, sky blue. On each house or structure, shutters and doors matched,
but the colors varied from one to the next, often dramati-cally.
  
 A thin scattering of people stood everywhere—on the porch of the weaver’s,under the broad eaves of
the coo-per’s across the boulevard, under the leafless trees at the edge of the green that the column
approached. Some smiled, but most just watched as the column rode south ward. While a handful of
men were among the bystanders, most were women, many gray-haired, but many young, and some only
girls. Occasionally, there were murmurs.
  
 “Another of the great sorceresses...”
  
 "... looks so small..."
  
  "...with that small a company... .. has to be powerful..."
  
  
 “...two of them...though.. .“
  
 “Better her than the Maitre..."
  
 “...don’t tell that to the shadow ladies ...”
  
 Secca wanted to shake her head. They talked as though she were the Lord of Defalk or the regent. She
was just a sorceress-protector who still was trying to figure out how to do her duty. She couldn’t have
explained why she was in Elahwa, except that she felt she should be—and there was nowhere else she
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

could take her lancers with the depth of winter yet to come.
  
 On the far side of the green--- a parklike expanse of bushes and browned grass surrounded by a stone
wall less than a yard high - was the Council building, a structure of a blue-tinged marble. The entire
three-level structure was less than forty yards across the front, and perhaps only sixty deep.
  
 As Secca guided the gray mare around the green, she could see that five women waited beneath and
before the square stone columns at the top of the stone steps of the Council building. Over tunic and
trousers, each wore a long armless scarlet vest that ran from shoulder to knee. A single black braided
cord at waist level provided the only cincture.
  
 As requested by the Elahwan captain who now led the honor guard, Secca turned the gray mare when
she reached a point in the street opposite the middle of steps to the Council building. Then she rode
forward and reined up five yards short of the bottom step.
  
 The woman in the center stepped forward. Secca thought the counselor was the one who had been with
Al-caren after the main battle with the Sturinnese north of Elahwa.
  
 “All Elahwa is indebted to you, to you and the great one who came before you.” The counselor bowed
her head. “Although you have the right to ask for whatever we can offer, beyond that, you are welcome
to stay, sor-ceress and protector.”
  
 “I appreciate your welcome.” Secca bowed her head in return. “I will ask as little as possible in these
troubled times.”
  
 A second counselor eased forward and walked down the steps carrying a basket—one gilded and
wrapped partly in crimson ribbons. In it, Secca could see a clear glass bottle, along loaf of bread, and a
small cloth pouch.
  
 “For your efforts, we welcome you. May the bread of Harmony sustain you. May the water you drink
always be pure, and may you always be the salt of your people.”
  
 Secca wasn’t sure how to respond, but the ceremony called for something. She bowed her head and
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

spoke. “Thank you for your welcome, and for the bread, water, and salt. For your welcome and your
ways, may the Har monies watch over you and keep you.”
  
 Smiles appeared across the faces of the counselors, and murmurs cascaded across the bystanders
around the green.
  
 "...only a sorceress dare to call on the Harmonies..."
  
 "...be why she’s a sorceress~protector..." .
  
 “... still Sea-Priest ships on the Southern Ocean..."
  
  The first counselor raised her voice. “We would like to meet with you in the morning4in the meantime,
Overcaptain Alcaren and the honor guard will escort you, your assistant, your players, and your forces to
the guest quarters and barracks.” The counselor turned toward Alcaren, who had reined up several yards
to Secca’s right. “Does that meet your satisfaction, overcaptain?"
  
  “I would be pleased, Counselor Veria.”
  
 The hint of a frown passed over the woman’s face, fol lowed by a rueful smile. “The overcaptain remains
under your command, Sorceress-Protector, until you discharge him or until his return is requested by the
Matriarch of Ranuak”
  
 Alcaren nodded as if he had expected no less, but Secca had the feeling that Counselor Veria’s words
were as much a surprise to Alcaren as they had been to Secca, and that they had been deliberately
uttered loudly in a public place to ensure all knew. Secca wanted to think about what those reasons might
be.
  
 “Until tomorrow, sorceress,” offered Veria with yet another bow.
  
 “Until tomorrow, and our thanks for your hospitality after a long journey." Secca inclined her head in
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

return, then eased the gray mare around to follow the honor guard as Alcaren urged his mount up beside
Secca’s.
  
 “We will turn right at the end of the next block,” Al-caren said from behind Secca.
  
 "Thank you.” After a pause, Secca leaned back toward the Ranuan and murmured, “You didn’t expect
that, did you?”
  
 “I was surprised, but I cannot sayit was totally unexpected.”
  
 “Because it keeps you under the command of a woman?” Secca’s tone was light.
  
 “That . . . and . . .“ Alcaren shrugged. “Both the Matri-arch and her sister are not entirely without humor
and wit” His voice expressed a wry humor of its own.
  
 “That's the Veria you mentioned before?"
  
 “The very same.” Alcaren gestured. “We turn here.” Once the column had turned right at the corner that
held a squarish building without a sign of any sort, Secca and the others rode southward once more.
While there were still bystanders who watched them, those grew less and less with each yard that
passed.
  
 “Why didn’t the older one return to Encora to become Matriarch?” Sceca finally asked.
  
 “Veria disobeyed her mother when she came to Elahwa to fight with the FreeWomen. She almost died,
and certainly would have been killed had the great sorceress not defeated Bertmynn.”
  
 Secca still felt a jarring note when she heard Anna being referred to as the Great Sorceress, even though
she knew it to be factually true. With the jarring came the cold emp-tiness of knowing she would never
see, never hear Anna again. Her eyes burned.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Veria felt her place was here, and soon became a coun-selor.” Alcaren cleared his throat before
adding, "That is all that I know. No one speaks of the details. At least, they did not when I was around.”
  
 Secca swallowed her grief and asked, “So the two sisters control the adjoining lands?”
  
 “They do not think alike. While they respect each other, they have most different views.”
  
 “How are they different?”
  
 “From what I have seen, Veria would use any tool to keep Sturinn at bay. The Matriarch would not”
  
 “She would let the Sturinnese take over Liedwahr?" Secca found her voice rising slightly.
  
 “She might well die attempting to stop them..." Al-caren stopped, as if unsure as to whether he could say
more ...or what.
  
 “You know more than that.” Secca could see Richina listening intently, and trying to give the impression
of pay-ing no attention at all.
  
 “I do not know,” replied the overcaptain.
  
 “What do you feel, then?"
  
 “All the Matriarchs have done little more with sorcery than scry what happens elsewhere in the world. I
have never seen one perform the kind of sorcery that you do. Yet they know all that comprises sorcery,
and they under-stand the Harmonies.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 "You seem to be saying that either they do sorcery in secret or that there is some reason that they do not
do much sorcery."
  
 "In a land like Ranuak, little can be kept secret for long if it has results.” Alcaren’s voice again contained
that dry humorous tone.
  
 “I see." Secca nodded. Alcaren was definitely telling her something, and she didn’t like what she heard
because, if he were right, Secca, Richina, Clayre, and Jolyn were all that stood before Sturinn’s conquest
of Liedwahr.
  
 “So..." Alcaren drew out the word, but as an ending, and not an invitation to more questions. Then he
gestured ahead and to the left.
  
 There, almost a dek south from the Council building, the honor guard turned to pass though a pair of
gate posts set on the left side of the road. A narrow paved lane led to a two-story dwelling that might
well have passed for a mansion, with its Wide-glassed windows, cream shutters, and double front doors
under a covered archway with stone mounting blocks for carriages.
  
 To each side and behind the dwelling were gray brick buildings that stretched back seemingly almost half
a dek in a squared-off horseshoe shape. The sides had the fre-quent doors and windows of a barracks,
while the back side of the horseshoe had several wide doors, indicating stables and other working
spaces.
  
 “The front building is the guest quarters,” Alcaren said. “You will have the master suite on the second
floor, with an adjoining smaller suite for Lady Richina.”
  
 “What about you?’ asked Seeca.
  
 “I have a small set of rooms on the lower level. They didn’t know where else to put me." Alcaren
grinned, and his gray-blue eyes twinkled for a moment. “I was the only man who was an overcaptain in
Elahwa.” He looked at Wilten. “I expect you will have the suite across from me. The barracks in back
will hold ten companies and their officers. The players should get the first set of company quarters, and
there are enough rooms in the guest house for your chief players.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Your lancers worked this out before we came?” asked Secca.
  
 "I suggested it in my scroll. The honor guard confirmed it”
  
 “The lancers and players will appreciate the quarters greatly.”
  
 While Secca dismounted and unsaddled her own mount, she did not leave the courtyard until she was
certain that all the lancers and players were indeed quartered. Her legs ached by the time she and Richina
followed Alcaren through the rear entry to the guest mansion and up the wide staircase. Dyvan and
Rukor trailed the three.
  
 “This suite is yours, Lady Ricbina.” Alcaren opened the door and motioned for Richina to enter.
  
 Secca did not enter, just held the lutar, waiting. She could see that the suite was about the size of
Richina’s rooms at Loiseau, if slightly more starkly appointed.
  
 “I will let you know about the meal shortly,” offered the Ranuan as he closed the door. He turned and
walked along the corridor, a good three yards wide, toward a set of double doors at the end.
  
 After Alcaren opened the rght-hand door, Secca stepped through the shimmering polished oak door
frame. Despite the grayness of the day, the large chamber was flooded with light from the wide windows.
A working desk faced away from the leftmost of the three windows, so that light would fall over the
shoulders of whoever used it. A cir-cular golden oak conference table was set before the right window,
with five chairs spaced around it. On the left wall was a tiled hearth with logs aleady set on a pair of
heavy iron andirons. An open door on the rightwall revealed a bedehamber, with a bathing chamber
beyond that.
  
 The petite sorceress shook her head. Somehow, despite all the words from the counselors, the guest
quarters and barracks were more than Secca had expected.
  
 “They owe you and your predecessor greatly,” Alcaren said. “They would like to feel that they could
repay some of that debt.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca wished more rulers felt that way, instead of acting like Bertmynn and his greedy son Myantar.
  
 “You need but use the bellpull to summon a servant. If you do not mind, I will arrange for the evening
meal for those in this building in about a glass.”
  
 “And the players and lancers?"
  
 “There is a larger kitchen in the barracks,” Alcaren said with a smile. “They will not suffer."
  
 Secca laughed.
  
 Alcaren bowed. “Until later, lady." With his smile still in place, he turned and departed, closing the outer
door with an audibleclick.
  
 Secca was still smiling as she walked toward the bath chamber, where two kettles of steaming water
stood on the table beside a tub filled with warm water.
  
 86
  
 A distant roaring and groaning filled the dark room, fol-lowed by a low grumbling rumble, and then by
the
 sound of metal being wrenched.
  
 Secca bolted upright in the oversized bed in the guest quarters. Ignoring the gumminess in her eyes, she
turned her head from one side to the other, trying to determine if the sound had come front the quarters
or from somewhere in Elahwa, but all she could hear was . . . nothing. Nothing except her own breathing.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Had she heard metal being bent and wrenched? Or had she dreamed that she had heard it? Or had it
been another distant and massive song-spell? The sound had been so much like the sound of tortured
Harmonies that had fol-lowed the fall of the keep at Dolov. Had it been a dream because she felt she had
acted wrongly? Or had it been actual sorcery penetrating her sleep? More Sturinnese thunder-drum
sorcery?
  
 She started to lie back, but she could feel her heart pounding. So she swung her bare legs over the side
of the bed and sat there for several moments in the darkness, taking deep breaths and trying to relax.
After a time, she stood, wincing momentarily as her bare feet touched the polished gray stone tiles of the
floor. She eased out of the small bedchamber and into the larger main chamber of the guest suite, listening
with each step. The main cham-ber was dark and silent.
  
 Certain that her chambers were empty of all but her, Secca used a striker to light the candle on the small
desk in the main chamber, then eased the travel scrying mirror from its leather case and set it in the small
pool of light cast by the candle. Next came the lutar. Her fingers were stiff as she began to tune the
instrument, but before long she held the lutar and stood before both candle and glass. What did she need
to know?
  
 Finally, she began the spell.
  
 “Show me now and in this light
 what great spell has passed thisnight..."
  
 The glass silvered, and then presented an image mostly of grays. With the darkness in the room and the
darkness of the scene displayed, Secca found making out details was difficult. As she peered at the glass,
she began to recognize a scene showing only shattered rock, much as Dolov had looked, except Dolov
was on a bluff overlooking a river, and the structure Secca beheld seemed to be on a low rise of some
sort.
  
 She swallowed.
  
 A keep somewhere had been destroyed by sorcery, but where she had no idea. Dumar? Ebra?
Ranuak?
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 With a sigh, Secca lifted the lutar and sang the words to release the first image. Then she tried a variation
on the spell.
  
 “Show me now and in this light
 Where in Dumar a spell has passed this night…”
  
 The mirror remained unchanged, reflecting only the candle above it, and hazy shadows, one of which
was Secca’s.
  
 Secca thought for a moment, then tried a third spell.
  
 “Show me now and as you must,
 the Neserean keep just turned to dust...”
  
 The scene was nearly identical to the first, and rather than struggle with keeping the image in the glass.
Secca immediately sang the release couplet.
  
 “Belmar?" she murmured.
  
 The fourth spell was an attempt to see if it had indeed been the Neserean sorcerer and plotter.
  
 “Showme now and as you must.
 the keep that Belmar just turned to dust..."
  
  
 The third image was near-identical to the first two, and Secca released it quickly.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 She swallowed and began the fourth spellsong.
  
 “Show me now and in this light
 how stands Clayre in open sight ...”
  
 The glass showed the dark-haired sorceress, hair disheveled, pacing beside a table holding a scrying
glass.
  
 Secca nodded and released the spell. Clayre was safe, but as disturbed as Secca. The red-haired
sorceress looked down at her own blank glass and shivered once, then set the lutar on the side of the
desk, before turning and walking to the center window, conscious of the chill welling away from the
Panes, even through the closed shutters. No sounds came from the city beyond the
 glass.
  
 After a moment, the sorceress unfastened the brass catch, folded back the right shutter, and gazed out
on the gray-paved lane, darker and grayer in the night, that led out to the main boulevard.
  
 Belmar? She had felt that it couldn’t have been Clayre, not the way that the Harmonies had protested,
and the mirror had confirmed that.
  
 And why at night? Not that she had not done spells at night or in the darkness.
  
 Secca leaned forward until her nose almost touched the cold glass, glancing upward... Darksong was
indeed in the sky, but past its zenith, but Neserea was to the west, where the red moon was higher in the
heavens.
  
 So the spell had been sung when Darksong had been high in the night sky in Neserea.
  
 Did that mean that a Clearsong spell for building a bridge would be more effective when the white moon
was at its zenith during the day?
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 She frowned. While there were some mentions of moon positions in the older books, they all referred to
Darksong. Yet it followed that they should affect spells under either moon.
  
 Slowly and carefully, she closed the shutter and re latched it Then she crossed to the desk, where she
re-cased the lutar, but left the mirror on the desk. After another moment, she blew out the candle and
made her way back to the bed, where she eased her way back under the comforter.
  
 She took a deep and slow breath, trying to relax, at least enough to get back to sleep.
  
 Belmar? Neserea? She turned over. . . once, and then again.
  
 87
  
 Secca adjusted the relatively clean tunic, then stepped toward the window of the main chamber of the
guest suite. The morning was gray and looked cold outside, but there seemed to be little wind. “It’s not
snowing or raining.”
  
 “Not yet,” replied Richina.
  
 Secca walked toward the wall peg on which hung her green leather riding jacket, removing it and
slipping into it.
  
 “You don’t want me to come?” asked Richina.
  
 “There’s no reason for you to,” Secca said, trying to avoid pointing out that the invitation was for the
Sorceress-Protector alone. “You could practice or rest. You can prac-tice here, if you like.” She sighed.
“I wouldn’t mind the rest.”
  
 “You didn’t sleep that well, did you?"
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “No,” admitted the redhead. “Not after all the work it took to find out what Belmar had done. I still
don’t know what keep he brought down, except that it’s in Neserea, and it’s not in Esaria.”
  
 “You don’t think . . .? Lady Clayre, I mean?’
  
 “No, She’s safe.” Secca shook her head, then fastened the oiled leather riding jacket “I think I would
have felt something like that, but I did use the glass last night to make sure. She was as surprised as I
was, I think, because she had her glass out." Secca glanced around, then reclaimed the green felt hat, but
tucked it into the jacket belt rather than wear it. "I hope I won’t be too long, but...I just don’t know.”
  
 “I hope the meeting with the counselor goes well.”
  
 “So do I.” Secca paused at the doors “Best you study the arrow spell. You may need to use it before
we return to Loiseau.”
  
 "The arrow spell . . . for thunder-drums?"
  
 Secca nodded before she turned toward the door, then stopped. “Could either of us have stopped them
here by ourselves? Do you think that will change when we get to Dumar?"
  
 “We’re going to Dumar?”
  
 “If we don’t, we’ll find the Sturinnese coming to us.” The older sorceress smiled. “So practice.”
  
 “Ah . . . yes, lady”
  
 Secca slipped out and down the corridor to the stairs. Wilten and Alcaren were mounted and waiting by
the rear entrance when Secca walked out. Behind them, in formation, were four guardsDyvan , Rukor,
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

Achar, and Eas-lon--- and a squad of lancers from Loiseau.
  
 “Good morning, lady,” offered Wilten.
  
 Alcaren smiled and inclined his head. “I trust you slept well.”
  
 “As well as could be expected, and certainly in greater comfort, thank you." She returned the smile,
before look-ing back up at Wilten. “Are the lancers comfortable?"
  
 “Most comfortable, lady, and well fed. They are pleased for the respite.” The overcaptain smiled.
  
 “And the SouthWomen?" Secca turned to Alcaren.
  
 “They are indeed, lady, and pleased to be back here.”
  
 “Good.” Secca mounted, conscious again of how she practically had to jump and lever herself into the
saddle because of her lack of height, at least when there were no mounting blocks convenient. As she
rode forward behind Achar, and the standard he bore, Wilten rode beside her on her right, and Alcaren
on the left.
  
 When the short column rode out from the paved lane and turned northward on the gray brick road
toward the Council building, the breeze stiffened. Fine misting drops of rain swept into her face, droplets
that stung as if they were tiny ice pellets. Secca pulled the green felt hat from her belt and pulled it down
on her head, so that the front brim would deflect some of the icy rain.
  
 “Good thing we’re here in quarters," observed Wilten.
  
 .          “Very good,” Seeca admitted, wondering as she did how long she could impose on the city, and
how long she dared. That would depend on the meeting with the Counselor, and on what she could
discover in the next day or so through the use of the scrying glass.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “You look worried,” ventured Alcaren.
  
 "Iam,” the sorceress admitted.“We have a respite, but the Sturinnese are still in Dumar.” She decided
against saying more for the moment.
  
 Alcaren frowned slightly, then shifted his weight in the saddle. “Up there, to the left, you can see the
walls for the quarters of the Free City’s lancers. Just this side--- the building with the pale green
shutters--- that’s the Boiled Pot.”
  
 “Boiled pot?’ asked Secca.
  
 "It is an odd name for a tavern--- it’s not really an inn— but it’s because the old proprietress said she
boiled every pot before cooking anything in it. She claimed that kept food from spoiling.”
  
 “Did it . . . Secca shook her head. Anna had insisted on the same thing for water used in childbirth. ‘It
should work.”
  
 Alcaren shrugged. “I wasn’t here that long before you arrived, but the local lancers claimed no one ever
got the flux from eating there."
            
 “Maybe more innkeepers should boil their pots," interjected Wilten with a laugh.
  
 “Especially in Ebra,” added Alcaren wryly.
  
 “I didn’t know..." Secca grinned at the Ranuan over-captain.
  
 “I’m fine . . . now. The ride from Hanils was . . .shall we say I have had more comfortable journeys.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Secca couldn’t help a gentle laugh at the wry and self-deprecating tone of Alcaren’ s response. “I’ m
glad you ' re fine now.”
  
 As the column turned left at the unmarked squarish building, Wilten pointed to the green across the
green. “Don’t see anyone there today.”
  
 “We wouldn’t be out in this if we lived here,” Secca replied. “I’d just as soon it didn’t turn to snow.”
  
 “It seldom does along the coast,” Alcaren said.
  
  Anna would have had an explanation for that, Secca reflected, realizing that there was much she could
have learned--- and hadn’t. And now she never would. The red-head reined up the gray mare on the
side of the steps leading up to the square columns at the front of the Coun-cil building, opposite the
bronze hitching rings set into the blue marble wall that comprised the side facing of the steps. She
dismounted quickly, and tied the gray to the end ring.
  
 Wilten nodded at the sorceress. ‘We’ll be here till you return, lady.”
  
 “I don’t know how long it will be."
  
 “We’ll be here.”
            .
 Alcaren dismounted, but did not leave his mount, nod-ding as Secca turned to walk back to the front of
the half-score marble steps. Between the darkness of the clouds overhead and the dampness left by the
fine rain on the stone, the pale blue marble steps appeared a darkish gray.
  
 Dyvan and Easlon followed Secca up the steps.
  
 A single woman guard in a crimson short cloak, wearing a brace of shortswords, stepped forward as
Secca walked through the square archway and right hand door of the double oak doors.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Lady Sorceress, Counselor Veria is the third chamber on the left.”
  
 “Thank you.” Secca offered a smile.
  
 “My pleasure, lady.” The smile presented more than mere politeness.
  
 Secca’s boots clicked on the blue marble floor, as she walked toward the doorway indicated by the
guard. Her steps echoed loudly enough that the sorceress suspected her heels were worn down and the
boot nails were striking the stone. She slipped off the hat, folded it, and slipped it through her belt She
tried to smooth her hair somewhat, knowing that it wouldn’t have mattered if she’d used a brush or
comb.
  
 The door to the chamber was unguarded, and Secca al-most felt foolish as she looked in to see the
counselor seated behind a wide table-desk, alone except for a stack of scrolls.
  
 “Lady Sorceress, do come in.”
  
 “Thank you.” Secca looked to Dyvan and Easlon. “If you would guard the door. . .?"
  
 “Yes, lady?"
  
 Secca eased the polished golden oak door closed and stepped into the chamber, a room roughly four
yards wide and three deep, containing a table-desk with a chair behind it, three chairs before it, and a
series of footchests lined up against the wall to the left. The table-desk was set before the single tall and
narrow window, with two oil lamps upon it—one on each side. Each side of the chamber also had an oil
lamp in a sconce. Although all four were lit, the room was still dim.
  
 Veria gestured toward the chairs. "I must apologize, but luxury is yet frowned on in Elahwa”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “The quarters for us are luxury enough in this season and so far from Mencha, and we are most
grateful.” Secca sat down in the chair to the right.
  
 “We are even more grateful for your presence and your decision to rescue Elahwa before dealing with
the keep at Dolov.” The counselor studied Secca before speaking again. “Alcaren’s message was brief.
He only wrote that you had destroyed the keep and left young Haddev there to rebuild and restore the
holding. I assume you used sor-cery.”
  
 “We did. I asked for those within to surrender. They refused. They even tried to kill the lancer delivering
the message.”
  
 “You decided to destroy the keep, then?"
  
 ‘The clouds were gathering to the north for another storm. We couldn’t stay. We had no siege engines,
and not that many lancers.” Secca shrugged. “I was tired and angry. Lady Anna pardoned Bertmynn’s
heirs and gave the keep and lands to them if they were loyal to Hadrenn and Lord Robero. Mynntar
rebelled, and his heirs refused to accept Lord Hadrenn’s or Lord Robero’s rule.” The sorceress paused.
“I’ve thought about it since. It might have been better if I had used sorcery to slay all within and left the
keep intact”
  
 “I think not,” replied Veria. "I say that not because I despise Bertmynn and his heirs. I do despise them,
but that is not why."
  
 “Oh?” Secca raised her eyebrows.
  
 “Any who rebuild it will know the effort and golds re-quired. Young Haddev will first call dissonance
upon you, in time, he will respect you, for he will learn what it takes to build . . . If you had emptied it and
bestowed it upon him...then he would have taken it as his due. Even if it goes to the younger brother, the
older will not forget.”
  
 Veria offered a crooked smile. “They will not like you much, but they also will not cross you."
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “I can’t say I thought of that,” Secca admitted.
  
 “You followed what you felt, and that is oft right more than fine words?"
  
 “Others have said that” Secca recalled Anna.
  
 “Remember this. Long after you and I are moldering dust in a fine tomb, for you will have that, men will
read of your deeds, and they will call you worse than a ruttng bitch because you employed sorcery to
slay fine lancers and armsmen. They will praise a masterful battle in which more died and suffered
because of the skill at arms of the marshal who won. Yet, in the end, all are dead. Most men, especially
lords and holders, wish to be known for their valor and strength.”
  
 “And women?" asked Secca. “Are we that different?”
  
 “Some women are like men, and some men think like women, but I would say that most women often
care more about what results than how the results were obtained, save they also realize that some means
will never achieve the results wished.”
  
 Secca nodded, although she was less sure of that than Veria seemed to be.
  
 “If I might ask,” Veria asked cautiously, “why did you determine to return to Elahwa?"
  
 Secca smiled, trying to compose a truthful answer that didn’t make her seem too simplistic or too
calculating. “I suppose because I could see no point in trying to return to Mencha with the Sand Pass
drifted deep in snow. The lanc-ers and players need a respite before we try such, and I thought there
was the chance that we might be needed to go to Dumar.”
  
 "Needed?" Veria shook her head. "Lord Robero should have dispatched one of the other sorceresses
the moment be discovered the Sea-Pigs had used the thunder-drums to raise the sea against Narial.”
  
 Secca wondered if she should have suggested such, or gone herself—except then Ebra would have
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

fallen.
  
 “You wonder that you should have gone?" asked the counselor. “That would have been no better, for
Elahwa would have fallen—and Ebra. Sending a sorceress to Neserea was unwise. A rebellion without
Sea-Priests is far less to be feared than ships and lancers in white in Dumar.”
  
 “Perhaps not,” Secca said slowly. “There is a sorcerer in Neserea. He brought down a walled keep
somewhere there last evening. The disruptions were enough to wake me.”
            
 Veria leaned forward in the chair behind the table-desk. “You could sense that all these many deks
away?”
  
 “Unhappily.”
  
 “Can the other sorceress sense such?”
  
 “I don’t know about them all,” Secca replied. “Some can, and some cannot.”
  
 "From that far away?"
  
 Secca offered a laugh. ‘We’ve never had this happen before, and I’ve not been able to talk to them.”
  
 ‘What of the younger sorceress with you?"
  
 “She is still learning,” Secca said. “She is the youngest who is beyond an apprentice.”
  
 “You were wise to bring her.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Before Veria could pursue more about sorcery, the red-headed sorceress smiled again and asked,
‘What can you tell me about Alcaren?"
  
 “Possibly less than you aheady know.” Veria smiled in turn. “He was not even yet born when I left
Encora. He comes from an old trading family, but not one of the wealthiest. He is trusted by the
Matriarch not to harm Ranuak, or she would not have sent him, and he is skilled enough to listen to his
captains, but strong enough that they will not overtly disobey him. There is more to him than meets the
eye, but he is skilled enough to hide what that may be, but not skilled enough to hide that such ex-ists.”
  
 Secca laughed gently. “Much of that---"
  
 “You have already discerned,” Veria completed Secca’s sentence.
  
 “What is there that is not to be seen?"
  
 Veria smiled “Besides his interest in you, you mean?"
  
 “Me? He is but interested in me because I am a sorceress.”
  
 “I have no doubts that he follows what you do, but he follows more than that.”
  
 Secca managed to keep from flushing.
  
 “Do not worry, He will never press, and if he is not to your inclination, then you need not worry.”
  
 Secca was not sure what to say.
  
 “That is but a guess on my part, but I have some years more experience in dealing with men.” Veria
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

shrugged. “As for the other, he reminds me of my father, although I could not say why in all respects. He
was not here long before you came, but he considers matters carefully, and seems to judge wisely.”
  
 “Do you know why he was chosen to come to your assistance?” Secca wondered whatVeria had seen
that she had not.
  
 "There was no one else the Matriarch could have sent. It would have been ill-regarded had the
SouthWomen come under their own overcaptain.”
  
 “Even when things were so..."
  
 “Desperate?’ asked Veria. “We would have accepted any aid. That you must know. But the Matriarch
must also answer to the men of Ranuak, and they would have been far less pleased. Nor would those in
Defalk or Dumar or Mansuur have been pleased with SouthWomen under their own overcaptain. The
SouthWomen could not protest, not when they had requested for so long to be sent.” The coun-selor
lifted her shoulders expressively.
  
 “Why Alcaren?"
  
 “She trusts him.That is most clear.Why she trusts him—that I do not know, although what I have seen
and heard would confirm that he is trustworthy.”
  
 “He seems so,” Secca agreed.
  
 ‘What do you plan, Lady Sorceress?’ Veria’s eyes seemed to twinkle as she waited.
  
 “I do not know yet. What I learn in the days ahead will tell me what courses may be open to us?”
  
 “Your only course is one that brings you to defeat the Sea-Priests as soon as you can. Each season that
you delay brings more lancers and more thunder-drums into Lied-wahr.” Veria’s voice was calm, but
almost chill.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “That may be, but even getting to Dumar would seem impossible at this moment,” Secca pointed out.
‘The passes from Ebra to Defalk are blocked. The ports at Encora and Narial are blockaded. We have
no ships, and we are not equipped to cross the Sand Hills into Ranuak,
 even were we to be welcome.” Secca paused. “Have you ships that would carry us?”
  
 “None that can easily reach us past the Sturinnese to take you to Dumar,” admitted Veria. “We may yet
find a way to reach Ranuak, and there the Matriarch could assist you, should you choose to go to
Encora.”
  
 “How could we be certain that we would not face op-position from the Matriarch?"
  
 “I cannot be most certain,” admitted Veria. “I doubt that the Matriarch would make you unwelcome in
Ranuak. I do not know that I would be welcome, but most of Ranuak would welcome a sorceress who
was devoted to repelling the Sea-Priests from Liedwahr.”
  
 “Most?” Secea lifted her eyebrows.
  
 “Most. The Ladies of the Shadows fear sorcery in any form and for any reason, although they will
accept that which is but used to watch or gather information.”
  
 “There are Ladies of the Shadows everywhere,” Secca said.
  
 “But not so many nor so powerful as those in Ranuak,” Veria replied. “The Matriarch watches them
most closely, and they her.”
  
 “They would oppose sorcery to stop the Sturinnese?” asked Secca.
  
 “They fear that Ranuak would again be laid waste, as it was in the Spell-Fire Wars.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “But . . .”
  
 “Exactly. The Wars gave them more freedom than any women in Liedwahr, or indeed in the world, yet
they seem to have forgotten such.”
  
 “Has the Matriarch?’ questioned Secca.
  
 “No. She would use any tool within her power to stop the Maitre. She is young for a Matriarch, and
must move with great care. But she would use me—or you.”
  
 Secca wasn’t quite sure how to respond, or that she should reveal she knew the Matriarch was Veria’s
sister. After a moment, she said, “You make her sound cold and most manipulative.”
  
 “She is not cold, but she is manipulative. Every Matri-arch must be so, while seeming to be most caring
and direct and honest” Veria raised her eyebrows before asking, “Is that not so with any ruler? For none
can be all things to all folk and thus must only appear such.”
  
 “I suppose so.”
  
 “Is it any different in being the shadow sorceress?"
  
 “The shadow sorceress?" Secca’s question was involuntary.
  
 “By remaining in the shadows, you and the one before you let others draw your image as they wished, if
with a touch of darkness and mystery.”
  
 "We...neither of us was or is all things to all folk.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “No, and that is why you chose the shadows, but at noon there are no shadows.”
  
 Secca shook her head at the cryptic words. “What do you want?”
  
 “You have already provided what we needed most. We can and will ask no more of you.” Veria stood.
“You may remain as you wish, all winter if necessary, or until the passes are clear for your return to
Defalk”
  
 “You don’t think that will happen,” Secca replied, standing in turn.
  
 “No. Given you are the daughter in spirit of the great sorceress, given a weak lord in Defalk, and a
weaker one in Ebra, and given what the Sturinnese plan . . . I think you will find acting is better than not
acting. But that choice must be yours.”
  
 “There are many ways to act.”
  
 “And as many not to act,” Veria replied. “I trust that you will do what is right and necessary, as you have
thus far. I doubt that you could do otherwise, however you choose.”
  
 ‘We will see.”
  
 “As I said, you are welcome so long as you wish, and I--- all of us---sincerely mean that. Without you,
we would already be dead or in chains. Nor do I wish to hasten any decisions. Whatever you decide,
you and your forces need rest first. I will be here when you are ready to decide, and it may be that I can
assist you.”
  
 “Rest we do need, and we are thankful for your support.” Secca inclined her head.
  
 “Andyou willalways have it.” While the emphasis on ‘you’ was slight, it was definite. . .
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 As Secca walked back down the corridor, followed by her guards, Veria’s words echoed in her
thoughts.That choice must be yours. That choice must be yours ...
  
 Would it be, really?
  
 88
 Encora, Ranuak
  
 In his small study off the balcony, Aetlen finishes the chord on the mandolin with a flourish, then grins at
his daughter. “There!”
  
 “I liked that one,” Verlya says. “I haven’t heard it before.”
  
 “I learned it from your grandfather, Ulgar. He called it a tune to stir the blood. Your mother thinks it’s
too stri-dent.”
  
 Sitting on the stool across from her father, the blonde girl frowns.
  
 "Too loud and noisy,” Aetlen explains. "Sometimes loud feels good. Will teach it to me?” “If you
promise not to play it often around your mother. She needs quiet these days.”
  
 ‘If you listen,” promises Verlya.
  
 "I will.” Aetlen looks to his left as the study door opens, and the Matriarch steps into the room.
  
 “Mother!” Verlya leaps from the stool, takes two steps, and wraps her arms around Alya’s waist.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 The Matriarch returns the hug, the somberness leaving her features as she holds her youngest child. In
time, she disengages herself gently and smiles, “Could you go downstairs and tell Cook and Ulya that we
would like to eat shortly?"
  
 “You’re eating with us?"
  
 “I am," Alya affirms.
  
 "I'll tell them." With a smile, the blonde girl bounces from the study.
  
 Aetlen rises and closes the door. "I heard . . . the shadow sorceress returned to Elahwa,” he says
slowly. “With Alcaren and the SouthWomen.”
  
 “She did not bring Hadrenn’s lancers, nor the company from Silberfels." Alya slips into the chair across
from her consort “Your study is warmer."
  
 ‘It’s smaller, and there’s but one window and the doors. I was giving Verlya a lesson with the mandolin."
  
 “She may need it,” Alya says darkly.
  
 “The shadow sorceress?”
  
 “She may come to our aid. Not with lanccrs, but with what she knows.” Alya’s eyes are dark as she
looks to her consort. “How can I refuse if she does? If she does not, we must face the old hard choices.
We may in any case.”
  
 “Do we need her aid? There is no hunger, and no older folk are dying of chill and consumption. We
have stores in the granaries—enough for years.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Do we wait until Dumar falls, and the Sturinnese try again? Do you think the Maitre will remove the
fleets once he holds Dumar?"
  
 “Can we break the blockade?”
  
 “With what? You know what happened the last time. We can protect the channel and keep them from
entering, but they can destroy our trade, and in time that will destroy all that is Ranuak."
  
 “Willit come to that? With the shadow sorceress in Elahwa?" asks Aetlen.
  
 “Perhaps not. The shadow sorceress met with Veria,” Alya says.
  
 “Your eyes say you are worried--- most worried."
  
 “Veria will speak as she sees. She may well persuade the sorceress to aid us. Or she may let the
sorceress make that decision.”
  
 “You worry that the sorceresswill come to our assis-tance?" Aetlen frowns.
  
 “I do indeed, for that will lead us down the trail to the true horrors of a sorcery war. We had almost
managed to bury the old knowledge.” Alya shakes her head. “Then came the Sturinnese and the great
sorceress.”
  
 “Is it just the old knowledge?”
  
 “No. The Lady Anna understood beyond the rote spells, beyond the music, and, worse, she has taught
at least the shadow sorceress. The spell-poisonings are but the begin-ning of the horrors.” Alya’s lips
twist “Yet we cannot bury that knowledge, not to any good end this time.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “If you kill the shadow sorceress . . .?"
  
 “You want your daughters--- all daughters--- in chains and under the thunder-drums?”
  
 Aetlen shakes his head.
  
 “Whatever may come, it is but a question of the least of great evils.”
  
 “The least of great evils. . ." Aetlen turns toward the single small window, where he looks into the
darkness of an early winter evening for a moment before turning back. “Can you see nothing more
hopeful?”
  
 “I continue to hope, but I cannot say that I see better.”
  
 Alya takes a deep breath, and a smile appears on her face. “Let us go have dinner with the girls.”
  
 Aeden matches her smile with one of his own, then offers her his arm.
  
 89
  
 Still puzzled by her meeting with Counselor Veria, Secca walked slowly up the steps toward her guest
quarters. She nodded to Dymen, guarding her door, and stepped inside. Richina looked up from the lutar
and the notation, then set aside the instrument and hurried toward Secca.
  
 “How was the meeting with the counselor?’ asked the younger sandy-haired sorceress.
  
 ‘Interesting.” Secca paused. ‘We’re welcome to stay here so long as we wish, all winter if necessary.”
She un-fastened the damp riding jacket and hung it on the wall peg, with the green felt hat over it. Her
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

eyes went to the window, where fine ice pellets bounced intermittently against the glass. “It looks like we
won’t be going west or north anytime soon.”
  
 “Lady, might you tell me why you found it interesting?”
  
 “Puzzling, even.” Secca turned away from viewing the falling ice mist, certain she didn’t want to discuss
her puzzlement. “Do you feel up to singing some more scrying spells? You might as well get used to doing
more of them.” She glanced toward the door. “The players and the over-captains should be here in a
moment.”
  
 “You’ve summoned them all?” asked Richina. “We need to see what we face, and talk over what
every-one knows. That will mean a number of spells. We have to see what’s happening in Encora,
Narial, and Neserea. You’ve done scrying spells, and now you’ve seen enough away from Mencha to be
able to visualize things. I can do the first spell, and you look at what the glass shows, and then try the
second spell in that area.” Secca gestured at the cased scrying glass set on the corner of the desk table.
“You’ll see.”
  
 Thrap.
  
 “Your players and overcaptains, Lady,” called Dymen, almost immediately following the rap on the
door.
  
 “Have them come in.”
  
 Palian was the first into the chamber, and she bowed, and then moved farther into the room, almost to
the desk. Delvor followed. Then came Wilten and Alcaren.
  
 Once the door closed behind Alcaren, Secca gestured toward the table. “We have some matters we
should talk over.”
  
 With a look at the five chairs set around the table, Ri-china slipped into Secca’s bedchamber and
returned with a stool.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “I can take that, Lady Richina,” Alcaren offered.
  
 “I am younger,” Richina countered with a smile.
  
 Alcaren returned the smile of the younger sorceress with one of his own. As Richina settled herself in the
stool. the Ranuan’s eyes shifted to Secca, to whom he offered a rueful and knowing expression.
  
 Secca almost laughed, for Alcaren’s face clearly ex-pressed dismay—exaggerated and overdone, but
still dis-may---at the thought that he was too old to take a stool.
  
 The others seated themselves—Secca with Richina on her left, Palian beside Secca, Delvor flanking
Richina, and the overcaptains across the table from the sorceresses.
  
 Secca glanced from one face to the next before speaking. “I have not mentioned to you what I
discovered last night, except to Richina,” Secca began. “The sorcerer Belmar has begun to use greater
powers, even calling upon thunder-drums and possibly Darksong. Last night, he brought down an entire
keep in Neserea with sorcery. From what we have already discovered, he intends to bring down Lady
Annayal and to become the next Prophet of Music.”
  
 "From where did this sorcerer appear?” asked Alcaren.
  
 "He is the holder of Worlan, a coastal town mainly to the west of Esaria. We think that he has been
taught sorcery by the Sturinnese,” Secca said.
  
 “Can what we do affect aught there? asked Wilten. “With this weather,” he added, gesturing toward the
window, “there is little enough we can do.”
  
 “Yet everywhere we gaze,” Palian said slowly, smoothing back her gray hair unconsciously, “there are
the Sea-Priests. They sent lancers and thunder-drummers to support Mynntar. They attacked Elahwa.
They ravage Du-mar, and now we learn that they are behind the revolt in Neserea." She looked at
Wilten, seated beside her. “Do you think such is mere chance, overcaptain?"
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Ah. . . no, chief player. No. I but questioned what we could do in this time of winters” Wilten shifted his
weight in the unpadded wooden chair.
  
 ‘We will not do anything today, or tomorrow, or perhaps longer,” Secca said. “The horses are worn and
thin. So are the lancers and players. Now is the time to think and plan.” She gestured toward the glass in
the middle of the table. "To think and plan, you need to see what we can see in the glass.”
  
 Secca rose and took the lutar from its case, tuning it slowly. Her eyes flicked to the window. Outside,
the fine ice pellets had stopped falling, but the mist seemed to be thickening, cloaking the lane to the
avenue with a white fog. She finished tuning and began the first spell-song.
  
 “Show us now and in the glass
 what with Belmar comes to pass..."
  
 As Secca completed the spell-song, the mirror sil-vered, then revealed the dark-haired holder and
sorcerer standing in a library of sorts. Behind a desk sat a heavyset and older man wearing a rich
burgundy tunic. Bel-mar was smiling as he spoke. The older man frowned.
  
 “The other is not happy,” Wilten said.
  
 “We do not know where this is,” Delvor murmured. Secca took the grease pencil and scrawled a line on
the rough brown paper before her, then eased it in front Of Richina. As Secca seated herself the younger
sor-ceress stood and cleared her throat, then took Secca’s lutar and sang the modified spell.
  
 The mirror showed a low villalike structure set before low hills. Long rows of dark sticklike objects
seemed to fill the fields behind the structures that formed three sides of a square around the villa itself.
  
 “Those are vineyard." Palian pointed to the wooden trestle poles. “That has to be in the Ferantha
Valley.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Secca frowned, trying to recall the Neserean geog-raphy. “That’s east of Sperea and south of Eiloch,
isn’t it?”
  
 Alcaren nodded.
  
 Withhis nod, Secca was most conscious, again, that Alcaren had not watched the glass on the table
desk, but had concentrated entirely upon her, and then upon Richina, as each had sung the scrying spell.
The Ranuan was all too familiar with far too many things, from ge-ography in lands where he had not
traveled—or said he had not traveled---to herbal remedies for overextended sorceresses.
  
 “It is south of Elioch,” Palian affirmed.
  
 Secca nodded at Richina, who sang the release cou-plet.
  
 “So Belmar is raising the south of Neserea against Lady Clayre and Annayal?" asked Wilten.
  
 “Most successfully, it appears,” Secca suggested.
  
 “You have dealt with a rebellion and withsorcery,” pointed out Delvor. “You are suggesting that matters
are different in Neserea?"
  
 "They must be,” replied Palian, “or Lady Clayre would not be having such trouble.”
  
 "There are large differences,” suggested Alcaren slowly.
  
 Those around the table looked to the Ranuan.
  
 “The Evult attacked Defalk, and the Lady Anna de-stroyed all his forces and buried a goodly section of
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

the northwest under molten rock. Bertmynn rebelled several years later, and the Lady Anna thoroughly
destroyed all his forces. Mynniar rebelled, and even with Sturinnese aid, the ladies here have destroyed
his forces.” Alcaren paused, glanced around the table as if to see that the others were waiting for a
conclusion. “The Prophet of Music and his ill-favored son were defeated on Defal-kan soil, not in
Neserea, and none returned to tell of the disaster, save the few who supported Lord High Coun-selor
Hanfor. Three times has Ebra been crushed. Never has such happened in Neserea. Also, Neserea is far
larger than Ebra and far richer. Even were a rebel to conquer Lord Hadrenn, what would he gain?
Whereas in Neserea . . .“
  
 The nods went around the table.
  
 “There is little we could do in Neserea, even were the passes clear,” Secca observed. “The difficulties
there show why we will receive little help from Defalk or the other sorceresses.”
  
 “It is but a rebellion,” Wiken said.
  
 "That may well be,” Secca replied, “but this rebel would make himself Prophet of Music, and both of his
predecessors attacked and invaded Defalk. Those attacks are certainly upon the mind of Lord Robero."
  
 “Too much.” The murmur was so low that Secca could not determine who said it, save that it could not
have been Alcaren, not from the half-smile and nod on his face.
  
 “That may be, but that is as it is,” she replied. "Du-mar is the problem. It has always been the weakest of
the southern lands.” Secca stood and took the lutar once more, clearing her throat before singing.
  
 “Show us now and in this glass
 where Dumar’s battles now come to pass ...
  
 The mirror split into six separate images and in all cases showed the white-coated Sturinnese moving
forward, seemingly against no forces whatsoever. Secca watched closely, concentrating on holding the
images as she did.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 The others half rose from their seats and also watched.
  
 In the middle image, one of the lancers pitched from the saddle with a long war-arrow through his neck.
  
 After a time, Secca sang the release couplet, set down the lutar, and reseated herself, ignoring the
renewed rattling of ice pellets against the window.
  
 "Whoever leads the Dumarans,” Alcaren said, “he is trying to avoid large battles. That is all he can do,”
  
 “Attack and run before they can bring the thunder-drums into play,” Wilten added with a nod. “Use
arrows from afar and arch them into the lancers.”
  
 “That will but slow them,” Alcaren pointed out.
  
 “Pethaps they hope Lord Robero will come to their aid,” suggested Palian.
  
 “No one else can,” Delvor added.
  
  Alcaren raised his eyebrows, but did not speak.
  
  “Do we know. . . who holds Dumar, or what remains of it?” asked Palian.
  
 Secca shook her head. “The last word we had was that Lord Clehar was mustering his forces, and that
was many weeks ago.” She took out the grease pencil again and scrawled a few more words on the
paper, then slipped it to Richina.
  
 The younger sorceress rose and took the lutar.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Show us now and as you must
 the one who leads and seeks Dumars trust...".
  
  
 The sole image in the glass was that of a younger, dark-haired and sharp-featured man in a crimson tunic
astride a dark chestnut. Seeca did not recognize the man, although he appeared similar to Lord Clehar.
“That’s not Clehar.”
  
 "It is not surprising,” Palian pointed out. “Clehar was gathering his forces when last we heard, and he
planned to lead them himself. He had no sorcerers or sorcer-esses, and his forces were much inferior to
those of the Sea-Priests.”
  
 Secca nodded to Richina to sing the release couplet.
  
 ‘They still hold out against the Sturinnese,” Delvor said.
  
 “How long?” asked Wilten. “For another season?"
  
  “Not past midsummer, I would guess,” offered Al-caren. “Unless they have assistance. Perhaps not that
long.”
  
 “We cannot reach them from here,” Palian stated, “Not unless we cross Ranuak, and, even were we
wel-come, that would take almost until spring.”
  
 “We aren’t deciding anything today,” Secca said. “I just wanted you all to see what we could bring forth
in the glasses We also need to see what is happening in Encora and where the Sturinnese ships are. If
they have left . . . then we could travel by sea."
  
 ‘They will not have left,” said Alcaren firmly.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “You are doubtless correct, overcaptain,” Secca re-plied, standing and lifting the lutar once more, “but
we should at least check the glass to see.”
  
 At Secea’s words, a smile flitted across Richina’s face.
  
 Alcaren also smiled, almost ruefully, as Secca began to sing.
  
 “Show us now, for all to see
 where near Encora sail and found may be
 the ships of Sturinn..."
  
 The mirror obligingly displayed the picket lines of ships beyond the channel that Secca had come to
rec-ognize all too well. After singing the release song, she moistened her lips and turned to Alcaren.
“They seem to be there, yet. Overcaptain, as you know Encora, if you would explain...”
  
 “I have told Lady Seeca this before,” Alcaren said. “The channel from the port harbor is most narrow,
and bordered by rocky shoals. Beyond the channel, the wa ter is shallow for many deks seaward, and
the Sturin-nese sail the deeper waters beyond that. There are ways for coastal ships of shallow draft to
avoid the war vessels, but not for the large traders of greater draft. There are large... there are many
defenses along the channel, and all in Encora, men and women, are trained in the use of blades and
bows. Eneora could be taken from the sea, it is true, but the costs would be so high as not even the
Sea-Priests would wish such.”
  
 “So they would prefer to take Dumar first?” asked Wilten.
  
 Alcaren nodded.
  
 “Ranuak can hold out for perhaps years, but it can offer little help to Dumar. Is that how you would say
matters stand, overcaptain?” asked Secca.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “From what I have seen, that is so.”
  
 “Were we intent . . . were we intent on taking the fight to the Sturinnese in Dumar, would the Matriarch
allow us passage? Would we be welcome? How would we be received?" asked Secca.
  
 “I cannot speak for the Matriarch, Lady Secca. I am but an overcaptain, and not one of those most
favored. I would think we would be well-received, but those are but my feelings."
  
 “With all our lancers except yours men?’ questioned Palian.
  
 “There are companies of men in the Ranuan lancers, and their officers are also men,” Alcaren pointed
out.
  
 “I presume our welcome would be greater the shorter our stay?” Secca studied the Ranuan.
  
 Alcaren laughed. “Not . . ." He paused. “That is most likely so.”
  
 “I see.” Secca nodded. After a moment, she stood. "There is little else we should discuss at the moment.
I would ask that you all consider what we have seen and what has been said. We will meet tomorrow. I
will inform you.” She smiled. “Thank you all.”
  
 As the others stood, Secca nodded toward the Ran-uan. “Overcaptain Alcaren . . . if I could have a few
mo-ments more of your time?”
  
 Richina glanced at Alcaren, then at Secca.
  
 “If you would practice those spells in your room,” Secca said gently, “We’ll go over them later.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Oh, yes . . . lady.” Richiaa bowed and turned.
  
 Secca waited until the door closed behind Delvor, the last to leave, before gesturing for Alcaren to
reseat him self. “I need to know more about Ranuak—and about you.” She slipped back into her chair.
  
 “What would you like to know?” Alcaren took the chair directly across thetable from Secca.
  
 “You have said that the Matriarch could spare but ten companies of lancers, and then two more with
yours. Yet you just said that all were trained in arms, and that it would be costly for Sturinn to take
Encora.”
  
 “Both are true. There are but a few more than twenty companies of Lancers maintained by the
Matriarch. Their pay comes from the tariffs from the Exchange and from tariffs on goods passing through
the port. That is all that the tariffs will support A good lancer is worth many men and women with blades
and bows. But in the streets of acity, where a lancer cannot turn or charge easily and where there are
thousands of men and women, a hundred companies of lancers might fail, unless the city were reduced to
rubble by sorcery.”
  
 “And so long as the channel is defended, the thunder drums cannot get close enough?”
  
 “Exactly.” Alcaren smiled.
  
 Secca wanted to shake her head, even as she found herself being charmed by the Ranuan’s wit and
knowledge, and by the gray-blue eyes that took in everything,
  
 seemingly without judgment. “Why is it, overcaptain, that you have an answer for everything?”
  
 “You have but asked the questions to which I have answers.”
  
 “Is your sister like you?"
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Alcaren shook his head. “She is like my mother, most able, and most able to calculate sums and tariffs
within her head. And she enjoys doing such.”
  
 “Do you have any other brothers or sisters?”
  
 “No. I fear that, having raised me, and having seen my sister, my mother did not wish to dare the
Harmo-nies again.” The Ranuangave an embarrassed laugh.
  
 “Most families in Encora are small?”
  
 “Two children . . . no more than three.”
  
 Secca nodded. That told her who was indeed in charge of the land. “Why is there still such fear of sor
cery? The Spell-Fire Wars took place so long ago..."
  
 “You have not seen Ranuak, have you?” "No."
  
 “There are bogs where the water yet bubbles up stinking of brimstone. There are places where nothing
will grow on the land, for morgen upon morgen, save per haps a stringvine, useful for nothing. There are
the Sand Hills, and at times when the winds blow different, an-other town is uncovered.” Alcaren
shuddered slightly. “I saw one, once, as a boy. There were bodies, like mummies, clad in what we might
wear, or in armor, and they had fallen where they stood, and something had sucked the very juices of life
out of them—and out of the land and the soil, and the winds whipped sand over them. There are towns
buried there that none have seen in thirty generations or more.”
  
 “There are no records of this,” Secea said.
  
 “There are many records, and maps, in the archives of the Matriarchs.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Why have few others heard this?”
  
 Alcaren laughed, without mirth. “Even now, would -be sorcerers sneak into Ranuak each time one hears
of a ruin or town being uncovered, seeking the secrets of the old sorceries. Would you want the world to
look like the Sand Hills, shimmering grains of lifelessness? We live in a land where, when the wind blows
the wrong way, we can smell what sorcery has done. Can you not understand?"
  
  Secca frowned.
  
 “Lady Secca . . . can you not see the dilemma that faces the Matriarch?”
  
 “I can see that she faces a problem, but not one so great as we face. If what you say is so, Sturnn will
take us all, save Mansuur, before the Sea-Priests turn on Ranuak.”
  
 “You are correct in that”
  
 Secca stopped. She looked at Alcaren, taking in the lustrous brown hair, the broad shoulders, and the
deep gray-blue eyes that seemed to hold a veiled sympathy---or was she seeing what she wished to see?
  
 After a moment, Alcaren added, “If the Sea-Priests are not stopped, Ranuak will also fall, be it a year or
two later, and all it has stood for will vanish under the chains of Sturinn.”
  
 The red-headed sorceress took a slow and silent breath.
  
 Alcaren waited, his eyes completely on Secca. “You are far more than you reveal,” she finally said. “I
have told you nothing but the truth, Lady Secca." “Truth can conceal as much as it reveals,” Secca
pointed out softly. “You know geography. You know about lands where you have not been, unless you
have been misleading me. You know about sorcery. You know trade, and even Counselor Veria knows
of you.”
  
 Alcaren grinned, an expression much like that of a boy with his hand caught in the jar of candied nuts.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Now why would she know of you, do you think?” Secca could feel that her smile was somewhere
between amused and almost malicious, perhaps because she felt as though she wrestled with the wind.
  
 Alcaren spread his hands, helplessly. “Perhaps you should tell me, Lady Secca?”
  
 “Encora is far from a small village, yet the counselor knew you. You speak well. You know a great deal,
and you have traveled. You have to be from animportant family. You might even be a cousin of the
Matriarch and her sister.”
  
 A quick flicker of the eyes was enough for Secca. “You are a cousin of the Matriarch.”
  
 Again, rather than denial, Alcaren offered the boyish and embarrassed smile. “I am. I admit it. I have
always been an embarrassment. No matter what I tried, it was never . . . accepted. Except for my being
a chief guard, and now an overcaptain.” The smile turned self-deprecating. “You can see why I would
rather remain as your overcaptain.”
  
 “Because you have been successful?”
  
 “I have not been unsuccessful, and what would I do were I to return to Encora?”
  
 “And that is why you decided to help us---or me?”
  
 "That is one of the reasons. Another is even more simple. I fear only sorcery can save Liedwahr- and
Ranuak. None in Ranuak can use it" Alcaren shrugged. “You can, and must.”
  
 “I must? You’re telling me I must?” Secca could feel sudden anger building.
  
 “You are angry. I can only tell you what. I see. You will use sorcery because, if you do not, you will die
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

or be chained by the Sturinnese, and then you will die, for you must be free.”
  
 Secca opened her mouth, then shut it. Finally, she stood. “We will talk later, overcaptain.”
  
 Alcaren rose from the chair, gracefully---and sadly, it seemed to Secca, even despite her anger and her
effort not to lash out at the overcaptain.
  
 “As you wish, Lady Secca,” he said, bowing.
  
 “When I wish.”
  
 “Yes, lady."
  
 Secca watched him slip out the door. Once it closed, she walked slowly to the window.
  
 Had she been angry because he had seen so much of her? Or because he’d seemed to pity her? Or
showed her that she was indeed trapped? That she was pushing to get to Dumar, for exactly the same
reasons he’d seen? That heknew what she faced, and hadn’t told her? Ex-cept he had, and he had also
told her the price sorcery had exacted from Ranuak.
  
 Or because she feared any man knowing her heart and soul?
  
 Swallowing, she looked into the distance, a distance misted by fog and weather.
  
 Outside, the ice pellets rattled against the thick glass of the windowpanes, and the misting fog rose from
the gray brick paving stones of the lone below the windows.
  
 90
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 From where she sat on one side of the conference table in her guest quarters, Secca glanced out the
window. Thin streams of cold water oozed down the panes. The rain, that had already fallen on the lane
and boulevard be-yond, shimmered silver in the gray midmorning light. Secca had the feeling that rain fell
all the time in Elahwa in the winter, and that she would be most tired of the chill, dampness, and gray
sides by the time she could depart, if she could determine how best to get her forces safely to Dumar.
  
 Richina followed Secca’s glance. ‘It rains much here. Do you think it does also in Encora?”
  
 “It is on the Southern Ocean, and I would guess so.” Secca looked back down at the scrying glass set in
the middle of the table. “Were we to go to Ranuak first, what could we do against the Sturinnese?” she
asked, musingly. She had some ideas, more than a few, but was interested in what Richina thought.
  
 “Did Overcaptain Alcaren suggest . . .?"
  
 “He had many suggestions.”
  
 Richina flushed and looked down.
  
 “Not those kinds of suggestions.” Secca laughed. “Is that all that is on your mind?"
  
 “He watches you, more than he would need, even were he a spy, and he is handsome.”
  
 “Striking, rather than handsome. And no, he was most reserved, and anything but forward.”
  
 Richina did not look at Secca.
  
 “He is a very private man, Richina. It is most difficult to draw him out, and even more difficult when
others are around. I was trying to find out more about Encora and about what the Matriarch is like.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “He speaks well,” replied the younger sorceress.
  
 “But seldom about himself or about Ranuak, and Ran-uak is the key to what we may be able to do and
how we could get to Dumar. The counselor has no ships that will carry us so far as Dumar—only the
fleets of Nordwei or the traders’ ships of Ranuak could, and we cannot contact or use those of Wei, and
those of the Matriarch are bottled inside the harbor of Encora or warded off by the Sturinnese
blockade.” Secca offered a polite smile. "The Sturinnese ships yet remain off Encora, and from where
they patrol, they could intercept any ship that left from here and at-tempted to land on the coast of
Dumar.”
  
 “Cannot you discover some sorcery to allow us to travel? You have studied much.”
  
 “Those ships are too far from the shore for song-sorcery to carry to them,” Secca said. “Yet, unless we
can get past those ships, Dumar will fall. Even if we do reach Dumar, until we destroy the ships, they will
be back...and back.”
  
 “The Sea-Priests raised waves through song. Could we not do the same? asked Richina.
  
 ‘They had the drums.” Secca tilted her head. ‘Per-haps . . .” She shook her head. “I do not think that
waves raised from the shore have the same effect upon the deeper waters. Otherwise, why would sailors
head to sea when storms threaten?’
  
 “Storms...? Is there a kind of storm that would threaten a ship? More than any other kind?"
  
 “I would have to ask,” mused Secca.
  
 "The overcaptain would know.” Richina grinned.
  
 "I am most certain he would.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “He must have made you most angry, lady.”
  
 “Angry?" Secca shook her head, all too conscious of her attempted deception—and self-deception. “I
think not”
  
 "You act . . ."
  
 Secca smiled. “As you felt with Haddev?" She raised her eyebrows, wishing not to dwell too much on
Alcaren. “He was handsome as well.”
  
 -“He did not care enough.”
  
 “He may have cared more than you think,” Secca said.
  
 “He saw you, and he did not hurt you, and he did not lead you on. He was bright enough to realize that,
beautiful as you are, you would be unhappy in Synek, and, in time, so would he. He will make a better
lord than his sire, I think.”
  
 “I would suppose so.”
  
 ‘Richina . . . would you have been happy in that shabby hold? In a land where a woman must still
request all through her Consort?"
  
 “I . . .” The sandy-haired sorceress shook her head. “Why does it have to be so?"
  
 Secca did not have an answer, either for herself or for Richina. Did Alcaren watch her merely for his
own ends? Or for the Matriarch? Did he seek to understand her better to manipulate her for some
unknown end? Yet..so far . . . . he had refrained almost scrupulously from suggesting anything. Was that
because her actions accorded with what he wanted? Or because he did care for her? Or because he
actually did not wish to push her? Or some of both? Or neither?
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Finally, Secca stood and walked to the window. She would not speak of Alcaren, not to Richina, not
after his declaration of what she must do.
  
 And yet . . . did she have any choice?
  
 She took a deep breath. Perhaps tomorrow she would talk to Alcaren again. Perhaps tomorrow.
  
 91
  
 The sky to the south was clear for the first time in weeks, but displayed the cold blue of a winter day.
From the center window of the main chamber of the guest quarters, Secca could see the topmost
branches of the trees across the boulevard bending in the wind.
  
 Her eyes went to the mirror on the table, the mirror that had shown skirmishes continuing in Dumar and
snow piled even deeper across the Sand Pass, and that Sturinnese ships yet patrolled the coast of
Liedwahr south of the Shoals of Discord. Lord Robero sat in his gilt chair and frowned, and the sorcerer
Belmar was riding somewhere with his players and lancers, a force that had grown in size to re-semble
the armsmen of Struinn. And Secca was sitting in Elahwa, doing nothing and going nowhere—and she
had done nothing in three weeks but sit and watch.
  
 She had to dosomething.
  
 With a snort, she pulled the riding jacket off the peg on the well and stuffed herself into it, then walked
out of the doors, with a brusque nod to Easlon and Gorkon as she passed. One of them followed, but
she didn’t look back to see which as she marched down the wide stairs and then back along the corridor
to the doors opening out onto the rear courtyard.
  
 Once at the entrance, Secca fastened the riding jacket more tightly before she stepped out into a cold
and stiff breeze that swept across the rear courtyard behind the guest quarters. She glanced across the
expanse of gray brick paving toward the barracks, then began to walk swiftly toward the red-painted
door that was supposedly an armory of sorts.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Each step clicked on the brick paving, reminding her again that she needed new heels on her boots. She
prob-ably should have considered that before she left Loiseau, but she had to admit to herself, if not to
anyone else, that she’d had no idea what she had been riding into or how long everything would take.
  
 A group of lancers from Loiseau stood a good fifty yards beyond the armory door. All of the lancer
rankers straight-ened as they saw her, but Secca merely smiled. She turned and opened the red-painted
door, trimmed in black, and stepped inside.
  
 A broad-shouldered woman with short-cut white hair and muscular forearms looked up from a
pedal-driven grindstone as Secca closed the door behind her. “Yes, lady?’ The gray eyes twinkled.
  
 “You are the armorer?” Secca ventured.
  
 “Such as there is,” admitted the older woman.
  
 “I was hoping,” Secca continued, “that you might have some blunt practice blades.
  
 “For your lancers?’ The armorer shook her head. “All I’d be having are rattan ones, and most lancers
be not happy with such. Rather they would break bones and claim pride than learn.”
  
 “You have a pair?’ asked Secca.
  
 “More than that.” The armorer slipped toward a rack in the left rear corner of the room. “Let me see, .
Four pair and one.”
  
 Secca smiled. “Might I see them?”
  
 “Of course, lady.” The armorer brought forward a pair and set them on the smooth and clean, but
battered, bench to the left of the door through which Secca had entered.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 As Secca began to try each of the practice weapons, the armorer brought the others to the bench as
well. Secca hefted each. The smallest was still longer than the saber at her belt, but about the same
weight, if of different bal-ance.
  
 “Could I borrow this pair?” asked the sorceress.
  
 “You may have them so long as you like for all that you have done.” The armorer smiled. “You may also
change either for another set, if they be not to the liking of your lancers.”
  
 “One is for me.” Secca picked up the pair, then turned toward the door. “The other may be exchanged.”
She smiled. "Thank you very much.”
  
 “I hope they will suffice.”
  
 “I’m sure they will.”One way or another.  Secca opened the door and stepped back out into the chill
winter day.
  
 Before taking three steps along the barracks row, Secca caught sight of a captain in the green of
Loiseau. “Captain Drysel!”
  
 Drysel an angular young man a good head and a half taller than Secca turned quickly, then inclined his
head. “Yes, Lady Secca?"
  
 “I have found some practice weapons--- they’re not blunted iron, but rattan. I would appreciate it if you
would spar with me.
  
 Drysel bowed his head more deeply and nodded, look-ing down at Seeca. “As you wish, lady.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Captain . . . I am in a foul temper. Please do not humor me more.”
  
 “Ah . . . yes, Lady Secca.”
  
 Drysel was one of the newer captains, a younger son of a cousin of Lord Robero’s consort Alyssa, and
the last officer to come to Loiseau. He’d been picked by Anna, but Secca hadn’t seen him or sparred
with him before, nor had he seen her work with a blade. She wondered if she were making a mistake,
but decided that if she were, she would pay for it, and if she weren’t and Drysel were as arrogant as his
attitude indicated, he would. “These are not iron, and I would prefer we avoid head cuts. Other than that,
if you can strike, do your best” Secca extended the longer weapon. “You may exchange this for another
from the armorer if you wish.” She inclined her head toward the black-trimmed red door.
  
 Drysel took the rattan weapon, hefted it then nodded. “This will be fine.” His smile as he looked down at
Secca was almost patronizing.
  
 Secca set the rattan weapon down, then slipped out of the riding jacket While it wasn’t too restrictive,
and she’d certainly worn it in battle, she didn’t want to be hampered at all. Then she unfastened her own
real sabre and scab-bard. She didn’t want that banging her legs and getting in the way. Across from her,
the young captain also took off his jacket, folding it carefully, almost as if it were a gesture to her. He left
his sabre and scabbard on his belt.
  
 The group of lancers who had been standing farther away began to edge toward Secca and Drysel, and
Secca could hear a few of the words they exchanged.
  
 “Captain. . . never crossed blades with her.
  
 “...only those wooden things…”
  
 “He’s good. . . she’ll be lucky that way.”
  
 Secca could feel anger rising in her, and she wondered why she was so touchy. Wrong time of her
season? Or something akin to what Anna had felt--- where people con-descended to her because she
was small, but simultane-ously deferred to her because she was a sorceress? Secca pushed the thought
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

away, taking a deep breath and posi-tioning her feet on the smooth bricks. The snow and rain had
washed away any grit, so that she wasn’t likely to slip.
  
 Across from her, Drysel squared his shoulders, then tested his footing by scuffing his boots on the
bricks.
  
 The two moved forward, Drysel watching Secca’s rattan blade far more than her eyes, Secca aware of
all of the younger man’s movements.
  
 Almost casually, Secca feinted toward Drysel’s left shoulder, then pulled back. Diysel’s weapon did not
move.
  
 She tried another feint this time toward his left thigh. He eased to his left, blade still in guard position.
  
 Secca feinted left, then ducked and swept under and inside his weapon and tapped Diysel on the right
shoulder, almost before the taller captain blinked.
  
 Quick . . . she was . . . "
  
 “No force in it.
  
 Secca pushed that back. It wouldn’t have been right to use full force on a captain who was just trying to
avoid either being struck or striking his commander. She wanted to shake her head. She wouldn’t have
had the problem if she had been a man. She’d seen enough lancers try to strike Jecks, Rickel, Himar,
and others.
  
 Drysel feinted, and Secca offered a half-parry, as if she didn’t know his move were a feint, then came
over the top of his weapon and forced it down into the bricks before dancing back.
  
 Still, the young captain avoided striking directly at Secca. If she struck him, under those conditions, she
would be unfair, and she might even hurt him.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 So she concentrated on his weapon, deciding to see what she could do to make him look silly, since he
was clearly wrapped in his own superiority.
  
 ‘With his next half-thrust, she ducked and came up under his weapon, putting her full weight, if
momentarily, behind her weapon, and taking her hilt against the rattan with enough force to drive the
weapon out of his fingers. With a smile she stepped back and beckoned for him to retrieve it.
  
 Drysel frowned momentarily, flexing his fingers as he retrieved the practice weapon.
  
 Secca could sense his grip on the rattan blade was firmer, but he was obviously determined merely to
defend.
  
 After another series of engagements, blade against blade, Secca hammered his weapon into the bricks
with enough bite that, in order to hold the weapon, Drysel went almost to his knees.
  
 As the captain straightened and stepped back, Secca caught some of the murmurs from the on looking
lancers.
  
 “...he won’t strike...see...she knows it...”
  
 “...she won’t either. . . won’t take advantage...”
  
 " . . .tying to disarm him . . .done it once already. . .”
  
 In the next set of exchanges, Secca managed to force Drysel’s blade higher and more to the side, then
slammed her blade into the side of his weapon just above the hilt. As Drysel’s practice weapon seemed
to bend in his hand and then drop to the bricks, Secca tried to break the mo-mentum of her
follow-through, but even so, her rattan slammed into his upper arm.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 She stepped back. "I'm sorry, captain. I was only trying for your weapon, not for you.” As she watched,
she could see blood oozing through the fabric of Drysel’s sleeve.
  
 Drysel concealed a wince. “I know, lady. That was ob-vious.”
  
 “I am most sorry,” Secca apologized again.
  
 “That is all right.” Drysel started to bend to retrieve the rattan weapon, then paused, with a
less-well-concealed wince.
  
 “I didn’t . . . ” Secca stood back, taking a deep breath, wondering what she could say. She shouldn’t
have let her temper, even focused into the weapon, get the better of her. Just because she wasn’t big . . .
everyone seemed to think she was fragile.
  
 “So . . . you are beating up on your officers, lady?”
  
 Secca mined to see Alcaren standing there. “I was trying to get some exercise. I’m not used to the
rattan, and I didn’t realize...” She broke off as she saw the amused expression in his gray-blue eyes.
“Perhaps you would like to take Captain Drysel’s place, overcaptain?"
  
 “And if I injured our sorceress, then where would I be?” Alcaren shrugged.
  
 “The same place you are now--- waiting in Elahwa.” Secca’s words were as chill as the wind she
scarcely felt.
  
 “I can see you will not accept my deferral.”
  
 “Not at the moment,” Secca replied.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Then. ifyou will allow me, captain...” Alcaren stepped toward Drysel and scooped up the blade off the
gray bricks.
  
 “Captain Drysel?" Secca said.
  
 “Yes, lady?’
  
 “I am most sorry for being overzealous. I would appre-ciate it if you would have Chief Player Palian
look at your shoulder. She is a fair healer.”
  
 “If you would allow me to watch for a moment before I do?"
  
 “Of course… but not too long.” Secca turned toward Alcaren, who had not bothered to remove his
riding jacket.
  
 “Limitations, lady?" asked Alcaren.
  
 “No head thrusts. I might still have to sing, and you might need to give orders.”
  
 “Most fair.”
  
 Alcaren was even more cautious, than Drysel, parrying Secca’s exploratory cuts, but not attempting to
slip by her weapon or begin an attack.
  
 The Ranuan followed the same pattern as Drysel had, except Alcaren was willing to attack Secca’s
weapon, and she was the one who almost lost her rattan blade. After the first set of exchanges, her
fingers tingled, and she cir-cled, flexing them as she did, trying to get more feeling back into them.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Abruptly, Alcaren stepped back. “A moment, Lady Secca, while I remove the riding jacket.”
  
 Secca nodded, stepping back and taking a deep breath. She noticed that there were more onlookers,
mostly SouthWomen, easing forward from the northern wing of the barracks.
  
 Alearen finished folding the jacket and stepped forward with a nod, then began a tightly focused series
of attacks, always at Secca’s weapon.
  
 She slipped aside, then managed to strike his weapon with fair force before falling back.
  
 They circled again.
  
 Secca could feel the dampnessall over her body, despite the chill wind, and she could see the sweat
beading on Alcaren’s forehead.
  
 She feinted, then struck upward under his weapon, but he recovered and came slashing down. She
pulled his rattan blade to the side, and almost drove it into the bricks, but, again, he recovered, and was
on the attack again, and Secea had to circle back.
  
 For a moment, they were almost hilt to hilt, but Secca managed to disengage before his superior strength
literally lifted her off her feet.
  
 Even so, he pressed the attack so fiercely that Secca had no choice but to slide his blade. The rattan did
not slide as smoothly as did steel, and the effort sent a jolt down her arm. She danced back, barely
avoiding a slashing thrust that, while possibly not intended, swept toward her right thigh, then stepped
inside and used the comparative rough-ness of the rattan to help his weapon along.
  
 While Alcaren staggered for an instant, he was back on balance almost before Secca was.
  
 They circled again, and Secca began the attack, but had to back off.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Alcaren returned the favor.
  
 How many times this continued Secca did not know, only that she wondered how long she could
continue. Yet she’d started it, in a way, and she hated to be the one who called the match--- if that was
what it was.
  
 Abruptly, Alcaren eased back “You . . . are more... dangerous than you look . . ." he said between
gasps.
  
 “So . . . are . . . you.” Secca wished she weren’t breathing so hard, but keeping up with the bigger and
stronger over-captain had taken everything she had.
  
 “I. . . .am sorry,” Alcaren continued quietly. “I did . . . not . . . understand.” He grinned. “I will be... very
sore in many places. . . because . . . I did not” He paused. “You have made...your point, lady---
pardon...my pun, and I...would humbly...suggest...that...we cease before. . . . you render. . . . . me. . .
unfit for. . . duty.” The grin was strained.
  
 Secca straightened, still breathing heavily. “I accept . . . gratefully . . . your advice.
  
 After a moment, she slowly bent to recover the riding jacket, although she was sweating all over, and
dared not don it until she cooled off. Then she refastened the sabre and scabbard to her belt.
  
 Alcaren slowly followed her in reclaiming his own jacket. Then he bowed.
  
 Secca bowed in return.
  
 ‘‘Like cats . . . they were . . . "
  
 “So alike . . . because . . .”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca couldn’t hear the last words, because Wilten moved in front of the SouthWoman who was talking
and stepped toward Secca.
  
 “Lady Secca?"
  
 “Yes, Wilten?’ Secca smiled politely.
  
 “It has been some time since I have seen you work with a blade. You use it like the best of lancers now.
Even the men saw it.”
  
 “Yes . . . the overcaptain and I did put on quite an ex-hibition. I trust our form was good enough to
inspire the lancers?’
  
 “It was most inspiring.” Wilten’s smile was warm. “It was also most impressive to the SouthWomen and
their captains.” The Defalkan overcaptain laughed. “It matters not to them how impressive we men are,
but how impres-sive you are.
  
 Secca nodded. "I do hope they were impressed." She paused. “If you will excuse me . . .?"
  
 Wilten bowed.
  
 The redheaded sorceress turned and walked across the courtyard toward the main guest quarters
building, still carrying the rattan exercise weapon. She was going to be sore in more places than she
wanted to count, but no one was going to see that, especially not Alcaren.
  
 92
  
 Secca eased into the chair at the conference table that would let her look out the windows to the
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

southwest.
  
 She had too many stiff muscles, more than she would have thought after the weeks of riding, but riding
and sorcery were not bladework against bigger and stronger men. Her left shoulder hurt especially. At
times, she detested being small.
  
 She glanced toward the window, not that there much to see, since the clear skies of the previous day
been replaced with gray clouds and a drizzling rain.
  
 “I wish I could have seen you sparring with Captain Drysel and Overcaptain Alcaren," Richina said.
“Drysel’ s whole arm is black, and there’s a slash that will take weeks to heal.”
  
 Secca winced. “That was an accident and bad blade work. I never meant to strike him. He was being
kind and refusing to engage anything but my blade. So I was trying to disarm him.”
  
 “He said that.”
  
 “How do you know? You said you weren’t watching.”
  
 “I was working with Palian and the players when he came in to have her look at his arm. He was most
uneasy. Palian told him not to worry, that you were far better with a blade than most lancers, and that
your size meant noth-ing."
  
 “It does, though. I have to work harder with a blade, and I can’t do as much sorcery as Anna could
before I get tired.” Secca shook her head. “Size has its advantages. If you learn to sing as well as I do,
then you will have the strength to do more sorcery. Lady Anna thought she was small, but she was not.”
Anna hadn’t understood what small was, Secea thought.
  
 “How could she think that?” asked Richina. “Only a handful of women are taller than she was.”
  
 I asked her that once. She said that in the Mist Worlds, she was a small woman, and that many women
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

were neartwo yards in height, if not taller.”
  
 "They must be giants there."
  
 “She was strong. . ." Secca mused. “her warhorses... all of them raider beasts. None but her or a few
favored ostlers could handle the first.” As she recalled Anna, she could feel again that gaping emptiness,
and she swallowed.
  
 “Despite your size, lady, you are strong,” Richina said quietly.
  
 With her sore muscles, Secca felt anything but strong as she gazed out into what seemed endless rain.
  
 Suddenly, there was a dullclunk, and the odor of hot metal filled the main chamber.
  
 Secca glanced around. On the working desk, not two yards from the conference table, rested a bronze
cylinder that had not been there moments before.
  
 Richina was the one to use her riding gloves to lift the bronze cylinder before it scorched the table desk.
  
 “Careful. . .“ The appearance of the message cylinder had Secca even more worried.
  
 Slowly, Richina extracted the contents of the cylinder----three parchment scrolls. Two were unsealed,
the third was beribboned in blue and set inside the second.
  
 Secca began with the first scroll, one from Jolyn, she confirmed by a quick look at the signature at the
bottom.
  
 Dear Secca—
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  I have been watching your progress through the glass and relaying what I have seen to Lord Robero.
He was pleased with your defeat of the Sturinnese, but concerned about the retreat of their ships to the
south. I was also surprised that he was so pleased about your destruction of the keep at Dolov.
  
 Secca nodded. She could see why Robero would be pleased.
  
 Clayre is having great difficulty with Belmar. The Neserean sorcerer travels quickly, and from place to
place. He knows what a glass will show, and what it will not, and often remains separated from his
lancers and his players. He has a group of players, and uses four thunder-drums as well. He has taken
the keep at Sperea through some kind of treachery, and most recently, just two days past, he destroyed
the hold of one Jysmar, near Netzla. . . . Why he did so is unclear; unless Jysmar opposed Belmar’s
efforts to claim the seat of the Prophet of Music. Lord Svenmar has declared his support for Lord
Belmar, as have several other holders in the south of Neserea.
  
 Lady Annayal has refused to consider a con-sorting until Belmar is removed as a threat, and the Liedfuhr
of Mansuur has moved more than fifty companies of lancers to the western border of Neserea.. He has
sent a scroll, which took more than four weeks to reach Lord Robero, as-serting that he had no intention
of attempting to conquer Neserea, but that he would not see his sister’s daughter lose her birthright for
lack of armed support.
  
 Lord Clehar was killed in the early battles in Dumar against the Sturinnese, and his brother Fehern has
taken on his title and duties. He did not tell Lord Robero, and I fear that Clehar had died before I had
dispatched the last scroll to you through sorcery. I discovered this only within the past week, when Lord
Robero re-ceived a dispatch from the Council Leader of Wei. Leader Ashtaar wrote that Nordwei has
sent all its fleets out of the Northern Ocean for fear that they might be trapped there over the winter.
  
 The roads to Stromwer are blocked with deep and early snow, and there is no way through the
Sudbergs or even through southern Neserea and across the lower Mittfels.
  
 Be most careful in whatever you decide.
  
 Secca moistened her lips, then set Jolyn’s scroll aside and picked up the second one, the one with the
blue seal of Defalk with the scrawled signature of Robero at the bottom. Secca smoothed it out slowly,
fearing the worst as she began to read the words set upon the parch-ment.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Sorceress-Protector of the East,
  
 Know you that the snows have left us pris-oned within wails of winter, and there is no manner in which
the Assistant Sorceress of De-falk can reach Dumar. Either treachery or the Sea-Priests have killed Lord
Clehar. His brother Fehern has taken over his duties, although we have received no word of such,
perchance be-cause of the weather, but, given that his death was before the worst of the storms, the
failure of the one who now acts as Lord High Counselor of Dumar to inform us is more likely to reflect
more than the death in battle of Lord Clehar....
  
 The Stusinnese now hold Narial and Dumaria. The sole major city holding out is Envaryl, and it is
unlikely to withstand the Sea-Priests into summer unless Dumar receives aid.
  
 While we have grave concerns about the cur-rent Lord High Counselor of Dumar, we have even greeter
concerns about the growing power of Sturinn in Dumar. For this reason, we would request that you
consider most carefully and se-riously how you might undertake an effort to assist Dumar. With the
rebellion and destruction in Neserea, the Lady Clayre cannot now leave that land. Even if she desired,
she would have to gather forces and travel southward for nigh on two weeks or more through the
rebellious south of Neserea and then through the high snows of the southern Mittfels.
  
 We trust in your enterprise and judgment. In the event that you will need such, I have also requested that
Lady Jolyn enclose a scroll for the Matriarch of Ranuak. The scroll suggests that all Liedwahr at risk, and
requests her as-sistance in aiding you as she sees fit. You may use this or not, as you see fit.
  
 Our hopes and best wishes are with you.
  
 Secca shook her head. That Robero would even con-sider a scroll to the Matriarch was the strongest
sign of all that all was less than well and getting worse.
  
 “What is it?” asked Richina.
  
 “Best you read them both. I would rather not repeat their Words,” Secca replied. “Don’t open the third
one. That’s from Lord Robero to the Matriarch, should we need such.” She passed the two opened
scrolls to the younger sorceress. “I’ll need to meet with the over-captains and chief players, and then with
Counselor Veria.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Is it bad, that bad?" asked Richina.
  
 “Is might be worse.” Secca glanced out into the grey and rainy day, considering how fate and the
Harmo-nies—or Discord—often left one with few choices indeed.
  
 93
  
 Outside, the mid-afternoon clouds were darkening, as if the misting rain were about to turn into a colder
and heavier downpour. Inside the guest quarters at Elahwa, seated at the table with her back to the
windows, Secca shifted her weight in the chair, ignoring the twinge in her left shoulder, and glanced
across the faces seated around the conference table—two overcaptains, two chief players, and one
sorceress besides herself. The logs set in the hearth previously had died into a wall of red-banked coals
that provided a gentle and welcome heat to the room.
  
 “I called you all together because we have just received some scrolls from Defalk. By sorcery.” Secca
gestured to-ward the now-cool and empty message tube in the middle of the conference table.
  
 "From your countenance, Lady Secca," began Palian, “it would appear that the news is not the most
welcome.”
  
 ‘Perhaps it would be best if I passed the scrolls around, and each of you can read them,” Secca
suggested. “When you are done, then we will discuss what we may do.” Secca handed both scrolls to
Palian, who sat to Secca’s left.
  
 Secca could have read the scrolls aloud, but felt they had more impact if each person read them, and she
was fortunate that Anna had insisted all chief players and of-fIcers had to be able to read. Also, Secca
could watch each person as he or she read the scrolls. Palian nodded slowly several times, then passed
the missives to Delvor with a faint smile. Delvor absently brushed back the lock of lank brown hair that
had been falling across his forehead for as long as Secca could remember, but his face remained
im-passive as he in turn passed the scrolls to Wilten.
  
 Wilten glanced to the bottom of each scroll before he began reading, as if to assure himself of who was
writing each one. Unlike the two chief players, the Defalkan over captain frowned more deeply with each
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

line he perused. As be passed the scrolls to Alcaren, Wilten cleared his throat and, looking at Secca,
shook his head.
  
 Secca returned the headshake with a faint smile, and waited for Alcaren to finish reading.
  
 Alcaren read through both scrolls quickly, his eyebrows lifting slightly, then passed them to Richina,
seated to Secca’s right. Richina looked at both briefly and then re-turned them to Secca.
  
 Secca took another study of the faces before looking across the table directly at Wilten. “Overcaptain . .
. you looked concerned, I would be most interested in your thoughts.”
  
 “I am most concerned,” Wilten began, "most con-cerned.” He gestured toward the grayness beyond the
window that he faced. “Snow has made all the mountains impassable. Here the rain has turned the
ground into swamps and bogs, and two mighty fleets patrol the south-ern coast of Liedwahr. We have
six companies of lancers, not even a full six companies, yet we are being asked to find our wayto Dumar
in some fashion, and there take on perchance fifty or more companies of Sturinnese lancers with
thunder-drums to back them. For all we know, there may be even more lancers than that.”
  
 "It does appear difficult,” Secca observed. "Theglass shows that the Sturinnese have not yet taken
Dumar. While they continue to fight and to push back the Dumarans, the Sea-Priests’ efforts are costing
them lancers. If we wait for the weather to allow us to travel through the mountains to Dumar, they will
doubtless have taken all of Dumar, and will have forces and thunder-drums awaiting us.”
  
 “We could have more lancers and more sorceresses, could we not?” asked Wilten.
  
 “Lord Robero can muster at most forty companies of lancers,” Secca pointed out. “And he cannot call
up the levies unless Defalk is invaded He would not hazard all those lancers in Dumar. So we might gain
little in addi-tional lancers, but much in greater numbers of enemies were we to wait until late spring or
early summer."
  
 “Any number would be most helpful,” Wilten offered. “Most helpful.”
  
 “That is true, but we cannot count on such.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Against the Sturinnese?” The older overcaptain raised his eyebrows.
  
 "Will Lord Robero send lancers southward against the Sturinnese if this Belmar becomes the Prophet of
Music in Neserea and if the Liedfuhr sends fifty companies into Neserea?” asked Secca.
  
 Wiltendid not answer.
  
 “Will Lord Robero wish to send us another sorceress if such should happen?” Secca pressed.
  
 “These are most perilous times,” murmured Wilten.
  
 “Indeed they are,” Secca agreed, as she turned her gaze on Alcaren. “What do you think, overcaptain?”
  
 “I cannot speak fairly of what is best for Defalk. I will not try." Alcaren shrugged. “I can only say that,
from what history shows, waiting has benefited none in opposing Stu-rinn. Your great sorceress is the
sole leader in Liedwahr who did not wait to face the Sea-Priests.Infact, she is the only one in the world
who did not wait, and she is the sole leader to have bested them.”
  
 Palian nodded, and Secca turned to the chief player.
  
 ‘What the overcaptain says is so,” began Palian. “I was there. Some told her to wait, and she did, but
onlybriefly, until she knew what spells she would perform and how she would use them and where. She
attacked the Sturinnese in the rain and storms when others would have waited, and she prevailed.”
  
 Delvor offered a brief smile.
  
 “Chief Player Delvor?" asked Secea.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “I can add little, except that I would rather see battles waged with sorcery fought in lands other than
mine.”
  
 Alcaren nodded to that comment.
  
 Secca glanced around the table once more. “Lord Robero would wish we find a way to Dumar, and
soon. While Overcaptain Wilten is most correct in noting that having more lancers is better than having
less, there is no certainty that we will have more if we wait, and great certainty that we will face more
enemies. The problem is not one of will, but of manner. We need a way to travel to Dumar that will not
exhaust our lancers and players and that will not take forever.”
  
 Alcaren cleared his throat.
  
 Secca gestured for him to speak.
  
 “We traveled here partly by riding, but part of the way on fast coastal schooners of shallow draft. It may
be that the counselors know of some such. While those vessels will not suffice for travel to Dumar, they
might aid in reaching Encora. They could carry us to the south of the Sand Hills. From there the riding to
Encora is swift and mostly upon dry roads.”
  
 “That would not get us to Dumar,” Wilten pointed out.
  
  “No,” Secca admitted, “but it would get us closer, and should the Sturinnese vessels move, or should
we find a sorcerous way to remove them, we could travel swiftly. Even if we could not, we could travel
across Ranuak well before spring and take the passes through Stromwer. At the very least, we would be
in better position to strike earlier, even were we required to wait for spring.”
  
 “That is true.” Wilten’s words were heavy, almost as if grudged.
  
 “I will see if I can meet with Counselor Veria tomorrow. Perhaps there is some way we can get to
Encora.” As she stood, Secca did not mention that she had already re-quested a meeting with the
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

counselor. “I would like a few moments with the chief players next . . . and you, Richina, after you take a
message. We must discuss spellsongs.”
  
 As Wilten and Alcaren rose, Secca beckoned to Richina. Bending forward, she said in a low voice,
“Would you ask Overcaptain Alcaren, most discreetly, if he would meet with me after the players
depart?" She added quickly. “I want his opinions without Wilten around, and I don’t want to announce
that.”
  
 Richina smiled. “Yes, lady.” She turned and followed the overcaptains out into the corridor.
  
 Secca waited until the door closed before reseating her-self She looked at Palian. “Is there any other
choice?"
  
 “None that I can discern, lady. The Sturinnese have planned this for many years, perhaps waiting until
Lady Anna passed, and they will pour more and more lancers into Dumar if once they hold the land.”
  
 Secca inclined her head to Delvor.
  
 The brown-haired man smiled. “I am not a sorcerer, nor a lancer, but those who wait give more venues
to their attackers.”
  
 All three looked up as Richina slipped back into the chamber. The younger sorceress nodded to Secca,
then seated herself.
  
 “Could all your players perform upon a vessel?" Secea looked once more to Palian.
  
 “If it did not pitch too wildly, I would guess, lady,” offered Palian. “That is but a guess, for none of us
have attempted such.”
  
 “I would say it would be easier for the second players,” suggested Delvor. “Strumming and fingering the
strings is easier than bowing under difficult conditions.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “The falk-horn and woodwinds would not be so affected either,” mused Palian. “You ask because we
may need to defend ourselves at sea?"
  
 "That is possible,” replied Secca. “I did not wish to re-quest vessels unless we have a sorcerous
defense.”
  
 “We would need to play where there is no water or spray,” Palian said.
  
 “And high enough on the vessel that our tones—and yours would carry,” added Delvor.
  
 “We would also need a vessel with enough space for all to play,” Secca continued.
  
 There was silence around the table. The red-haired sor-ceress looked to Richina. “Do you have any
thoughts on this?”
  
 ‘What about the wind? If it were behind us . . ."
  
 “Then it would carry the spells further.” Secca’s lips curled as she wondered how many more things they
did not know. “Is there anything else?"
  
 Palian shook her head.
  
 “No, lady,” murmured Delvor, as did, a moment later, Richina.
  
 “You may go, but if you do think of other considera-tions,” Secca said, rising, “I would hear them.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Once the three had left, Secca walked to the window, where she stared into the gray and the rain that
now fell in heavy leaden drops that occasionally splatted against the glass. The gray and the rain and the
gloom weighed on her, and she realized that she missed the sunlight, the light, and the grace of Loiseau.
Would she ever even see her hold again? At times, she had to wonder.
  
 At the thrap on the door, she turned. “Yes?"
  
 “Overcaptain Alcaren,” announced one of the guards, Easlon, Secca thought, from his voice.
  
 “If you would have him enter.” Secca stepped toward the table and waited.
  
 Alcaren stepped inside and bowed. “You requested my presence, lady?”
  
 “I did. You are very perceptive, and most gallant, over-captain,” Secca said.
  
 For the first time since she had met the Ranuan, Alcaren looked almost puzzled, as if pondering how to
respond. After a moment, he offered the boyish, embarrassed grin. I fear you have me at a loss, Lady
Secca.”
  
 Secca thought for a moment, but could see no answer that would not lead to greater difficulty and
misunderstand-ing no answer except the truth, much as it grated on her to have to speak it. “Our blade
skills are close, although you are somewhat better. You are far stronger than I, and larger. You allowed
me to retain more respect than I de-served. I appreciate it."
  
 Alcaren bowed again. I learn much of you as time passes, lady, and it is a pleasure. Would that all ladies
of power had your determination and grace.”
  
 Secca could hear that the words were more than for-mality, and carried a touch of warmth unusual for
the al-ways polite and discreet overcaptain.
  
 “For your grace . . . and kindness, I thank you.” Her words sounded too formal, but anything less formal
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

might have been misuderstood. So she added quickly, “that was not all I had in mind, but I did want you
to know that” Why she did, Secca wasn’t totally sure, except that Al-caren’s grace had made her feel
small in spirit, and she hated feeling petty—even if she had been. “Would you sit down?”
  
 Alcaren took the same chair he had used earlier.
  
 Secca seated herself as he did, then spoke. "I wanted your thoughts on other matters. We have
discussed storm spells, overcaptain. You have been a trader. Are there any types of storms that are more
deadly to a vessel than oth-ers, or any more deadly to a warship?"
  
 “All storms can damage a ship, but few are strong enough to sink a good vessel outright.”
  
 “A strong thunderstorm?”
  
 “Such might rip away sails if the master were caught unawares and break a mast, perchance, but the ship
would remain sound.”
  
 ‘What of typhoons?”
  
 “A strong typhoon can drive a ship upon the coast or rocks or shoals.” Alcaren frowned. “A good
master can keep a good ship far enough at sea to avoid such—unless the storm is most sudden and far
larger than likely to be created by sorcery.”
  
 “Sometimes, in the spring, there are whirlwinds—they can tear apart a cot,” Secca offered.
  
 “Waterspouts can do such to a ship as well.” Alcaren smiled. “But they are infrequent and most
capricious, and they seldom last long.”
  
 “I wonder if we could create such,” mused the sorceress.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “If you could, andif you could direct such, you might destroy many ships.”
  
 ‘We will have to think” Secca nodded. "For we cannot be sure to reach Dumar before late spring,
except by ship.”
  
 “Spring--- that will be too late.”
  
 “Not for Wilten,” said Secca with a laugh.
  
 “I do not understand why you have as overcaptain such a soul as Wilten,” Alcaren said slowly. “At a
time when you must act, or risk losing all, he sees not that.”
  
 “That is true,” Secca replied. “And that I brought him, that also is my failing. He is the most experienced
of my officers. Before you joined us, I relied more heavily on Stepan. He was the arms commander for
Lord Hadrenn."
  
 "The one whose body you sent home with an honor guard?"
  
 “He gave good advice, and understood much. He held off the last attack of the Sturinnese before they
broke, and saved the victory.”
  
 “Ah... that explains much.” Alcaren nodded. “Still... you inherited Wilten as your most senior officer
from the great sorceress, and she was no stranger to battle . . .“ The Runuan fingered his chin.
  
 Secca paused to think. Why had Anna retained and pro-moted Wilten? Then she smiled. Of course!
  
 “Why do you smile?"
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “In her later years, Lady Anna wished to avoid pitched battles. She was able to deal with most matters
with subtle sorcery. Would a senior officer who was more aggressive have been suited to such a post?”
  
 Alcaren smiled knowingly. “And the lady died just shortly before you wore required to leave on your
expe-dition, and you trusted in her choices."
  
 “I had not worked that closely...” Secca shook her head. “Before this winter, it was years since any
sorceress in Defalk had been in a pitched battle.”
  
 ‘That is, alas, true of most of us,” Alcaren pointed out. “In that, those of Sturinn have us at a great
disadvantage.” He smiled. “You have fought more battles than all those lancers in Encora who did not
come to Elahwa.”
  
 “What of the others?’ Secca asked.
  
 “The Matriarch sent ten companies in addition to the SouthWomen. Perhaps six companies worth
remained when you routed the Sea-Priests. Those who could ride began the long coastal ride back to
Encora within days.”
  
 "How many companies could the Matriarch raise?’
  
 “‘There are twenty. There would be twenty still, but with the strength of sixteen, or perhaps more, if new
recruits have been found.”
  
 The two looked at each other, and Secca knew they understood the same truth--- not enough lancers
existed in all Liedwahr to stop the Sturinnese by force of arms.
  
 Finally, she eased back the chair. “Thank you, over-captain. I will meet with the counselor in the
morning, if she will see me. Then we will know what we may do.” Secca stood, forcing herself to move
smoothly, and not to show the stiffness she felt.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Alcaren also rose, speaking as he did. “She will see you. Elahwa will not remain the Free City unless
Defalk re-mains strong and with power in the hands and spells of the sorceresses.”
  
 Power in the hands of the sorceresses? Secca could feel an unseen and cold mantle of . . . something . . .
dropping onto her shoulders.
  
 Alcaren smiled, half sadly, then bowed, before turning and departing.
  
 Secca watched him go, almost with regret. What else could she have said?
  
 Outside, the heavy rain splatted against the glass of the windowpanes, as the late afternoon darkened
into a gloom-ier dusk.
  
 94
  
 Secca pulled off the dripping green felt hat after she hurried up the steps and under the outside columns
of the Council building. She squeezed the water from the hat, folded it into her belt, smoothed her hair,
and then stepped toward the single guard.
  
 “Counselor Veria is expecting you, Lady Sorceress,” the tall woman in the crimson guard’s uniform told
her.
  
 Again, Secca felt somewhat over-guarded as Dymen and Achar followed her inside and down the
corridor to the counselor’s chamber. Both guards remained outside when Secca entered and closed the
door.
  
 The sorceress bowed. Veria did not rise from behind the table-desk, but inclined her head to the chairs.
Secca took the chair on the right side.
  
 “You requested this meeting. Lady Sorceress,” Veria said.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “I did . . . Yesterday afternoon, I received several scrolls from Falcor.” Secca extended the two to the
counselor.
  
 “You received scrolls? In this weather?” Veria looked at the two rolled sections of parchment, but did
not begin to read them.
  
 “By sorcery.” Secca explained. “Those scrolls were written yesterday. We can send scrolls in a bronze
tube. It is exhausting, perhaps the only sorcery a sorceress can do for a day—or longer—and a
sorceress can send less than a handful in a year. It is seldom used because there is usually so much of
greater import.”
  
 “A scrying glass takes less effort?”
  
 “Much less,” Secca admitted.
  
 “Scrolls sent hundreds of deks in moments.” Veria shook her head. "I almost understand the wailings of
the Ladies of the Shadows.”
  
 Secca offered a polite smile.
  
 After a moment, the counselor began to read the scrolls.
  
 Secca took in the chamber. The outside wall was the same polished blue marble, while the inner walls
were the golden oak but none of the walls bore any decorations, except for the simple baseboards and
crown moldings. Even the bronze brackets and wall lamps were simple and smooth metal, and the glass
mantels of the lamps curved gently.
  
 Veria set down the scrolls, then belatedly extended them to Secca, who rerolled them and slipped them
inside her jacket.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “You wish our assistance in getting to Dumar, I take it?’ asked the counselor.
  
 “That might be difficult. You might help us reach En-cora, I was led to believe.”
  
 “No doubt by Alcaren?"
  
 “We did discuss it”Secca admitted.
  
 “The Matriarch would be pleased to see you, for she— as do I--- knows that without sorcery,
Liedwahr cannot re-sist the Sturinnese,” Veria paused, and her eyes met Secca’s. “Not all in Encora will
be pleased to see a sor-ceress, and even less would they be pleased were they to know the extent of the
sorceries you have accomplished. I have seen you raise the wind, and dispel the fog. I have seen you call
forth fire and lightning, and direct arrows through sorcery.” The counselor’s smile was faint and chill. "I
doubt that I have seen near all that you can or may do.”
  
 “I have ideas,” Secca offered, “but whether any will work. . . that remains to be seen.”
  
 She paused for but a moment “Is Alcaren right that you might be able to assist us? You had suggested
that you might when I met you first”
  
 “Alcaren is correct, and I did suggest such. We have no means that would aid you in reaching Dumar,
but it is possible that we could find enough coastal vessels to land you along the southern side of the Sand
Hills or perhaps farther south. It might be dangerous. The Sturinnese do have shallow draft patrol
schooners, but they have but few, for they are ill suited to deep ocean crossings. We have not seen any in
a season or more. The larger war vessels dare not venture into the shallows.”
  
 "How long?” asked Seeca warily.
  
 “A week to make ready, two or three days for the crossing. You would still face a hard ride of three or
four days.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “If it can be done, we would be most grateful,” Secca replied.
  
 “It will not be without cost” Veria held up a hand. “Traders, even those of Elahwa, do nothing without
rec-ompense, but the Council will provide such”
  
 “You expect something in return?"
  
 Veria laughed mirthlessly. “We will obtain much in re-turn. Either you will defeat the Sea-Pigs, or you
will oc-cupy them for another few seasons or years. If you defeat the Sturinnese, we obtain freedom
from their domination for many years. If you occupy them, while that occurs, we can recover our
strength.”
  
 “I would hope we would do more than occupy them for a time.” Secca did not voice the thought that all
that de-pended upon their reaching Encora at the very least.
  
 “So do I, but I must be prepared to justify the golds even under the worst of happenings.”
  
 Secca nodded, even as she wondered about a system where a leader had to justify every action in terms
of its costs. Could one really put a price in golds on women not wearing chains? Or being able to reject
an ill-chosen con-sort?
  
 “When will we know what is possible, and the timing?" asked the sorceress.
  
 "Late tomorrow, or early the day after. As soon as I know, so will you—or almost, although we have no
mag-ical ways to send scrolls." Veria smiled and stood. “If we are to have you on your way soon, I must
be finding those who can make this happen.”
  
 Secca stood and bowed. ‘We thank you.”
  
 “Thank me best by surviving and defeating the Sea-Pigs.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Behind the cool words, Secca sensed an old and cold anger. She recalled what Alcaren had told her.
Had the counselor been tortured? Secca was not about to ask ‘We will do our best”
  
 “I am certain you will, and for that, I am most grateful.” Veria offered a last smile before Secca turned
and slipped back out the door.
  
 With each echoing click of her boots on the polished blue marble floor so she walked back toward the
front en-trance, Secca felt more alone—even with two guards fol-lowing her.
  
 95
  
 From the window of the guest chamber, Secca looked out into the midday drizzle. Her left shoulder still
twinged, and she hadn’t even realized that she had pulled the muscles there when she had been sparring
with Al-caren, not until a day later. The wet weather did little to help the soreness that had come from
that sparring.
  
 It had been almost two days, and she had beard nothing from Veria. The rain of the previous days had
stopped, but the clouds remained--- featureless, dull gray. She shook her head. She missed the bright
and clear skies of Loiseau. Finally, she turned and looked down at the table-desk, her eyes taking in the
spells she had scrawled on brown paper.
  
 She stepped back and uncased the lutar, then tuned it. As she stood over the desk, looking down at the
modified flame spell, she strummed the lutar and mentally tried to match the note values against the words
on the page. After running through the spell melody twice, she set the lutar aside. The last line still
bothered her.
  
 Before she could sit down with the paper and grease pencil, there wasa thrap on the door. “Yes?”
  
 “A messenger for you, lady,” called Easlon from beyond the door. “From Counselor Veria.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Have . . . them come in.” Secca wasn’t sure whether the messenger would be man or woman, not in
Elahwa. She turned and waited.
  
 The young woman who stepped through the door was a taller and more slender version of the
counselor, with short-cut dark hair, wearing the crimson tunic of a lancer of Elahwa. She bowed. "Lady
Sorceress.”
  
 “Welcome.” Secca smiled. “Are you . . . related to Counselor Veria?”
  
 “Her daughter.” The lancer smiled. “I’m Averra.”
  
 “I’m sorry. You must be asked that often.”
  
 “Not so much any longer. She says that’s because her hair is so gray.” The lancer’s smile was warm and
open, and Secca wondered if Veria had once smiled so.
  
 “I am sorry,” Secca apologized again. “You bring a mes-sage . . . perhaps about our travel?”
  
 “Yes, lady. She sent me to tell you that the Council has managed to arrange for enough vessels for four
companies. We can attempt two trips, or we can send you and three of your companies and one of the
SouthWomen . . . and then we would be pleased to escort the other two compa-nies along the longer
coastal route.”
  
 “Only four companies?” Secca frowned.
  
 “It is not the lancers, lady,” Averra said. “It is the mounts. For such a short trip we could take twice the
num-ber of lancers, but mounts are heavy and take more space. Also, we needed vessels with a crane
and hoist”
  
 Secca nodded. She just hadn’t thought about the size and weight of mounts. “Do you know why three of
my companies?"
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “The counselor said that you would like most of your forces with you, but, should you leave Ranuak
quickly, the Matriarch will need all the forces that can be mustered.”
  
 Secca’s lips quirked. She doubted that was the only rea-son. “When will the ships be ready?”
  
 “You will need to start loading no later than midmorn-ing the day after tomorrow.” Averra bowed.
‘What shall I tell the counselor?”
  
 ‘We need the ships, but I need to talk to my over-captains and players before I can say which
arrangement we prefer.”
  
 “She thought you might.”
  
 “I can send a messenger later this afternoon,” Secca said. "To the Council building?”
  
 “She will await word, lady.” Averra bowed.
  
 “Thank you, and give her our thanks for all her efforts.”
  
 “That I will, lady.”
  
 Once Averra had left, Seam sent Dymen to collect the overcaptains, the chief players, and Richina. Then
she took out the scrying mirror and set it in the middle of the con-ference table. She glanced out the
window, but nothing had changed. The sky was still gray, but no rain fell.
  
 Secca picked up the spell she had been working on and studied the last line, but still had no better
words when Palian--- the first to arrive—stepped inside the chamber.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Delvor will be here shortly. He was repairing a lutar, and was setting the joins.” The gray-haired player
smiled, then asked, “Have we word on ships?’
  
 ‘We do, and that is what we need to talk about.” The door opened, and Wilten, Alcaren, and Richina
en-tered. Secca gestured to the table. ‘Please be seated. Our other chief player may be a few moments
longer.” She took the chair with its back to the window. With the seem-ingly constant grayness of
Elahwa, she didn’t mind not looking out.
  
 “How is Captain Drysel?" Secca asked Wilten.
  
 “Much bruised, lady, but recovering. He appreciated your note.”
  
 “I was sorry. It was an accident, but I'm sure it was painful."
  
 “It cannot hurt him to learn that size is far from every-thing.” Wilten’s voice held a dry humor that Secca
had not heard before.
  
 Alcaren kept his mouth from smiling, but not his blue-gray eyes.
  
 The door opened a last time, and Delvor slipped in.
  
 “I am most sorry, lady...”
  
 “Palian told me,” Secca said. “I would not have you hasten a repair to a lutar. We will need every lutar
in the weeks and seasons ahead." She waited for him to take a seat before she continued.
  
 "I have talked to Counselor Veria, as you know, and they have gathered enough ships to take us to a
point on the south side of the Sand Hills. We can ride from there to Encora in several days. There is one
problem.” Secca paused. "There are not enough vessels to carry all of us and our mounts at the same
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

time. The most they can take is the players and perhaps four companies.” She paused. “The counselor
also made it clear that they would prefer that one of the four companies be one of those commanded by
Overcaptain Alcaren.”
  
 “Lady Secca . . .” Alcaren said, “that was not my do-ing.”
  
 “I was led to believe that the Matriarch wants at least one, if not both, of the companies of SouthWomen
back in Ranuak to be ready in case the Sturinnese attack there.”
  
 “And we are considering going there?" asked Wilten.
  
 “Does it matter? riposted Secca gently. ‘We will have to fight them in one place or another, If we go to
Ranuak, and the Sturinnese attack, we do not fight alone, and then, at the very least; that may slow the
conquest of Dumar. Here, we do not even pose a threat to the Sea-Priests.”
  
 Palian nodded slowly.
  
 Delvor brushed back a lock of his lank hair.
  
 Alcaren shifted his weight in his chair, but did not speak.
  
 “What if we take the three companies and one of the Southwomen first,” asked Richina “and then wait
to de-termine if the ships can make a second trip? We can use the glass to see. If they can, we wait. If
not, we start for Encora and wait there.”
  
 Secea looked at Wilten. “What do you think?”
  
 Wilten shook his head. “Against the Sea-Priests, four companies or six . . . it makes little difference, If
your sor-cery does not hold, then two companies will not change matters. I would favor Lady Richina’s
suggestion, though, for if the ships can travel the inner gulf again, it will be far easier on the riders and
mounts.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca hoped so, but sea travel was out of her experience. “Do you know where the Sturinnese ships
are?” asked Alcaren.
  
 “I thought I would try to call their images in the glass, so all could see.” Secca eased from her chair and
reclaimed the lutar, checking the tuning before beginning the scrying spellsong.
  
 “Show us now andupon the sea
 those shipsnear where we may be...”
  
 Even after the end of the spellsong, the mirror re-mained blank. Was that because the spell was faulty,
or because there were no ships on the inner gulf between Elahwa and the southern end of the Sand Hills?
Secca didn't know. She tried a second version.
  
 “Show us now and in the lightof day
 any ships that mayoppose us on our way...”
  
 This time the mirror split into more then adozen fragmentary images, each fragment showing a different
ship, and all but two were white-hulled. Even before the others could really look at the images, Secca
sang the release couplet.
  
 “What---" began Alcaren.
  
 “It showed every ship that could sail to the inner gulf,” Secca said. “The spell wasn’t right.” She lifted the
lutar and tried a variation on the spell.
  
 “Show us now and upon the sea,
 vessels in the inner gulf that be...
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Again the mirror came up blank.
  
 The fourth spell—the one that asked for vessels south of the inner gulf; showed five large Sturinnese
warships and three smaller vessels, rigged as schooners.
  
 After letting everyone see the images, Secca sang the release couplet
  
 "There are no Sturinnese ships in the inner gulf now... is that what the glass shows, lady?’ asked Wilten,
  
 “It is.”
  
 Wilten turned to Alcaren. “How long will it take them to sail northward?’
  
 “Into the inner gulf? Several days.” The Ranuan paused momentarily before adding, “But the last part of
the voyage will take us out of the shallows of the inner gulf.”
  
 “I would say that we take as many as we can on the first voyage, lady,” Wilten suggested. “Even have
they scrying glasses, they will have to see us depart in such and then find us."
  
 There were nods around the table.
  
 Secca was forced to agree that his suggestion made the most sense—and it agreed with the suggestion
of Counselor Veria. "Then, that is what we will tell the counselor.”
  
 She still wondered about the South Women--- they seemed better disciplined than most lancers, and
sup-posedly they fought well, but no one seemed to want them around, and that bothered her.
  
 96
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca glanced from the piers out into the harbor, empty, except for the vessels tied at the heavy wooden
piers. The morning was chill, made more so by the wind blowing off the dark gray water. There were five
vessels of varying lengths at the piers---but the largest was perhaps sixty yards in length, the smallest little
more than thirty. A line of mounts stretched along the pier. Secca watched as one was led up a gangway
and onto the deck of theFoam-sprite, the nearest vessel.
  
 “We’ll do what we can, Lady Sorceress,” offered Weyla, captain of the largest schooner, theAlycet.
The captain wasa wiry woman almost as tall as Drysel, and a good fifteen years older, but Secca would
have wagered her golds on Weyla in any contest between the two. "Luck and Har-monies with us, and
we’ll get well south of the Sand Hills. If not . . .” She shrugged. “We land you where we can.” Her
eyebrows lifted. “Unless your sorcery can help.”
  
 “It’s possible. I’ll certainly try if we need it, but I’ve never tried it on a ship.”
  
 “Like you," the captain continued, “I’d be wishing we could carry all on one crossing. The problem was
not the lancers, but the mounts. Easy for a company or two, but six be a problem. Safer to make one
crossing with five vessels than five with one.”
  
 “That’s what Counselor Veria told us,” Secca replied.
  
 “Take the morning to load, and then we’ll sail. Usually get a southwesterly by afternoon. Sweeps inland
to the Sand Hills, especially this time of year. Small pier at Ily-got. We can’t get that far,and you’ll have
to swim them ashore . . .won’t be bad . . . we don’t draft that deep...and the water here’s not that cold,
not like up near Os-twye.”
  
 “Why couldn’t we get that far? The Sturinnese?"
  
 The weathered captain nodded. ‘We can go shallow along the Sand Hills. Know the waters and the
shoals. South of that, the shallows narrow, and they can get to us unless we hole up in one of the shallow
bights. There we’d have to hoist the mounts clear, and you’d swim ‘em in. Probably not more than a
hundred yards fifty in some places.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 "Let's hope we can get to a place with a pier,” Secca said. ‘Maybe sorcery can help.
  
 “We’d prefer such, lady,” replied the captain. “Faster for us, and it will let us make a second run without
the Sea-Priests havin’ time to bring in one of those patrol schooners that can go where we do. ‘Course,
better here than in their lands. They got slave galleys there, and with thunder-drums and oars, and
shallow draft, best you not be anywhere close.”
  
 “They don’t have anything like that here, do they?’ asked the sorceress.
  
 “Only the smaller schooners, but they take Dumar, and it won’t be long before Dumuran captives’ll be
rowing galleys.” Weyla inclined her heat “Be seeing you on board.”
  
 Secca bowed, "I’ll be there shortly.” She watched as the weathered captain walked down the pier
toward the sea-ward end where theAlycet was moored.
  
 As she watched, Alcaren and Wilten appeared from be-hind a group of sailors in pale blue trousers and
jackets and walked up the pier from where they had been over-seeing the loading of the SouthWomen’s
mounts on theFoamsprite.
  
 “How is everything going?”
  
 “It’s not the loading I’m worried about, lady . . .“ Wilten coughed, then fingered his chin. “The captain
there. . . she said. . . we might have to swim the mounts to shore.”
  
 “So did the captain of theAlycet,” Secca replied. “I don’t know that many of our lancers can swim.”
Secca wasn’t that sure she’d do well in the water, either.
  
 “That be true, lady,” admitted Wilten.
  
 “All they have to do is hang on to the mounts,” Alcaren offered. “The water isn’t that deep except in the
center channel.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 That was easy enough for Alcarem to say, Secca re-flected. "Can you both travel on theAlycet with me
and the players? We need to have some time to talk over things.
  
 “My captains would not object, I do not think,” said Alacaren.
  
 “Nor mine.” Wilten shrugged. “They cannot go off somewhere on their own.”
  
 Secca nodded… “I’ll tell Captain Weyla.” She looked toward theAlycet, hoping again that she wouldn’t
have to swim her mount from the ship to a strange shore.
  
 97
  
 With the sea spray misting around her, whipped by the brisk wind, Secca walked forward, along the
right side of theAlycet , her hand not all that far from the heavy wooden railing, trying to adjust to moving
on a surface that slowly pitched with the long rolling and following swells.
  
 To her right, to the west, she could just make out a long and low dark smudge that one of the crew had
said was land--- swampy wetlands that were still a part of Elahwa. South of the swamps were higher and
far drier bluffs, and south of the bluffs—well out of sight, were the Sand Hills.
  
 Stiff as the wind was, with the full late afternoon sun falling on the schooner, Secca felt warmer than she
had at the piers in Elahwa that morning. She eased up to the railing where Alcaren leaned on the polished
but worn wood, looking to the southwest.
  
 The Rarnuan did not turn as Secca joined him. “We might just get to see a hint of the Sand Hills before
sunset.”
  
 The wood on which Alcaren’s hands, overlarge for his frame, rested was battered, but buffed smooth
and var-nished. The Ranuan followed Secca’s probing eyes. “You have to keep the wood sealed. It
splinters and rots, oth-erwise. Doesn’t matter so much on the rails here, except for you and me, but
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

anywhere the sails could touch, you don’t want splinters or sharp edges—put a rip in the can-vas, and
then where would you be?”
  
 “In some sort of trouble. Why did you say the rails didn’t matter except to you and me?” Secea
frowned.
  
 “Real sailors scarcely ever touch the rails.”
  
 As if to make that point, theAlycet pitched forward more steeply. Secca had to grab the railing. The ship
then rode the following swell, still maintaining a southwest heading, or so it seemed from the position of
the sun.
  
 “Do you always stay up here on the front?” asked Secca, loosening her grip on the varnished but
salt-sticky railing.
  
 "The bow?" Alcaren grimaced. “I do indeed. Here, the air is cool and fresh.”
  
 Secca glanced southward. “This seems wide enough for a larger vessel,”
  
 “Here...it is, but before long, the deep part of the channel will narrow, and it would take less than a glass
for the captain to have us in water where you could walk to shore. That’s why we pitch so much with so
little wind.”
  
 “Because the water is shallow?” asked Secca. She thought any water over her head was too deep.
  
 Alcaren nodded “Where you see the waves break…” He pointed to the west, his arm almost in front of
Secca’s nose. “That is where there are shallows and shoals.”
  
 Secca followed his gesture, seeing white spray less than a dek away. “It doesn’t look shallow.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “One of those big Sturinnese war brigs would get hung up there and break her back, just like that.”
Alcaren smiled. “But they know that. We won’t see them until the channel widens.”
  
 “How long will that be?”
  
 “Late the day after tomorrow at the earliest” Secca glanced upward. As the mast seemed to move,
 she could see Clearsong, almost at its zenith. It would be high in the sky well into evening. She hoped
that was a good sign.
  
 98
  
 A few scattered high white clouds scudded across the late morning sky, moving to the south with the
wind that carried theAlycet southward. Somewhere to the west— just beyond the horizon, according to
Alcaren—were the last traces of the Sand Hills. Secca stood on the raised rear deck of theAlycet, close
to the railing around the wheel platform. To her left was Weyla, although the captain’s eyes were never
still, and never turned toward the sorceress. Alcaren stood almost at the starboard rail, facing into the
wind. Richina leaned on the railing as well, less than two yards from Alcaren, but farther forward.
  
 Perhaps a half-dek astern and to the north of theAlycet followed theFoamsprite. For a moment, Secca
watched the smaller vessel, her bow cutting into the long swells, with spray and foam seemingly almost
touching the base of the bowsprit. Then the sorceress looked forward again.
  
 On the lower mid-deck, Palian was rehearsing the first players, and the sound of strings and horns
drifted aft to Secca. The second players stood on the raised forward deck, as if waiting for the first
players to finish rehearsing.
  
 “A good half-day out of the channel... another few glasses, and we can run for Ilygot,” said the tall and
wiry captain.
  
 “How far are we from there?”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Half a day, if the wind holds.”
  
 “Sail to the east!” came a call from the lookout above.
  
 The captain turned away from Secca, peering to her left and back toward the east “Can’t see yet; but
can't be other than the dissonant Sea-Pigs.” She glanced eastward, then looked toward the helmsman.
“Bring her ten starboard.”
  
 "Ten starboard, aye. Coming starboard.”
  
 As theAlycet swung to the west, with the wind coming into the sails more directly, Richina climbed up
the ladder from the lower deck. "We’re turning..."
  
 Secca gestured toward the east “There are ships there.”
  
 Behind Richina, Wilten appeared, his face slightly pale. “Sorceress?"
  
 “The Sea-Priests may have found us.”
  
 Weyla glanced upward, toward the lookout “How many?”
  
 “Four, mayhap five!” came back the call.
  
 Five vessels had to be Sturinnese, Secca reflected. She stepped forward until she looked down on the
mid-deck. "Players, stand by. The lookout has sighted the Sturin-nese.”
  
 “Stand by,” called Palian.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Second players to position,” ordered Delvor.
  
 The second players began to climb down the ladders to the main deck.
  
 Seeca walked back toward the captain, who pointed eastward. “Just out there.”
  
 Secca could see but specks of white above the dark blue water.
  
 “They’re running with the wind, and they carry far more sail than do we.”
  
 “Can we make it to Ilygot?" asked the sorceress.
  
  “I’d wager against it” Weyla looked westward, then walked toward the raised platform, that held the
helm, where she studied the map fastened on an inclined plot. Secca eased behind the captain, leaving
Richina, Wilten, and Alcaren by the railing, all three now peering out to the east.
  
 “We are here . . . most exposed.” Weyla pointed to the map, at a series of dotted lines in the green
space that seemed to represent water. “The shallows to the west of us are narrow. Don’t offer much
protection. Another five deks south, there is a reef, and we could almost reach Ilygot behind it.”
  
 “That’s where we’re headed?”
  
 The captain nodded, “For now. Need to watch, see how fast they’re closing.”
  
 Secca frowned, catching the concern in the older woman’s voice. “You think they’re faster than we
are?"
  
 “The wind favors them, and there was but a short time between when the lookout sighted them and
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

when we could see sail from the deck.”
  
 For a time, all watched the dark blue waters to the east, and the specks of white on the horizon that
quickly grew into sails above white hulls. Secca began a vocalise, trying to warm up slowly, sensing she
would need sorcery, and wondering how singing on the sea would affect the results of the spell.
  
 “Five vessels---two brigs and three of the shallow-draft schooners—all full-rigged,” Weyla pointed out.
  
 Secca frowned. “I thought there were only three of those schooners. That’s what the glass showed.”
  
 ‘They had to be using their own glasses,” suggested Alcaren from behind Secca. His face was pale.
  
 “They use scrying glasses often,” Secca said, “and they were following us all the time in Ebra” She
paused. “I worry about the drums on the water.”
  
 “You think the thunder-drums work better at sea?” ques-tioned Richina.
  
 “Why else would they have developed them?”
  
 The captain inclined her head, and Secca slipped away from the railing toward Weyla.
  
 “Sorceress,” Weyla said slowly, her voice pitched low, “Never have I seen a ship that size move with
that quick-ness. On this course we cannot reach the reef before they reach us.” She gestured again. “The
three small war schoo-ners can follow us into the shallows.”
  
 Secca glanced atthe oncoming vessels, white sails bil-lowing in the midday sun. The Sturinnese were not
within normal spell range, but . . . could she speed the five Elah-wan ships with a wind spell? “I will see
what I can do.” She stepped forward, looking down on the main deck, and called to Palian, ‘Players!
The fourth building song!”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Form up! The fourth building song!”
  
 Secca’s command was echoed by both Delvor and Palian, and both sets of players formed up on the
mid-deck, the second players forming an arc around the first, both facing eastward. As the scrambling for
position died away, and renewed tuning echoed upward, Palian glanced to Secca.
  
 ‘When you’re ready,” called Secca.
  
 “The fourth building song. On my mark . . . Mark!”
  
 The gentle pitching of the deck had little effect on the players as the first bars poured forth from the
strings and horns and from the lutars of the second players. Secca faced forward and sang.
  
 “Turn the wind from them to our sails,
 and let us fly before the gales...“
  
 The sails billowed and theAlycet seemed to lurch forward, spray cascading in sheets almost to the
forward rails, with a salty mist drifting aft toward Secca. Several players lurched sideways with the ship’s
motion.
  
 Secca, took a deep breath, then looked at the wiry captain. Weyla glanced from Secca to the
helmsman, and then to the pursuing Sturinnese.
  
 The sorceress followed the captain’s eyes. While the five Elahw an vessels clearly were increasing
speed, the sails of the Sturinnese remained billowed and taut, and the distance between the Sturinnese
and theAlycet con-tinued to decrease, if more slowly.
  
 Were the Sturinnese using wind sorcery backed by drums, as Richina had suggested and Secca feared?
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Whatever the Sturinnese were using, it was allowing the pursuing vessels to close on the Elahwan ships,
de-spite the increased speed afforded by Secca’s sorcery-boosted winds.
  
 ‘We need to run for shore, sorceress.”
  
 “Do what you think best, captain.” Secca eased to the rail, putting a hand out to steady herself. From
there, she studied the oncoming vessels, trying to think of what spell she could use, and how.
  
 “Starboard thirty!” Weyla ordered the helm. “Bring her round! Easy!”
  
 “Aye. Starboard thirty. Easy as she goes."
  
 Richina eased up beside Secca. “They must be using sorcery, too.”
  
 “I fear so.” Secca looked to the north, where the other Elahwan vessels stretched almost in a line
abreast, ex-cept for the northernmost, which had begun to fall be-hind the four others.
  
 The two sorceresses continued to watch as the white-hulled vessels drew nearer in the Alycet and the
other four ships carrying Secca's force.
  
 Secca ran through another volcalise, trying to fix the spell in her mind--- a spell she wasn’t sure would
even work. Yet she knew the Sturinnese had to be closer before any spell would carry to them.
  
 The five Sturinnese vessels were less than a dek to the east, when Weyla barked an order. "Fire parties
on the deck! Fire parties on the deck!” She looked toward Alcaren Wilten, and the two sorceresses.
“Best you move forward of the helm. Put the mast ‘tween you and the Sea-Pigs.”
  
 As Secca slipped to the starboard side of theAlycet, following the captain’s directions, from somewhere
be-low appeared nearly a half-score sailors, six men and four women, each carrying two buckets. Of
each pair, one bucket held sand. The second was empty but was attached to a long coiled line.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 TheAlycet and theFoamsprite, and the two vessels immediately abreast of them, were pulling away
from the other Elahwan vessel.
  
 Weyla shook her head. “Told Ilspeth that rig wasn’t right.”
  
 “The rig?" asked Seeca.
  
 “Wavesinger’srigged for a northern run. Tighter, but you don’t get as much sail in a following wind.”
  
 “So she can’t use the wind as fully?"
  
 Weyla nodded. “Aforelong, they’ll be using the big crossbows to send fireshafts into us. Could be
before we cross the shallows.”
  
 Secca could see whitecaps ahead, but they seemed distant, more than deks away, and the land beyond
was but a thick line on the horizon. Her eyes darted back to the white-hulled pursuers, the closest—one
of the smaller schooners—less than five hundred yards aft.
  
 "Can you offer another spell?” asked the captain. “The flame shafts will be striking soon.”
  
 Secca tried to gauge the distance. How would she know? Too early and the spell would be wasted.
‘Per-haps...”
  
 Hissssssss... thunk/
  
 Secca’s head jerked up at the sound, her mouth open-ing as a flaming shaft slammed into the deck.
Before she could utter a word, one of the women sailors had stepped forward, struck the shaft with an
iron hammer to knock it loose and flat on the wooden deck, then covered the flames with damp sand
from the bucket she carried.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Hissss...
  
 Secca ducked, but the second flaming shaft had a!-ready passed a good yard over her head at an angle
and plunged into the dark blue waters of the Southern Ocean. A flicker of orange caught her eye. She
swallowed as she saw flames begin to climb up the canvas of the aft mast of the trailingWavesinger. She
looked at her companions. Alcaren and Richina looked greenish. Wilten’scountenance was drawn. Even
Weyla looked worried.
  
 Seeca stepped forward and looked down atthe play-ers. On the deck below, Palian’s face bore a
greenish cast, as did Rowal’s. “The third building song!”
  
 Secca’s command was echoed by both Delvor and Palian, and both sets of players began to reform,
now facing southeast, not quite toward the pursuing Sturin-nese.
  
 “The third building song . . . on my mark!” Palian’s words were forced.
  
 “Now!” ordered Secca. On the third bar, the one that began the spell proper, she launched into the
words.
  
  
 “Come wind and rain, too fierce to fight,
 strike with power, and all storm’s might,
 lightning bolts to cleave day into night...”
  
 As she finished the spell, Secca could only hope her visualizations of the stormwinds were accurate
enough, and that her voice and the tones of the players were strong enough. Yet, even before the echoes
of the spell-song died away, the once-clear sky began to darken, and a lightning bolt flashed from above,
striking the second Sturinnese vessel.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Winds whipped through the canvas above her, crack-ing the sails like the whip of a teamster. The Alycet
pitched forward to swells that had become waves five yards or more from crest to trough.
  
 A line of dark rain—almost like a black curtain formed to the south of the ten ships, and began to move
northward . . . but too slowly. The leading Sturinnese brig surged before the storm, less then a hundred
yards from the Alycet, plunging directly toward the Alycet's stern quarter.
  
 “Richina--- get me a lutar! Any lutar!” Secca yelled.
  
 “A lutar! A lutar!” Richina’s voice rose over the storm, penetrating the whistle of the wind, and the
crashing of the bow into heavier and heavier swells. “A lutar for Lady Secca!” The younger sorceress
was half-way down the ladder to the mid-deck, swinging one-armed.
  
 A player staggered and slid toward the blonde sor-cress, thrusting a lutar at her. Richina grasped it, and
then struggled up the ladder one-handed.
  
 Secca tried to move forward to meet Richina, but found her feet sliding, carrying her aft. An arm---
Al-caren’s arm reached out and lifted her toward the rail-ing, which she grasped with both hands to
steady herself. Then she made her way forward, hand over hand.
  
 Richina thrust the dark-bodied instrument atSecca.
  
 Taking the heavy lutar in her left hand, Secca half--walked, half-lurched along the side of the taffrail until
she stood just to the starboard of the back of the helm platform. The Sturinnese ship was so close that
she could see the letters of the name stenciled beneath the bowsprit. She braced herself with one leg
against the taffrail, ran her fingers over the strings quickly, hoping the instrument was close to being in
tune, cleared her throat, and began the spell.
  
 “Turn to fire, turn to flame
 all those who stand against our name.
 Turn to ashes, turn to dust...”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 More lightnings flared out of the blackened sky, some so close to Secca that she felt the heat across her
face. Screams echoed from the doomed Sturinnese vessel. The smell of charred flesh swept across the
Alycet in waves . . .between spray and wind.
  
 Secca clasped the borrowed lutar with one hand, the railing with the other as theAlycet pitched away
from the burning mass that had been, moments before, a proud and dangerous white-hulled warship.
  
 The black storm curtain swept over the three trailing Sturinnese vessels, and they vanished from Secca’s
vision.
  
 Despite the torrents of rain and wind, the sole re-maining white-hulled ship—one of the smaller war
schooners plowed toward theWavesinger, striking the Elahwan vessel midships, even as the storm
curtain swept over both ships.
  
 Secca watched, trying to breathe as the wind sucked air from her very lungs, but she could not make out
either vessel.
  
 Then . . . suddenly, the air began to clear, the swells to diminish.
  
 Still hanging on to the railing, Seam glanced out at the circles of debris that appeared and disappeared in
the swells. Not a single white-hulled vessel remained.
  
 “Hard port!” snapped Weyla. “Make for theWavesinger!"
  
 TheAlycet’s bow swung to port, seemingly away from the other Elahwan vessels, before settling on a
heading almost due north. The ship seemed more slug-gish, and a crackling and cracking overhead drew
Secca’s eyes. The mainsail was almost in two pieces, and four sailors aloft struggled to furl the whipping
canvas.
  
 As theAlycet neared the wreckage that had been theWavesinger--- and the Sturinnese schooner---
Secca could see shattered timbers, shredded canvas, several barrels  and more than a few heads
bobbing in the water, some attached to immobile bodies. Most of those in the water waved as the
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

Elahwan vessel neared, but there were far fewer heads than had been lancers and crew upon the
Wavesinger.
  
 At the sound of a particularly loudcrack, Secca glanced up at the tattered mainsail, and the sailors
strug-gling to finish furling it, and then back at the wreckage of theWavesinger.
  
 Weyla issued another set of commands, and the Aly-cetslowed, turning somehow into the wind so that
the sails went limp. “Get that mainsailfurled!”
  
 As Secca watched, Alcaren wrapped a line over his shoulders, then tied the bitter end to the railing.
After making sure there was loose line hanging, he dived into the water. He surfaced and swam strongly
toward a limp figure, then swam back toward theAlycet, towing the lancer. One of the sailors lowered a
line with a loop in it, and Alcaren slipped the figure into it before swim-ming after yet another struggling
lancer.
  
 One figure dropped below the water as Secca watched, as if dragged down, and did not reappear.
  
 A small-boat appeared in the water, lowered from the davits on the port side of theAlycet, and the crew
rowed toward a group of figures clinging to a wooden hatch cover.
  
 Richina slipped up beside Secca. “It happened so fast. One moment, they seemed deks away, and then 
. . . sud-denly, they were just...right there.”
  
 “All battles are like that, I fear,” offered Wilten. The overcaptain’s eyes remained on the figures in the
water. “Some of those are lancers. I think the one swimming there is Drysel.”
  
 Secca lightened her lips. Drysel. . . her lancers... those who drowned had died because she had wanted
to get to Ranuak, and because she had not really been prepared to handle sorcery upon the sea. Why
did she have to learn so many things the hard way and so late?
  
 She wished she could swim like Alcaren—or do something--- but the dayflashes before her eyes told
her she could do no more sorcery, even had she known any sorcery that would suffice. So she watched
in silence as the other Elahwan ships and their small-boats joined the search.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 The sun hung low above the western horizon before the small-boat returned to theAlycet for the last
time, the third officer shaking her head when she positioned the craft under the davits, “None left,
captain.”
  
 As the crew turned the winches that lifted the boat, Weyla walked toward Secca.
  
 The sorceress turned. “I’m sorry, captain.”
  
 The older woman gave a slight, but firm headshake. “Risk we all understood, sorceress. Wasn’t all your
do-ing. I told Ilspeth she needed to re-rig for the Gulf and southern waters. Didn’t believe me.”
  
 “Is she . . .?”
  
 Weyla shook her head. “Second said she was drag-ging lancers topside, then got caught in something.
Went down with theWavesinger.”
  
 “I’m sorry.”
  
 “No one made us take you, sorceress. We all wanted the risk golds. Besides, first time in a year that any
caught by the Sea-Pigs have come clear.”
  
 “I cost you a ship.” Secca glanced up at the main mast, where the tattered mainsail had been furled.
“And more.”
  
 “This is war, Lady Secca. You lost half a company. and all their mounts.” Weyla smiled grimly. “I would
trade a sail for my life and my ship any day, and one ship for five Sturinnese.” Weyla smiled grimly.
“None will reach us afore we make port at Ilygot. Maybe not even for weeks.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Secca hoped not. She wondered if trading one ship for five would be enough, given the vast Sturinnese
fleets she had seen in her glass. Again . . . her lack of experience had cost everyone dearly, no matter
what the Elahwan captain said.
  
 “ ‘Sides, this way, with those Sea-Pigs gone, and them having no other shallow water vessels, we can
slip back along the coast and pick up your other lancers, neat as you please. Also be a while afore they
try the Gulf.” The captain gestured toward the helm. “Best we get on with it. Be a bit tricky coming in
after dark” With a brisk nod, Weyla turned and moved toward the helmsman.
  
 Secca returned the nod. She felt numb, far number even than after the land battles that had killed many
more lancers on both sides.
  
 Alcaren re-appeared, wearing a dry set of blues, doubtless his only other uniform. His face was almost
as pale as Secca felt hers was. He looked at her with eyes that seemed to look within her. "Few could do
what you did.”
  
 “I did not know.” She shook her head. "I acted too late.”
  
 “It is difficult to cast spells on a moving deck, and more so to do it in a storm, as you did with the last
spell.”
  
 “You’re kind,” she replied, “but I almost failed, and many died because I was slow and did not
understand."
  
 “Most of us live because of you.” His voice was firm. She shook her head a second time, turning away
from him and looking aft, back toward the wreckage that still marked her failure, and the watery grave of
half a com-pany of lancers, good mounts, and too many sailors.
  
 Alcaren stepped to the taffrail, standing beside her, not speaking.
  
 Secca was grateful for his presence, and for his ac-ceptance of her need for silence.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 They stood there, without speaking, as theAlycet swung southwest once more, leading the way toward
Ilygot...and Ranuak.
  
 99
  
 As dawn seeped past the closed shutters into the small inn room, Secca turned over, to avoid facing the
light. Even with her eyes closed, her head ached, and dayflashes seared through her skull. The light
strengthened.
  
 Finally, the sorceress sat up and swung her feet over the side of the bed. The floorboards were cold . .
.and gritty. Sitting in the gray light that seemed far brighter than she knew it was, she used her left hand to
massage her forehead and then her neck. Her head still ached, and her eyes burned, whether she opened
them or closed them. But headache or not, Secca was a person who woke early, and once awake,
seldom if ever could return to slumber.
  
 She could smell the harbor of Ilygot, the dampness of awinter mist, the odor of fish decaying
somewhere. Slowly, she stood and tottered toward the basin and pitcher on the side table. She began to
wash, reflecting on the day before, and upon her slowness in reacting to the Sturin-nese. Had it been
thunder-drums upon the other vessels, drums she had not heard, or had it simply been because she had
been attempting sorcery under most unfamiliar conditions?
  
 Weyla and the three other Elahwan captains had man-aged to rescue slightly more than half the lancers
aboard theWavesinger, and most of the crew, simply because they had been topside. The losses had not
been nearly so great as in some battles, but they still bothered her because she knew they could have
been avoided by a more experienced sorceress.
  
 She snorted quietly to herself. The only problem was that there weren’t any sorceresses or sorcerers
who were more experienced in warfare—except among the Sturin-nese, who never seemed to stop
fighting somewhere.
  
 After she pulled on her riding clothes. Secca pulled back one shutter and looked downhill at the empty
piers. TheAlycet and the other Elahwan ships were gone. Although Weyla had told Secca that she would
sail before dawn, to catch the land breezes, Secca somehow felt regretful and alone.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 From the adjoining narrow bed came a groan as Richina turned over. “How . . . lady . . . it is most
early.”
  
 Secca did not reply for a moment, finally closing the shutter and turning. “I was too uncomfortable to
sleep longer. You can sleep for a bit. I’m going down to get something to eat.”
  
 She sat on the edge of the narrow bed and pulled on her boots, then stood and reclaimed her riding
jacket. All her clothes felt clammy and chill, and her head still throbbed.
  
 After opening the door, she stepped into the narrow hall where Rukor and Dymen stood. “Lady Richina
may be a while yet.”
  
 Rukor smiled. “I will accompany you, lady.”
  
 Secca descended the staircase, a passage so small that her shoulders almost brushed both walls, and
stepped out into the foyer off the public room. The odor of bread and grease wafted toward her, and she
swallowed.
  
 With Rukor standing guard behind her, Secca debated entering the small public room, empty as it was
save for Wilten, her own officers, and Alcaren. The two over-captains had been sitting at a corner table,
and, upon seeing Secca, Alcaren rose and bowed in her direction.
  
 Secca stepped forward.
  
 “Good morning, lady.” Alcaren’ s voice was cheerful.
  
 Secca nodded, but did not speak immediately as she seated herself.
  
 Wilten gestured toward the single serving woman. “Something hot for the lady.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Cider be all we got”
  
 “Fine.” Secca’s voice cracked on the single word. “And some bread and cheese, please.”
  
 “You be wanting any mutton, lady?”
  
 “No . . . I think not. Thank you.”Even the thought of mutton sent cramps through her stomach. She
waited until the serving woman turned. “How is everyone this morning?”
  
 “All the lancers that got saved are fine, lady,” Wilten replied. “Good thing as the ocean is warmer here,
though. Some were pretty chill, anda lot of bruises, but only two were hurt beyond that---one got a
broken arm and another a slash across the shoulder. We used the elixir on both and set the arm.”
  
 Withathunk, the serving woman set a tall mug of steaming cider on the plank table. “Here ye be. Two
cop-pers.”
  
 Secca fumbled for her wallet, and Alcaren slipped a pair of coppers onto the table, coppers that
vanished into the large hand of the woman.
  
 “Thank you,” Secca said.
  
 “Best you not be opening that wallet here,” murmured the Ranuan.
  
 The Sorceress nodded and then sipped the hot cider slowly. After several small swallows, she broke off
a chunk of the warm and moist dark bread. As she ate, she could feel some of her headache recede. She
still was see-ing occasional dayflashes.
  
 “Captain Weyla said it could be six to eight days before she’d be able to return with the last two
companies,” Al-caren volunteered after a time of silence. “Especially to bring more mounts.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca ignored the fact that Weyla had told her the same thing the night before, and looked at Wilten.
  
 “I can wait here for the other two companies, Lady Secca,” offered the older overcaptain.
  
 “You wouldn’t mind that?”
  
 “Lady Secca, I’d just as soon be here as in Encora. I’m not a town lancer, not in a large town, anyway.”
  
 And not in a city run by women, either, Secca suspected. “You’ll need to keep one company.”
  
 “The one without mounts is fine. Won’t have to worry much about feed,” he replied. “You should leave
as soon as you can.”
  
 “Why do you think so?” Secca repressed a frown. Wil-ten had been the one who had been most
opposed to trav-eling to Ranuak. “It’s likely to take several glasses to straighten matters out”
  
 “The Sturinnese are after you, Lady Secca. They might well send vessels here if you linger. If they
believe you to be heading to Encora, then the last two companies will find sailing less . . . disputed . . .
and we will have more lancers when we need them, whether that be in returning to Defalk or in going on
to Dumar.”
  
 Secca took another swallow of the cider. While it had a deeper clove taste than she would have
preferred, the hot liquid was definitely easing the tightness in her throat.
  
 “And, begging your pardon, lady, you are not looking up to great sorceries in the next days,” Wilten
added.
  
 Her overcaptain was definitely right about that. She turned to Alcaren. “Should we not send messengers
ahead to request the Matriarch’s permission to come to call upon her?"
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 He nodded. “Only four initially, I would suggest.”
  
 "Two SouthWomen, and two lancers?"
  
 “That would be best.”
  
 “They can depart when we do.” Secca frowned. She’d have to give them golds for lodging, and she was
begin-ning to doubt that the hoard of coins she had brought, extravagant as the amount had seemed when
she had left Loiseau, would see her through the coming weeks, let alone an expedition into Dumar.
  
 She took another mouthful of bread and cheese, won-dering what she could really do in Encora. Would
she just have to wait until spring to travel overland to Dumar? Or would Dumar be completely in the
hands of the Sturinnese by then?
  
 She lifted the mug.
  
 100
 Encora, Ranuak
  
 The winter mist collects on the window beyond the Matriarch’s study, gathering, and then oozing down
the ancient glass in slow rivulets. Inside, in the glow of the oil lamps set in white bronze sconces on the
white walls, Aetlen sets down the mandolin and looks to the woman who sits behind the flat table desk.
“You look like you are listening, but your mind is elsewhere.”
  
 Alya says slowly, “The glass tells me that the shadow sorceress fought a sea battle with the Sturinnese
south of the Gulf. She destroyed four ships with storms and the fifth with fire."
  
 “Upon the open ocean?” asks Aetlen.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Upon the open ocean. She is riding south from Ilygot with two companies of her lancers and one of
South-Women. She will arrive here in three days.”
  
 "Is Alcaren with her?”
  
 “He is. I cannot say what transpires between them, save he is acting as overcaptain for both her lancers
and his.”
  
 “It could be worse.” He leans forward and sets the man-dolin on the polished wood of the table-desk,
then leans back, his eyes still on the Matriarch. “Using Alcaren so . . . you risk much."
  
 “Not so much as not using him. At worse, he guards our ally. At best, he will learn enough to help
her...and us."
  
 “That is a frail reed,” Aetlen points out.
  
 “As my mother said, it is the only reed we have, except trust in the Harmonies.”
  
  “You both have had this habit of assisting the Harmo-nies."
  
 Alya shrugs and smiles. “Where I can...”
  
 “Do the Ladies of the Shadows know the Sorceress ap-proaches?” asks the sandy-haired consort.
  
 “I would think not yet, but within glasses they will.” Alya sighs. "Best we make ready the guest quarters
and barracks, and put on extra guards.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “You expect them to act that soon?”
  
 Alya laughs. “I would be most surprised if they did not. A true great sorceress within Encora? One who
has no scruples about using her powers?"
  
 "I would say she must have some.”
  
 “She uses them. To the Ladies of the Shadows, that means she has none.”
  
 Aetlen winces. “They would die rather than be chained, as are women in Sturinn, yet they would kill one
of the few hopes of holding off the Sea-Priests.”
  
 “The Sea-Priests have already lost fleets and more than a hundred score lancers to the sorceresses of
Defalk, and Defalk has no interest in exerting power beyond Liedwahr. Yet the Sea-Priests persist Who
is more foolish?"
  
 Aetlen laughs, his tone bitter. “And we are caught be-tween those who will not use sorcery to save us
and those who will use it to enslave us.”
  
 “Ever it has been, dearest. Those who are blind slaves to principled belief would claim virtue while
murdering for their beliefs. Yet they claim that they are exalted above those who profess no such
principles at all, even as the bodies pile up.”
  
 “It is indeed a pity that you cannot say such openly.”
  
 “That . . . I cannot do. Not while the dismal swamps yet dot Ranuak, or the Sand Hills shift across the
north, coy-ering towns and uncovering others to reveal mummies of mothers still holding babes in arms.”
  
 “I know.” Aetlen’s voice is soft. “I know. So, again, we must put our trust in the Harmonies, and in
others.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “And post guards." Alya says dryly. “And train sorcer-ers whom we cannot avow.”
  
 Both laugh, half in irony, half in bitterness.
  
 101
  
 Dark gray clouds loomed over the valley to the west of the road, clouds so dark that the early afternoon
felt more like twilight. The road, while not paved, was of a firm clay and just wide enough for two
wagons to pass side by side. The valley itself was split by a narrow river. To the east of the river, below
the road, was an ancient-looking conifer forest, although the trees displayed a col-oration that held as
much black and purple as green.
  
 Beyond the river to the west were small ponds fringed with yellowish reeds and linked by patches of
sickly greens and orangish-browns. From amid the browns protruded leafless polelike trees. Secca could
see not a single dwell-ing in the entire valley, which stretched a good fifteen deks from northeast to
southwest, and more than ten in breadth.
  
 A light mist drifted across the riders heading along the ridge road to the southwest. Secca and Alcaren
rode near the front of the column, behind a small vanguard of four lancers, andin front of Richina and
Palian. With the mist came a sickly bitter odor from the valley, not quite like burned meat, nor like
swamps, nor like rotten fruit, but reminding Secca of all three.
  
 Not a pleasant place, she said quietly.
  
 “No," Alcaren admitted. “These are the Great Dismal Swamps of the north. They say that once the
entire valley was like the western side.”
  
 “What caused them?" Richina’s voice drifted up from behind Secca and Alcaren.
  
 “The Spell-Fire Wars." Alcaren replied. ‘There are many valleys like this throughout Ranuak.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “From sorcery?” Richina’s voice carried a tone of dis-belief.
  
 "From sorcery,” Alcaren affirmed. “You have seen a battlefield blasted black by Lady Secca, have you
not? Do you think she or the Lady Anna were the first to harness such power?” He glanced at Secca.
  
 “We have blackened the land in a few places,” Secca admitted. “But nothing I have done would turn a
valley into something like this—even after scores of generations. Nor did Lady Anna create any
destruction such as this.”
  
 “I would hope not, lady.” Alcaren’s voice was calm. “Yet this was the price for the freedom of both Wei
and Ranuak from the Mynyan lords. These valleys once held hamlets and towns, and the sorcery of the
Mynyans turned them into spell-blasted holes that filled with water and be-came poisoned bogs and
swamps. The Sand Hills are where the ancient Matriarchs turned the once-fertile bor-derlands of Mynya
into desert heaped with sand. When the spring storms shift the dunes, folk still find hamlets where lie the
bodies of those poor folk buried under the sand in those long-ago days.”
  
 “Are you sure that the dunes date back that far?’ asked Richina. “I thought the Evult used sorcery to
move the Sand Hills to block the Sand Pass.”
  
 “He moved the Sand Hills.” Alcaren turned in his sad-dle. “He did not create them. The first Matriarchs
did that through their sorcery.”
  
 Had sorcery done all that? Secca glanced to the dark and misshapen trees, and then to the sickly greens
of the bogs and swamps. After a moment, she considered the contents of the notebooks locked behind
iron at Loiseau . . . and shivered.
  
 Alcaren did not remark upon her reaction, but continued to ride beside her. Secca looked ahead, where
the road followed the ridge line toward the southwest . . . and En-cora.
  
  
 102
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca shifted her weight in the saddle, glad for the morn-ing’s sunshine; hazy as it was. She rode
between Palian and Delvor, and behind Alcaren and Richina. The road followed the northern bank of a
small river that wound through low rolling hills generally covered with scattered grasses and scrub bushes.
At times, Secca had seen small flocks of sheep in the distance, but the size of the flocks suggested that
the grazing was indeed poor.
  
 “Is there a better way to set up the players if we must offer spells from a ship again?” she asked, looking
first to Palian, and then to the lank-haired chief of second players.
  
 “The sound of the instruments might carry farther from the rear deck,” offered Delvor. “They would from
the front deck, but there is much spray, and damp strings lose their tuning in moments.”
  
 “Do you think we will need to use ships against the Sea-Priests?" Palian frowned.
  
 “I cannot see them bringing their fleet into a harbor so that I can sing a spell over it,” Secca replied.
  
 “Did not the Lady Anna. . .?"
  
 “She destroyed one of their fleets by building the giant dam on the Falche, and letting it gather water for
seasons. When she tilted the dam with sorcery, the flood destroyed the fleet because it was anchored in
the harbor at Narial. That was because the Sturinnese held the city,” replied Secca. “They don’t hold
Encora.”
  
 “I doubt there’s a river that big flowing through En-cora." Palian nodded to the narrow stream flanking
the road.
  
 “Or that the Sturinnese will anchor somewhere like that without watching the river through their glasses,”
added Delvor.
  
 “We won’t have that much time, either," Seeca pointed out.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Silence fell over the three for a moment
  
 "What is that?” Richina’s voice contained such curiosity that Secca looked forward and followed the
gesture of the younger sorceress. The hilltop a good five deks to the north of the road glistened black in
the hazy morning sunlight.
  
 “It is called The Last Encampment,” Alcaren said. "It is said to mark the farthest advance of the Mynyan
lords into Ranuak. There the first Matriarch cast the first true Dark-song spell and turned all of the
Mynyan forces there into stone, but the spell was so violent that even the stone figures melted like wax.”
Alcaren pointed farther west. “That smaller hill there, do you see it?"
  
 “It’s black, too,” Richina observed, “but smaller.”
  
 "That was where the Matriarch stood. The spell recoiled upon her and those around her.”
  
 Secca winced at that thought. She cocked her head. Thinking exactly about his words, about the spell
recoiling upon the first Matriarch, and about the feeling behind those words.
  
 “Lady?" asked Palian.
  
 “I’m fine. Just thinking.”
  
 “Have you ever been there?” Richina pressed.
  
 “Only to the lower part of the hill,” Alcaren replied. “Nothing lives where it is black, and often animals
still die if they spend much time among the shining black stones.”
  
 “Have you seen that?’
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Alcaren nodded. The hair falls from their fur in clumps, and they bleed from all over their skin. If they live
for more than a few days, all their hair vanishes and their teeth fall out. Any animal that eats the flesh of
one of them also dies.”
  
 “After all these years?’ asked Delvor, his voice skepti-cal
  
 “None will stop you if you wish to test what I have said,” replied Alcaren. “But none will touch your
body or aid you, either.”
  
 Delvor shuddered.
  
 Palian nodded, sadly and reflectively.
  
 Somehow, reflected Secca, the concerns of the Ladies of the Shadows did not seem quite so strange,
not if a fraction of what Alcaren had said happened to be true . . . and she had yet to hear a word from
him that she knew to be untrue.
  
 103
  
 As the gray mare carried Secca to the crest of the road that passed between two hills almost tall enough
to be very small mountains, the sorceress could see a broad plain spreading before her, filled with
winter-turned fields edged with stone walls and interspersed with infrequent wood-lots, also marked by
stone walls. Every morgen of land seemed to be in use, either for homes or fields or barn-yards—and the
trees in every woodlot or orchard ran in neat rows.
  
 To the south, perhaps ten deks from the road, lay the dark blue-gray expanse of the Southern Ocean,
empty of either sails or whitecaps that could be seen from that dis-tance. A dark smudge appeared on
the horizon to the southwest--- the island that sheltered the port.
  
 A good fifteen deks to the west was a second set of low ridges, topped with lines of white stone walls
that shim-mered in the midday winter sun.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “There! Those are the northern and eastern walls of En-cora.” Alcaren gestured toward the ridge hills.
  
 “Walls?” While Secca had seen more than a few walled keeps in Defalk and in Ebra, she had never seen
walls around an entire city—or even parts of it.
  
 “They are older than the city. They have never been used for defense, but they were built in the
generations after the Spell-Fire Wars.”
  
 “I suppose there are seawalls as well?’ asked Secca,
  
 “Of course.” Alcaren nodded. He did not smile. “Even all the fleets of the Sea-Priests would have
difficulty in taking Encora from the sea."
            
  “There don’t seem to be any ships out there,” ventured Richina, from where she rode behind Secca.
  
 “The Sturinnese would have to be either to the southeast or much farther to the southwest. Except for a
few narrow channels, those waters are too shallow for most of their war vessels.” Alcaren smiled. ‘We
have never marked the channels, and they change often.”
  
 “They cannot scry the channels?” asked Richina.
  
 Secca winced.
  
 “Lady,” Alcaren’s voice was patient.
  
 “Oh..."
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Secca could sense the flush and embarrassment of the younger sorceress. At times, it was hard to
remember that Richina was still several years shy of a full score—until she asked a thoughtless question
that betrayed a lack of experience at variance with her very womanly appearance.
  
 “Is that why the Elahwan vessels cannot travel farther south than Ilygot?” Richina asked quickly.
  
 Before they had left the small town of Zedal that morn-ing, Secca had used the scrying glass to seek out
the lanc-ers of Loiseau that followed her to Encora. The glass had shown that the two remaining
companies were sailing southward on three of the Elahwan vessels and that there were no Sturinnese
forces near the ships. Secca only hoped she had phrased the spell correctly enough that there would be
none near by the time the three vessels neared llygot.
  
 “Yes,” replied Alcaren. “The secrets to the channels are held most closely. Also, it would be difficult to
maneuver more than a ship or two in the shoals and the shallows, and even the most experienced Ranuan
captains will not traverse the East Sound in rough waters or in storms.”
  
 "Encorais well-protected,” offered Palian easily.
  
 “With our past, could we afford otherwise?” countered Alcaren.
  
 “After more than a thousand years?” questioned Secca.
  
 "Whose fleets blockade our ports?"
  
 At the dryness of Alcaren’s tone of voice, Secea laughed, even as she considered the memories of a war
so violent that scars remained everywhere throughout the land after scores of generations. “You make a
good point, over-captain."
  
 The light breeze was chilly, but not unbearably cold, as the column began the descent into the valley that
lay be-tween them and the white walls of Encora.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “We should dispatch the messengers now, should we not?’ asked Secca.
  
 “It would be best,” answered Alcaren.
  
 While they had already sent one set of messengers from Ilygot and while it was almost certain that the
Matriarch already had known of their journey and approach to Encora even before those messengers
had arrived, the cour-tesy of a more formal and immediate notification was certainly due. Secca and
Alcaren had earlier decided on sending eight more lancers, four from the SouthWomen and four from
Secca’s diminished forces.
  
 "Messengers to the fore!” called Alcaren.
  
 The eight riders rode forward along the shoulders of the road, passing the players, and then Richina,
Delvor, and Palian.
  
 “You have your scrolls?" asked Secca.
  
 ‘We do, lady,” answered the squad leader a South-Woman in a crimson-trimmed blue riding jacket.
  
 “Convey our regards to the Matriarch and to all others as well,” Secca continued.
  
 “Yes, lady . . . overcaptain.”
  
 Secca and Alcaren watched as the lancers trotted ahead and down the road that angled northward on its
initial de-scent toward the flatter land of the valley below.
  
 “You are certain we will be welcome?" Secca asked in a low voice.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Who else can use sorcery against the Sturinnese?" re-plied the Ranuan.
  
 “With what I have seen in the last few days, I would question whether the use of sorcery is that
welcome.” After a moment she added, “Unless the sorcery is performed beyond Ranuak.”
  
 Alcaren shook his head ruefully. “I am most certain the Matriarch would have few difficulties with that
and would support any such efforts.”
  
 Secca still wondered as she shifted her weight in the saddle, her eyes going again to the distant white
stone walls of Encora.
  
 104
  
 By late afternoon, heavy gray clouds had drawn across the sky, and a fine mist sifted down, carried by a
light wind out of the south. Each fine droplet felt like a tiny point of ice on exposed skin. Secca had
refastened her jacket and pulled the green felt hat from her saddlebags. Alcaren rode bareheaded, but
Secca could see the redness from the damp and chill on the tips of his ears and on his cheeks.
  
 The road itself was similar to the main highways in De-falk--- stone-paved and straight, raised a
half-yard above the plain through which if passed, and very slightly crowned so that rain would run off the
broad and graveled shoulders. The thoroughfare was far,far older than any of the stone highways in
Defalk, as the fine cracks and more than occasional replacement stones indicated. Those darker
replacement stones were also much smaller than the massive slabs that represented the original paving.
  
 Each of the scattered dwellings that flanked the highway was also of stone, with a slate roof. Stubble in
the fields had long since been turned under, leaving neat rows. Al-though the dwellings varied in size, all
were scrupulously kept, as were the outbuildings. Perhaps because of the cold, Secca saw few souls out,
and those she did see paid little attention to the column of riders plodding westward toward Encora.
  
 The column was less than two deks from the base of the ridge holding the city walls when Secca could
make out through the mist both a crossroads coming directly from the north, and more than a score of
riders reined up in two lines just beyond the crossroads.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Alcaren gestured toward the riders waiting at the cross-roads ahead. “We have an honor escort
waiting.”
  
 “Let us hope they are just an honor guard,” replied Secca.
  
 “Were they not, the gates would be closed, and there would be no guard at all,” suggested the Ranuan.
  
 Secca debated taking out the lutar, then decided against it, since the rain would do it little good, and
displaying it would only offer offense. She did begin a gentle vocalise.
  
 Alcaren looked at her, eyebrows raised.
  
 ‘I prefer not to ride into a strange city with no defenses at all, overcaptain.”
  
 “You have a certain ability with a blade, lady.”
  
 “It is not sufficient to make a would-be enemy hesitate, as you well know.” She paused, then said with a
smile, “Your blade might, but not mine."
  
 “I would not wish to cross blades with you again, my lady.” As Secca turned, he added, returning her
smile with one of his own. “Not if you were angry.”
  
 Secca laughed gently, enjoying the moment of banter, but she continued to warm up until she had ridden
to within a hundred yards of the riders beyond the crossroads.
  
 The twelve lancers that Secca and Alcaren had sent as messengers waited, mounted, on the flat of the
road below the inclined and paved road that wound upward through four switchbacks to the gates
above. Behind the twelve were two companies of Ranuan lancers wearing pale blue riding jackets
identical to the one worn by Alcaren—one company on each side of the road.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 The overcaptain of the Ranuan lancers rode forward and halted her mount. "Lady Socceress! The
Matriarch wel-comes you and your company to Encora.”
  
 Secca reined up the gray and inclined her head. “Thank you. As you know, we come in friendship, and
in hopes of finding a way to defeat the Sturinnese?"
  
 Behind her, Richina and the other riders slowed to a halt.
  
 “The Matriarch knows such and welcomes you as friend and ally. All Eacora is open to you.”
  
 “Thank you, and the Matriarch.”
  
 “We are here to escort you to the guest quarters and barracks.”
  
 ‘We appreciate your courtesy and grace.” Secca nodded again.
  
 One company of the Matriarch’s lancers swung onto the road to lead the way up the road to the gates
above, while the second waited and then brought up the rear.
  
 Alcaren’s SouthWoman squad leader eased her mount up beside the Ranuan overcaptain. With her was
Delcetta, the SouthWoman company captain.
  
 “Overcaptain, ser?" offered Captain Delcetta.
  
 “Yes?" replied Alcaren.
  
 “The Matriarch has requested that we remain under your command until the problem with Sturinn is
resolved. The South Council has concurred.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “I appreciate the support of the Council,” Alcaren said.
  
 So did Secca, especially after riding through Ranuak. The SouthWomen seemed more likely to support
sorcery than many throughout the land.
  
 With a nod, the captain and the squad leader turned their mounts.
  
 While she rode up the inclined road toward the gates, Seeca studied both the road and the walls as best
she could through the mist. The road narrowed slightly, and indented stone rain gutters appeared on both
the uphill and downhill sides, gutters that drained into stone channels at each of the four switchbacks.
Once Secca neared the top of the ridge, the scale of the walls became even more apparent, ramparts of
gray-white granite that towered a good fifteen yards above the rocky ground out of which they rose.
  
 Secea held herself ready to use sorcery, even without the lutar, should it be needed, but those massive
walls held no guards, nor were any evident near the gates. The single gate opening was but four yards
wide, and framed with massive stone pillars, two on each side. Each pillar had been cut as a single unit.
Between the pillars were the edges of the gates, each nearly a span in thickness. Each gate was designed
to slide out from between the pillars, and the city walls behind them, along stone channels more than two
spans deep and across the gate opening, one be-fore the other, so that when the gates were closed there
were two thicknesses of timber, each tightly anchored in stone on three sides. Where the channels
crossed the road-way, they were covered with thin oak planks to ensure neither horses nor people broke
legs in them.
  
 Secca studied the stone of the walls as the gray mare carried her past the unguarded gates. She nodded.
  
 “Lady?” asked Alcaren.
  
 “The stone work was accomplished with sorcery.”
  
 “You recognize the method?”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “I have some familiarity with it. I don’t think those gate pillars could have been put there any other way.
Not that I know of, anyway.”
  
 “That may be, but it might be best if you did not voice that too widely.”
  
 Secca snorted. “Use the fruits of sorcery, but do not mention it?”
  
 “You have seen what sorcery has done to this land.”
  
 “Like any tool, it can be used for good or evil. One should not blame the tool.”
  
 “Blaming the tool is far easier, especially when the user may have had little choice.”
  
 Secea did not reply. She understood Alcaren’s point, but also felt that those who restricted what tools
could be used often deserved the results that befell them.
  
 Once through the gates, the Ranuan lancers turned slightly right and began to follow a gray stone
boulevard that, within fifty yards of the wall and gate, arced downhill through a grassy park toward the
dwellings and structures of the city below. For the first time, in the park, Secca saw hardwoods and fruit
trees, rather than the endless conifers that had seemed to populate the land of Ranuak all the way from
Ilygot.
  
 “Are there many such parks in Encora?’ she asked.
  
 “One cannot go a dek in any direction without finding a large park, and less than that for small greens,”
replied the overcaptain.
  
 To the southwest, Secca thought she could make out long stone piers at the edge of the dark circle of
water that formed the harbor, and seawalls to the east of the piers. At least two vessels were tied up at
the longer pier, and there might have been others, but the taller structures near the center of the city
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

blocked a full view of the wharfs and piers.
  
 Below the park, the boulevard straightened, pointing like a quarrel toward the harbor, and settled into a
gradual decline toward the water. Raised stone sidewalks flanked the boulevard, and the dwellings on
each side were gen-erally of two or three stories, built of stone, with covered balconies looking out in
front, and over rear garden court-yards.
  
 Less than four blocks from the base of the park and toward the harbor, Secca glanced up at the
topmost bal-cony of a three-story dwelling on the left side of the bou-levard. There stood a figure in a
dark hooded cloak, the face lost in the hood and the gloom of the growing twi-light. A Lady of the
Shadows?
  
 Why?
  
 To warn Secca against sorcery?
  
 For the first time since they had begun to ride through Ranuak, Seeca noticed people who actually
looked at her, and at the others, although indirectly. No one seemed to stare or study the column intently,
but they were not tra-versing the city without notice.
  
 The guest quarters and barracks lay just on the northwest side of the boulevard less than half a dek from
the harbor. They were so similar to those in Elahwa that they might have been designed by the same
person, save that the walls of the structures were of the whitish-gray granite, and that a wall a good five
yards in height surrounded the entire compound. The blue-painted iron gates were swung back and
locked open. When the Ranuan honor guard, swung through the gates, the stone walls threw the echo of
their hoofs on the stones of the drive back at Secca.
  
 The drive was flanked on both sides by a low boxwood hedge that did nothing to mute the echo of
hoofs, and before the guest house itself was a circular rose garden, one whose roses had long since been
cut back to ready them for the spring still many weeks away.
  
 Standing on the steps at the rear of the guest quarters was a tall and squarish woman in the pale blue of
the Ranuan lancers, but with a single red rosette embroidered upon each shoulder of her riding jacket.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Alcaren reined up and bowed. “Commander.”
  
 “Overcaptain.” The commander smiled at Secca. “On behalf of the Matriarch, Lady Sorceress, I bid
you and all those with you welcome to Encora. The Matriarch offers her hospitality and support, and
assures you that you will lack for nothing as you prepare to deal with the Sturinnese invaders.
  
 “We are pleased to be here and greatly appreciate your support and that of the Matriarch,” replied
Secca.
  
 “We are even more pleased to welcome you.” The com-mander bowed deeply. “Once you have rested,
the Matri-arch looks forward to meeting you.”
  
 “As I do her,” Secca replied, wondering how long be-fore the meeting would actually take place.
  
 105
  
 Secca stood over the small round conference table in the main chamber ofthe Matriarch’s guest
quarters, hold-ing her lutar and looking down at the scrying glass laid in the center of the table. She
studied the image in the sil-vered glass. The Sturinnese vessels appeared where they had been for
weeks—south of the harbor of Encora.
  
 After singing the simple release couplet, Secca laid the lutar on the table and walked toward the middle
window of the quarters’ main chamber, halting well back so that she would not be that visible from the
open gates or from the boulevard itself. The air was so still that the dismal gray mist and fog of the
previous days continued to hold Encora prisoner. She could only see the vague outlines of the
warehouses that fronted the stone piers less than half a dek away.
  
 After a time, she spoke to Richina, who remained beside the table. “If we are not summoned in the next
day or so, I will see if Alcaren can arrange for us to travel the western bluffs overlooking the channels
south of the harbor.”
  
 ‘Why has she not met with you?” asked Richina. “The Matriarch, I mean.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 The older sorceress turned. “She cannot be that hasty.”
  
 “You have traveled across half of Liedwahr, and now...“ Rlchina shook her head.
  
 “I am a sorceress, and they fear sorcery,” Secca pointed out. Have you not seen the scars of sorcery
upon this land?”
  
 “I have seen things which the Ranuans claim are scars of sorcery.”
  
 “Do you know of any other way to build roads with such large stones? Or the walls of this city?"
  
 Richina glanced down at the floor.
  
 “I cannot but worry about those who fear sorcery,” Secca said slowly. “If the Matriarch waits to see
me, so that none will claim she rushes to greet a sorceress, then their power may be great.” She glanced
at Richina. "Per-haps you should spend some time with your glass and try to see what you can discover
about the Ladies of the Shad-ows here in Encora."
  
 “I will try, Lady Secca.”
  
 “Good.” Secca paused. “Will you send word that I would see Overcaptain Alcaren and Captain
Delcetta?”
  
 Richina’s eyebrows lifted.
  
 “I doubt the SouthWomen—or the good overcaptain---have any love for those in the shadows.” Secca
concealed a wince at the way has words had come out. More than once, she had been accused of being
in the shadows.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Yes, lady.”
  
 When the door closed behind Richina, Secca replaced the lutar in its case, and then seated herself
behind the working desk. That morning, the scrying glass had shown her that the remaining two
companies--- and the mounts for the under-strength company—had landed in Ilygot and were riding
southward. Lord Fehern still held the lands around Envaryl, and it seemed as though the Sturinnese were
no longer attacking. That disturbed Secca, although she could not say why, unless the Sea-Priests had
decided to wait for better weather in the spring.
  
 She took out the sheets of brown paper with the spells she had used to create the storms that had
destroyed the Sturinnese vessels, looking across the lines. She shook her head. Two spells on mostly
calm waters, and the weather had made it impossible for the players to continue, and the third had been
all she could manage. Three spells for five vessels? And the Sturinnese had almost three score war-ships
left to the Southern Ocean?
  
 “Overcaptain Alcaren and Captain Delcetta,” called out Easlon from the corridor outside.
  
 “Have them come in.” Secca set aside the spells.
  
 Once the two Ranuan officers entered, Scea gestured to the small round conference table, seating herself
and waiting for them to do so as well.
  
 “Tell me about the Ladies of the Shadows, if you would.” Secca glanced at Captain Delcetta.
  
 “They do not believe in sorcery, save for gathering in-formation and sending messages.” The words of
the cap-tain with the short-cut strawberry blonde hair were clipped.
  
 "They would seem to be especially powerful here in Ranuak,” ventured Secca.
  
 Neither officer spoke.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca looked at Alcaren. “How much does the Matriarch fear them?”
  
 “She fears them not at all, not for herself certainly.” Alcaren offered an amused smile.
  
 “Yet she fears meeting with me upon my arrival, and would that not mean that I should be concerned?”
  
 “There are double guards outside the wall, and they do not care who leaves,” said Delcetta.
  
 “Does anyone know the names---"
  
 “No. They know sorcery’s limits.”
  
 "Perhaps not mine.” Secca stood, then bent and uncased the lutar. Her fingers skipped over the keys as
she began the spell.
  
 “Show me now and in this light
 the Ranuan shadow lady of greatest might.
 Show her face as it may be
 clear for all to see.. .”
  
 The minor silvered without hesitation, revealing a round-featured and gray-haired woman with a
surpris-ingly sharp jaw-line attired in pale blue. Secca’s eyes darted from the image to the two Ranuan
officers. Del-cetta looked at the image, frowning. Alcaren’s eyes wid-ened ever so slightly.
  
 “You know her, overcaptain.” Secca’s words were not a question.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Only by sight and position, Lady Secca. That is San-thya, the Assistant Exchange Mistress.”
  
 One-handed, Secca pushed an empty sheet of paper toward the overcaptain. “If you would write down
her name.”
  
 Alcaren glanced from Delcetta to Secca, then at the paper. He reached for the quill beside the inkstand.
Secca nodded. Alcaren wrote a single name.
  
 Secca began the spell again.
  
 “Show me now and in this light’
 the shadow lady of next to greatest might...
  
 The image in the mirror was that of a narrow-faced woman with hennaed hair, and deep-set gray eyes.
Secca looked at Alcaren again.
  
 “Felcya of the Artisan’s Guild . . .” 
  
 The sorceress managed eight more versions of the spell before she had to stop with the onset of
dayflashes. Alcaren had known four others, and Delcetta had named two Alcaren had not known.
  
 Secca set aside the lutar, and began to eat the biscuits in the tin on the sideboard. Her head was
throbbing, if not so badly as with battle sorcery. After several bis-cuits, interspersed with cold water, she
looked up from the conference table at the two silent Ranuans.
  
 ‘What will you do with these names, lady?’ asked Alcaren.
  
 “For now ... nothing. Should I?”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 He shook his head.
  
 “You aren’t saying something,” Secca suggested.
  
 “I would be most careful, that is all, Lady Secca. Some of the shadow ladies have had rivals vanish—or
be killed within locked rooms.”
  
 That was all Secca needed--- another type of attack to worry about. She avoided sighing and took
another swallow of water from the goblet, emptying it. “You didn’t mention that.”
  
 “Ah . . . I did say that the Ladies of the Shadows did not like sorceresses, lady.” Alcaren looked almost
em-barrassed.
  
 Secca was supposed to have guessed that the group included professional assassins? She did sigh.
Then, Al-caren had warned her, if slightly belatedly.
  
 “That is very seldom,” suggested Delcetta quickly. “They would prefer that those who profess sorcery
leave Ranuak.”
  
 “I would like to,” Secca replied. “The Sturinnese and the winter snows make that difficult. I hope the
Ladies of the Shadows would consider such.”
  
 “I would not know.” Alcaren shrugged. It was a most unconvincing shrug, and one clearly designed to
suggest that Alcaren did know, and that the Ladies of the Shad-ows had little interest in Secca’s
concerns. “They have not had a great sorceress within Encora before. I could not say what they might
do.”
  
 If that did not happen to be a warning...Secca hadn’t heard one.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 She rose. “Thank you both. I appreciate all you have told me.” She smiled, an expression obviously as
false as the overcaptain’s shrug.
  
 The falsity of the shrug and his few words about the Ladies of the Shadows troubled her. Not their
falsity, but what that falsity conveyed. Alcaren did not lie well, and that meant he had not lied to her in the
past. He had evaded answering some questions, but he had not lied, not the way he just had, and that
troubled her more than if he had.
  
 Finally, Secca ate another pair of biscuits, and then took out the brown paper and the grease marker.
She needed another set of spells, and before the evening.
  
 106
 Mansuus, Mansuur
  
 The Liedfuhr holds his aching head in his overbroad hands for a moment then massages his temples
before looking up at Bassil, who stands, patiently, before the study desk. “The shadow sorceress is in
Encora?”
  
 "That is what your seers show. The Sea-Priests did not fare well in Ebra and retreated to their vessels.
She de-stroyed five in the short passage across the Gulf to Ranuak."
  
 “That is well, but hardly enough. Now the sorceress will remain blocked in Encora unless she can break
one of their fleets,” Kestrin points out. "The sea has always been the strength of Sturinn. Until then and
unless she does, what can she do?" He frowns, leaning back in the padded desk chair. His eyes flick to
the windows at the howling of the late afternoon wind that promises yet more snow, then back to the
overcaptain. “She will not divert the Sturinnese for a moment. Nor will it help Aerlya.”
  
 “For the moment, your niece holds Neserea,” Bassil states.
  
 “For the moment, and only because the Sorceress of Defalk has removed two of this Belmar’s allies,
and de-stroyed bridges and who knows what else, but it is not enough. Each week that passes tempts
more to back the usurper."
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “The sorceress is hampered by having to defend Aerlya and Annayal, as well as fighting Belmar and his
Sturinnese sorcerer.”
  
 “Yet Lord Robero will send no other sorceress to her aid. So I must send aid.”
  
 “You will risk his wrath?”
  
 “What wrath? I will send the lancers in Unduval through the Mittpass, along with another fifty
companies, including the thirty in Deleator. They will answer to Aerlya, An-nayal, and the Sorceress of
Defalk in that order--- and I will send a message to Lord Robero to affirm that, al-though he may not
receive it until all is moot. Still, he wants Belmar as the new Prophet of Music even less than do I.”
  
 “I foresee even greater conflict,” Bassil says quietly.
  
 “So now you think I err?” Kestrin looks at the over-captain.
  
 “No, sire. I fear I may have advised you too cautiously. I would have your lancers proceed against any
of Belmar’s allies who stand without his sorcerous aid. Leave Belmar to the sorceresses. I would also
place what companies you can northwest of Envaryl.”
  
 “To give the Sturinnese in Dumar pause?”
  
 “If anything will,” admits Bassil.
  
 “And should I prepare to send another set of lancers through Aleatur once the snows melt?”
  
 “If you can.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Kestrin stands and looks to the north-most window, studying the dark clouds that loom in the late
afternoon. "To think that all Liedwahr is at war or stands on the brink, when all was calm and peaceful
not a half-year ago.”
  
 “Much has happened since then, sire.”
  
 ‘What? Two people died. . . just two people.”
  
 “They were not just two people,” Bassil points out. “They were the two who created that peace and
who en-sured that all Liedwahr was united against Sturinn. Now you must do the same.”
  
 “Me? And who else?”
  
 Bassil does not answer.
  
 In time, the Liedfuhr’s eyes turn toward the window and the clouds massing to the north.
  
 107
  
 In the dim light of the single lamp still lit in the main room of the guest quarters, Secca lifted the brown
paper and read. After studying the words yet again, Seeca slowly picked up the lutar and began the spell.
  
 “Bell to ring and crystal sing
 should any step within the door,
 louder still, the air to fill
 should they weapons bring...”
  
 After completing the spellsong, she set the lutar in its case on the side table on the west wall of the main
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

chamber, leaving the case open. After wicking down add out the last lit lamp in the main chamber, she
stepped into the smaller bedchamber, sliding the thin iron bolt shut. She examined the bolt, shaking her
head. She wasn’t sure that she couldn’t undo the bolt from outside with a thin knife. Then, that was
another reason for the spell, although the lingering nature of the spell would drain some small part of her
strength, but not that much, since it war a warning spellsong, and not one requi ring great energy.
  
 But it was clear she needed such a warning. Although Richina had also had little luck in uncovering
anything about the Ladies of the Shadows, the younger sorceress had reported to Secca that she had
called up many faces, but had found none engaged in anything other than nor-mal activities. Secca shook
her head. That was always the problem with scrying—all too often the glass showed nothing useful . . .
although the number of faces Secca and Richina had seen in their glasses was dis-turbing enough, and
another reason for the warning spell.
  
 Once in the bedchamber, Secca slipped from her rid-ing clothes into a simple shift. Before going into the
small bath and robing chamber, she removed the sabre from its scabbard and set it on the bedside table
away from the door. Her eyes dropped to the iron bolt she mistrusted, and she found herself shaking her
head.
  
 With an upper room, two locked doors, guards out-side her door, and a warning spell . . . she should
have felt safe. But then, she knew nothing of the Ladies of the Shadows, save some were either assassins
or could call on such, and assassins often found ways around guards and locks. She also knew, cryptic
as Alcaren had been, that he had wanted to warn her, yet not obviously. Why?
  
 She still had no answer for that, unless he feared ears were everywhere, and that an obvious warning
might make matters even worse. Secca liked that idea even less.
  
 Finally, she climbed up into the high bed and snuffed out the candle.
  
 For a long time, she lay in the darkness, thoughts whirling through her mind. Eventually her eyes closed.
  
 Clnnnnnennnnnnggg...
  
 The clanging of the bell and the ear-splitting ring of the crystal jolted Secca full alert, and she flung herself
sideways from the bed, her hand closing around the sabre on the table, even before her bare feet touched
the cold wooden floor.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca blinked away sleep, or tried to, as she stood there, sabre in a near-instinctive guard position,
peering back toward the door.
  
 After what seemed long moments, Secca could make out the shadowy form sliding toward her. The
sorceress lifted her blade and eased along the side of the bed and then around the foot of the bed to get
away from the wall.
  
 The intruder more than a good head taller than Secca--- moved forward with grace toward the foot of
the bed, trying to back Secca into the corner. The in-truder’s longer blade flicked in the dimness at
Secca, and Secca barely managed to parry it, as much by feel as sight. She gave ground as she did,
trying to ignore the ringing and the clanging that continued unremittingly.
  
 “Lady Seeca! Lady Secca!” came the calls of the guards outside the room, calls barely audible over the
bell and ringing crystal as the two guards pounded on the door to the main chamber.
  
 Secca kept her own blade high, trying to gather her thoughts, and the spell she thought she had
prepared. What were the words?
  
 Another thrust slash from the intruder, and Secca cir-cled away from the corner of the room where
she’d almost been skewered by the very skilled and silent at-tacker.
  
 After another cut-slash from the silent intruder, Secca circled back, still mentally fumbling for words,
cough-ing and trying to clear her throat.
  
 Finally, she had the words, the all-too-simple words and melody.
  
 …Flay……flay..
  
 Another attack, and a dry throat, and Secca had lost both melody and timing, and had to scramble
aside.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 As she circled back, she bent and half-slid, half-shoved the stool toward the dark and taller figure, who
stepped aside gracefully.
  
 Secca used the moment to begin the spell again.
  
 “Flay with fire, flay with flame,
 this one who’d defy my name
 kill this one with fire’s thrust,
 as fire canand fire must!”
  
  
 Secca again skipped aside, barely parrying two more thrusts before the miniature flame lances appeared
from nowhere. The intruder continued to try to bring the longer blade against Secca, even as the taller
woman shuddered noiselessly under the impact of the fires.
  
 The ringing of the crystal ended witha snap, and crystal shards tinkled onto the floor. The clanging of the
bell stopped as abruptly.
  
 Secca just stood, blade up, scanning the room, hoping there were no others nearby.
  
 “Lady Secca! Lady Secca!”
  
 Still with blade in hand, Secca fumbled the striker left-handedly and managed to light the candle on the
table beside the bed. The yellow-orange light was enough that she could tell no one else was in the
bed-chamber, and the door to the main chamber, slightly ajar, suggested how the intruder had gained
access.
  
 The sorceress cleared her throat and edged toward the door, using a quick flick of the sabre to open it
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

all the way. The main chamber was empty, but the draft from the open end window gave a good
indication of how the attacker had reached Secca’s chamber.
  
 Secca edged toward the door of the main chamber. "I'm all right.”
  
 “Are you sure, lady?”
  
 She recognized Easlon’s voice. “Who is on guard with you, Easlon?”
  
 “Rukor, lady.”
  
 “I am, lady.”
  
 The two responses were near simultaneous.
  
 She slipped the iron bolt, ready to close it—or spell-sing as necessary, but the only ones in the hallway
were the two guards. “Come in. Lock it behind you.”
  
 She eased toward the lutar she had left on the side table, checking the strings in the dim light before
slip-ping toward the open window. Almost without pause, she began the second spell.
  
 “Flay with fire, flay with flame,
 all those who with this one came
 Kill them all with fire’s thrust,
 as fire can and fire must!”
  
 Three firebolts flared from the dark gray clouds, strik-ing once behind the boxwood hedge by the drive,
and twice beyond the walls. This time, there were screams.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca took a deep breath, then used the striker in the main chamber to light the desk lamp. After that,
she walked slowly to the window. The would-be murderer had edged her way along a ledge barely a
span wide from the corner where a step-chimney had offered ac-cess to the second level. She looked
down, closely. A pry bar had been set carefully next to the wall, obvi-ously to be retrieved on the way
out.
  
 Followed by Easlon and Rukor, Secca returned to the bedchamber where she looked down at the dead
figure, whose faced was crossed with blackened lines. The in-truder had been a tall woman,
well-muscled, with dark brown hair. Before the sorcery, she had been handsome. She had also been one
of those whose visage had ap-peared in the glass, but whose name neither Alcaren nor Delcetta had
known.
  
 “Find a blanket or something to wrap her in,” Secca said tiredly. ‘We’ll need to deliver her to the
Matriarch. Roust out some of the lancers and do the same with the others.”
  
 “Others?" stammered Easlon.
  
 "Those firebolts outside? Each struck someone, and they were with this woman.”
  
 The two exchanged glances.
  
 “Yes, lady.”
  
 “As you wish, Lady Secca.”
  
 Secca closed her eyes for a moment as she stood there. She really could use more sleep, but wondered
if she would ever sleep that well again in Encora.
  
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 108
  
 Secca rode on the north-south boulevard, away from the harbor and the guest quarters and toward the
dwelling set amid a parklike garden and behind granite walls that appeared pale blue. The more she
thought about the as-sassin of the night before, the angrier she felt. Even though Alcaren had warned her,
even though she had seen the scars of sorcery throughout Ranuak, Secca still smoldered. She had always
disliked the pettiness and the maneuvering for power, the use of politics she had seen among the
Thirty-three and in Falcor, and the Matriarch was clearly using Secca for her own political ends.
  
 Perhaps that had been another of the reasons why Anna had insisted an taking Secca to Loiseau. A fiery
temper did not mix well over time with the intrigues in the cor-ridors of the liedburg of Falcor--- nor in
other corridors of power.
 A few words drifted in her direction as she rode past what appeared to be a shop dealing ia all manner
of bas-kets.
 “The Lady Sorceress of Defalk. . . has to be..."
  
 “Her hair . . . like flame..."
  
 “ . . . looks stern..."
  
 “ . . .in great anger..."
  
 “ . . . is said that some already attempted to remove her...”
  
 Secca could not catch the rest of the words of those few who turned to watch as she was escorted
along the wide stone-paved boulevard by the two companies of lancers, one in the green of Loiseau and
the second in the crimson and blue of the SouthWomen. Yet the fact that those in the street knew of the
assassination attempt told her again that every wall in Encora might well have ears—or worse.
  
 “You are still angry,” offered Alcaren, riding beside her. “Perhaps I should have been more direct...”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “No. I understand that. You thought that if you said something very direct and obvious that word might
get out that I’d been warned, and I would find it even harder to protect myself.”
  
 “I am most sorry . . .” Alcaren’s voice war soft, but strained.
  
 Even in her anger, Secca could sense both the truth of his words and something more thsn mere
professional con-cern. She turned, wanting to ask, then stopped what she was going to say. Finally, she
spoke. “I can see that. It was not your fault, and I do not blame you. You have always spoken truth to
me.”
  
 “I have tried.”
  
 “Unlike others.” Secca snorted. “But your truth also says that Encora is a pit of vipers with spies
everywhere.”
  
 “That it is,” Alcaren admitted. “Why do you think Del-cetta and I prefer to serve you?”
  
 “That just makes me more angry. If Sturinn weren’t such a problem.. .“ She shook her head. “Still, the
Ma-triarch has much to answer for. Last night was totally un-necessary. It was an easy way of dealing
with a problem that should have been handled generations ago.”
  
 “How?” asked Alcaren. “By using sorcery? So that even more women would flock to the shadows? By
imprisoning mothers and giving their daughters another reason to hate the Matriarch?”
  
 “I don’t know.” Secca shifted her weight in the saddle. “All I do know is that allowing assassins to
attack me is not exactly hospitable . . ."
  
 “The Matriarch had guards everywhere, lady. Yet they did not, or could not, stop your attacker. Does
that not tell you something?”
  
 “Yes. It tells me that too many women in Ranuak are stupid and fearful. And possibly men as well.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Alcaren winced. After a moment, he added, “Say what you will to the Matriarch, but essay to say it
without the fire of anger that consumes you.”
  
 Secca forced herself to take a deep breath. Alcaren was right about that, and he was daring to offer
good advice to a very angry sorceress, which offered another message. That message could
wait---would have to wait---until after she dealt with the Matriarch. In dealing with the Matriarch, Secca
needed to be cooler, the way Anna had been. It had never done Secca any good to lash out---and the
Matriarch was not unintelligent She could not be, and rule.
  
 Secca took a slow deep breath, then nodded to Alcaren. “Thank you.”
  
 They rode silently toward the opening in the bluish-white granite walls that surrounded the Matriarch’s
grounds. There were no gates, not even decorative ones, only the opening leading through a single high
stone arch. Above the keystone of the arch was a single white-bronze fire lily. The stone drive inside the
walls curved to the side of the three-story dwelling in the middle of the park-like setting. There, under a
low portico barely high enough to allow a rider on a tall mount to pass without ducking, was a long
carriage mounting block. Toward the dwelling from the mounting block were three wide stone steps
leading to another archway.
  
 The SouthWomen lancers had already passed under the portico and re-formed, facing Secca as she
dismounted and handed the gray’s reins to her guard, Dyvan. Alcaren dis-mounted as well.
  
 “Grace and strength, lady,” offered Captain Delcetta, her voice strong but not booming, carrying over
the light mid-morning breeze.
  
 Secca turned and inclined her head before taking the first step toward the archway. “My thanks to you
all.”
  
 Beyond the archway was a square foyer and a single staircase. There were no doors beside the one
through which she and Alcaren had entered. At the foot of the staircase was a single guard in a pale blue
uniform abso-lutely without insignia. “You are expected, lady and over-captain.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 The staircase leading to the second floor landing was not overly broad--- less than three yards from one
plain stone wall to the other. A single guard stood at the top of the landing, looking down at Alcaren and
Secca.
  
 Alcaren walked up the stone steps beside Secca, close enough to offer his arm, though he did not do so.
As they crossed the landing and approached the single door of golden wood set to the wall at the far side
of the landing, the guard spoke.
  
 “The Matriarch will see the Lady Sorceress alone, over-captain.”
  
 Alcaren nodded. “I will wait here.”
  
 The guard turned and eased the door ajar. “The Sorceress-Protector of Defalk, Matriarch.”
  
 “Have her enter.”
  
 Secca stepped into the formal receiving room. Despite her resolve to be calm and not to lash out in
anger, she could feel the fire in her amber eyes as she looked toward the dais and the woman seated on
the blue crystalline chair that was not quite a throne. The hazy light that fell through the floor-to-ceiling
windows onto the shimmering blue stone fleer offered little cheer and less warmth.
  
 “Welcome, Lady Secca.” The silver and blonde-haired Matriarch inclined her head in greeting. It has
been long since a sorceress has visited Ranuak as friend and ally.”
  
 “After last night, it may be a great while before another does.” Secca managed to keep her voice even,
but she could sense the edge it carried. She stepped several yards short of the crystalline chair, sensing
that the chair was far more than ceremonial.
  
 ‘That might be best,” replied the Matriarch. “Sorcery is not favored by many in Ranuak.”
  
 “Yet you use it, and you would have me use it to assist Ranuak.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “I do not believe Ranuak has even asked such of you.”
  
 Again, there was the hint of a twinkle in the eyes of the Matriarch.
  
 “I would not be here were it otherwise,” Secca pointed out. “And I am not much interested in further
employing words as blades.”
  
 “What am I to do with you, Lady Secca?’ Although the Matriarch’s voice was calm and firm, there was
an even greater hint of a smile in her eyes, very much at odds with the tone of her voice.
  
 “Perhaps you could begin by apologizing for the behav-ior of those who tried to kill me. You have their
bodies, and you would know better than I what occurred,” Secca suggested. “You could then advise me
of what you intend to do to redress the grievance. And then, perhaps, we could discuss how we can
work together to remove the Sturin-nese from Liedwahr.”
  
 Alya laughed, gently, humorously. “You are as direct as the blade you bear.”
  
 Secca drew the two scrolls from within her riding jacket and extended the first. "This I bring from Lord
Robero.”
  
 “Thank you.” The Matriarch took the scroll but made no effort to open it.
  
 “And this is from me.” Secca handed the unsealed short scroll. "I thought you might find this helpful in
dealing with those who have in their hearts less than the best in-terests of Ranuak and Liedwahr.”
  
 Alya took the list, her eyebrows raised. "This is. . .?"
  
 “A list of some of the more powerful within the Ladies of the Shadow in Ranuak.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Alya laughed. “It will indeed be most helpful, perhaps even in ways neither of us might envision.”
  
 “It is very possible I would not envision those ways,” Secca said carefully, “but I cannot imagine that you
have not considered all of them.”
  
 The Matriarch shook her head slowly. “Although I never met the Lady Anna, you are as she once might
have been.”
  
 Secca cut off her immediate response and considered the Matriarch’s words before replying. “I would
not know, but I have always thought most highly of her. More highly than any other I have ever met.”
  
 “And she of you, most clearly, and with great reason.” The Matriarch pursed her lips. “I am truly sorry
about the events of the past evening. I had hoped that my guards, and those of the SouthWomen, would
have deterred the Ladies of the Shadows. I had hoped . . . but I still feared.”
  
 “Yet...?” Secca waited.
  
 Alya frowned. “You have seen my dwelling; You have seen how few guards I have. I can muster fewer
lancers than can Lord Robero.”
  
 “Ranuak is richer than Defalk.”
  
 “Ranuak is as rich as it can be. It cannot be much more than it is. Defalk can be far greater and more
prosperous than Ranuak."
  
 Secca’s face expressed skepticism.
  
 “It is simple. You rode from the east. You saw the swamps and the bogs, the trees that grow less than
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

well. All the land that bears good harvests, all that is used. We have turned to the sea, because we have
little good land, for most of Ranuak is poisoned or poor, or both.”
  
 “Poisoned? After all these years?"
  
 “Not just from the Spell-Fire Wars, Lady. Once the sor-cerers and sorceresses of the east, and not just
the Myn-yans, employed sorcery for creating all manner of devices and materials. When they wrenched
metals from the earth, the rain seeped into the pits, and leached forth noxious substances. When they
pulled iron from the soil, trees and plants withered and died, There must be a balance within the soils and
within the lands, and there is none in much of Ranuak, and it will be many hundreds of generations before
the Harmonies restore such.”
  
 Secca tilted her head. The Matriarch seemed truthful, and what Secca had seen bore out her words. So
did now some of Anna’s words, words she had scarce heeded in years past.
  
 “You have heard this before?” asked Alya.
  
 “Lady Anna . . . she offered some words. She always said that the least sorcery was the best”
  
 “She was right.” Alya paused, then asked, “How can Ranuak help you defeat the Sturinnese? Is that not
why you came to Encora?”
  
 “I had thought to come here to reach Dumar,” Secca said. “So that I could keep the Sea-Priests from
subjugat-ing that land and using it to conquer all of Liedwahr.”
  
 “You cannot reach Dumar by sea from here any more easily than from Elahwa. Not while the
white-hulled ships hold the Southern Ocean,” pointed out the Matriarch. “And we of Ranuak have few
ships left from the attacks of the Sea-Priests. Even were their fleets to vanish, hard years would face us.
Would that we could take some of their ships in recompense for the suffering that they have caused.
Have you spells that would destroy them, but not their vessels?”
  
 “Thatmight be possible ... but only for a few vessels,” Secca admitted. “It took all my efforts, and those
of my players, to destroy a mere five vessels. Sturinn has four-score warships in the Southern Ocean.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Mere?" Alya arched her eyebrows. “One sorceress, a score of players, and five mighty ships are
gone.”
  
 “Compared to the task at hand . . . mere,” Secca replied. ‘What I can do with sorcery is limited, and
more so upon the ocean, it would seem. I can scarcely sing spell after spell on a ship pursuing the
Sturinnese.” She paused. “With their thunder-drums, after my first sorcery, they would use the drums to
speed from us.”
  
 “What if they were gathered together?” asked the Ma-triarch. “Could you not come up with one spell
that would leave at least a few ships untouched, and then a mighty enough spell to destroy the others?’
  
 “Perhaps. I might be able to sing a spell that would affect them all. I’ll need to try out some things on the
shore, though.” Secca frowned. “Spells dealing with the oceans or objects upon them are harder.”
  
 “So it is said.”
  
 “How would one gather all the Sturinnese ships to-gether?”
  
 “That . . . that we might well manage.” Alya offered a wry smile. “The Sturinnese fear and respect you,
lady. If all our trading vessels were armed, and gathered as if to carry you to Dumar, what would the
Sea-Priests do? Es-pecially after they found five ships less than able to halt you?”
  
 Secca nodded slowly.
  
 ‘It will take a week, maybe two, for they must see in their glasses what we do . . .”
  
 As the Matriarch explained, Secca listened, forcing her-self to concentrate on the problem of the
Sturinnese and to put aside her anger at the Ladies of the Shadows and the Matriarch’s inability to deal
with them. The problems of the Ladies of the Shadows would have to remain thorn of the Matriarch.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Not so a few other problems, Sauna feared, but she forced herself to listen carefully.
  
 109
 Encora, Ranuak
  
 The Matriarch sits upon the blue crystal chair on the dais in the formal receiving room.
  
 “The Assistant Exchange Mistress, Matriarch.”
  
 “Send her in.” Alya’s voice is even more chill than the gray clouds that she can see through the long
windows, c1ouds that have returned to cloak the skies over Encora in the late afternoon.
  
 A gray-haired and round-faced woman steps through the door that is quickly closed behind her with a
dullthunk. The Matriarch watches as the women steps toward her, then stops and bows, if almost
indifferently. The Matriarch waits.
  
 “Why am I here, Matriarch?" asks the gray-haired woman after a time. “Have I done aught to displease
you? What, I can scarce imagine.”
  
 “I believe you can, Santhya. I do believe you can.” The Matriarch studies the Assistant Exchange
Mistress. “Last night, there was an attack on the Sorceress-Protector of Defalk. I thought you might
know something about it.” The Matriarch’s voice is mild.
  
 “I am less than pleased to have a sorceress of power in Encora, but that is true of many, as you must
know.” San-thya bows her head slightly and waits.
  
 “The assassin was one of your number, Santhya. The sorceress killed her face-to-face. You and the
others of the Ladies of the Shadows underestimate the sorceress in that fashion, and in others.” The
Matriarch lifts a roll of parchment. “She provided me with a list of, all those in authority within the Ladies
of the Shadows.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “That is a lengthy list, Matriarch. Their absences would be noted.”
  
 Alya laughs, if mirthlessly. “That they would. Fear not, Santhya. I see no point in executing you all--- not
at the moment. You will all merely be my guests in the White Tower until the Sorceress-Protector leaves
Encora.” A cold smile crosses her lips. “So long as no other attempts are made on her or upon any in her
party ... why, nothing will happen.”
  
 “I cannot speak for the others.”
  
 “Oh, I understand that. Indeed, I do. That is why you will join all of those on the sorceress’s list--- and a
few other names I have come across—as my guests. I am also keeping your daughters as my honored
guests, of course—in the Blue Tower. As we speak, they are being gathered.”
  
 Santhya nods. “I cannot say I would expect any less.”
  
 “Those keeping watch over your daughters will be the third and fourth companies of the SouthWomen.”
  
 “You cannot---"
  
 “Do not tell me what I can and cannot do.”
  
 Santhya’s ruddy color pales.
  
 “I might add that there are two others who know sorcery with the sorceress. It is most unlikely that all
three could be killed at once. The others would have my leave to turn their sorceries upon every name in
this list. From the White Tower it would take but a single spell. Alya's eyes fix on Santhya. “I do hope
you understand.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 The older woman’s eyes are as cold as those of Alya. “I understand, Matriarch. You will revisit all the
horrors of the Spell-Fire Wars upon us.”
  
 Better that than chains for generations to come. You may go. Your escort awaits you.”
  
 The Matriarch’s eyes appear as gray as the clouds as she watches while Santhya turns and walks slowly
toward the door at the back of the formal receiving room.
  
 110
  
 In the light cast by the lamps set in the middle of the conference table, Secca looked down at the lines
scrawled on the single sheet of heavy brown paper, then at the stacks of brown paper piled around her.
  
 “Dissonance . . . frigging dissonance . . .” Tiredly, she took the grease marker and lined through the
words she had just written, as she had lined through others earlier. “Note values. . . not right. Again!”
  
 She rubbed her forehead and then took a sip from the water goblet She turned the sheet of heavy paper
over and lifted the grease market
  
 “Lady . . . why do you not write another spell melody?’ asked Richina, as she refilled the goblet.
  
 Secca pursed her lips tightly together. She could tell she was ready to lash out at Richina, and Richina
didn’t deserve it--- not too much. She looked up at the younger sor-ceress for a long moment.
  
 “I am most sorry . . .” As Richina backed away from Secca and the piles of brown paper, her hip struck
the table. Water slopped from the pitcher.
  
 “Richina,” Secca said slowly, “I will be asking the players to perform upon the deck of a ship that may
be pitch-ing. Fire arrows way be falling around them. Some may feel their stomachs lurching within them.
Is that not so?”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Ah . . . yes, Lady."
  
 “How well are they likely so play a spellsong they have practiced but for a few days?"
  
 Richina's mouth opened, then closed.
  
 “That is why I struggle with words and note values. That is why I call on dissonance. That is why . . .“
Secca let the words die in her mouth.
  
 “Yes, lady,” Richina said, as if she knew not what else to say.
  
 "I must also worry about whether the Matriarch’s plans will work, whether the spollsong I have yet to
write will do what it must, and whether someone else in this dissonance-forsaken land will try yet again to
kill me.”And whether sorcery will lead to yet another spell-fire war where whole lands are again
devastated.
  
 “Did not the Matriarch sequester all those Ladies of the Shadows?"
  
 “Did we not have double guards the other night? Did Acaren not have SouthWomen patrolling the
grounds and the walls?” Secca took another swallow from the goblet.
  
 “Yes, lady.”
  
 “It is not your fault, Richina. It is not. . .“ Secca set down the marker. ‘Perhaps I will think better in the
morn-ing.” She stood. “I must hope so. . . I must.” She bent down and blow out one of the lamps,
wondering as she did whether the mixture of great and shadow sorcery she was attempting would be
sufficient.
  
 Yet . . . what other choices did she have? Her lips twisted in a bitter smile.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 -
 How many others had thought those same words over the generations? Had the ancient Matriarchs felt
so . . . be-fore they turned hilltops into shimmering black rocks and inundated villages with hot, sands?
  
 111
 Encora, Ranuak
  
 Cold droplets of water collect on the windows of the third floor of the Matriarch’s residence, droplets
not quite chill enough to freeze in the late winter night of Encora. Across the table where they share a late
supper, long after their daughters have been tucked under their covers, Aetlen looks at his consort.
  
 “How went matters with the sorceress?”
  
 “She is strangely old and strangely young, as are all who would use the Harmonies.” Alya fingers the
empty wine goblet.
  
 “Asare you.”
  
 The Matriarch shakes her head. “It is not the same. A sorceress---or a sorcerer—cannot help but feel
the sorrow and pain that accompanies sorcery. Yet, to do what she must, she cannot dwell too greatly on
the consequences of each spell. Not as a young woman. Not if her mind is to remain whole.”
  
 “Will she do what you feel necessary?"
  
 “I do not know. I suggested she consider a spell to empty some ships of their crews and officers , but
that sorcery verges on Darksong and will not carry far upon the waters.”
  
 “Do we need the ships that badly?" asks Aetlen.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  “We have lost close to a score since last summer. Need I tell you what that loss has done to us, to the
Exchange?”
  
 “No.” Aetlen’s voice is dull. “Yet sorcery for survival is one matter, and sorcery for gain . . ."
  
 “Trade is survival for Ranuak, dear one.” Alya’s voice is almost as flat as that of her consort. “Do you
think I would suggest such were not matters nearing desperation?”
  
 He nods slowly, then clears his throat before speaking. “There is one other matter. About the Ladies. . .
the sor-ceress could not have known all those names, not even with Alcaren’ s assistance.”
  
 Alya offers a twisted smile. “Of course not, but she handed me a list with eight out of the highest
half-score, and the two most important, including Santhya.”
  
 “You waited for the Ladies of the Shadows to act... just so that you could claim that you were not being
hasty, and that you were protecting them?’ He shakes his head. ‘What if they had not acted, but waited
for you?"
  
 ‘They did not They could not wait, not after so many years. You must admit, dearest, that it was
effective.” Alya takes a sip of the amber wine that is more bitter than she would prefer.
  
 “Effective, but most risky,” he suggests. ‘What if the sorceress had not been able to kill Jesreya?"
  
 “That was a risk, but it is unlikely that a sorceress un-able to think facing an intruder would also be able
to deal with the Sturinnese.”
  
 “Dear one. . . she could have been a sound sleeper, and very alert when awake. Or unable to hold off
Jesreya with a blade, for long enough to cast a spell. You...we... were most fortunate that she is the kind
who wakes quickly.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “I know.” Alya sighs. “I was wrong there.”
  
 “You were most fortunate. I would not risk such again. We need the sorceress if we are to avoid
worse.”
  
 “I will not. My few seers are watching all the time. So are the SouthWomen, and not just those under
arms.”
  
 Aetlen winces. “You will have a revolt here, just as is happening in Neserea, if you do not tread with
great care.”
  
 “I know that, also. Yet . . . what else can I do, matters being as they are? If aught else befalls the
sorceress, we are lost.”
  
 Two pair of eyes meet. Both are bleak and dark with worry.
  
 112
  
 The wind blew out of the south, gentle but chill. As Secca rode southward behind the squad of
South-Women that served as a vanguard, she tightened the fas-tenings on her riding jacket, and pulled
down the green felt hat more tightly. Already they had ridden more than a solid five deks southwest of the
harbor along the west side of the channel, and Secea had seen no sign of the sheltered cove Alcaren had
promised.
  
 She watched the road and the gentle indentations of the coast, and tried not to shiver in the raw and wet
wind under a hazy gray winter sky. While the day was colder then she would have preferred, she had
little enough time before the Matriarch’s orders for readying the handful of ships were conveyed to their
captains and owners.
  
 Every so often she glanced sideways at Alcaren, but his eyes darted between the rood ahead end the
dark waters below. The road followed the curve of the time-worn low bluffs that formed the shoreline of
the channel south of the harbor of Encora. The short space to her left between the road and the channel
was mostly filled with water-smoothed boulders. To the right of the road was a line of low hills, sloping
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

gently upward to rises which were no more than twenty yards above the water.
  
 She felt foolish in some ways, accompanied as she was by two full companies of lancers and a full squad
of the South Women, but she could understand Alcaren's con-cerns, even with most of the leaders of the
Ladies of the Shadows supposedly under guard in the White Tower--- and their children in the Blue
Tower. She twisted slightly in the saddle, looking briefly at Alcaren and wondering if she would ever have
children when most men looked either to bed her and leave her or consort her for her power and lands.
  
 “You look fretful, lady,” offered Alcaren.
  
 “I was thinking of the daughters and children in the Blue Tower.” Secca wasn’t about to say exactly
what she had been thinking, especially not to Alcaren. While he in-trigued her and seemed to be more
than politely interested, too much was hidden behind the pleasant demeanor and the polite manners.
  
 “That is most necessary. Did Jesreya offer a word when she attacked you? Did she cry out when your
sorcery killed her?”
  
 “Youknew who she was?"
  
 Easing his mount slightly closer to the sorceress, Alcaren shook his head emphatically. “I never met her.
She was once a lancer officer. I had heard her name in years past, and once, when I was guarding the
Matriarch, a Lady of the Shadows called upon the Matriarch. The woman had the same long hair, and
was of similar height, but I did not see her face clearly. It might have been Jesreya.”
  
 Secca Studied Alcaren's face, but the penetrating gray-blue eyes seemed to hide nothing. She wanted to
shake her head. The Ranuan had been attentive, interesting, and appealing in a reserved fashion, yet . . .
there was some-thing more, and she was less than certain she wanted to know what it might be. Was that
because she would have to trust him? She tried to push aside that question. “Do you think it might have
been her?’
  
 “I would judge so, but it would be but a guess.” He laughed. “The guards of the Matriarch do not
question.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “You are an overcaptain, but you have questioned me.”
  
 “Suggested my lady . . . never questioned.” Alcaren looked away abruptly for an instant, peeringat the
road ahead, before turning back. “We are almost there.”
  
 Somehow . . . in his words themselves, or in the way they had beendelivered, or in looking away,
Alcaren had offered something, and Secca could sense it, but not name it, as if he had almost said more
than he wished, and was uneasy about it.
  
 Her lips tightening, Secca leaned forward in the saddle, her hand going back to brush the lutar case
strapped behind her saddle, her eyes on the dark gray-blue water of the channel.
  
 The road curved back southward. As the gray mare car ried Secca around the curve, before her
appeared a circular sheltered cove or small harborlike expanse of water, per-haps two deks across, and
almost cut off from the channel by two ancient rock jetties, whose ends were less than a hundred yards
apart. Rising out of the channel waters a half-dek eastward of the antiquated seawall was a long sand
bar. Roughly ten yards below the road, gentle sandy beaches circled most of the cove, except where yet
another jetty, barely visible because of the sand drifted up and around it, protruded from the westernmost
edge of the shallow water.
  
 Alcaren again eased his mount toward Secca’s gray. “Will this do for what you essay?"
  
 Secca continued riding, studying the waters and the shoreline, before she replied to the Ranuan, “Was
this an-other result of the Spell-Fire Wars? It looks likeit was once a harbor.”
  
 “It was a harbor, although so far back that nothing re-mainssave the seawalls and the jetty.” He smiledat
her, warmly.“Several generations back, my mother said, trad-ers from the Ostisles asked permission to
dig a channel from here out to the main channe.” He shook his head. “It sanded up almost as fast as they
could dig. I do not know if sorcery created it or changed it, only that it is a pleasant place to swim in the
summer,”
  
 “You have swum here?” She could not but help wonder , with whom he had swum---if anyone.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “At times. It is a favored bathing place—in summer.” He laughed. “The water is too cold except then.”
  
 “This should do.” Secca pushed away the thought of swimming.
  
 “Good. It is the closest place to Encora that would come close to what you requested.” He gestured.
“The road will carry us within fifty yards of the inner jetty.”
  
 Once the column had reined up on the section of the road closest to the jetty and after Alcaren had sent
out squads along the road a half-dek in each direction, the Ranuan looked to the sorceress. ‘Whenever
you are ready, Lady Secca."
  
 Secca dismounted and handed the gray’s reins to Easlon, still mounted beside Mureyn. The two guards
glanced at the road that led back to Encora.
  
 “I would doubt we will be here more than a glass or so,” Secca said as she began to unstrap the lutar
case.
  
 “Yes, lady.” Easlon nodded.
  
 Deciding to leave her hat on, and carrying the uncased lutar, Secca slowly walked halfway out the
sand-covered rocks of jetty. Even after all the years of wind and water, the regularity and smooth finish
of the dark stones sug-gested that the walls and jetty had been created by sorcery. After a single shudder
as she thought about yet another evidence of ancient sorcery, she stopped walking and glanced toward
the darker waters of the main channel to the east, before surveying the shallower gray and more placid
waters of the ancient harbor.
  
 Alcaren stood on the jetty a good ten yards closer to the road, his head moving slowly as he surveyed
the channel beyond the ancient seawalls, the road that arced around the sanded-in harbor, and the lancer
guards stationed there. His eyes brushed across Secca, lingering for a moment before resuming their
searching pattern.
  
 Secca squared her shoulders, then took a deep breath and began to tune the lutar. Finally, she lifted the
lutar and began to play, running through the melody without the words, but concentrating on them in her
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

mind. On the flat gray water, a cone of mist swirled for a moment, then vanished as Secca frowned,
losing her concentration for a moment.
  
 She forced her mind back to the spell and began to play the spell melody again from the beginning,
ignoring the second mist funnel.
  
 When she finished, she looked around, noting that Al-caren’s eyes darted away from where the
ephemeral mist funnel had appeared.
  
 Finally, after taking a series ofdeep breaths, she looked to the channel and, holding the lutar but not
playing it, began to sing the spell, softly and without any projection.
  
 “Water boil and water bubble
 like a caldron of sorcerers’ trouble...
 build a storm with winds swirling through
 in spouts that break all ships in two…”.
  
 The light, hazy, gray mist of the sky darkened into almost blackness, so dark that the day became dusk.
From nowhere came a howling wind that ripped at Secca’s riding jacket, at her hat, and at the lutar in her
hands. Sand lifted from the jetty and the beaches blasted her clothing, and the back of her unprotected
neck, each grain feeling like the bite of some insect.
  
 Under the pressure of the winds she took several steps eastward, before she dug her boots in and
caught her balance.
  
 In the center of the sanded-in harbor, less than half a dek from Secca, rose a gray-black funnel. The
water-spout towered nearly forty yards up, and the water level in the ancient harbor had dropped over a
yard as the swirling mass of gray water swayed away from Secca and toward the seawalls and the main
channel beyond.
  
 Secca swallowed, and sang, if not quite raggedly, the special release couplet.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Stop! Stop, the water in its spout,
 let it fall in rain and rout!”
  
 Sheets of rain cascaded around her for several mo-ments, before she found herself buffeted by a last
vio-lent gust of cold wind. She looked down at the lutar, then pulled a strip of cloth from her belt usually
used for blotting her own forehead and began to wipe off the lutar and blot away the water. She hoped
she could get it dry enough before the water affected the strings too much. The half-soaked sorceress
finally looked up to see Alcaren watching her intently, his face somber.
  
 Then he grinned, shaking his head. His grin faded. “We need to get you back to Encora where you can
dry out and get warm.”
  
 Secca couldn’t help returning his grin with a smile. “It does work . . . with just the song and no
accompa-niment.” Her own smile faded. “But we still have to get close enough so that it will strike
enough of their ships.”
  
 “That is the Matriarch’s task, is it not?”
  
 Secca nodded, repressing a shiver. The wind had not subsided to the gentle breeze it had been before
the sorcery, and she could feel the chill as it gusted past the damp legs of her trousers.
  
 113
 Netzia, Neserea
  
 The golden sheen of the wood panels set between the ancient built-in bookcases, also of golden oak,
glistens in the light from the half-score manteled lamps set in bronze free-standing sconces, wellaway
from wood and books.
  
 The door to the study opens, and two men step inside. The taller closes the door. He is dark-haired, and
his blue eyes are as cold as the snow that covers the fields and hills beyond the walls of the keep. The
shorter wears gray. Both nod but slightly to the blonde-bearded man who remains seated behind the
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

writing table, but who gestures to the pair of unpadded and straight-backed oak chairs across the table
from him.
  
 “Now that spring is but a few weeks away, at least in the south, I thought we might discuss how we will
be proceeding.” Belmar bows to the blonde-bearded man be-fore seating himself.
  
 The man in gray bows and sits without speaking.
  
 “I see, most honored Belmar,” begins the bearded man, “or should I begin to call you honored Lord
Prophet Bel-mar. . ."
  
 “I think such is premature, perhaps by years, honored Ayselin.” Belmar laughs good-humoredly, but his
eyes do not laugh with his voice and face.
  
 “Chyalar has begun to refer to you as such,” Ayselin replies.
  
 “I was not aware that he thought so highly of the office of Prophet.”
  
 “He does not. Nor do most in Neserea. That is why he ties your name to such with every opportunity.
But then, that is why you sent assassins after him. It is a pity that their success did not match their fees.”
  
 “Golds are but a tool.” Belmar laughs again. “Indeed they are, and that is why I have supplied such to
you, but they are not endless, and I would suggest that they be spent with greater return.”
  
 ‘While they did not succeed, Chyalar may proceed with greater caution,” suggests the younger holder.
  
 “Yes . . . he may... suggest to Lady Aerlya that his suit to be consort to Lady Annayal might be well
preferred to a forced suit by you.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “He is already consorted.”
  
 “For now.”
  
 Belmar laughs, delightedly. ‘What a most wonderful idea! Have her murdered in a way that casts great
doubt about the most noble Chyalar and his motivations.”
  
 “I thought that would appeal to you.” Ayselin nods, then touches his beard for a moment. “You still have
not been able to thing the Sorceress of Defalk to bay, for all your sorceries and lancers, and when spring
comes, what is there to prevent Lord Robero from sending more lancers or another sorceress or both to
the aid of Lady Aerlya? Already, there is word that the Liedfuhr may send fifty companies of Mansuuran
lancers to support his niece. With all your sorceries, and a mere forty companies of lancers beholden to
you, you cannot fight both Defalk and Man-suur.”
  
 “We will not have to do such. Lord Robero will do noth-ing beyond what he has done,” suggests
Belmar. “He hoards his lancers, and he spends but two sorceresses— one here and one in the east”
  
 “There are two in the east,” jerGlien says mildly.
  
 “Two. . .and what have they done in almost two sea-sons? Propped up a puppet in Ebra, and barely
managed to struggle to Ranuak. There they must deal with an in-decisive Matriarch and murder attempts
by the misguided Ladies of the Shadows.”
  
 “It is not that insignificant an effort for two women with but a handful of lancers,” suggests Ayselin.
  
 Belmar shakes his head with a broad and condescending smile. “No. It is not. But does that weakling in
Defalk use their actions to his advantage? Does he request lancers from High Lord Counselor Hadrenn?
Or even golds?"
  
 “Lord Robero is overly cautious, but he could well agree to allow his sorceresses to work with the
Liedfuhr’s lancers to restore all of Neserea to Lady Annayal. And he would do such in a moment rather
than send his own lancers, as well we all know.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Belmar fingers his chin, frowning. "There is much to that, and we must ensure that such does not occur.”
He glances toward the man in gray. "Is this an area where your masters might provide some suitable
mischief, master jerGlien?"
  
 “They would not wish such an alliance, that is true. Perhaps a fleet sent from the Ostisles to patrol off
Defuhr Bay?" He raises his eyebrows in inquiry.
  
 “You suggest that so readily that it is apparent such has already been planned,” offers Ayselin.
  
 The Sturinnese shrugs. “It would not be opportune to invade Mansuur at this time, but such a maneuver
will keep the Liedfuhr from sending more lancers eastward, for they cannot be recalled quickly.”
  
 “And it will bring more ships closer to Dumar—and Ranuak,” suggests Ayselin. “Doubtless filled with
lancers.”
  
 “I would not guess what the Maitre plans,” jerGlien re-plies. “One does that with great risk.”
  
 “That still will not offer us much assistance,” Ayselin points out.
  
 “You have been insistent that no lancers or ships from Sturinn enter Neserea. Do you wish that to
change?” asks the Sturinnese.
  
 “No,” Belmar says, “but perhaps a chest of golds for us to raise and arm more lancers. That would be
far cheaper for the Maitre.”
  
 A second shrug follows. “I can but ask.”
  
 ‘That is true,” Belmar says politely. “But...if we are better armed, then neither Delalk nor Mansuur will
be nearly so interested in what may occur in Dumar—or Ran-uak."
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “That is true, and I will convey those thoughts,” says jerGilen.
  
 “As for other plans,” Belmar says, “I had thought per-haps a little sorcery in the vineyards to the east of
Itzel might prove useful.”
  
 Ayselin waits.
  
 “Well. . .those who hold those lands, they still support Lady Aerlya and her ill-gotten daughter, and
many oftheir coins come from their vintages...”
  
 The other two in the library nod as Belmar continues to talk.
  
 114
  
 Secca stood on the rear steps of the guest quarters in Encora as Wilten and the two additional
companies of lancers rode up the drive between the boxwood hedges toward the guest quarters and
barracks. Leading the col-umn was a squad of Ranuan lancers in blue, not the SouthWomen, although
the last company in the column wore the crimson and blue riding jackets of the SouthWomen.
  
 In the late afternoon, a chill winter sun tried to break through the white and hazy clouds that covered
most of the sky like a thin layer of gauze. Secca could see Clear-song for a moment, before a heavier
and grayer cloud ob-scured the larger moon.
  
 As the first squad of Ranuan lancers turned aside, Wilten rode to the steps, where be reined up and
half-bowed from the saddle. “Lady Secca”
  
 “I am most glad to see you, Wilten.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 The overcaptain bowed again. “And I you, Lady Secca.”
  
 “How was the journey?”
  
 “Longer than one would like, but the weather was mild. The air to the north is warming, and spring may
come early.” The overcaptain smiled politely.
  
 Secca returned his smile with one equally pleasant. ‘We need to discuss some matters—once you have
the com-panies settled. If you and Overcaptain Alcaren would join me, we have much to do, and little
enough time in which to accomplishit.”
  
 Behind Secca’s left shoulder, Richina nodded.
  
 “A half a glass, lady?’ asked Wilten.
  
 “I will await you. My chambers are located as they were in Elahwa.
  
 With a bow, Wilten turned his mount toward the bar-racks.
  
 “He is worried and tired, lady,” offered Richina as the two sorceresses reentered the building.
  
 “Are not we all?” asked Secca, dryly. “The rebellion worsens in Neserea. The Sea-Priests will hold all
of Dumar in a season if we do not act. We must use great sorcery in a land that has already once been
prostrated by it, and that land is our sole, ally willing to offer more than mere words of concern.” She
glanced at Richina. “I would like a mo-ment myself. If you would escort the overcaptains . . .?”
  
 “I would be happy to do so.” Richina inclined her head. Secca turned and walked back through the
arched door and along the corridor to the stairs, then up to her guest quarters, nodding to Dymen as she
entered. Once inside, she walked to the working desk, reaching down and lifting the goblet. The water
was warmish, but cleared her throat.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 For a time, she stood alone in the main chamber of the guest quarters, looking toward the harbor where
sailors swarmed over the mast of one of the vessels there while they worked on the rigging. Several more
ships had ap-peared from their previously hidden anchorages or ports to tie up in the main harbor, and
on all sailors toiled, making ready for the voyage ahead.
  
 Secca wondered if the sailors did not feel a geater sure-ty in the future than did she, with all the
unknowns that surrounded and faced her.
  
 “Overcaptain Wilten, Lady,” called Dymen. “And Lady Richina and Overcaptain Alcaren.”
  
 “Have them enter.”
  
 Wilten stepped into the guest chamber, his tired eyes avoiding the stack of brown paper on one side of
the small round conference table. He took three steps forward and bowed. Behind him followed Alcaren
and Richina, who offered bows in turn.
  
            “I will not keep any of you overlong. Especially you, Wilten. You have had a long journey, and
the one most recent.” Secea did not seat herself.
  
 “As you must, lady.” Wilten frowned, and his eyes did not quite meet Secca’s.
  
 Alcaren’s eyes betrayed no surprise, and Richina merely watched Secca.
  
 “You must know that we are going to try to use sorcery against the Sturinnese. I met with the Matriarch,
and we have come up with a plan. A sorcerous plan.” Secca looked directly at Wilten.
  
 “I can see no other way, lady. That troubles me.”
  
 ‘We must strike against their fleet. That was the only way in which Lady Anna drove them from
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

Liedwahr, and it will be the only way in which we can do the same.”
  
 Alcaren nodded.
  
 “You know, Lady Secca,” Wilten said carefully, “that their ships do not come near the shore, and this
will be even more so now that you have destroyed those few of shallow draft that challenged you in the
Gulf.”
  
 “I know. The Matriarch is providing us with ships.”
  
 “As she should,” said Alcaren.
  
 “Could she not just provide the ships to carry us to Du-mar?”
  
 “She does not have enough ships to protect us from the warships of Sturinn. Also, that would not
destroy the Stu-rinnese fleet,” Secca pointed out.
  
 “I see that.” The older overcaptain’s voice was cautious.
  
  “I intend to take but one company on board the ships and without mounts. They will be there to protect
me and the players and Richina.”
  
 Wilten’s eyes flicked to Alcaren, then focused on Secca. His brow crinkled.
  
 “To ensure that all works as it should, we will be pre-paring to load all lancers the day after tomorrow
with their mounts.”
  
 “All lancers?’ asked Alcaren.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “You will take but one company, but we will prepare to load them all?” followed Wilten.
  
 “Yes.” Secca nodded. “The Sturinnese have scrying glasses. They will doubtless be watching us closely
now that you have arrived. The weather is fair, and the winds would favor us. So they will expect us to
act quickly, and that we will.”
  
 “But they will watch you, and if you do not board a vessel. . ."
  
 “We all will be boarding vessels—very carefully, The Sturinnese will doubtless use sorcery to create
much disruption in the channel and upon the sea. Their great sor-ceries are much like mine, and cannot
be repeated quickly, and that is when we will strike—with sorcery.”
  
 “Perhaps I am overly tired, but if you would ex-plain . . .“ said Wilten.
  
 “We will begin to load the vessels. It is likely the Stu-rinnese will send a great wave down the channel
and into the harbor to destroy ships and delay our departure. The channel is too shallow for a great wave
to travel far, and it will break far away from the harbor. There will be flood-ing, perhaps water several
spans deep in the streets, even a yard deep. That sorcery is like great battle sorcery and will tire greatly
both the drummers and the Sturinnese sor-cerers. When the water from that great wave retreats, I will
board the largest of the Ranuan ships, and we will take sorcery to their fleet. They will believe, we hope,
that I am traveling to Dumar to stop their conquest. That is why Richina and Alcaren will be with me, and
why you will prepare the remaining lancers as if for an overland ride.” Secca shrugged. “That is the plan.”
  
 “And you will take but one company with you?”
  
 “That way, it will look as though I am trying to reach Dumar in desperation. Also, there is little point in
hazard-ing the lives of brave lancers to no end,” Secea pointed out. “If I am successful, we will return
and embark all within a few days. If I am not you will return all the lancers to Loiseau when the weather
permits and await Lord Robero’s commands.” Secca offered a broad smile. “I do not expect the latter,
but I would be a poor sorceress- protector if I did not have orders for all possibilities.”
  
 Wilten bowed. “As you command, though I would that you take greater protection with you. Another
squad, at the very least.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “I will consider that, and we can talk tomorrow, when you all have had a chance to consider these
plans.” Secca smiled again.
  
 When the door closed behind the three, the warm and enthusiastic smile faded from the lips of the
sorceress as she turned back toward the conference table, and the spell that lay there, underneath a plain
sheet of heavy brown paper.
  
 Secca disliked the expansion of the shadow sorcery, but the songspells involving poisons, such as the
one she had used against Myantar and his captains, required, more of the crystals than she had carried
with her. Likewise, using a variant of the flame spells would prove too exhausting.
  
 She bent over the table and uncovered the words of the spell Anna had written years earlier, reading the
opening lines slowly. “Infuse with heat, and turn to steam, the wa-ter . . ."
  
 Shaking her head, Secca paused. When Anna had ex-plained how the spell worked, Secca had been
horrified---but, horrified or not, she could see no other alternative for what needed to be done. Secca
needed the Matriarch’s sup-port, and the Matriarch needed the ships, and both knew the Sturinnese
needed to be stopped, and that could not be done without great sorcery--- and more ships for Ranuak
  
 Secca straightened and looked, bleakly, toward a setting sun that was turning the hazy clouds into a
bloody pink froth.
  
 115
  
 The predawn gray seeped into the main chamber where Secca checked the sheaf ofspells she had
readied. She doubted she would have the time to check them again, or even use any except the first two,
But she slipped them into the saddlebag anyway.
  
 Moments earlier, as she had finished dressing, she had heard the first companies of lancers riding toward
the har-bor, and that had meant she needed to head down to the lower level and to play her part.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Abruptly, the very air began to shiver around Secca, or so it seemed, and then an anguished chord
rattled through her. She glanced toward the windows, but they were not shaking. A wry smile crossed
her lips. The wrenching of the Harmonies was an indication that the Sea-Priests had indeed called up
their great wave. The smile vanished as she wondered if Alcaren and the Matriarch had been right that
the wave would not greatly damage Encora.
  
 She forced herself to the window to watch.
  
 For a long time, nothing happened. Another company of lancers rode out of the guest quarters, and then
a third.
  
 Secca squinted. A silver-grey was filling the lower pan of the drive--- water! Rushing water. From the
guest quar-ters windows she watched as grayish water flooded up the drive from the harbor, then
seemed to stop. The water was only a bit more than hock deep on the trailing mounts of the next lancer
company to leave the guest barracks.
  
 To the south, she could see masts swaying . . . but only swaying. She hoped that the Matriarch's
judgment about what a great sorcerous wave could do to Encora had been correct. She watched for
several moments longer, but the water across the drive got no deeper, and, in fact, seemed to be slowly
receding.
  
 With a nod to herself, she picked up her saddlebags and lutar, and then the traveling saying glass. She
opened the door and stepped out into the hallway. There Gorkon took the mirror and saddlebags and
followed her down the wide stairs. Richina, who had been watching from her doorway, scurried to catch
up.
  
 Secca had barely stepped through the archway above the rear steps to the guest quarters when Alcaren
rode up the paved lane, his mount spraying water from the puddles remaining. The Ranuan overcaptain
had a grim smile on his face.
  
 “The wave wasn’t that deep, was it?" Secca asked.
  
 “No. It was just what you and the Matriarch had hoped for. The Sturinnese raised the ocean, but the
shallows spread it thin.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca gestured toward the south and the damp streets and puddles between her and the harbor. “This
was scarcely like what happened to Narial.” She still couldn’t quite believe the difference.
  
 “Of course not Great waves can break over the land only when there are deep waters and narrow
shallows. Here the shallows stretch for tens of deks, and widen as they near Encora, so the great waves
break far from the harbor, and the harbor level rises but little. The Matriarch warned those in the coastal
towns to move to higher ground. While there was doubtless much damage in Nerula and Gherste, we can
hope few lives were lost.” Alcaren paused. “As you and the Matriarch discussed, such sorcery is most
difficult, and now that the waters are receding, we should hasten to the piers before the Sturinnese can
refresh themselves.”
  
 “I am ready now.”
  
 “So am I.” added Richina.
  
 “If you would summon the players, Richina,” Secca re-quested.
  
 “Yes, lady.” Richina turned and hurried across the damp stones, her boots occasionally splashing water.
  
 Secca turned full to Alcaren. “Is it likely that they could raise yet another wave while we are in the
channel, or just leaving it?”
  
 “It is possible. Anything is, but they have never done so two times on the same thy.”
  
 “Let us hope they do not today,” Secca said as she stepped toward the gray mare that Rukor was
leading from the stable.
  
 At the end of the long courtyard that separated the wings of the barracks, the players were gathering end
mounting, strapping instruments in place. Secca watched for a mo-ment before she saw Palian's
gray-haired figure, and Del-vor chivvying the second players into order. Richina began to hurry back
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

across the courtyard, this time mounted and riding around the players, and the last company of
lanc-ers--- and the squad of Alcaren’s SouthWomen that would also accompany Secca.
  
 After fastening the saddlebags with spells end her cased lutar in place, Secca half-climbed, half-vaulted
into the saddle, then turned to wait for Palian and the players.
  
 Palian was already riding from the barracks courtyard toward Secca, raising her hand. ‘We stand ready,
lady.”
  
 “Then let us go.” As Secea replied and turned the grey back toward the harbor, the sky was turning a
brighter gray--- not orange, for the heavens held the same hazy formless clouds that seemed to be almost
constant through the winter in Encora.
  
 Riding down the damp stones of the lane, past the box-wood hedge toward the boulevard, Secca tried
to check everything. So did Alcaren, riding slightly forward and to the sorceress's right.
  
 Two full companies of SouthWomen blocked the boul-evard heading north, and as the grey mare
carried Secca through the gates, Captain Delcetta rode forward. “If you don’t mind, sorceress, we
would like to ride as shield.”
  
 “Thank you.” Secca offered a smile, understanding all too well that if any of the supporters of the Ladies
of the Shadows wished to act, now would be their last opportu-nity before Seeca tried to deal with the
Sea-Priests.
  
 Richina rode to Secca’s left, and Alcaren to her right, both behind the South Women and their shields.
Behind Secca came the players, also shielded by the second com-pany of SouthWomen. Secca felt as
though she were al-most in a moving box, with lancers all around her. Those nearest her bore silvered
shields, held so high that she could barely see the buildings on each side of the boule-vard.
  
 The city area near the harbor held the odors of fish and salt, and all the walls of the buildings—from the
chandlery to the weavers—showed an almost even water line at about half a yard above the paved and
raised sidewalks. Those flooded streets were empty, except for the lancers, and the players. While it was
still just before dawn, Secca won-dered if the Matriarch had ordered the streets cleared.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Looking past riders and shields, Secca’s eyes searched every side street, but all she saw were
lancers—regular Ranuan lancers in blue. She could also see that the water was quickly receding, as fast
as it had risen, if not faster.
  
 “The Matriarch had this whole part of the city cleared, didn’t she?” Secca said in a low voice to
Alcaren.
  
 “She did not tell me such, but it appears so.” The over-captain flashed a brief smile. “It would certainly
ensure that the Sea-Priests would know we are trying something.”
  
 “So that they will attack us instantly?"
  
 “Not instantly, but once we clear the channel and the shallows.”
  
 At the open stone-paved plaza between where the bou-levard ended and the loading area for the piers
began, Wil-ten was waiting, mounted, looking north. As he saw the SouthWomen, and then Secca, a
momentary smile of relief crossed his face. He rode forward toward the sorceress and her escorts.
  
 “How did it go?” asked Secca.
  
 "Everyone was prepared. Some mounts got skittish when the water rose around them, and we had to
pull a couple out of the harbor. Drysel thinks he lost one lancer, unless he’s hanging onto a pier post or a
rock somewhere.”
  
 “Nowit’s our turn,” Seeca said. “Make sure everyone gets dry. It’s still winter, even if it’s late in the
season and warmer than Loiseau.
  
 “That we will, lady. You be most careful.” Although Wilten’s words were addressed to Secca, his eyes
rested on Alcaren.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “We will look after her most closely,” Alcaren said.
  
 “I am most certain you will,” Wilten said firmly. “And you, Lady Richina, take great care as well.”
  
 “Thank you, Wilten.” Richina inclined her head.
  
 With a last nod and smile at Wilten, Secca urged the gray forward once more.
  
 “TheSilberwelle is at the second pier at the end,” Al-caren said.
  
 “I can see the ship.” Secca reined up at the base of the second long stone pier, now merely covered with
a film of water. Alter dismounting and handing the gray’s reins to Rukor, she unfastened the lutar and
saddlebags. Easlon and Dymen scrambled to dismount as did Richina and several of the SouthWomen.
  
 Still surrounded by guards and lancers, Secca walked seaward along the pier until she neared the
gangway to theSilberwelle.
  
 “Lady Sorceress!” called a voice. Although the voice was deep and strong, the woman who stepped
forward to the railing beside the gangway was less than a span taller than Secca and not all that much
broader. Her face was tanned and weathered, and a broad smile showed even white teeth. “Denyst,
captain of theSilberwelle.”
  
 “I’m Secca, and this is Richina. She’s also a sorceress.” As Secca stepped on board, she nodded to
Alcaren. “You know Alcaren?”
  
 “Since he was mayhap knee-high.” Denyst smiled. “Glad to see he’s been put to good use.”
  
 As he half-bowed to the captain, Alcaren’s smile was somewhere between amusement and relief, Secca
judged.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “He was one of those to persuade me to help you, sor-ceress,” continued Denyst. “I can’t say any of us
much like sailing out to a war fleet.”
  
 “Nor do I,” Secca replied. “But we have to do some-thing."
  
 “We do. We’ll not sail anywhere if we do not,” Denyst nodded. “Being as this is a short voyage, you
sorceresses can have my cabin, and the players can use the mess.”
  
 Secca glanced to Alcaren.
  
 “I’ll show Palian and Delvor,” the overcaptain affirmed. “They’ll need somewhere to keep their
instruments dry until it’s time to play.”
  
 “The mess will do for that.”
  
 Secea turned as she caught sight of Palian leading the players toward the gangway. ‘"Here are the
players.” She waited until the two chief players were on the deck.
  
 “Palian is my chief of players, and Delvor is the chief of the second players.” Secca gestured toward the
two.
  
 “Welcome to theSilberwelle.” Denyst inclined her head to the two. ‘We’d like to be setting sail in less
thana glass. Take us three glasses to clear the channel.” Denyst turned to Alcaren. “The overcaptain will
be showing you where you’ll be hanging your cloaks.” She turned to Secca. “If you’d not mind . . ."
  
 “Go ahead, captain,” Secca said. “Alcaren can get us settled.”
  
 “Once we’re under way, I’ll find you. There are a few things we need to talk over while we’re headed
down the channel.” For a moment, Denyst turned to watch the SouthWomen and lancers walking up the
gangway. She looked back atAlcaren. “They’ll have to be quartered in the fo’c’sle bay.”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “That will be tight.”
  
 “Put some in the port crew room if you have to.”
  
 “Yes, ser.” Alcaren nodded.
  
 Denyst turned aft and climbed the ladder to the poop deck.
  
 As the Ranuan captain stepped away, Palian looked to Secca. “In what fashion would you like us to
proceed?”
  
 “The Sturinnese may call storms or something upon us. You and the players will wait in the mess room
until just before you are to play. That way we may avoid wet strings and soaked players. Richina will
summon---"
  
 “It might be best if I summoned them on your signal,” Alcaren suggested from where he stood to the
right, near the railing. “You might need the Lady Richina’s skills.”
  
 Alcaren’s suggestion made sense, but Secca wondered if she were coming to rely too much on Alcaren.
“You’ll summon the players on my signal.” She addressed Palian. “You know the two spellsongs we plan
to use, but we still may have to use the long or short flame song.”
  
 “We understand.”
  
 Alcaren gestured toward the lancers who were forming up behind Secca and her group on the main
deck and then at the players milling by the starboard railing.
  
 “Alcaren . . .perhaps you’d best get everyone settled,” Secca suggested. ‘Then the five of us should
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

meet again. Richina and I will wait here.”
  
 “With your guards and some lancers.” Alcaren smiled. “I’ll have Dymen take the lutar and mirror and
saddlebags to the captain’s quarters so that you don’t have to keep carrying them. If that meets with your
satisfaction?”
  
 Secca nodded.
  
 Alcaren gestured, and Easlon and Dymen stepped for-ward, along with a half-score of the South
Women.
  
 Boxed in as she felt, Secca repressed a sigh, but handed the lutar to Dymen, and then the saddlebags.
  
 As she waited for Alcaren to return and for theSilber-welle to move from the pier, Secca studied the
vessel itself. The main deck was higher above the water, and the ship had greater freeboard than the
Alycet. TheSilberwelle was also a good thirty yards longer and ten wider, clearly a deep-ocean vessel
built for long voyages while heavy -laden. The three masts were all square-rigged.
  
 As had been the case with theAlycet, every surface was smoothed and varnished or oiled, and the
brasswork gleamed.
  
 “It is a beautiful vessel,” murmured Richina.
  
 “Single up!” came the command from the poop deck. “Harbor rig!”
  
 “Aye! Harbor rig!”
            
 Secca watched as the crew, men and women, swarmed up masts and let out canvas, and then cast off.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Under the light northeast wind, the Silberwelle glided away from the pier and toward the southwest, but
long before nearing the shore, eased onto a more southerly heading, in the middle of a channel that
seemed deks wide. But even Secca could see the lighter shades of the shal-lower waters, not all that far
to either side of the ship.
  
 “If you’d join me, Lady Secca,” called Denyst.
  
 “Why don’t you wait here for Alcaren, Richina?’ Secca said.
  
 “As you wish, lady.”
  
 Secca turned and climbed the ladder. Denyst stood sev-eral yards to the left of the helm platform, itself
raised above the upper deck.
  
 “Most have not talked of this, but the Sea-Pigs could raise another wave as we clear the channel,”
suggested Denyst.
  
 “Alcaren said they couldn’t create as large a wave here.” Denyst laughed. “Not so large as elsewhere,
but it might be a good ten yards from crest to trough just beyond the channel. Hit us sideways, and we’d
go over.”
  
  "Oh..."
  
 “In the open sea, wouldn’t be near as big, and a good ship’d hardly notice it, just a big even swell.”
Denyst laughed. “Well . . . . . we’d notice it, because the sea flattens, but any good ship mistress could
handle it. They do it offshore, and it’d break at the end of the channel, and that’s where it’s dangerous.
Once beyond the shoaling, the break would lift everything maybe two yards in foam and water."
  
 ‘What would you suggest?’ asked Seeca.
  
 “I’ve told the others to hang back.Silberwelle will be battened down. If the wind holds, two-three deks
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

shy of the channel end, we’ll pile on full canvas and race for the open water. There’s but a
one-or-two-dek space where a great wave could break.”
  
 “That’s why everyone should be below?”
  
 Denyst nodded.
  
 “Including us?”
  
 “You won’t be doing us much good, lady, if you’re washed overboard before we get to the Sea-Pigs.”
The cap-tain offered a humorous smile, as she continued, “And I wouldn’t stand well with the Matriarch
if I allowed that to happen.” She turned to watch as Alcaren climbed up the last few steps of the ladder
and crossed the poop to the two women.
  
 “Captain.” Alcaren bowed. “All the lancers and players are settled.” He turned to Secca. “Your chief
players have begun the tuning and practicing.”
  
 “Thank you,” Secca said.
  
 “Before long, in the next glass or so, best you settle yourselves in my quarters,” suggested Denyst.
  
 “We will,” Secca promised. “Could we stay up here for a bit, though?” She thought Alcaren would
appreciate the fresh air as well.
  
 Denyst nodded.
  
 Secca eased to the starboard railing and gazed out to the west. The vessel had already passed the
ancient harbor where she had practiced her sorcery. She pointed back to the northwest. “Is the old
harbor about there?”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “I think so,” he replied. “It’ s hard to see from the chan-nel.”
  
 A jetty and a breakwater--- all that remained of a harbor once created and maintained by mighty
sorcery. She shook her head and studied the coast and the dark rocks, rocks that began to lighten as the
orange ball that was the sun rose out of the Eastern Sound.
  
 The wind seemed to strengthen as theSilberwelle sailed farther from Encora itself, and spray began to
mist over the bow.
  
 The sun stood well over the isle that formed the eastern side of the channel when Alcaren looked toward
Denyst, then touched Secca’s arm.
  
 “I know. It’s time,” she said.
  
 Richina waited on the main deck as Secca and then Al-caren climbed down the ladder.
  
 “We’re headed below,” Alcaren said. “It could get very rough when we start to leave the channel.” He
gestured for Richina and Secca to enter the door-like hatch he held open. “The captain’s quarters are the
farthest aft.” After Richina eased past him, he smiled and looked at Secca. “You’re fortunate that Denyst
likes you. Not every ship mistress would offer her quartets.
  
 Secca smiled. “I think I am fortunate that she likes you.”
  
 Alcaren flushed. “Ah . . .”
  
 “Oh . . . you knew her before?” Secca wondered if Den-yst had been a former lover, knowing that it
was none of her affair, yet ... She pushed the thought away.
  
 “No . . . not as a friend or acquaintance . . . She is one of my mother’s closest friends.” The Ranuan
shook his head. “I had not thought to presume . . . but she offered theSilberwelle, and it is one of the
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

largest and most sea-worthy, and she is noted for surviving storms that have sunk other vessels.”
  
 “We are both fortunate.” Secca hoped the captain’s abil-ities and fortune would continue. Witha smile,
she turned and eased toward the hatch door, suddenly aware of how close the broad-shouldered
overcaptain was, but she slipped past him without flushing and made her way along the narrow
passageway. While she did not have to duck, anyone much taller would need to be most careful.
  
 The captain’s quarters were spacious—for a vessel----nearly five yards in width and almost as deep,
with a re-cessed double-width bunk against the forward bulkhead, a series of built-in chest cabinets
against the rear, and a round table in the middle of the room. Secca noted that all the chairs around the
circular table were fastened to the wooden deck, as was the table itself. Alcaren, or Dymen, had placed
the lutar in a net-covered open wooden bin fastened to the bulkhead with brass-studded heavy leather
straps.
  
 “Why did the captain want us in here?” asked Richina. “She thinks that the Sturinnese may try to bring
another great wave against us as we leave the channel before we can get to the safety of the open seas,”
replied Alcaren.
  
 “Safety of the open seas?’ Richina looked puzzled.
  
 “The safest place for a ship in a storm is well away from the coast and from the shallower waters right
off the coast,” Alcaren explained. “A truly safe harbor, such as Encora, is best. After that, the open seas
are to be pre-ferred."
  
 Secca and Richina exchanged glances.
  
 Alcaren shook his head. "The shallows will break a ship.”
  
 After several moments, Secca turned her head to Richiña again. "We need to start some vocalises. I
don’t know how long it will be after we leave the channel before we find the Sturinnese.” Or before they
find us.
  
 Alcaren nodded slightly.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 The two sorceresses had completed a series of two long, drawn-out, and gentle warm-ups, when the
pitching motion of theSilberwelle began to increase.
  
 “I think we’re out of the channel,” offered Alcaren, straightening in the chair he had taken closest to the
hatch door. He swallowed.
  
 A half-smile flitted across Secca’s face as she recalled Alcaren’s discomfort with sea travel.
  
 A deep bass rumbling filtered through the hull of the ship, a rumbling that seemed to go on and on. At the
sound or sensation, Secca cocked her head. Across from her, Al-caren frowned, also tilting his head
slightly.
  
 Secca glanced at Richina. "Did you . . .?”
  
 Richina nodded, her face showing apprehension.
  
 Secca’s eyes went to Alcaren again.
  
 He shook his head.
  
 Then, not all that later, the pitching of the ship stopped, almost abruptly, as if theSilberwelle had entered
an area of calm water. Alcaren frowned again, then lurched from his chair to the forward porthole where
he looked out through the green-tinted thick glass.
  
 “What . . .?” began Secca.
  
 “Hold on to the chair. Hold tight!” Alcaren wrapped his arms around one of the circular posts framing
the captain’s bunk.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Why?” Richina tightened her hands over the carved arms of her chair.
  
 “Another wave! Hang on!”
  
 Secca gaped as she felt the deck tilting, the forward bulkhead of the cabin seeming to rise a good two
yards above the rear one, and she could feel her feet dangling away from the deck for a long moment.
  
 Then abruptly, the bow dropped with a lurch, and Secca’s stomach dropped with it, and her boots
slummed down on the deck. The light from the portholes vanished momentarily as dark water appeared
outside, and then was replaced with foam, and then the grey of day. Despite the closed hatches and the
raised coaming of the hatch to the captain’ s quarters, a thin sheet of gray-blue water poured across the
wooden deck of the captain’s cabin.
  
 TheSilberwelle continued to ride through a series of maneuvers, combining a slight tendency to
corkscrew with irregular pitching of decreasing intensity.
  
 Secco wasn’t sure which had shocked her more, the fact that the Sea-Priests had been able to use
sorcery for another great wave or the fact that Alcaren had sensed the disruption of the Harmonies, as
though he were a sorcerer. Alcaren . . . a sorcerer?
  
 Secca wanted to shake her head even while the ship continued to ride out the aftermath of the wave. A
sorcerer! That made sense, and yet, the fact that he had used no sorcery somehow reassured her, but
she couldn’t say why. Nor was she ready to struggle with all that implied—not rightbefore a sorcerous
sea battle, and not when Alcaren had been trustworthy in all that he had said and done.
  
 Richina looked pale and Alcaren positively green by the time the hatch door opened to reveal a figure in
blue.
  
 “Selya, first officer. Captain would like you topside.” Selya did not wait for their response, but
disappeared as quickly as she had appeared.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Secca took the saddlebags and the cased lutar and headed along the passage to the open main deck.
Outside, in the chill sea air, she glanced around. TheSilberwelle looked little different, save that all
surfaces were wet and water sloshed along the decks.
  
 Turning, she climbed the ladder to the poop deck, and crossed to the railing around the helm platform
where Den-yst stood.
  
 “Quite a ride there, if l do say so.” said the captain. “Nothing we couldn’t handle, though. Been through
worse in the fall storms in the Bitter Sea. Lookout has sighted sails to the southeast. They’re faster, but
the wind’s with us. I thought we should let them catch us. Otherwise, they might get suspicious.” She
looked at Secca.
  
 “How long will it take?’
  
 “A glass, I’d wager.”
  
 “That would be good. Can you let us know about a quarter-glass before they get in range for their
fireshafts?"
  
 “You want all of them close?"
  
 “At least a handful,” Secca said. ‘We can’t do spell after spell.”
  
 "The Matriarch said we might be able to pick up a few ships..."
  
 “That’s possible--- if the spells go right.”
  
  Denyst nodded. “Spare crews are on theSchaumen-flucht”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Secea glanced forward, noting that the swells remained constant, and still almost two yards from crest to
trough. About every third swell, a thin spray rose over the bow, but only a little water struck the fo’c’sle,
and only within a yard or so of the base of the bowsprit.
  
 “More sails to the southwest, captain! Looks like a half-score!” came the call from the lookout above.
  
 “Starboard ten,” ordered Denyst.
  
 “Aye. Coming starboard ten.”
  
 “Alcaren . . .” Secca began, then shook her head.
  
 “You want the players on deck?” Alcaren swallowed as he finished the question.
  
 “They don’t have to run, but better now than later.”
  
 “I’ll tell Palian.” The Ranuan overcaptain turned and climbed down the ladder to the main deck, crossing
the deck beside the mainmast.
  
 Secca looked down at the lutar and saddlebags.
  
 Richina took both with a smile.
  
 Secca began another vocalise. “Holly-lolly-pop.. .“ For some reason, she had to stop and cough up
mucus, but after the second run-through, her cords felt clear.
  
 “They’re running under full sail, captain, even the ones coming into the teeth of the wind,” reported the
lookout.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “Sorcery?” asked Denyst.
  
 “Wind sorcery,” Secca confirmed. She frowned as she realized the implications. The Sturinnese had
raised two mighty waves, and each took a sorcerous effort that was similar to fighting an entire battle, at
least from the way the Harmonies protested, and yet there were some Sturin-nese strong enough to call
up winds to speed their vessels. Just how much sorcery could they do?
  
 Shortly, Alcaren returned. He glanced at Richina, carry-ing Secca’s lutar. “It might be better if I held
this.”
  
 Secca nodded.
  
 "Thank you,” said Richina as Alcaren took the lutar. Secca glanced out upon the fleet bearing down
upon her three vessels. She could not even count how many, so nu-merous the sails appeared, but she
saw no point in using sorcery just to discover numbers.
  
 “A third of a glass or less before the lead frigate closes, sorceresses.”
  
 Secca walked to the railing at the edge of the poop deck that overlooked the main deck and called
down, “Players! First spellsong will be the third building spell. The third building spell. Less than a
quarter-glass.”
  
 “Run through on the third building spell!” ordered Palian. “At my mark. . . Mark.”
  
 Although she managed to keep smiling, within herself Secca winced at the first few bars. The pitching of
the Silberwelle had definitely affected their playing. But by the fourth or fifth bar, the raggedness
smoothed out, and she let out a breath she hadn’t even realized she was holding.
  
 She looked up and out off the port side of the ship. Three of the white-hulled Sturinnese frigates were
less than a dek away. Another three were closing on the Schaumen-flucht.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 She glanced toward Alcaren. His face was composed, but pale and greenish. Richina’s eyes were still
fixed on the nearing Sturinnese vessels.
  
 Secca closed her eyes for a moment, concentrating on the first spell she would use, trying not to think
too deeply about it. According to Anna’s notes, it wasn’t Darksong because it referred only to water as
a substance, and not to any living aspect, but Secca wondered how close she would be coming to
Darksong with it. Still...she had promised the Matriarch she would try.
  
 She stepped back to the railing overlooking the main deck, where the players faced southward, to the
port side of the Silberwelle. “Chief players!”
  
 ‘We stand ready.”
  
 “Third building song. Now,” ordered Secca.
  
 “At my mark!” called Palian. “Mark!”
  
 The opening bars were far smoother than with the run-through, and Secca concentrated on a smooth
and free pro-duction, not worrying about actual projection, as she launched into the spellsong.
  
 “Infuse with heat, and turn to steam,
 the water within the veins and bloodstream
 of each Sea-Priest and all whom they command;
 Boil within their blood right where they stand..."
  
  
 An off-key note chimed through the gray skies, fol-lowed by the sound of crystal shattering. Secca
blinked, staggered, then went to her knees on the hardwood of the deck, one hand thrust out to keep
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

from falling totally on her face.
  
 Alcaren had an arm around Secca, and was helping her to her feet almost immediately. Waves of light
and dark washed across her vision, and it took all her effort to stand, even with Alcaren’ s support. For a
time, she just stood on the deck, unseeing.
  
 Alcaren and Richina exchanged words. Secca had no idea what the two had said, but Richina moved
away and then disappeared.
  
 Secca tried to make out what was happening around her. Her head was throbbing, and double images
flashed before her eyes. Alcaren seemed to be two separate men, one looking at her with kindness and
concern, the second leering and sneering simultaneously. She closed her eyes.
  
 “Lady Secca! Drink this. You must”
  
 Even Richina spoke in two voices, and Seeca had to struggle to make out the words. She swallowed
what-ever Richina tendered, feeling the liquid splash across her cheeks and chin.
  
 Some of the headache began to subside, and the dou-ble images of those around her seemed to fade
slightly, so that each person carried a silvered shadow, rather than a double of their entire self. She
blinked again, her eyes watering in light that seemed far too bright, even though the sky was filled with
high gray clouds.
  
 “You need to drink more, my lady,” said Alcaren gently.
  
 His breath and words seemed close enough to caress her neck, and she wanted to lean back into his
arms. Instead, she forced herself to take a longer swallow from the mug Richina held.
  
 “Dissonance! Lead frigate swept starboard right into the other one!” The words came from the lookout
above, sounding very far away. “Looks like none at the helm, captain.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Secca shook her head. At least the first spell had worked on one of the Sturinnese vessels.
  
 “Two of ‘em, like as in irons,” reported the lookout after several moments.
  
 After taking a biscuit front Alcaren, who was still pale and greenish, Secca slowly ate it, interspersing the
biscuit with sips of water to get it down her suddenly dry throat. She looked up as a shadow fell across
her, squinting to make out the figure of the captain.
  
 ‘Whatever you did, Lady Secca, there are five, maybe seven, of their vessels unhelmed,” said Denyst.
“The others are regroupmg and starting to close on us once more.”
  
 “How long?”
  
 “Another half-glass.”
  
 “I’ll be ready.” Secca began to eat the second biscuit offered by Alcaren.
  
 “Lady, you cannot do more sorcery. I can use the flame spell against them,” Richina offered. “I can.”
  
 “Not yet.” Stepping slightly away from Alcaren, Secea took another swallow of water, reaching for
an-other biscuit. “I can do one more spell, if that is not enough, then you will, have to use the flame spell.
Tell Palian to be ready with the first building spell. The first building spell.”
  
 “As you wish, lady.” Richina did not turn toward the players, but remained looking at Secca.
  
 “Let her do the flame spell, my lady,” Alcaren whispered. “She must try herself, and whatever she does
will leave less for you.”
  
 Secca opened her mouth, then closed it. Finally, she spoke. “Richina . . . perhaps you should try the
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

flame spell on the nearer vessels.”
  
 “Yes, lady.” A trace of a smile flitted across Richina’s face, then, vanished.
  
 A glance passed between Richina and Alcaren, but Secca ignored it. She would still have to handle the
storm spell . . . somehow. The flame spell wouldn’t reach far enough. Nor would the wind spell she had
used against the Sturinnese before. And Richina had not the feel for the storm spell.
  
 The Sturinnese recovered quickly. Before long, un-less Richina could destroy the Sturinnese ships, both
she and Secca would have to fight off the effects of the thunder-drums, as the Sea-Priests neared the
Silber-welle.
  
 "Chief players!” called Richina. “The short flame spell."
  
 “Standing ready with the short flame spell.”
  
 Richina watched as the white hulls of the Sturinnese closed. “On your mark, chief player!”
  
 "The short flame spell. Mark!” called Palian.
  
 When the second bar of the accompaniment began, so did Richina’s spell.
  
 “Turn to fire, turn toflame
 All ships here with Sturinn' s name. . ..
 turn to ashes,on this sea...“
  
 As the younger sorceress’s words finished, a curtain of flame flared southward, wrapping itself around
the nearest two vessels, and the bow of a third. In moments, the three were blackened hulks.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca's eyes went from Richina, now holding the rail for support, to the remainder of the seemingly
endless white-hulled vessels, watching as those untouched by the first two sets of spells, once more
turned toward theSilberwelle.
  
 Secca nodded to Alcaren, squinting to make the two images she saw of him into one. "Tell Pahan I will
need the first building spell.”
  
 “Can you dothis?" whispered Alcaren, leaning to-ward Secca.
  
 “I must . . . .All is lost if I cannot."
  
 Alcaren looked directly atSecca. Even through the silvered, half-double images that were those of but
one man, she could see the concern on both his faces. Then he turned and called out loudly, “The Lady
Secca will be using the first building spell. The first building spell.”
  
 ‘We stand. ready with the first building spell,” came back Palian’s reply.
  
 A flaming quarrel flew toward theSilbenvelle, falling short, and plunging into the blue-gray waters fifty
yards off the ship’s quarter. A heavy vibration filled the air, and then died away.
  
 The dissonant drums! In moments, they would begin to support the Sea-Priests. She had so little time.
  
 “Be but a few moments before they’re in range, sor-ceresses!” called Denyst.
  
 Secca took a deep breath and stepped up to the railing above the main deck. “The first building song.
Now!”
  
 “The first building song,” repeated Palian. “At my mark. Mark!”
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca pushed the headache, the wavering vision, the double images, even that of Alcaren holding the
lutar case and watching her, all out ofher mind and concen-trated on the spell, on the words, on meshing
with the melody that rose from the players below.
  
 She began to sing, and she was the spell that rose from theSilberwelle.
  
 “Water boil and water bubble,
 like a caldron of sorcerers’ trouble...
 build a stormwith winds swirling through
 in spouts that break all ships in two . . .”
  
 Secca managed another breath between thestanzas, knowing that she needed at least two complete
stanzas to build the spell fully.
  
 “Ocean boil and ocean bubble,
 crush to broken sticks of floating rubble
 ships crewed by those in Sea-Priest white
 and let none escape the water’s might...”
  
 As the last notes died away, a silence seemed to creep across the afternoon. The swells around the
Silberwelle flattened, and the gray light filtering through the hazy clouds dimmed even more, until the sky
was almost black and silent.
  
 From somewhere in the distance came a low and growling rumble, followed by a high-pitched whistling
whine, before the two sounds merged into a rushing and roaring torrent.
  
 Secca tottered, her hands on the railing, trying to hold herself erect as a series of black columns reared
out of the suddenly flat waters of the Southern Ocean. Each waterspout column split into two, one silver
and one black, just as each player on the deck seemed to have doubled, and each sail and white hull.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 The spouts moved slowly, inexorably, toward the white hulls, touching one, then another, and as each
dark spout touched a Sturinnese vessel, that ship dis-integrated into splinters flying in all directions. With
each disintegration, the screams unheard by few others— that Secca understood--- reverberated inside
her skull, until she wanted to lift her hands to her ears to block out the sounds of death and destruction.
  
 Richina’s hands went to her ears, and Alcaren stag-gered as if struck, but straightened.
  
 Scattered drumming rose--- and then vanished.
  
 Both the roaring and the screams continued to rise, until their combined din was all that Secca could
hear, a roaring shriek that began to drive her to her knees, a roaring so powerful that she could not even
lift her hands to block the sounds that prostrated her. Her fin-gers, trying to hold to the railing, failed, and
she could feel her body crumpling, sliding down beside the rail-ing, until she was sprawled on the deck of
the Silber-welle.
  
 Lying on the deck, her life being wrung out from within and without . . . she shuddered as the darkness
fell across her, sensing that her chest was frozen, that she could neither speak nor breathe.
  
 “No!” screamed Richina. “No!”
  
 Someone was singing, but she could not hear the words.
  
 A voice from far away far, far away--- announced gravely, “The sorceress has left the shadows.”
  
 No! she wanted to scream. I’ll always be in the shad-ows now. I’ll never live, never love. For she could
feel the cold darkness, and the blackness, and the disso-nance, all gathered above her, descending....
  
  
 116
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Southern Ocean,
 South of Ranuak
  
 TheSilberwelle’s sails flap once and then hang from their yards, limp, in the sudden stillness that
surrounds the Ranuan trading vessel, a stillness at variance with the roaring and rushing sounds that
rumble toward those stand-ing on the deck.
  
 Alcaren’s eyes dart from the massive water spouts that have begun to shred the Sturinnese fleet to the
slender, almost-fragile redheaded figure who grasps the railing overlooking the main deck of the
Silberwelle. He swallows as he watches her fingers spasm and her body shudder, as if pummeled by
forces no one else can see as hear.
  
 As she grasps the railing to steady herself, Richina's eyes are fixed on the white-hulled ships being
shattered by the dark spouts, as are those of the ship-mistress of theSilberwelle.
  
 Only the gray-blue eyes of the Ranuan overcaptain see Secca crumple, see her slide down beside the
railing, her fingers limp, her eyes closed. Lutar case in hand, Alcaren takes two steps, then rushes toward
the fàrward railing and the fallen sorceress.
  
 At the sight of Secca collapsing, Palian turns from the players and the destruction on the sea to the south
and begins to scramble up the ladder.
  
 Richina turns, slowly, her mouth opening into a soundless cry.
  
 The redheaded sorceress lying on the deck on her back opens her eyes, then her mouth, as if to speak,
then shud-ders, her eyes wide, seemingly sightless.
  
 Alcaren fumbles open the lutar case, snatches Secca’s lutar from within, and stands over her. He clears
his throat and begins to sing, his voice true, but carrying an edge that threatens to overwhelm training and
past discipline.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “With my voice and with my song,
 Keep her safe and make her strong.
 Still within her that darker spell,
 so all within her is mended fair and well.
 With my voice and with my song...”
  
 Palian stops at the top of the ladder and shudders, her eyes flicking back and forth between the sorcerer
and the dying sorceress.
  
 Richina moves step-wise toward the pair by the rail-ing, as if uncertain as to what she could or should
do even as Alcaren’s voice completes the spell.
  
 A single long note—somehow half-harmonic, half -Clearsong, and half-dissonant, half-Darksong
vibrates through the air, and the entire ship shivers. Crystalline shard notes slash at those who can hear
the Harmonies. Richina and Palian shiver again, as if slashed by unseen knives.
  
 The strings on Secca’s lutar snap, and the metal ends flay Alcaren’s hands and jaw, leaving long red
lines. His legs fold under him. He topples forward, like a tree cut with a single swing of an axe, and the
lutar drops from his limp fingers and strikes the deck with a single half-melodicthunk that echoes far
more loudly than it should.
  
 Richina and Palian stare for a long moment before rushing toward the fallen couple.
  
 “Darksong,” murmurs the chief of players. “Twice.” Tears stream down Richina’s cheeks as she looks
helplessly down at both figures on the deck before her.
  
 Palian drops to her knees, her fingers searching for signs of life.
  
 117
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 In the time just before midmorning, sunlight flowed through the windows of the main chamber of the
Ma-triarch’ s guest quarters, the first sunlight Secca had seen in days, if not in weeks. A warm and light
breeze flowed through the partly open end window, bringing in the smells of an early spring.
  
 Secca looked down at the scroll before her on the con-ference table, her eyes skipping over the lines
she had struggled to write, struggled because with each word, she fought another battle, one having little
to do with the words before her.
  
 . . .were most successful in destroying all but a handful of the Sturinnese ships in the Southern Ocean.
According to the scrying glass, there are less than a half-score such vessels remaining, and four have
turned there sails toward the Ostisles...
  
  . . .were able to remove the crews from six ves-sels and make the ships available to the Matriarch in
recompense for the losses suffered by Ranuak, both in supporting us and otherwise . . .
  
 She shook her head. ‘Writing this is hard.”
  
 “Writing anything might be a little harder than usual,” pointed out Richina. “After all, you did so much
sorcery you almost died, and that was less than a week ago.”
  
 Although Secca knew better--- she had died, or had come so close as to make little difference—she did
not correct the sandy-haired young woman.
  
 At thethrap on the door to the guest quarters, Secca sat up straighter in the armchair pulled up before
the conference table. She laid aside the quill with which she had been writing to Lord Robero.
  
 “Overcaptain Alcaren, ladies,” called Rukor. “If the Lady Secca can receive callers."
  
 Secca swallowed, her eyes going to the door.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Richina looked to Secca.
  
 “I’ll . . . I’ll see him,” Secca finally said.
  
 “Have him enter,” Richina said quickly, standing and striding toward the door, as if to make sure that
Secca did not change her mind.
  
 Secca turned her head atthe sound of hoofs on the long drive outside the windows of the guest quarters,
although she could not see the drive from where she sat at the table. As the door opened, she looked
back to-ward the broad-shouldered figure who stepped inside.
  
 “Come in,” said Richina belatedly, holding the door wide. “She is much better.”
  
 Secca felt as though a bolt of Clearsong had shivered through her heart and thoughts, freezing her where
she sat for a long moment.
  
 Richina closed the door, her eyes on Secca.
  
 Secca felt all eyes were on her, from everywhere, even though there were but three of them in the
cham-ber.
  
 Alcaren stepped toward the armchair, and Secca could see that the red welts on his cheeks had begun
to fade. The overcaptain swallowed, his eyes full on Secca. “I did not want to intrude until you were well
enough ...I brought this for you...something to take with you,” he offered, stopping just short of where
Secca sat and extending a rose, the perfect white bronze rose with an iron stem, so delicate-appearing it
seemed the slightest breeze would rip off the petals.
  
 “It is beautiful.” Secca hesitated, glancing down at the uncompleted scroll, then turning her eyes back to
Alcaren.
  
 “Like you, it is far stronger than it appears,” said the sorcerer/overcaptain gently.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 Secca did not speak for a moment, a moment she knew was as fragile as appeared the rose Alcaren
held. What words could she offer? How could she say what she felt?
  
 “Though it is not so beautiful,” Alcaren murmured, his voice so low she could barely hear the words.
  
 Secca wanted to reach out, to draw him to her. in-stead, she looked into Alearen’s gray-blue eyes.
‘Thank you. . . for the rose. . . for my life. . . for everything.” But thanks were not enough. Could she say
more? How could she not? And yet. . . what? How?
  
 Alcaren looked down for a moment, then raised his eyes to Secca’s amber ones. The faintest of smiles
showed at the corners of his lips.
  
 The silence drew out, as eyes met eyes. “You. . . no one. . .“ Secca felt as though each word tripped
over the one previous. ”I wish I had ...seen... sooner.”
  
 “I saw you had,” he answered slowly. “I was unsure If I should come . . .after that. I was not well . .
.either
 . . . at first,and then. . ."
  
 Secca ignored Richina’ s puzzlement, concentrating on Alcaren, trying to find the words, trying to step
from behind the years of walls so carefully built. “I’m... glad . . . you did. I do not know . . . if I would
have had your courage.”
  
 “My lady. . . . I could do no other.”
  
 Secca laughed, softly, warmly. "I did not mean your saving me . . . although that was a sacrifice no one
could expect . . . and most courageous.” Her eyes dropped to the rose for a moment before meeting his
gray-blue eyes again. “I meant coming here.”
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 "That . . . was harder. I thought of coming yesterday.”
  
 “I thought of seeking you,” Secca said slowly. “I was not brave enough.”
  
 “You nearly died,” he offered with the smile that warmed her. “Few would question that bravery.”
  
 “You couldn’t say . . . could you?’
  
 “I feared you saw,” he replied. “I thought you might guess every time looked at you.”
  
 "I did guess,” Secca admitted. “I was afraid to believe it” She looked up at Alcaren.
  
 “As was I,” he replied.
  
 At the click of the door opening, both turned their heads, as did Richina.
  
 Another figure stepped into the room, just ahead of the announcement by Rukor. “The Matriarch of
Ran-uak.”
  
 Alcaren turned. “Matriarch?”
  
 Alya laughed, gently, as she approached the pair by the table. “I had not thought to find you together,
but that is asit should be.”
  
 Secca could not help but smile at the slightly puzzled expression and knit brows displayed by Richina.
  
 “The sorceress understands, Alcaren, and so does your heart, if not your mind,” said the Matriarch.
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 “It never ends, does it?” said Secca, fighting for a way to say what she needed to without the Matriarch
saying it for her. “No matter how mighty the battle and how great the victory?"
  
 Alcaren’s eyes flicked to Secca then back to the Matriarch.
  
 “No.” Alya shook her head. “The rebellion burns hot-ter yet in Neserea, and the Sturinnese still hold
Dumar, and they will send more fleets. And if you destroy those, as did your predecessor, you will still
have to fight battles in sunshine and shadow.”
  
 “More battles? The lady . . .“ Alcaren began.
  
 “The lady needs you,” Secca managed to blurt out, her mouth dry, before anyone, anything, could stop
her, before someone else spoke for her.
  
 Alcaren turned to Secca, the gray-blue eyes wide, his lips parted slightly.
  
 “You’re the first in years to give without asking, without expecting,” Secca said. “And no one has ever
risked so much for me.”
  
 “I had not...” Alcaren turned to the Matriarch. “If the lady will let me serve her, I would ask your leave
to be released from your service?”
  
 Alya laughed. “Separating you two would be worse than your mixing Clearsong and Darksong. Far
worse, and there is no way you can remain in Ranuak, not now that the world knows you are indeed a
sorcerer. Though I will keep the Ladies of the Shadows in the towers until you are both departed.”
  
 “But . . . you said I could never be a sorcerer,” Al-caren replied.
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 “Not in Ranuak,” Secca said gently. As Alcaren turned to her, she felt the moment freeze, everything
becoming as still as it had upon theSilberwelle just before the waterspouts had destroyed every
Sturinnese ship, before the recoil had killed her, and before Alcaren had offered his spellsong and life to
save hers. She had to make it clear to everyone, but especially to herself. "Liedwahr and Defalk need
you.” She swallowed and repeated, “So do I.” She felt even more defenseless than she had on the
Silberwelle as dissonance had swooped down on her. But she waited, hoping. Hoping she had not
waited too long already.
  
 “I had hoped...” he began, bending toward her, his eyes bright.
  
 Secca lifted a hand, reaching out and touching his cheek. “I had not even dared to hope . . . not for so
long.”
  
 “Nor I.” Alcaren's right hand took her left, his fingers entwining with hers, as he set the perfect rose on
the table and lifted her from the chair into his arms.
  
 Her arms went around him, as the sunlight fell across them, and, outside, the first sounds of spring
murmured in the midmorning air.
  
  
  
  
  
 TORBOOKS BY L. E. MODESITT, JR.
 THE SPELLSONG CYCLE
 The Soprano Sorceress
 The Spellsong War
 Darksong Rising
 The Shadow Sorceress
 Shadowsinger
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
 THE SAGA OF RECLUCE
                   The Magic of Recluce                  The Towers of the Sunset
                      The Magic Engineer                             The Order War
                      The Death of Chaos                               Fall of Angels
                         The Chaos Balance                             The White Order
                       Colors of Chaos                           Magi’iofCyador
 Scion of Cyador
  
 THE ECOLITANMATTER..
              The Ecologic Envoy                              The Ecolitan Operation
               The Ecologic Secession                                The Ecolitan Enigma
 Empire and Ecolitan
 (comprisingThe Ecolitan OperationandThe Ecologic Secession)
  
 THE FOREVER HERO
 Dawn for a Distant Earth
 The Silent Warrior
 In Endless Twilight
  
 Of Tangible Ghosts
 The Ghost of the Rereleter
 Ghost of the White Nights
  
 TIMEGODS'WORLD
 The Timegod
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

 Timediver's Dawn
 The Green Progression
  
 The Parafaith War
 The Hammer of Darkness
 Adiamante
 Gravity Dreams
 The OctagonalRaven
 Archform: Beauty*
 *forthcoming
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html

