THE
SPELLSONG
WAR
Book Two of THE SPELLSONG CYCLE
L. E. Modesitt, Jr.
To
my one and only soprano sorceress
********
CHARACTERS
Anna Regent of Defaidk and Lady of Loiseau [Mencha]
Jimbob Heir to Defalk [Falcor]
Hanfor Arms Commander of Defalk
Dythya Counselor of Finance
Essan Lady and widow of Lord Donjim
Herene Younger sister of Lady Gatrune [Pamr]
Herstat Saalmeister of Eldheld
Menares Counselor
LORDS OF DEFALK

Jecks Lord of Elheld [Elhi], Advisor to the Regent
Arkad Lord of Synfal [Cheorj]
Birfels Lord of Abenfel; consort is Fylena
Clethner Lord of Nordland
Dannel Lord of Mossbach; consort is Resengna
Dencer Lord of Stromwer; consort is Wendella
Fustar Lord of Issl
Gatrune Lady of Pamr
Geansor Lord of Sudwei
Genrica Lord of Wendel
Gylaron Lord of Lerona, consort is Reylan
Hryding Lord of Flossbend [Synope]; consort is Anientta
Jearle Lord of Denguic
Klestayr Lord of Aroch
Mietchel Lord of Morra
Nelmor Lord of Dubaria; eldest son and heir is Tiersen
Sargol Lord of Suhl
Tybel Lord of Arien
Vlassa Lord of Fussen; heirs are twin sons, Ustal and Falar
Vyarl Rider of Heinene
FOSTERLINGS AND PAGES
Alseta Daughter of Chief Player Liende
Bar at Page
Birke Heir of Lord Birfels [Stromwer]
Cataryzna Daughter and heir of Lord Geansor [Sudwei]
Cens Page
Hoede Youngest son of Lord Dannel [Mossbach]
Kinor Son of Chief Player Liende

Lysara Daughter of Lord Birfels [Stromwer]
Resor Page
Secca Daughter of Lord Hryding [Flossbend]
Skent Page
Ytrude Daughter of Lord Nelmor [Dubaria]
DEFALKAN ARMSMEN
Alvar Captain
Himar Captain
Jirsit Undercaptain
DEFALKAN PLAYERS
Daffyd Viola; first Chief Player
Liende Woodwind; second Chief Player
Delvor Violino
Duralt Falk horn
Hassett Violino
Kaseth Violino
Pallian Violino
Yuarl Violino
OTHERS OUTSIDE DEFALK
Ashtaar Spymistress of Nordwei
Behlem Prophet of Music, Lord of Neserea; consort is Cyndyth
Bertmynn Lord of Dolov, Ebra
Ehara Lord of Dumar; consort is Siobion
Hadrenn Lord of Synek, Ebra
Konsstin Liedfuhr of Mansuur

Maitre of Sturinn Leader of Sturinn; master of the Sea-Priests
Matriarch Head of State, Ranuak; consort is Ulgar
Nubara Overcaptain of Lancers, Mansuur, stationed in Neserea
Rabyn Heir of Behlem, Neserea
Tybra Leader, Council of Wei, Nordwei
OUVERTURE
* * * * * * *
1
WEI, NORDWEI
THE heavy gong sounds, and the two women in the uniform of
the Council turn and open the lacquered double doors, each
beauing the ancient symbol of the Council of Wei. Each wears
twin black-lacquered scabbards at her hips, and the scabbards
contain the infamous short swords of the Nordan Guard.
Ashtaar moistens her lips and steps through the doors, then
dawn the black carpet toward the dais.
The black-lacquered Council table is also ancient, and behind it
sit seven figures. The woman in the center wears a
silver-and-black seal on a heavy silver chain. Her dark eyes
hold Ashtaar as the spymistress walks down the dark green
carpet toward the space below the dais holding the table.
"The mist-world sorceress now holds Defalk. The Council has
read your report, and would like to inquire further."
"Yes, Ancient One." Ashtaar bows.

"Please summarize the major events that led to the
current's.tate of affairs. Briefly."
"A travel sorceress and a player summoned the lady Anna from
the mist worlds. Both are dead now. The sorcerer Brill spirited
her away and tutored her in the ways of both Darksong and
Clearsong. The Dark Ones tried to kill her and failed. She
supported Lord Barjim against the Ebrans at the Sand Pass.
Barjim and Brill were killed, and she collapsed, but not before
she destroyed two-thirds of the invaders. She somehow found
her way south and recovered in Synope, in the lands of Lord
Hryding. Lord Behlem of Neserea then marched into Defalk
and took Falcor, but not before Lord Jecks rescued the heir, his
grandson Lord Jimbob. Lord Behlem offered his support to the
sorceress, and she accepted it and went to Falcor. The Dark
Ones gathered another army and marched toward Falcor. The
sorceress used water magic and song to destroy the entire
Ebran army and all the darksingers in Defalk. The Evult
responded by flooding the Fal and destroying half of Falcor.
Lord Behlem attempted to remove the lady Anna, and she used
her sorcery to kill him and his consort and enlist the support of
many of the Neserean troops in Falcor. Then she proclaimed a
regency for young Jimbob. Shortly, almost at the dawn of
winter, she marched a small force through the Ostfels and used
her sorcery to destroy the Evult, the city of Vult, and most of
Synek. She almost died, but the lords of Defalk, especially Lord
Jecks, rallied behind her. So did the people. She has a
reputation for being good and fair, and vindictively just."
Ashtaar bows once more.
"The rains now fall on Defalk, do they not?" asks the red-haired
woman to the left of the Council leader. 

"Yes. The sorceress removed the chains on the clouds when she
destroyed the Evult."
"Will the sorceress attempt to rule directly and put young
Jimbob out of the way?" asks the dark-haired Council leader.
"That does not appear likely. She can have no children and has,
in effect, adopted the boy."
"And Lord Jecks has not objected?"
"He publicly supports the sorceress. As do the lords Birfels,
Nelmor, Hryding, Geansor, Clethner, and the lady Gatrune,
and the Rider of Heinene. There are doubtless others, and none
of the thirty-three have raised voice or hand against her."
"With her powers, I doubt any of sound mind would do so,"
suggests the Council leader. "Are there any whispers of
discontent?"
"Almost none that we have been able to track. She holds but
one hostage, and that is Wendella, the consort of Lord Dencer
of Stromwer. Dencer is rumored to be less than happy."
"No others?"
"None that we know or can scry."
"What of Ebra?"
"The land has been flattened, mostly by the floods she
unleashed down the river Elha, and Vult lies buried under the
fire peak the Ebrans are calling Zauberinfeuer. Hadrenn has
claimed the ruins of Synek. He is the one of the sons of an

ancient lord, and several pretenders are struggling over
Elawha. A lord named Bertmynn is raising armsmen in Dolov.
He wishes to be lord of all Ebra." Ashtaar waits.
"We have received a scroll from the Liedfuhr. He protests our
interference in Defalk. He also informs us that young Rabyn is
the Lord of Neserea and under his protection and regency.
What beyond that do you know?" The dark-haired Council
leader smiles faintly.
"He has dispatched fiftyscore lancers to Neserea. They were
delayed by the snows in the Mittpass, but travel the south road
through the Great Western Forest."
"Spymistress of Nordwei… is it fair to say that a year ago we
faced possible threats from the Prophet of Music and the Dark
Ones, and both have been destroyed?"
"Yes, Leader Tybra."
"Is it also fair to say that you chose not to remove the soprano
sorceress?" asks Tybra.
"I waited to see whether the Dark Ones and the Prophet were
successful in their attempts. The Dark Ones failed in four
attempts. The Prophet and his consort failed as well. We have
been able to trace at least two attempts by Neserea." Ashtaar
inclines her head. "I thought it best not to turn the sorceress's
wrath against Nordwei."
"So… now we have a strong and united Defalk on our southern
borders, and this is your doing?"
"We have a united Defalk, ruled by a woman for the first time

in recorded history, and a Defalk that will take a decade or
longer to recover from the drought and depredations of the
Dark Ones and the Nesereans." 
"That is what you say. For now… for now, we shall see. You
may go, but do not hesitate to inform the Council should this
sorceress take any action that could possibly affect Nordwei."
"Yes, leader Tybra." Ashtaar bows a last time, then turns. She
does not wipe the dampness from her forehead.
2
THROUGH the scarcely cracked high window behind her,
Anna could hear the half-frozen rain clattering on the stones of
the liedburg. The entire keep felt damp, and even the small fire
in her receiving room and de facto office wasn't enough to
remove the dampness. She needed the slight draft from the
window to keep from being suffocated from the fireplace,
which drew poorly with small fires.
Sorceress, Regent of Defalk, Protector of the Heir, not to
mention being Lady of Loiseau, and she had to worry about
firewood. She hadn't thought about firewood being a
problem-but nearly a decade of drought had wrought
enormous damage on the once-wide forests of Defalk.
Then, there was so much that she'd never thought she'd have to
consider. She'd been trained to be a professional opera singer,
and fallen back on university teaching with the demands of
Avery's career. Later when he'd left her and the children for his
slim blonde young thing, the teaching, and several additional
part-time jobs, had become necessities. Anna laughed softly to

herself. She was slimmer and younger looking than Paulina
now, and Avery-the self-styled Antonio, king of the
comprimarios- would never know. Neither would Mario and
Elizabetta. Irenia… Anna's eyes misted. Her oldest daughter's
death had been the catalyst that had left Anna open to poor
Jenny's and Daffyd's spellsong-that had brought her
Liedwahr-and all the rest had followed, like dominoes falling,
until she had become regent of a ravaged land. And she'd done
little enough, with the press of the Regency, with the lands
bestowed on her- Loiseau-because Brill had left no heirs. She'd
granted the present tenants the right to remain, but she needed
to do something about a more permanent arrangement. That
meant traveling to Mencha, and she didn't have ten days to
spare, not counting the time she'd need at Loiseau.
Anna sighed. She stood, pushed back the chair from the
worktable, and moved toward the center of the room, her eyes
shifting toward the high-backed gilt chair on the dais, the chair
she avoided using whenever possible. After a moment she
turned, stepped away from the side of the dais, and walked to
the single window at the back of the receiving room, where the
base of the sill was nearly chest-high. Once again, the dimness
reminded her that she'd planned to rearrange the liedburg,
perhaps put the receiving/conference area somewhere with
more ventilation and light.
She sighed-another item low on her long, long list. Before long,
she would need to use some of that sorcery to replace the bridge
over the Falche, one of the casualties of the war with Ebra when
the late Evult had melted all the snow off the northern Ostfels
and sent a flood careening down the Fal River and into the

Falche with enough force to rip out all the bridges and denude
the banks for two hundred and fifty deks. Roughly, a hundred
and fifty earth miles, she translated mentally, rubbing her
forehead. She still had trouble thinking in rods, furls, deks, and
leagues. There weren't any feet, and yards were still basically
yards, and the units above were decimal-based, but she'd never
been that good in mental arithmetic.
"Lady Anna?" Giellum knocked on the heavy door even as he
peered inside. "Counselor Menares to see you. And your
midafternoon repast." The young guard set the platter on the
only open space on the table before straightening.
"Send him in." She headed from the window back to the
worktable.
The heavyset and gray Menares stopped short of Anna and the
table, and bowed, extending the scroll. "This arrived by
messenger, Lady Anna."
"From whom?"
"Lord Arkad of Cheor, I believe."
Anna looked at the plate heaped with bread and cheese before
her on the round oak table that served as work-time eating
place, desk, and conference table, then at the sealed scroll.
She didn't want to eat any more, and she certainly didn't want
to read the latest scroll from Lord Arkad-or his scribe. But she
had to eat, because of the energy demands of sorcery, or she'd
literally wither away into anorexia or the local equivalent. She
also had to read the scroll because Arkad was one of the

thirty-three lords of Defalk. From what she recalled, he was also
one of the handful who still hadn't paid his liedgeld to the
Regency, nearly a season past the end of harvest when it was
due.
"Sit down, Menares." She took the scroll, then motioned to the
chair across from the one where she sat. After a long look at the
platter, she took a swallow of water and a mouthful of bread
and cheese, and a second, forcing herself to eat, still fighting a
lifetime of habit that equated any healthy amount of eating
with gluttony.
Menares shifted his weight on the chair, but said nothing.
Anna broke the seal and began to read to herself.
Arkad has always supported the rightful rulers of Defalk, and
certainly recognizes the legitimacy of the late and great Lord
Barjim, and of his son Jimbob. As we have expressed earlier,
while Lord Jecks and other respected lords of Defalk have
reluctantly endorsed the expediency of a prolonged Regency, as
did we, our initial concerns about the continuity of such an
arrangement remain, especially about the use of the liedgeld.
As a loyal lord, we are deeply concerned that such funds, which
have been sweated from the very soil, be employed in support
of Defalk's long and glorious tradition. We ask your assurance
and your pledge as regent that such funds be used as
traditionally required. We look forward to your response, and
to your continued efforts on behalf of Lord Jimbob… 
Arkad hadn't signed the missive, but concluded with a
sealmark and his name printed beside it.

Anna snorted. Lord Arkad of Cheor was getting to be an even
bigger pain, with his missives and not-so-subtle hints that a
male Regency or ruler was to be preferred and trusted, not to
mention his use of the royal we. She had to put an end to such
garbage, preferably without putting an end to the writer. She
couldn't ensorcel or flame every chauvinistic lord in Defalk- not
and have much of a kingdom left for Jimbob to inherit.
She sighed.
"Lord Jecks, Lady Anna," announced Skent, the dark-haired
page, from the door.
"You may go, Menares. Lord Arkad has found another excuse
to delay paying his liedgeld. You might think of the possible
actions open to a disgusted regent."
The white-haired counselor rose and bowed. "As you wish,
Lady Anna."
"Have Lord Jecks come in." Anna took another mouthful of
bread and cheese, then stood.
"Lady Anna." Jecks inclined his head.
Jecks still reminded her of a young-faced and white-haired
Robert Mitchum with the smile of a Sean Connery. Despite his
white hair, and a muscular frame somewhat stockier than the
movie stars he resembled, his hazel eyes were clear and
intelligent. Although he looked older than Anna, she suspected
that in actual years, the long-widowed lord was probably even
younger than she was. Certainly, the clean-shaven Jecks
remained the most attractive man she'd met in the year she'd

been in Defalk. He was also one of the few lords respected
near-universally by both his peers and the armsmen and
workers of Defalk.
Then, part of that was the sorry state of Defalk. Jecks was
widely respected by the common people not only for his
fairness and honesty, but also for not taking his pleasure with
every comely young maid on his lands, and instead providing
them with a modest dowry. What a place, where women were
usually chattels. Careful, Anna reminded herself, it hasn't been
that long since all of earth was that way, and a lot of it still is.
"Please sit down. I need to eat. Again." After another sip of
water previously orderspelled and a mouthful of bread and
cheese, she added, "You had something to say. Please go
ahead." 
Jecks eased into the chair across the table from Anna. "Lord
Birfels sent me a message."
"Yes." Anna wanted to scream. Birfels had supported her, but
he much preferred to work through Jecks-or any man. "What is
his difficulty?"
"Besides his reluctant acceptance of the present situation?" Jecks
offered a wry smile. "He noted that the return of the rains offers
the first opportunity in many years for the planting of all his
fields. He also noted that seed grain is scarce."
Anna nodded, waiting for the shoe, or boot, to fall.
"The only source of such seed grain is the Ranuan factors in
Sudwei or Ranwa, and they are hesitant to extend credit to

Defalkan lords, especially when the Regency itself has not
completed repaying those funds borrowed by the former lord."
"And I suppose Lord Birfels lacks sufficient golds to purchase
the seed outright?"
"He did not write of that, but, as you know, the past years have
been hard. Were I in his situation, even I would be pressed…"
"Except you're more prudent than most and saved the
necessary seed grain?" asked Anna, glancing toward the closed
door to the receiving room.
"It was not easy, but Herstat and Dythya also insisted." Jecks
grinned. "Herstat has been my saalmeister for many years, and
when they insist, a lord should listen."
"That's why you let me borrow Dythya to get the liedstadt and
liedburg accounts in order?"
"I do not feel quite so outnumbered now-at home. Here…" As
he smiled, Jecks' eyes went to the closed door of the receiving
room, almost as though he were nervous about being alone
with the regent.
Nervous? Why was every man in Defalk nervous to be around
her? When she had appeared on Erde, and especially after
Brill's death spell had turned her permanently young-looking,
they'd all been leering, except Jecks, but he'd been interested,
just more restrained.
Now… once she'd demonstrated some power, and ability to
rule, the leering and interest had vanished. Of course, using

spells to burn up a dozen or so assassins and plotters didn't
exactly help your sex appeal.
"I take it that this seed grain would be a problem for most lords
in Defalk?" she finally asked, ignoring Jecks' glance past her.
"Many," admitted Jecks. "Especially those in the south. Ranuak
is close, and they have relied on the grain dealers there for
generations."
"How can I repay the Ranuans when I can't even get the lords
of Defalk to pay liedgeld?" She extended the scroll from Arkad
to the white-haired lord. "Please read this."
Jecks read slowly, then looked at Anna.
"What am I supposed to do with this Arkad of Cheor? Is it
because he has no money?" 
"That I would doubt. His lands, many of them, hold the
bottomland between the Falche and the Synor. They are
among the richest in Defalk, and there is water."
Another penny-pinching, chauvinistic self-centered prig! Or a
troublemaker. "Was he like this before, or is he really upset
about a female regent?"
"He was a problem to Barjim, I believe."
"He's getting to be more of a problem to me, and that's not
going to help Jimbob any."
"If it should come to that, Jimbob will have fewer problems.
Arkad's sons died without issue, and he had no daughters, only

a niece."
"So… the lands will revert to Jimbob?"
Jecks frowned. "No. Should Arkad die without issue, as is now
the case, you or Jimbob could bestow the lands to someone…"
"More supportive?" asked Anna. "What about the niece-or her
consort?"
"She might have a slight claim."
"But the other thirty-two would welcome another man?"
Jecks shrugged. "They will await your action."
This chauvinism… can you ever make things better? "In short…
like everything else around here… it's my problem." Anna
forced another wedge of cheese and some bread into her mouth
and chewed slowly.
"As I told you before," Jecks looked at her thoughtfully, "you
have done the impossible, and your people will expect that and
more. You are the destroyer of dissonance, the savior of the
land, lady and sorceress, great Regent of Defalk. They will not
wait for the healing of time."
She nodded, then swallowed. She'd read something like that,
once. What had it been? The revolution of rising expectations,
where the more a leader did, the more people expected?
"The problem of expectations." After another swallow of the
water she'd orderspelled that morning, she added, "Let me call
Dythya."

She lifted the bell and rang it once. A dark-haired page opened
the door and peered inside. "Yes, Lady Anna?"
"Skent? Would you see if Dythya's free?"
"Yes, lady."
As the door closed, Jecks asked, "What will you do with that
one?"
"Educate him, and marry him to the girl he loves."
"The lady Cataryzna?"
"Lord Geansor could do worse," Anna said dryly, thinking
about the crippled Lord of Sudwei and his blonde daughter.
"He could indeed." Jecks laughed softly. "That is why you are
dangerous. You look for ways to forge people's dreams into
what must be."
That's dangerous? It seemed more like common sense to Anna.
"Pardon me, Lord Jecks. Would you like some cheese or bread?"
"No, thank you, lady. Not even a young armsman could eat as
you must. But do not mind an old warhorse." 
Anna wanted to kick him under the table for the slight tone of
self-pity. Then, he probably did think of himself that way. Why
did girls always think that young men were so appealing?
Then, why did so many men think shallow, pretty girls were so
appealing? Like Avery had.
"Lady?"

Anna smoothed her face. "Sorry. Old memories…"
Jecks accepted her explanation with a nod.
Shortly, the dark-haired and graying Dythya appeared. "Lady
Anna."
"Please sit."
Dythya took the seat at the table to Anna's right, and to the left
of her former lord.
Anna waited until Skent closed the door to the receiving room
before beginning. "I understand that, unless we further soothe
the Ranuans by paying some or all of the debt incurred by
Lord Barjim, a number of our lords may find it difficult to buy
seed grain."
Dythya frowned momentarily.
"And most of those are in the south." Lord, how she hated the
politics. Of course, they were in the south, and they could
threaten to pledge fealty to the Matriarchy or even Dumar, she
supposed, on the grounds that the regency was not meeting its
obligations to them.
"Where do we stand?"
"I did not bring the accounts."
"Just in rough terms."
"We have almost five thousand golds in the treasury. We will
need to spend close to eight before harvest. We still have not

received the liedgeld from eight lords. That would be about five
thousand golds more."
"The eight we'll have to spend-does that include what we owe
the Ranuans?"
"No, Lady Anna."
Anna winced. Another fifteen hundred golds she-or the
liedstadt- didn't have.
"All right. We'll have to make arrangements to send another
five hundred golds. But we'll send a message which says that
we expect our lords and people to receive normal commercial
terms, especially as regards seed grain." She looked at Jecks.
"Will that help?"
"Were Lord Barjim still lord… I would say not." The
older-looking lord shrugged. "With this, you will have made
two payments, and defeated the Ebrans. I would think it would
be in the interests of the… women of Ranuak to accede to your
request."
"Let's hope so." Anna turned back to the de facto accountant.
"Can you make the arrangements and have a scroll drafted for
me to sign? Have Menares work on the wording."
"Ah…"
"I know," Anna said tiredly, realizing that Menares would
resent the implication that he was taking orders from Dythya.
"Tell Menares that it is my request and not yours and that if he
has any questions to come to me." 

"Thank you, lady."
"And Dythya? Could you write out a summary, a shortened
version of the liedstadt accounts, so that 1 can have it to refer
to? Make sure you list all the lords who are short on their
liedgeld-all of them."
Dythya nodded.
"That's after you take care of the payment to the Ranuan
Exchange or whatever it is."
When the door closed again, Anna turned back to Jecks. "What
do you hear about Ebra?"
"I am not a sorcerer," he pointed out with a smile.
"Sorceresses have their limits, too," she answered. "According to
what I've called up on the glass, the place remains a mess.
There's nothing happening in Vult, and there won't be for
years. Someone is rebuilding parts of Synek, and most of the
wreckage in Elawha has been cleared away. I can't tell who's in
charge from the glass."
"The whispers from the peddlers are that Hadrenn holds Synek.
He is the youngest son of Jykell, who was the last Lord of
Synek before the Dark Monks seized Ebra." Jecks looked at the
empty goblet before him.
"Wine or water?" Anna asked.
"Wine, please."
The red wine she poured was slightly better than high-grade

vinegar. As she had discovered from experience, trying to
improve things like food and wine involved Darksong and was
chancy at best. Then, any spell that affected something that
was living or had once been living was Dark-song-and invited
trouble.
Jecks took a hefty swallow. "The Liedfuhr of Mansuur has
dispatched a force of lancers, and they are riding to Esana."
"To support Rabyn?" She paused. "Or an advance force for an
attack on us?"
"Young Rabyn still can claim the loyalty of many who
supported his sire, and who feel he is the legitimate Prophet of
Music." Jecks set his goblet down gently. "I do not think the
Liedfuhr will attack Defalk until matters in Neserea become
more clear."
"You mean, until the mighty Liedfuhr Konsstin has Rabyn
firmly under his thumb?"
Jecks laughed softly. "One forgets-for a time. You have such
strange phrases, Lady Anna."
"Thank you." Anna didn't point out that, for her, Defalk often
had very strange turns of phrase, with a language that was far
more Teutonic in origin and only sounded like English at times.
"My pleasure, lady." Jecks rose. "By your leave? I had arranged
for Jimbob to receive blade instruction from Himar."
"You're a better blade," Anna said. 
That got a wintry smile. "True. But children oft receive

instruction poorly from parents and grandparents."
"Have fun watching, and don't wince too much." Anna
returned the smile. She knew Jecks' frustration all too well.
None of her children had wanted her as a voice teacher. Still, it
was hard to see the handsome Jecks, white hair or not, as the
grandparent of a boy as old as Jimbob.
After a time, Anna looked up. She sat alone in the receiving
room. Alone, if she didn't count the guards outside the door, or
the pages. Skent was there now. Then, weren't rulers always
alone?
She stripped off the purple regent's sash, laid it across the gilt
chair on the dais and walked to the door.
Blaz and Giellum followed her up the stairs and down the
corridor to the door to Lady Essan's rooms, the sharp-voiced
but observant consort of the late Lord Donjim, the Lord of
Defalk before Barjim.
Anna rapped on the door.
Synondra edged the door open. "Oh, Lady Anna… please do
come in."
Anna had not so much as stepped inside when Lady Essan
spoke. "Synondra, you may take a walk or otherwise amuse
yourself."
"Yes, Lady Essan." Synondra bowed to Anna, and added in a
low voice, "She is tired."

Who isn't: Anna wanted to say, but didn't. "I won't stay too
long, but I do need to talk to her."
Blaz shut the door as Synondra left, stationing himself outside
on one side, Giellum on the other.
Lady Essan sat before the fire, her ubiquitous glass of apple
brandy half full, a wool shawl around her shoulders. The room
felt almost stifling to Anna, and she took the chair farthest from
the fire, unfastening the top button of the loose green shirt she
wore under the green-and-gold-trimmed tunic. She was glad
she'd left the Sash of the Regent in the receiving room.
"You not be cold, girl-woman?"
"Not here."
Essan shook her head. "Times I think you might still be from
Erde… then… cold it must be in the mist worlds."
"It gets much colder than anything I've experienced here." 
Especially the winters in Iowa. Those she didn't miss at all.
"These old bones would not be pleased."
"In those places, these younger bones weren't pleased." Lord,
she'd disliked Iowa-even if it had been about the only place
she'd managed to land a decent-paying job.
Essan took another sip of the apple brandy and looked at the
fire.
"What do you know about Lord Arkad of Cheor?" Anna asked.

"It has been years since I heard that name." Lady Essan took a
sip of the brandy. "Eine figure of a man he was then, but only a
figure. Donjim said he followed the last words he heard. He had
no heirs, then. Has he now.' 
"Jecks says there are no direct heirs. I don't know about others,"
Anna admitted. "Arkad keeps weaseling out of paying the
liedgeld. This time he wants assurance that I'm spending the
coins truly for the defense of Defalk."
"Those lands be prosperous, even now."
"That's what Jecks said."
"Rulers and regents cannot brook outright defiance, not even
great sorceresses," the white-haired woman offered, her hand
going to the glazed almonds in the small dish.
"It's a problem," Anna admitted. "I don't want any more lords
to get the idea they can flout the Regency, but I don't want
them to get the idea that the only solution I have to every
problem is force."
"Why not? That is the way their minds work. If a ruler cannot
force or coerce them, most lords feel that such a ruler be not
strong enough to hold Defalk."
Anna held the wince inside, knowing that what Lady Essan
said was doubtless true. But it bothered her. Using force and
sorcery against outside enemies made sense, but against her
own lords?
"That was Barjim's greatest fault. He did not use his strength

enough when times were good. Then, he did not have enough
strength to establish fear and respect when times worsened.
Like it or not, sorceress-woman, men bend only to force." Essan
half laughed, half cackled. "Except in the bedchamber, and
even there, it be best for a woman to be strong."
"Always strength."
"Always, and more so here in unsettled times." Essan readjusted
the shawl around her shoulders.
"Will you join us for dinner?"
"And leave my fire? That moldy hall be no place for old bones
in winter. Synondra will fetch me a plate, if you mind not."
"For your advice, Lady Essan, and your friendship, Synondra
may fetch plates any or every night. But you are always
welcome at the table." Anna eased out of the chair, her forehead
damp from the heat of the stuffy room.
"For that I thank you. Too bad I had no daughter like you. Nor
a sister." Essan lifted her brandy glass. "I might even try to
linger on and see what you do." The older woman offered
another chuckle, followed with a raspy cough.
"Are you all right?"
"Fine. Right as any old fool can be. Go… you need to be regent
and sorceress again. Go on."
Anna slipped out, and motioned to Synondra, who hovered
outside the door. "Please let me know if that cough gets worse. I
don't like…"

"I will, Lady Anna, and thank you."
The sorceress, still followed by her guards, strode down the
corridor to her own chambers, small for a regent or ruler-just a
bedchamber and an adjoining bath and jakes, but sufficient
and easier to ward and guard.
In the dim light cast by the bedside candles, Anna glanced at
the shutters closed over the windows she'd installed with
sorcery, then at the black lines etched into the stones of the
outside wall of her room. The black lines were her reminder of
her inability to use her sorcery to see earth- and her daughter
Elizabetta. That last attempt had created a small explosion,
etched the outline of the mirror into the stone, and nearly killed
Anna.
The most powerful sorceress in Defalk, and she couldn't even
view her daughter for a second, not without risking explosions
and fiery catastrophe.
A second mirror hung on the wall beside the outline of the
vanished first mirror, its frame already singed, its varnish
bubbling from the heat of sorcerous far-seeing. The sorceress
shook her head. Menares was right in his insistence that she
adopt the reflecting pool used by most sorcerers. At least the
water wouldn't catch fire.
Anna slipped into the washroom and glanced in the mirror,
catching sight of the blonde hair, the thin face, and the eyes
that had seen far more than her otherwise youthful
countenance showed. Then, her features were finer than a
younger woman's would have been, but the complexion, hair,

and skin tone were those of an eighteen-year-old-apparent
eternal youth-the dream of all the earth media promoters.
"Time for dinner, and all that entails." She finished washing
away the grime that still seemed to accumulate, then brushed
the blonde hair that was again getting too long, before heading
out the door and down the stairs, trailed by Giellum and Blaz.
As her stomach growled, once more reminding her that
sorceresses had to eat twice what a healthy armsman needed,
Anna glanced at the candle mantels. They needed cleaning
again. She hoped she'd remember to have someone tell Virkan,
but she wasn't going to disrupt dinner.
Skent waited outside the middle hall. The sound of voices
drifted through the door that was slightly ajar. The page
bowed. "Mutton stew with potatoes, lady."
"Thank you." Anna wished they had less mutton and goat, but
the drought had left those as the most plentiful meat animals in
Defalk. Perhaps after a few years of the returned rains, that
would change-except there would be some other problem.
"The lady Anna," announced Skent.
The middle hall went silent as Anna stepped in, Skent behind
her.
"Go on," she said with a smile, still vaguely amused that the girl
born Anna Mayme Thompson in Cumberland, Kentucky,
could silence an entire hall of people merely by appearing.
As she settled into the chair at the head of the table, Anna noted

that Skent had managed to find a seat near the foot of the table
across from Cataryzna, the only heir to Sudwei and attractive
as well.
Jecks followed her eyes and nodded. "Good match, if their
affection holds." 
Jecks sat to Anna's right, Hanfor to her left. Hanfor was
commander of the liedburg armsmen and of the nucleus of
what Anna hoped would be a standing and highly professional
national army. Young Jimbob sat below his grandsire, and
below Jimbob and Hanfor sat Menares and Dythya.
Anna wanted to smile as she regarded the two would-be lovers
at the foot of the table. Beside Cataryzna was her thin-faced
and stern aunt Drenchescha, a lady who would certainly ensure
that Skent did not become overly friendly too soon.
"I see you did not protest when Lord Geansor requested that his
sister accompany Cataryzna on her return," said Jecks, pouring
some of the red wine into Anna's goblet.
"I cannot be everywhere, and Drenchescha is most capable of
looking after Cataryzna's interests."
"Geansor seemed pleased to return her for your program of
fostering and education."
"That's what I thought. Why did you think so?" Anna took a
small sip of the wine.
"It's to his advantage. She could be no safer than with you, and
anyone who attacked Sudwei could not take the heir. Also, you

will find her a husband, and one you favor, and one that she
can accept, and that means more support for his lands. How
can the man lose? He is capable, but remains a cripple." Jecks
filled his own goblet and handed the pitcher to Hanfor, who in
turn filled his goblet and passed it to Dythya. 
"I hope he sees it that way."
"He will, Lady Anna," said Hanfor.
At Hanfor's words, both Dythya and Menares nodded. A faint
look of puzzlement crossed the redheaded Jimbob's face, then
vanished.
Anna wondered if she should speak up, and avoid anything
vaguely private. Somewhere, sometime, she'd read that sotto
voce conversations by rulers in public made people uneasy.
"Have you had any luck in the search for a weapons smith?"
Anna asked more loudly, turning to the graying arms
commander.
"No, my lady." Hanfor smiled briefly. "Yesterday, a
journeyman wheelwright tried to convince me that he could do
the job. He couldn't explain the difference between a
shortsword and a rapier." He paused as one serving girl set the
large bowl of stew before Anna, and another eased a basket of
hot bread beside it.
"We need to advertise," the sorceress mused.
A puzzled look crossed Jecks' face, hidden quickly by a
pleasant smile. Hanfor merely waited, as did Dythya and

Menares.
"Can we send scrolls or messages to Ebra or Ranuak suggesting
that the position of weapons smith to the Regency for the Lord
of Defalk is open?"
"To whom… ?" began Menares. "Do they have guilds or
something?"
"Of course, that would work," added Dythya with a smile.
"You could also send scrolls to the portmasters at Encora and
Narial."
"And they would pass on such news?" asked Menares
skeptically. 
"They would contact the mastercrafters," Dythya explained. "If
the master smiths had journeymen who needed positions, they
would tell them. If positions are few, then they would tell any
one who came about the opportunity so that the newcomers
would not take from those already smithing there."
"I could see that," mused Hanfor. "I could send scrolls to a few
armsmen who might know of weapons smiths."
"We'll talk about that tomorrow." Anna wanted to rub her
forehead. Even at dinner the problems kept assaulting her. She
used the overlarge serving spoon to ladle out her portion of
stew, then eased the huge bowl toward Jecks, and the bread
toward Hanfor.
"It smells good," offered Dythya. "Better than the heavy
noodles and the fried dumplings."

As her stomach growled again, Anna hoped so. She also hoped
she could get some sleep uninterrupted by some nightmare or
another.
She took a bite of the stew-spicy, but not burning, thank
heaven, or the harmonies, she mentally corrected herself.
Anna looked to the server. "Jysel, would you convey my thanks
and compliments to Meryn?"
Jysel bowed and flushed. "Yes, Lady Anna."
"Thank you." Anna needed to work in another visit with the
cooks, among everything else, but the personal touch was what
made the difference. It definitely did, but it took time, and that
was something that was also in short, short supply.
Like everything else in Defalk, she mused, taking another
mouthful of stew, nodding to herself as she did, appreciating a
meal that was neither bland nor tongue-searing.
3
MANSUUS, MANSUUR
WHAT have you discovered, Bassil?" Leaning forward in the
silver chair, Konsstin peers across the polished walnut of the
desk at the raven-haired officer who has entered the Liedfuhr's
private study.
"About Defalk, sire?" Bassil's words are formal and barely
contain the hint of a question in their tone.

"What else? I did not send you out to seek out the price of grain
in Encora." Konsstin leans back and tugs at his beard, half light
brown, half silver, and close-trimmed.
"The seers show that the sorceress has recovered. Lord Jecks
and the heir have returned to Falcor, and the liedburg flies
Jimbob's ensign with a Regency symbol. They are training
more armsmen." 
Konsstin frowns. "The bitch is serious."
"So it appears, sire."
"What about the dissonant northern traders?"
"Nothing. Their seers watch us and the sorceress. The Ranuans
have been silent."
"And about Bertmynn?" Konsstin pushes back the heavy chair
and stands, clasping large hands behind his back for a
moment, pushing back the silver cloak, revealing the
close-fitting sky-blue velvet tunic and trousers with the silver
piping that nearly matches the silver in his hair and beard.
"As you requested, we sent a hundred golds and twoscore
blades. You know that another young lordlet has taken Synek?"
"That's Hadrenn. We can't have two of them fighting over a
corpse. We'll have to choose before long." Konsstin paces in a
small circle for a time, then looks straight at the dark-haired
younger man. "Send Hadrenn fifty golds… no weapons. Tell
him it's a token to help rebuild the devastation caused by his
nettlesome neighbor. Use those exact words-'nettlesome

neighbor.' I don't want them thinking of her as a danger, just as
a troublesome problem."
"Just fifty?"
"In another two weeks-make that three weeks-send off another
fifty golds. People remember unasked-for and repeated smaller
gifts more than large ones. Besides, our lordlet Hadrenn will use
them more wisely if they're small." After a pause, the Liedfuhr
adds, "Gifts need to be bigger than pocket change and small
enough that the recipient can delude himself into believing he's
not being bought."
"I will remember that, ser." Bassil stands, waiting, apparently
relaxed, his eyes never leaving Konsstin.
Konsstin's head and eyes turn toward the wide windows to his
left. "We need a true Empire of Music, Bassil."
"Yes, ser."
"Don't humor me!" Konsstin's voice rises to a bellow. "I don't
need someone who tiptoes around agreeing with me."
Bassil has stepped back, but his eyes meet those of the
Liedfuhr. "You do not like those who agree, nor those who
disagree, nor those who question. What would you have me do,
ser?"
Konsstin's frown is broken by a hearty laugh. "That's the first
honest thing you've said today."
"It can be dangerous to be too honest around those who are
power-ful.

"Perhaps I am too hard on people… but everyone has a
scheme, and those who do not scheme flatter in the hopes of
position and influence." His hazel eyes harden, then smile.
"What do you want, Bassil?" 
"Position, influence, and enough coins to be comfortable. I
would rather obtain all three through ability than through
scheming or flattery."
"Do you have enough ability for that?"
"I think so. You would have to be the judge of that."
"So," laughs Konsstin, "you grant me my due."
"How could I do otherwise? You are the Liedfuhr."
"Careful, that verges on flattery."
Bassil swallows.
"Enough of these games. I know what you want, and you'll
have the opportunity to prove that ability… or to fail. That's all
anyone can ask for." The Liedfuhr's fingers brush his
close-trimmed beard. His lips tighten, and his eyes close for a
moment before he continues. "I wasn't spouting idle thoughts
about an Empire of Music, you know. It will not be long before
the ships of Sturinn seek Liedwahr for more than trade. And
what will they find? A bunch of ragtag holdings and merchant
city-states scrapping with each other?"
"Unless matters change, that is what they will find," points out
Bassil. "That is the way the eastern half of Liedwahr has always
been."

"The western half was that way, too, until the time of my
great-grandsire." Konsstin clasps his hands behind his back
once more and paces back and forth in front of the walnut
desk. "You know, the Maitre of Sturinn is building warships
with three masts, ones tall enough to touch the clouds. The
Ostisles have submitted."
"It will be years before-"
"A Liedfuhr has to think years in the future, Bassil. No one else
does." Konsstin offers a snort. "Defalk was practically prostrate
while that sorceress was recovering. Did anyone think what
would happen once she recovered? Did any of those close
enough to act do anything?"
"What might they have done?" asks the raven-haired younger
man. "Your seers' pools showed that Ebra was ravaged. The
Norweians were still rebuilding Wei, and there was no effective
ruler in Neserea after the death of the Prophet… and his
consort. That leaves Ranuak, and the Matriarchy has never
used arms except at sea or in defending their own lands."
"And Dumar," adds Konsstin.
"You would have expected Ehara to march his small armies up
the Great Chasm in winter?"
"They should have done something. Why am I the only ruler in
Liedwahr who sees the images in the pool of the future?"
"The sorceress seems to see the future."
"That she does. I must grant her that. But what can she do?

Defalk is surrounded on five sides. She has no access to the
ocean and thirty-three stiff-necked and feuding lords who are
only agreeable when you have their necks under your boots.
She can only be in one place at a time, and she has no standing
army, and no naval forces, and a land that can barely support
its people." 
"Yet the people support her."
"For now. They once supported Barjim, and then half fled
Falcor at the first whiff of battle." Konsstin unclasps his hands
and stretches. "For that matter, what am I supposed to do? I
proposed a confederation to that idiot my daughter married.
No… he had to have his own empire, and now where are they?
Charred corpses under a monument that no one will recognize
a generation from now."
"Lord Behlem was somewhat headstrong," temporizes Bassil.
"That's like saying… Oh, never mind. And now I have to deal
with Neserea. My grandson takes after his mother and his
grandmother, both vipers, the harmonies soothe their departed
spirits, and I'm in the most awkward position of being his
regent-from a thousand deks away." Konsstin turns and
marches toward the windowed door, which he flings open, and
steps out onto the balcony, where the wind blows the silver
cloak back over his shoulders.
Bassil follows, standing back from the sculpted limestone
balcony railing.
From the western balcony of the blufftop palace, the Liedfuhr

surveys the stone walls of the fort below that commands the
junction of the Ansul and the Latok Rivers. Then he swivels on
one boot heel and studies Bassil. "I've sent the lancers to support
that lizard Nubara… but it will take a lizard to deal with a
viper."
"Should you not take a stronger position?" asked Bassil.
"Are you suggesting that I should?"
"You know your grandson and Neserea far better than I do,
ser. But you do not trust him, and you did not trust his father
or your daughter, and Neserea flanks Defalk and Nordwei."
"And Dumar. Let us not forget the ever-ambitious Ehara."
Konsstin turns back to the balcony and the view of the two
rivers that form the Toksul, the great river of Mansuur that
flows westward to Wahrsus and the ocean. "So I should cross
the Westfels and expand Mansuur… because no one else can
see the dangers… or because I am ambitious… or because…"
His words die away in the stiff wind that blows uphill to the
palace and eastward across the bluff.
Bassil waits for what the Liedfuhr may command.
4
UNDER gray clouds that appeared to be slowly lifting, Anna
looked out over Falcor from the north tower, the one in which
she had stayed when she had first come to the liedburg, the one
where poor Garreth had sketched that sole image Anna had
been able to send across the mists between Erde and earth for

Elizabetta. Garreth-tortured by the prophet Behlem's consort
Cyndyth, another innocent who had died just because she'd
been close to Anna.
Anna shook her head. Now she couldn't use her skills even to see
her youngest, much less send anything across the gulf between
worlds. Her eyes traveled westward over the roofs of Falcor,
seeing what appeared an endless stretch of gray and brown
and white. The white was the already melting slush from the
first snow seen in Defalk in nearly a decade.
Behind her, Giellum and Blaz stood at the top of the tower
stairs. Giellum watched the stairs, Blaz the tower and the
grounds.
Several plumes of smoke rose from the chimneys surrounding
the liedburg, barely standing out against the morning mist that
swathed the brown of the winter fields and that rose around the
gray of the walls and roofs of Falcor. Half the city's structures
were still vacant, Anna suspected, but she hoped that would
change as Defalk recovered.
After a last look across the liedburg and Falcor, Anna turned
and headed down the steps of the tower and then down to the
main-level receiving room. The candle sconces and mantels on
the left side of the hall had been cleaned, but not those on the
right. That was some prog-ress.
Menares was waiting for her outside the door. She nodded for
him to follow her inside the receiving room.
"Have we had any response to all those scrolls we sent? Or from

the Matriarchy about Barjim's debts?" She slipped the purple
regency sash over her green tunic and trousers, wishing she'd
thought more about color coordination earlier, but she was
stuck with both colors for differing reasons. She even had a
purple-and-gold vest that someone had made for her.
Menares shrugged his heavy sloping shoulders. "Lady Anna…
with the rains, and now the snow, the roads are muddy
swamps. Messengers, wagons, all will be slow for the winter."
How had people on earth dealt with muddy roads? Paved
them, but asphalt and cement weren't exactly practical for
Defalk. She frowned. Hadn't Brill used sorcery to create a brick
road to the fort at the Sand Pass? And the ancient Romans had
built stone roads that had lasted centuries.
Lord, she wished she knew more. "Until when?"
"Spring planting, I would say. The roads might dry sooner.
Then they might not. It has been many years since Defalk has
had rainfall, Lady Anna." 
In short, no one was prepared for mud, and she hadn't even
thought about what it would do to roads in poor, backward
Defalk.
"Menares… go talk to Tirsik. See if he can give the messengers
ideas on where and how to travel through this mess more
quickly. Then let me know."
Menares bowed and departed.
Anna hoped that Tirsik, the stablemaster, could help Menares

out. She looked at the murky water in the pitcher, then sang
her water spell, watching as the swirling subsided into a clear
whirl, before filling her goblet and taking a long swallow. The
door creaked ajar.
"Arms Commander Hanfor," announced the stocky and blond
Cens, another page from the time of Barjim. 
"Come on in," Anna said.
Hanfor's weathered face carried a half ironic, half sour
expression as he stepped into the receiving room. "What
problems now?" asked Anna. 
"There's nothing new, lady."
"You looked so disgusted."
"I feel like a graybeard with that title," admitted Hanfor. 
"You're more than an overcaptain, and you are the arms
commander of Defalk," she pointed out. "Is there some other
term of office you'd prefer?"
"The others are worse."
"Then you're stuck being arms commander." Anna gestured to
the chair across the table from her and waited for Hanfor to
seat himself. "Menares told me the weather had slowed our
scrolls and messengers."
"Mud is hard on horses and men." Hanfor added, "Especially
those who have not experienced it."

"That's anyone from Defalk who's under twenty," suggested
Anna. "What do you suggest?"
"There is little I can suggest. The rain the land needs. The
roads… they could be better, but one cannot build roads in
winter and rain." The arms commander shrugged. "Who would
build them? You have given me coins to pay armsmen I do not
have, and cannot find. Not enough. If we cannot find
armsmen, where will we find those to build roads?"
"Or repair bridges or houses or…" Anna shook her head. "Even
if our message scrolls do get through, when will craftspeople or
armsmen arrive? Next summer?"
"Not before spring for most."
Anna paused, then asked, "What did you want? I just hit you
with my problems."
"We still have no weapons smith." Hanfor stroked his beard.
"Himar received a scroll from his brother who heard that the
Ranuans have a ship loaded with blades that were destined for
Elawha."
"How much?" 
"I do not know. A good blade fetches a gold, sometimes two."
"We could spare a hundred golds, perhaps two hundred, but
wouldn't we have to send a large guard?"
"We could send twenty or thirty golds, and arrange to take the
blades in Sudwei." Hanfor laughed. "Now, after the destruction
you rained upon Ebra, there cannot be that much of a market

for blades there."
Anna chuckled. "Why not? Work out the details with Dythya
and have her see me if she has a problem… or a better way."
"Thank you."
"Thank you," she answered. "If what Himar's brother heard is
true, it would give us more time to find a weapons smith. If not,
we haven't lost anything. Is there anything else?"
"Not at the moment."
"But you're worried about those blades?" Anna smiled.
"Good weapons are hard to come by. As hard as to find those
who can use them."
Especially in Defalk, thought Anna. "We'll try to purchase what
we can."
The arms commander bowed.
Anna managed another swallow of water after Hanfor
departed and before the receiving room door opened again.
"The lady Wendella begs your indulgence," said Resor.
The last person Anna really wanted to see was Wendella, Lord
Dencer's consort, who remained as a hostage because Anna
trusted neither Dencer nor Wendella.
"Have Giellum or Blaz escort her in." Wendella deserved an
armed guard, if as nothing more than a more blatant reminder
of her status.

Resor's eyes widened. "Yes, lady."
The brown-haired woman bowed low, carrying the child in her
left arm. "Lady Anna."
Blaz stood behind her.
"You asked to see me," Anna said quietly.
Wendella bowed. "I would ask your indulgence. My son has
not ever seen his father, nor have I seen my lord in more than
half a year. Nor my brother, the lord Mietchel."
"Lord Dencer is always welcome here," Anna said truthfully. 
Her brother is a lord? Why didn't I know that?
"I would like to return to Stromwer and to my lord. Please, my
lady Regent?" Wendella went to her knees.
Anna ignored the gesture, distrusting it, knowing that over the
fall and early winter Wendella had continued to bad-mouth
Anna to whoever in the south tower would listen, until even the
stern Drenchescha had told Wendella to cease her complaining,
and the pages had been able to repeat Wendella's words from
memory.
"She's a bitch from the mist worlds . . ." And that had been one
of the phrases that people had dared to repeat.
"Lady Wendella," Anna said, "Lord Barjim didn't trust your
lord, and nothing you've done-or said-has given me any reason
to reject Lord Barjim's opinion. Lord Dencer has continued to
court both the Matriarchy and most lately, Lord Ehara of

Dumar. I have found, if anything, that Lord Barjim was
extraordinarily trusting for a lord of Defalk."
"You are a bitch! Go ahead, flame me! See where that will get
you!" Wendella lurched upright, words and spittle flying from
her mouth.
"Blaz-" Anna began. Lord, she wanted to fry the impertinent
bitch, but she couldn't. That would have been within her rights,
especially in Defalk, but it would have freed Dencer to wed
someone else and to cause even more trouble.
Blaz stepped forward, and Wendella backed away from the
regent.
"I'm going!"
"No. You're not going. Not for a moment." Anna turned and
riffled through the spell folder, until she had the sheet she
wanted. Then she stood and took the lutar from its case,
quickly checking the tuning.
"No!" Wendella turned, then stopped as she saw Giellum at the
door, behind Blaz.
"Just see that she stays here," Anna said tiredly, taking the
grease marker and altering the spellsong she'd once used on
both Madell and Virkan.
"You can't do anything to me. I'm a daughter of the
Thirty-three."
Anna continued to mark the margins of the heavy brown paper.

"No!"
"You want to go home to Stromwer. We'll be happy to make
that possible." Anna glanced at the notations and hummed
through the melody, once, then again. Then she lifted the lutar
and strummed the chords.
Wendella lurched toward Anna, for an instant before Blaz
grabbed her.
Anna began to sing.
"Wendella wrong, Wendella strong, 
loyal be from this song. 
Wendella young, Wendella old, 
faithful be till dead and cold.
"Consort of lord, mother of son, 
Woman of means, this be done. 
Treachery prevent to all this land 
with your cunning and your hand."
"Nooooo…" As the notes died away, the dark-haired woman
collapsed to her knees on the polished stones of the
receiving-room floor. "No…" she sobbed, barely hanging on to
the infant in her arms.
Anna felt like she'd been shaken momentarily, and for a few
moments, there seemed to be two images ot Wendella berore
her, one colder somehow than the other.
Forcing herself to ignore the strange reaction, Anna lifted the
bell and rang it, then set the lutar on the chair beside the one

she used. Even after the double image faded-something that
hadn't happened to her ever before-her head ached. It had the
few times before when she had used personal spells, probably
because they were technically Darksong, and Darksong didn't
always agree with her bodily harmonics-and probably would
less and less, from what she understood. The strange double
image confirmed that.
Clearsong would have been easier on her, but it didn't work on
people.
"Yes, Lady Anna?" This time Skent was the page who peered
into the room, his eyes going from the sobbing form on the
floor to the regent.
"Would you have a message sent to Lord Dencer that the lady
Wendella and his son and heir are free to return to Stromwer at
her and his convenience?"
"Yes… Lady Anna."
"If she has the coins for an escort, she may leave immediately.
But draft a message for me anyway." Anna's eyes went briefly
to Wendella. "And I'll need something to eat."
Skent nodded and vanished.
Anna shouldn't have yielded to her temper, but she was so tired
of spoiled lords and ladies, some of whom were worse than the
most ungrateful students she'd taught, and that was saying a
lot. The headache had not subsided. In fact, it was worse.
"Waaa…" The child in Wendella's arms began to cry.

"You have killed me…" sobbed Wendella, cradling her son and
struggling into a sitting position.
"Why? Because I bound you not to betray me or Defalk? If
that's so, Wendella, then you've admitted that my judgment of
you and your lord is correct." Anna smiled coldly. "You're
going home, and you'd better find a way to keep your lord
loyal to the Regency and Jimbob. For your own sake, if not for
Defalk's."
"You are cruel… so cruel…"
"I don't have time for games and intrigues." Anna nodded to
the guards. "And I have even less for the people who attempt
them. Good day, lady."
A stone-faced Blaz took the dark-haired lady's arm and helped
her to her feet. Giellum opened the door.
Alone momentarily in the receiving room, Anna took a deep
breath. Then she set aside the lutar, replacing it in its case, and
refiling the spell in the folder.
She massaged her forehead, then poured another goblet of
water. Both Blaz and Giellum had been shocked. Had it been
because she'd used sorcery? Or because she'd let Wendella live?
She rang the bell again. Skent peered in.
"Have Blaz and Giellum step in for a moment, please."
The two guards stepped inside the receiving room, and the door
clunked shut. Giellum swallowed. Blaz remained stone-faced.

"I'm not upset or angry," Anna said quietly.
Neither guard moved.
"But I do have a question for you. Blaz… do you think I was
too lenient on the lady Wendella?"
"It be not my place to judge." The guard's voice was hoarse.
"Giellum?"
"I… How… would… ?"
"I know." Anna sighed. "Anything you say would be wrong.
That's the problem with being a ruler, even a regent. No one
wants to tell you what they think. If they agree, it's flattery. If
they don't, it's dangerous." She smiled wryly. "So I'll have to
guess."
Giellum swallowed again.
"Giellum… you don't have to swallow."
That got another swallow, and Anna wanted to sigh in
exasperation. Instead, she continued. "The lady Wendella was
extremely rude." She glanced at Blaz. "I think that's something
we can all agree on."
The wary look in Giellum's eyes, and the fractional nod from
Blaz confirmed that.
"In fact, after I spelled her, she as much as admitted that she
and her lord Dencer were disloyal to the Regency. Did either of
you wonder why I let her go?"

The lack of reaction confirmed her guess.
"You did, but you don't want to second-guess a regent. Think
about this. If I had executed the lady Wendella, several things
would have happened. First, Lord Dencer would immediately
start telling everyone how I killed his wife and heir, and how I
was out to take over all Defalk by replacing all the old lords.
Then, he would be free to marry whoever he wants, possibly
even some relative of Ehara of Dumar. This way, he has a
struggle with his wife. If he kills her, and he may, probably
with poison, it will take some time. I can certainly accuse him of
proving his disloyalty, and I don't have her blood on the
Regency. He might even get the message and become more
loyal." She shrugged. "It's a nasty business, but the fewer
disloyal lords and ladies I have to execute outright, the stronger
Lord Jimbob's position will become."
Blaz gave the slightest of nods. Giellum had turned pale.
"You look shocked, Giellum. Ruling isn't all battles. A lot of it is
positioning things so that your enemies look bad and
unreasonable. Wendella and Dencer have been trying to make
me look like the bitch of Defalk. We'll announce to all the lords
that we are pleased to return Lord Dencer's consort and his heir
to him and wish them both every happiness. It should
confound just about everyone." Anna took a sip from the
goblet. "And you can tell anyone you want what happened. I
will, and there's no secret about it." In fact, I hope you do tell just
about everyone.
She studied the two, catching the hint of a smile in Blaz's eyes.
Well, one out of two wasn't bad, and maybe the older guard

could get it across to Giellum.
"Do you have any questions?"
"No, lady," said Blaz.
"No… lady," added Giellum.
No sooner had her guards left than Resor opened the door
again. "There is a player here, Lady Anna. He says his name is
Delvor."
"I'll see him." No one else could, and at times like this she
missed Daffyd. She really needed another player-master, but
where would she find one?
Blaz followed the would-be player into the receiving room and
stood just inside the door, hand on his blade.
The young man stepped into the receiving room and looked
down at the floor. Lank brown hair-too long-spilled across his
forehead. His fingers were white where they clutched his violino
case.
"You… summoned me, sorceress." His thin voice trembled out
of a thin face.
"I requested players." Anna waited. Yes, she had requested
players, from everywhere and even with the promise of a
healthy wage. And this trembling youngster was only the
second since harvest-two in half a season, when she needed a
good dozen, if not more. The first so-called player had carried a
falk horn on which he couldn't play "Come to Jesus" in whole
notes. Anna's eyes focused on the youngster. "Are you

interested in being a player for the Regency?"
"Yes, lady." He looked down.
"I take it that you are worried about playing for an unknown
sorceress, but you need the coin even more than you worry?"
The youngster just shivered.
"What is your name, young player?" Anna hated it when she'd
been given a name and didn't remember it, but she'd never
been that good with names.
"Delvor, lady."
"Delvor, I don't eat players. I do pay them well, if they can meet
my standards. That's a silver a week." She paused.
"A silver… ?"
"Take out that violino and play something for me."
Delvor's fingers still trembled as he fumbled out the old and
polished instrument. The trembling lessened as he began to
tune the violino.
"Anytime you're ready."
Slowly, he raised the instrument and the bow.
After the first unsteady notes, the short melody was clear.
Delvor didn't squeak or shriek, and his fingering looked sure.
From where he stood by the door, Blaz gave the faintest of
nods. Anna wasn't so certain.

"All right." Anna gestured for the violinist to stop. "How do you
learn a new melody? Can you read notation?"
The look at the floor answered that question.
"I take it that you learn by ear?"
"I can play what I've heard," the player answered. He
swallowed. "Sometimes, I must hear it more than once."
More than sometimes. Anna nodded, then cleared her throat.
"I'll sing a short song-just the notes, not the words. Listen
carefully. I'll want you to play it as well as you can."
Delvor lowered the violin and bow and nodded.
"La, la, la…" Anna sang the water spell melody. That couldn't
cause any trouble, or not much, if it were passed on to others.
Delvor cocked his head, listening.
"Now… you try it."
The player picked up the bow. All in all, Anna had to repeat the
song more than three times before Delvor could basically
replicate it.
She wanted to shake her head. Still… he had been able to pick
it up. She supposed he would have a use, if only as the
equivalent of third or fourth chair, not that sorcerers' players
were classified that way.
"Delvor?"
"Yes, lady." The player hung his head.

"There is a great deal you do not know. If you stay here, you
will have a lot to learn."
Delvor licked his lips.
"You may stay. You will receive a silver a week, and, until the
rest of the players arrive, you will also be required to assist in
other areas. Nothing heavy, but I may have you learn new
skills or serve as a messenger. Do you understand?"
"Where…"
"There are players' quarters in the liedburg. You get quarters
and food and the silver. Do you wish to serve the Regency?"
Delvor went to his knees. "Yes, lady."
Anna lifted the bell, and Cens entered.
"Cens, this is Delvor, and he is one of the new players. He can
have one of the small rooms in the players' quarters by the
stables. I'd appreciate it if you'd get him settled. Then tell
Dythya about him."
"Yes, Lady Anna."
When Cens and the player had left, she looked down at the
table. There was another reason why poor Daffyd hadn't been
able to find many players. Most of them didn't have any
spines-except for those who'd already died at the Sand Pass or
in the destruction of Vult.
She sighed. Then, what player in his or her right mind would
want to serve her when most of those who had were dead? Poor

Daffyd-he'd been a good viola player who had helped spell her
to Defalk and then served as her chief player, and he was
buried under the lava of the volcano she had raised to destroy
Vult and the dark Evult who had directed the darksingers of
Ebra against Defalk. So were all of the others who had followed
her to Vult. She sighed again. Get back to a problem you can do
something about. . . maybe.
She couldn't get supplies or move troops if the roads turned to
mud every time it rained. She couldn't use sorcery to repair the
roads without players and stones being carted nearby, and she
couldn't have the stones carted except in dry weather. And she
couldn't find enough players.
Anna took a deep breath. She still hadn't paid that visit to the
kitchens and Meryn. She might as well do that, before she
forgot. The liedburg ran on meals as well as coins and arms.
The ubiquitous Blaz followed her down the corridor and out to
the section of the liedburg that jutted into the rear courtyard,
almost standing alone-probably for fire reasons.
Meryn stood at the far end of the huge hearth, with one of the
oven doors open, easing a wooden paddle containing the dough
that would be bread into the oven. At the table behind her, Jysel
was plucking a just-scalded chicken, and other sodden birds lay
beside the first.
Anna waited until Meryn closed the oven door.
"Oh… Lady Anna." The head cook's hands fluttered. Behind
her, Jysel's mouth opened.

"I don't have any problems," Anna said. "I've enjoyed your
cooking, and I really liked the way you spiced the mutton stew
the other night. It wasn't bland, and it didn't burn my tongue."
The cook's hands stopped fluttering. "We do as we can, lady.
But with so many mouths…"
Anna held in a sigh. Like everything else in Defalk, the
liedburg kitchen was probably overworked. "You could use
another good cook?" She gave a smile.
"I could use three, lady, not that there be three in Falcor I'd
want." Meryn shook her head.
"If you find one you would like to help you, let me know."
Anna sniffed. "The bread smells good. I don't know how I'd
manage without all the bread you've baked for me."
"That be good." Meryn smiled. "Unlike some, you appreciate
good food, and the folk who fix it." She paused. "Molasses for
the dark bread, it be getting dear."
Anna half nodded to herself. Everything was getting dear.
"Once, a long way away, I fixed a lot of fancy meals." The
sorceress offered a laugh. "And not with sorcery. But I had
things that made it easier. I wouldn't want to try to cook in that
hearth."
"Takes watching, lady, that it does."
"I'm sure it does." She glanced toward Blaz. "I wish I could stay
longer, Meryn… Jysel… but I wanted to tell you again,
personally, how much I appreciate all the cooking and the

work."
Both women bowed.
Once back in the receiving room, Anna rang the bell even
before seating herself at the worktable.
"Find me Menares." '
While she waited, she began to make a list-yet another of the
endless lists that grew faster on the bottom than she could
complete on the top.
This list held the key roads from Falcor to the borders. Should
she add molasses to the supply list?
"Lady Anna?" Menares bowed. His eyes flicked away from her
to the floor, then to the empty gilt receiving chair.
"What did Tirsik say?"
"The stablemaster will talk to the messengers, he and Captain
Alvar. They should ride on the edges of the roads, and he will
tell them where not to ride."
"Good."
"He also sent his thanks for the coins for the extra straw."
Anna nodded. "I need you to find something else. Find me an
artist. One who can do good sketches of bridges and roads and
forts. There ought to be someone who can draw somewhere
near Falcor. I'll pay him-or her." With the word "her," she
thought of poor Garreth, who'd drawn her picture, and who

had been killed merely on a whim by Cyn-dyth while Anna
had been saving the Prophet's armsmen.
"Yes, Lady Anna." Menares' voice contained a resigned tone,
the one that suggested she was being unreasonable or frivolous.
"I'm not crazy," she snapped. "We need better-" She groped for
a suitably impressive word. "-infrastructure here in Defalk, and
that means roads and bridges, and since we don't have any
dissonant builders and no coins, that means sorcery, and I need
images for sorcery. Is that clear?"
Menares nodded, backing quickly out of the receiving room.
Once again, she was getting a reputation for being a
temperamental bitch. Why couldn't they see? She wasn't even a
military type, and it was obvious. Defalk was surrounded on all
sides by potential enemies.
With Blaz and Giellum following her, she left the receiving
room and took the small service hall. Her boots echoed on the
stones of the narrow passage. She opened the back door to slip
inside the large hall that was being used as the de facto
schoolroom for her pages and fosterlings. Trying not to sneeze,
she remained behind the long tapestry and listened.
Dythya was speaking.
"Remember… the position of the numeral determines the
amount of its greatness. In the first position, a six is just a six. In
the second position, it is a sixty, or ten times greater. In the
third position…"

"Numbers different when they are in different places. New
symbols! You confuse us. Why do we even have to use new
characters for numbers? The old ones were fine," said Hoede,
almost red-faced.
"Once you learn them, using figures is easier," Dythya said
patiently. "It is easier to check accounts, and to keep track of
what you have spent."
"You haven't told me why we must use different symbols for
numbers."
Anna decided to put an end to the discussion. She stepped out
from behind the dusty arras depicting Lord Donjim's grandsire.
"Lady Anna…"
"Sorceress…" 
"I beg your pardon, Dythya." Anna nodded to the woman who
was the liedstadt accountant, or the closest thing to an
accountant.
Dythya merely nodded, a faint smile playing around her lips.
Anna turned to the youngsters seated at the long table, grease
markers and rough brown paper before them. Her eyes took in
each in turn. Secca, the youngest redhead, glanced up at the
sorceress openly. Skent, at the end of the table, did not quite
meet her eyes. Nor did Ytrude, the shy and tall blonde. But
Anna did get a flashing smile from the redheaded Lysara, the
older sister of Birke, who remained with his father at Abenfel.
On the other hand, Cataryzna smiled shyly. Cens just looked
blank, as did Resor. Hoede swallowed and pursed his lips.

Jimbob, at the end of the table, met her eyes for a moment.
"Hoede." Anna fixed the sandy blond with blue eyes that were
as cold as the Falche River beyond the liedburg walls. "If you
spent as much time learning your digits and how to use them
as you do arguing about it, you'd not only be able to improve
your sire's accounts, you'd have time left over for more pleasant
pastimes."
Hoede's eyes fell.
"Since you want an answer, I'll make it simple. Defalk almost
perished under the old ways. Nordwei, Ranuak, Neserea, and
even Mansuur have adopted more modern ways of doing
things. We either adopt even better methods, or we will be
forced to submit."
"But you have sorcery," murmured a voice.
Anna shook her head. "I managed to hold off the Dark Ones,
and bring back the rain. Magic does not work on crops, or on
accounts, and a sorceress can only be in one place. I cannot be
there to tell every lord and holding how and when to plant. I
will not live long enough to advise your children. If you don't
learn as much as you can, most of you won't hold what you
have." She smiled. "I know… some of you are not the heirs, and
that means knowledge is even more important for you, because
what you can do is determined even more by what you can
learn." She turned back to Hoede. "You can ask all the
questions you want about why something works or how to
calculate or use your knowledge. If you wish to ask questions
about the necessity of learning such matters, then come to me.

If you persist in wasting the time of those who teach you with
such childish inquiries, then I will send you and anyone else
home and invite another young person." She smiled. "Is that
clear?"
"Yes, Lady Anna." The rqarmured answer was nearly in unison.
"There's an even shorter answer, Hoede," Anna continued. "I
saved Defalk when no one else could or would. Since my ways
worked, and nothing else did, you'll learn my ways." She
paused. "I also might point out that the more powerful lords in
Defalk have already adopted these numbers and this system.
They say it takes less time and works better. Now Hoede, I've
given you three reasons. Do you need any more?"
Hoede looked down, his face as red as the stripe in his tunic.
"Dythya will examine you on how well you learn the new
number system, all of you. I expect you all to do well." She
smiled, then nodded, and left by the front door, where Giellum
waited. 
She glanced at the young guard. His eyes dropped.
Why did everything she did shock the young? Or some of
them? She was supposed to accomplish grand deeds-like
figuring out how to keep Defalk from being dismembered by
its neighbors when she had next to no armsmen, few coins, and
drought-ravaged cropland that would take years to recover
even with the return of the rains.
Anna paused outside the receiving room and looked to Barat,
the one page not in lessons.

"Yes, lady?"
"I'll need some bread and cheese. And a piece of fruit, if there is
any."
Leaving Giellum outside with Blaz, who had hurried back from
the large hall, she entered the receiving room, glancing to the
rear window, and the hint of sunlight after the days of mixed
rain and snow.
With a sigh, she slumped into her chair at the table.
One player, no weapons smith, no messengers getting
anywhere fast, and enemies on just about all sides.
She had to do something!
First, she shuffled through all the papers she'd reclaimed from
Loiseau, Brill's hall in Mencha, until she found those dealing
with building. There were no spells of bridges-just for a barn
and a fort. For a moment, she studied Brill's spell for the fort,
probably the one he had built at the Sand Pass, murmuring the
words as she read, trying to get a feel for the rhythm.
"… replicate the bricks and stones. 
Place them in their proper zones… 
Set the blocks, and set them square 
set them to their pattern there…"
The spell melody notes were a cross between chord symbols
and medieval tablature-and hard enough to decipher, let alone
turn into music.

"Lady?" Barat stood in the door with a platter in hand.
"Thank you." The growling of her stomach reminded
her-again- how she couldn't put off eating, especially with what
she had in mind for the afternoon.
After she finished everything on the platter, a feat that would
have turned her into a butterball once upon a time, she began
to scrawl out possible spells on the brown paper.
Then she took out the lutar, tuned it, and tried the words-only
in her head-with the chords.
Finally, she lifted the bell and rang it. This time Resor opened
the door.
'Resor, would you tell Fhurgen that I am going riding in a bit,
and that I'll need two squads of guards, or whatever he and
Alvar think is nght."
"Yes, Lady Anna." Resor did not close the door, then asked,
"What should I tell them if they ask me your destination?" 
"Somewhere around Falcor."
"Yes, lady."
Anna replaced the lutar in its case, and picked up both the case
and her jacket and hat.
Blaz and Giellum flanked her on the walk from the main
building to the stables.
Tirsik met her before she had taken a pace inside. "Lady Anna."
The white-haired and wiry stablemaster nodded, glancing at

Anna's riding gear and the lutar case. "The roads are foul."
"I'm not going far. Just to the other side of Falcor up by where
the bridge was."
"Even the roads in Falcor are slippery."
"Then few will be out."
A wry and wintry smile crossed the white-haired stablemaster's
face. "As you wish, and it usually is, my lady."
"I know, Tirsik. I'm being difficult. So is most of Liedwahr at
the moment." She added, "I hope I didn't ask too much of you
when I sent Menares over to have you instruct some of the
riders and messengers on foul-weather traveling."
"It be my pleasure, lady, and glad to put what these gray hairs
have learned to service."
"You are a learned rascal."
"Once, lady. No longer."
Anna grinned and headed for Farinelli's stall. The palomino
gelding greeted her with a loud whuff.
"I know. I'm late, and you want to be groomed on schedule."
By the time she had Farinelli brushed and saddled, Fhurgen
and her guards had formed up in the liedburg courtyard.
Anna pulled on the leather riding jacket and the
floppy-brimmed hat of the type that had seen her through her
time in Defalk, then strapped the lutar in the case behind the

saddle. She led Farinelli out, mounted and nodded to Fhurgen.
"Let's go."
She let Farinelli pick his way across the wet stones of the
courtyard and out through the main gate. Fhurgen and the
guards followed.
The north breeze was chilly, even for Anna, but the leather
jacket kept her comfortable. She could sense the shivers of the
guards, and catch a few phrases.
"… know she comes from the mist worlds… day like this…"
"… doesn't even look cold…"
"… went through the Ostfels in six feet of snow… Tyres said…"
Anna wanted to snort. The expedition against the Evult had
been in late fall, and there hadn't been any snow to speak of.
Some cold rain, but no snow.
As she rode across the flat outside the liedburg and toward the
road that led through the part of Falcor north of the keep, Anna
studied the buildings. A few more bore signs of life, like smoke
from chimneys, or new shutters or even windows. There were
still too many empty structures. 
Two blocks up, she saw a new sign-a picture board depicting a
golden lutar outside a refurbished inn. Anna laughed. The
Golden Lutar- clearly an attempt at flattery, since the
instrument had been made by Daffyd specially for her and
was, so far as she knew, the only one in Liedwahr.

Still, the rebuilt inn was one good signal at a time when there
were few enough.
Her smile faded when they reached the north end of Falcor and
the Falche River. Anna reined up and studied the ruined bridge
buttresses, the remnants from the flood unleashed by the Evult
of Ebra, and the riverbed, through which ran a muddy and
winding track.
Originally, the old bridge had consisted of three spans, the ends
of each outer span anchored in the rock on each side of the
river. The center span had been anchored on the western side to
a pier sunk into the rock beneath the riverbed and to a second
pier on the eastern side which had rested on a rocky islet in the
river. Parts of the two piers remained, and muddy water
swirled around the disarrayed stones, covering the lower section
of the rude trail that travelers had used after the bridge had
been swept away.
Anna finally turned in the saddle and fumbled with the lutar
case, easing the instrument out, and then easing Farinelli
forward.
"Fhurgen, please move the armsmen back."
"Yes, lady." The dark-bearded squad leader raised his arm.
"Back. Back to the pedestal there."
As her guards guided their mounts back toward the pediment
that might once have held a statue, Anna ran her fingers over
the strings and checked the lutar's tuning. Then she ran
through the spell melody once, thinking the words.

She cleared her throat and began the spell, not belting, but
using full concert voice.
"… replicate the blocks and stones. 
Place them in their proper zones… 
Set them firm, and set them square 
weld them to their pattern there…
"Bring the rock and make it stone…"
The stone under the bluff seemed to shift even before she
finished the first verse. Strophic spell, her thoughts corrected
automatically.
A shiver in the harmonies underlying all Liedwahr followed the
last chord, except Anna knew only she heard that shiver, she
and any other sorcerer or sorceress. The lightning that flashed
across the half-clear sky was visible to all, and murmurs swept
across the armsmen as the white-and-gray clouds began to
darken into black. 
Anna, holding the lutar one-handed, used the other on the reins
to urge Farinelli away from the edge of a bluff that suddenly
felt all too insecure.
The ground rumbled, and dust puffed from beneath the sodden
upper soil that overlay the rocks beneath. Another flash of light
seared across a sky that had become dark gray.
The edge of the bluff from where Anna had begun the spell
shivered, then peeled away in a brown-and-gray cascade, even
as a shimmering mist of silver, sheathed in the faintest of
rainbows, began to arch across the river.

The sorceress, feeling lightheadedness slashing across her
consciousness, struggled to get the lutar back in its case.
How would you replace it now?
The ground shifted again, and Anna struggled to stay balanced
in the saddle as Farinelli sidestepped and she tried to close the
lutar case.
A line of fire seared across her eyes, and again that gigantic
harp that affected only her strummed somewhere she could not
see, but only sense.
More dust rose around her with the grinding of rocks below,
and the river began to boil, sending steam up to mix with dust
and rock powder, until the entire area from one edge of the
Falche to the other was cloaked in a gray mist.
Anna's eyes burned, and her head swam, and she grabbed for
Farinelli's mane, as the entire world turned black.
5
ESARIA, NESEREA
THE dark-haired youth shivers and draws his green cloak more
tightly around him. He sits on a green cushion in the gilt throne
chair that comprises the official seat of the Lord of Neserea, and
the Protector of the Faith of the Eternal Melody.
A cold breeze seeps into the receiving room that adjoins the
empty, columned, hilltop chamber used in the summer.
Through the single window, the youth who is neither boy nor

man can see the fluted marble pillars, and beyond them, the
whitecaps of the Bitter Sea.
"Am I not the Prophet of Music, Nubara?" 
"Young Lord Rabyn, you are indeed the heir of the Prophet of
Music and will rule Neserea-" The officer in the maroon
uniform of a lancer of Mansuur breaks off his words as the
youth's eyes flash.
"Grandsire's message said I was Lord now."
"He also confirmed me as acting regent for him in your name."
Nubara smiles politely.
"But you should serve me." The hint of a pout frames the full
red lips.
"I serve the will of the Liedfuhr." Nubara smiles broadly.
"Always in your interests, most assuredly."
The music of low strings sifts through the morning stillness
from the adjoining Temple of Music, providing a soothing
background that neither Lancer nor youth acknowledges.
"What are you doing about that evil woman who killed my
mother and my father the Prophet?" Rabyn's eyes narrow as he
watches the older man who stands below the low dais.
"The sorceress Anna, Lord Rabyn?" Nubara's smile narrows.
"Your grandsire has indicated that he was most displeased, and
that he will take such matters into his own hands. Fiftyscore
lancers make their way here to Esaria."
"That's not what I asked. What are you doing?"

"Following the orders of the Liedfuhr. I am, after all, a Lancer
of Mansuur."
"You are a…" Rabyn frowns, then smiles. "I should be thankful
to you."
"It is hard to be patient when great wrongs have been done,
Lord Rabyn. You must recall that the sorceress subverted fully
a third of your sire's forces, and murdered most of those officers
who were loyal to him… and to you. We are working to rebuild
your armsmen."
"All of the Prophet's Guard returned, except for their
commander. You could command them."
"I could indeed. Would you have me lead them against the evil
sorceress and lose them as well? She has never lost a battle, and
those who have opposed her have never lost less than the
majority of their forces. There are no armsmen left in all of
Ebra." Nubara bows slightly, raising his eyebrows.
"She can be defeated. Anyone can be defeated." The pout on
Rabyn's lips grows fuller.
"That is what your grandsire believes. That will take many
armies. The sorceress can be in but one place at one time. She
must be encircled so that her armies are reduced and
destroyed."
"That is why you are seeking more armsmen?"
"Exactly, Lord Rabyn. Exactly." Nubara smiles and bows.
"Thank you, Nubara. You may go." Rabyn's eyes remain on

the lancer until the older man leaves the chamber. Then the
young Prophet of Music shivers and readjusts the heavy cloak.
6
YOU are so good with young voices, Anna dear. I really do not
understand why you persist in this sorcery business." Her eyes
cold, Dieshr smiled across the too-neat desk at Anna.
Anna wanted to scream, but what was the use? Dieshr was
Music Department Chair, and Anna didn't have tenure. And
what was this sorcery Dieshr was talking about? Anna certainly
didn't believe in witchcraft.
"Besides, you should devote your energies to obtaining a
doctorate. That would make you far more marketable in
today's academic community."
A doctorate? After all the years when Avery-the great
Antonio-had offered reason after reason why it wasn't the right
time, or appropriate, or whatever? "The children are too young."
"We can't afford it… perhaps next year."
"You wouldn't take off now, not when I've just gotten this break
with the New York City Opera?"
"Teenagers really need their mother… it's the most sensitive
part of their life."
Anna did scream, and Dieshr vanished into gray smoke, and
the scream came out of her too-dry mouth more like a groan.
The gray smoke turned into gray walls.

Her head ached-throbbed-and her mouth was dry. A blond
face swam into view.
"Lady… please drink. You must drink."
She drank what tasted like vinegar, and the gray walls turned
black again.
The next time she woke, Cataryzna was still waiting.
"Can you drink, lady?"
Anna nodded and sipped from the cup. Her eyes still burned,
and her head continued to throb, if less violently. She took a
small swallow, then another.
The door opened, and a white-haired figure slipped into the
chamber, and settled onto the chair beside the bed.
Anna wondered if she looked as terrible as she felt. She could
tell she was dehydrated and started to reach for the cup.
Cataryzna lifted it to her lips.
From the light, Anna thought it was morning.
"Morning?" she finally asked.
"It is morning, lady," answered Cataryzna. "We were not sure
you would see it."
Anna tried to struggle into more of a sitting position, and her
blonde fosterling-Lord Geansor's daughter-adjusted the pillows
behind her.
"More… wine." Anna drank again, and could almost feel the

worst of the headache subsiding. Lord, was she that
dehydrated? She probably had no blood-sugar level at all,
either.
"Some bread might help." 
"I will get it." Cataryzna slipped toward the door and out into
the second floor corridor, her shoulder-length hair flying out
behind her.
"Lady Anna," Jecks said slowly, from the chair beside her bed.
"You cannot rebuild Defalk by destroying yourself with
sorcery."
For a moment, Anna just took in his words, then sipped more
of the vinegary wine. She wished it were water, but in her
condition she couldn't orderspell water, and trying to drink
unspelled water would invite disaster of another type.
"If you destroy yourself, everything you have preserved will
vanish." Jecks swallowed.
"Lord Jecks." She wanted her voice to be hard, but it just
sounded tired. "Everyone counsels me to patience. Everyone
tells me that we cannot do this. We cannot find players. We
cannot find weapons smiths. We cannot travel or whatever
because the roads are too muddy."
"You cannot rebuild Defalk in a season." He forced a smile.
"You cannot do that in even two seasons or a year."
"We may not have a year," Anna said. "If you want your
grandson even to have a land to rule, we have to find ways to
do all those things everyone tells me we can't do. Now… do we

have a solid bridge over the Falche?"
"Yes, Lady Anna. Hanfor thinks it will outlast Falcor." Jecks
smiled. "The channel beneath is also rather deeper. It is almost a
gorge."
So that was where the stone had come from. Anna nodded. It
would have been easier with players-much easier-but Delvor
alone wouldn't be much help. A name popped into her
head-Liende, the woodwind player injured in the Sand Pass
battle.
"Liende, the player? Isn't she still at Elhi?"
"I believe so."
"Would you have her summoned to Falcor?"
"You may summon anyone you wish."
"Stop humoring me!" Anna hated any hint of condescension,
even from Jecks, even if he did resemble her favorite movie star,
even if he had actually shown some real concern for her as a
person, not as a regent. "I'm not being whimsical. I need
players. She knows who many of them are, and if I can't do
anything else, I'll build roads. To the west first."
"You cannot-"
"Why not? The first threat will be from the west, won't it?"
"That will not come for years, and you must recover."
Anna doubted she'd have that much time, but she couldn't

argue everything. "Good. Then we can build lots of roads and
weapons and train an army." Anna took another swallow of the
vinegary wine. Her stomach growled. She needed to eat.
Another problem-the demands of sorcery drove her metabolism
so high that anything that left her unable to eat for very long
was practically life-threatening. She wasn't sure she wanted to
see how thin her face had become.
The door opened, and Cataryzna scurried back in at almost a
run, carrying a platter. Skent followed with a second. The
dark-haired page's eyes took in Anna, and she could see the
shock there. She'd wondered how bad she looked, and now she
knew. 
"Can you eat?" asked the blonde.
Anna reached for the bread, and slowly began to chew. She
wanted to smile as she saw Skent and Cataryzna standing side
by side. Perhaps her weakness-how she hated to be weak!-had
had some positive effect.
She tried the white cheese that Skent had brought. She'd need
protein and fat. Lord, she needed everything.
In between bites, she turned to Jecks, noting absently that he
continued to worry one hand against the other. "I'll be fine. At
least with rest and more food, I will be."
"You cannot… You must not…" Jecks stammered.
"Lord Jecks… we have no choice. We must rebuild Defalk as
quickly as possible." She swallowed more of the wine.

"I will have Liende sent for," Jecks said. "And I will tell her to
bring any players she knows."
"Good." Anna could feel tiredness creeping over her. Not the
draining exhaustion that had felled her at the bridge, but a
fuller feeling.
"Why are roads so important, lady?" Cataryzna said quietly.
"You murmured of roads and of doctors."
Anna sighed, even as she could feel the lassitude creeping back
over her. She shouldn't have gotten upset. Anger always tired
her, and she was already exhausted-and what she'd done had
been Clearsong. "I'm tired. So tired." She forced out the
remaining words. "So all the dissonant lords of Defalk don't go
on thinking they're independent little countries. So that we or
Jimbob can put an army at their gate in two days instead of
two weeks. So that…" So many things…
She shut her eyes.
7
ENCORA, RANUAK
HAVE you discovered what caused that vast harmonic shudder
yesterday, Veria?" With a cheerful smile, the round-faced and
gray-haired woman sniffs the steam from the cup she has lifted
level with her double chins.
"Yes, Matriarch." The black-haired woman at the other long
end of the oval ebony table sips her own cup of scalded cider.
"There is no one left but the soprano sorceress-" 

"Best you call her the Regent of Defalk, for that is what she is
and will be for many years," suggests the silver-haired man
who seats himself across the table from the Matriarch.
"The Regent of Defalk, Father," Veria corrects herself, slightly
readjusting her powder-blue robe. "She used the harmonies to
replace a huge stone bridge across the Falche. It was one of
those destroyed by the Evult's flood."
"There is a rough balance in that," judges the Matriarch, after
taking a sip of steaming cider.
"It will be a while before she balances all the dissonance created
by the Evult," suggests Ulgar. He twists the end of his silvered
handlebar mustache before adding another pinch of cinnamon
to his cup. "I wish she had tortured him more before she
destroyed him."
"Father…" protests Veria.
"That is vulgar, Ulgar," suggests the Matriarch.
"Honesty, my dear, honesty. All proclaim the need for honesty,
but none allocate so much as a silver for it." He slurps his cider.
"Not so much as a single silver."
Veria glances to her mother.
"That's the Regent's problem," continues Ulgar, reaching for the
pot and refilling his cup. "She is honest enough to see what was,
what is, and what yet must be done, while all those around her
are blinded by the dishonesties of the past."
"You are being obscure-again, dear." The Matriarch pats back

a stray iron-gray hair.
"Exactly how are those around the sore-the regent, blinded by
the past?" asks Veria.
Ulgar lifts his cup, then a silvered eyebrow. He sips without
speaking, as if the answer were obvious.
"Father…"
"Very well, if your mother the Matriarch consents to hearing
the views of an old and foolish man."
"Ulgar, mock humility doesn't become you. It's also dishonest,
and rather hypocritical when discussing the honesty of others."
The Matriarch smiles broadly.
Ulgar returns her smile with one more sheepish. "Very well," he
repeats, clearing his throat. "Defalk is bordered by five other
lands. Ebra has been devastated, but already conflict between
two successors brews in there, fostered by the golds of the
Liedfuhr. In Nordwei, the Council of Wei has met to discuss the
Regent, and, should she prove successful in strengthening
Defalk, will seek her destruction. Ehara of Dumar has already
begun to consider sending aid to Lord Dencer, hoping to win
him to Dumar and to provide a staging area for Dumaran
armsmen. Neserea has become a true protectorate and pawn of
the Liedfuhr, with the cunning Nubara moving the stones.
Lord Behlem's son Rabyn has his father's lack of intelligence,
but not his cunning, and his mother's viciousness, but not her
brains." 
"You did not mention us," points out Veria.

"We are as bad as the others. Those of the trading faction have
declined to extend credit for planting to the southern lords of
Defalk, when for the first time in a decade such plantings will
succeed."
"The Regent still owes fifteen hundred golds to the Exchange,"
notes Veria.
"Those were not her debts, yet she has paid five hundred and
pledged to pay the remainder. She has kept every promise she
has made-for good or for evil." Ulgar smiles blandly. "Is there
another leader in Liedwahr who can claim that?" He turns to
the Matriarch and raises his cup. "Saving you, of course, dear."
"The Exchange will not be a problem, Ulgar, not for the spring
planting," answers the Matriarch. "I have suggested that the
Exchange be willing to grant such credit to the lords of Defalk
for seed grain and planting necessities if the Regent of Defalk
reaffirms her commitment to repay the loan. She has already
sent a message doing so, along with a second payment of five
hundred golds."
"You knew that, and didn't tell them?" asks Veria.
"I told the Exchange-mistresses no lies. I never tell lies. The
harmonies do not permit that." The Matriarch takes another sip
of tea, then nods at Ulgar. "I don't believe you ever finished
explaining about Defalk, dear."
"Oh… well… it's simple enough. All of the lands that ring
Defalk fear the sorceress-regent, but those lords and advisors
around her believe that, because wars were slow in coming in

the past, they will be as slow in the seasons ahead. Yet Konsstin
has already dispatched fiftyscore lancers to Neserea."
"The harmonies yet favor her." The Matriarch smiles, still
cherubic. "That the Exchange-mistresses do not understand."
The smile vanishes, and her eyes fix on Veria. "Nor do the
South Women."
"The South Women?" asks Veria. "What have they to do with
this?"
"Everything," answers the Matriarch. "They would have us
re-create the Guardians of the South once more in Encora, and
thus mimic our enemies. They would have us retreat from
financing the trade of those who are not our friends, and thus
starve those who are." She shakes her head. "I have said it
before, and I will again, and some will not heed. Matters
balance; they always do."
Ulgar slurps his tea, and Veria winces.
The Matriarch smiles half fondly at the silver-haired man. As
her eyes go to her daughter, the smile turns cherubically
perfunctory. She rises from the table. "I must go and reassure
those who doubt the force of the harmonies."
"Matriarch," asks Veria carefully, "do you believe that the
sorceress-regent will not turn on Ranuak?"
The Matriarch pauses by the door. "Anything can happen
under the harmonies, but the Regent of Defalk uses all the
harmonies, and distrusting the good will of one in accord with
the greatest of the harmonies of Erde can create vast

dissonance. I would not will it that Ranuak be on the side of
dissonance. Nor should you."
With another smile, the Matriarch nods her head to her consort
and to her daughter. Veria turns and watches her mother
depart, again readjusting the loose-fitting powder-blue robe.
Behind Veria's back, Ulgar shrugs, then shakes his head.
8
ANNA eased herself onto the stool in front of the group
gathered in the main hall of the liedburg, the makeshift
schoolroom. Her eyes flickered to the door where Jecks and
Blaz stood. Jecks was trying to hide a frown.
"Because there have been too many questions, I'm going to tell
you all something about sorcery." Anna forced a smile, her eyes
surveying the fosterlings and pages.
The silence was the most absolute she'd heard in the entire time
she'd observed lessons for them.
"Some of this, you may have heard, but not everyone here
knows all of this." That was a safe bet, because she doubted
even Brill had known some of what she was about to say.
"There are two kinds of sorcery here on Erde. One is Clearsong;
the other is Darksong."
"Like the moons…" Lysara murmured, nodding at Anna.
"Like the moons," Anna agreed with Lord Birfel's daughter,
recalling Erde's two moons-the baleful red point-disc of

Darksong and the small white orb that was Clearsong.
"Clearsong is what a sorceress uses to deal with things that are
not alive and have never been alive. Stones, metal, bricks, if
there's not too much straw in them, glass…" She struggled for
examples.
"What about wood?" asked Jimbob.
"Wood comes from trees, and they were once alive. That takes
Darksong." Anna took a deep breath. She was still too weak,
but she had to do something besides eat and lie in bed or sit
behind her table in the receiving room.
"Darksong is used for living things or things that were once
alive- like wood or bone. Darksong also takes more skill in
singing the spells, and more energy. If you do too much of it, a
Darksong spell can kill you." She paused. "So can a Clearsong
spell, but it takes a bigger spell."
Anna paused, breathing harder than she would have liked. The
room remained silent.
"What is a spell?" she asked. "It is the combination of music,
sung words that match the music, and the meaning of the
words themselves. They all have to match. You can speak the
words of a spell to music, and nothing will happen. You can
sing the words of a spell-and unless you are very, very good,
nothing will happen. And if it does, without music, it will take
most of your energy-and, if you survive it, at least until you're
as experienced as I am, you'll feel like someone's lancers ran
their mounts over you."

She could see the doubt on a few faces, especially those of
Lysara, Cataryzna, and Skent-the ones who'd heard her use
spells without accompaniment. "Yes, I have cast spells without
anything but my voice." She shook her head. "Do any of you
know what sort of training I've had?"
The blank looks-just like the students in her music appreciation
classes at Ames-confirmed the ignorance.
"My oldest daughter, were she alive, would have children
almost as old as Secca. I've worked on my voice for over thirty
years, and most of the time that's meant two to three glasses of
solid singing every day, and another three to four glasses
studying the music and… the spells that accompany it." She
shrugged. "You can believe it or not. That's what it took Lord
Brill, and that's what it took the Evult. That's what it will take
you if you want to be serious about it. If you have a voice and
talent."
She cleared her throat.
"There are also rules for sorcery. First, no sorceress, or sorcerer,
can cast spells that directly affect her. I can't change my
appearance or make myself older or younger, or less tired, or
heal my own wounds. I think some of you have seen that.
Second, the stronger and better the supporting players, the
more effective the spell. Third, sorcery does not create things
from thin air. It rearranges what is already in this world. When
I used sorcery to make a gown when I first came to Falcor, the
spell transformed old cloth into new cloth. When I made the
bridge the other day, the stones came from the riverbed. You
can see that there is a gorge there that wasn't there. Finally,

sorcery is limited by the strength and talent of the sorcerer and
sorceress."
Anna felt lightheaded, and knew she should stop. Besides, they
all had that dazed expression-like children who had discovered
there was no Easter bunny… or something.
"Magic, like everything else in this world, takes a lot of skill, a
lot of raw talent, a lot of training, and you can only do so
much. You all need to think about what I've said." She slipped
off the stool and walked slowly past the table to the door in the
silence.
Jecks offered his arm, his brows knit in concern.
She took it.
Outside the main hall, once the door had closed behind them,
he whispered, "You're not strong enough for this yet."
"They need to know I can't work miracles all the time. Better I
tell them than they find out and feel I've deceived them." 
"Some will feel that way now."
"They may," she agreed. "And they can leave, and we won't
waste anv more effort on them." She wanted to scream, but she
was too damned tired. Why was everything a double standard?
Why was it that people could understand that an armsman
could only fight so long, and that he couldn't defeat an entire
army single-handedly, but they thought that a sorceress who
couldn't sing spells endlessly was weak?
9

STROMWER, DEFALK
YOUR son and heir, my lord." The dark-haired woman bows
deeply, almost prostrating herself on the rich maroon of the
time-worn carpet in the private study.
"What bargain did you make with the bitch?" The gangly Lord
Dencer, pushing a lock of brown-and-gray hair off his
forehead, surveys the woman and the infant she carries, but
makes no move toward her.
"I said nothing, and I agreed to nothing, my lord." She
straightens, and her son clutches at her shoulder. "I had hoped
you would be pleased to see us. We rode as fast as we could."
"So… Wendella, my consort, what message do you bring?"
Dencer's words are hard, bitter. He puts both hands on the
wood of the desk and leans forward, looking improbably like a
long-legged heron about to spear a marsh frog. "For you must
bring message or bargain."
"I was sent with no messages and no bargains."
"The bitch knows I do not favor her, and she is far brighter than
either Barjim or Behlem. She would not have released you
without gaining something. Something!" Dencer bobs his head.
"What are you hiding?"
Wendella's eyes meet Dencer's. "My lord, the bitch sorceress…
she sent no message to Stromwer. Yet she delivered one to me
in bidding me leave. While it was to me, you should hear it."
"To you?"

Wendella shivers, but clears her throat, and shifts the infant
higher on her shoulder, absently patting his back. "When she
dismissed me, the bitch said that you had continued to court
both the Matriarchy and Lord Ehara of Dumar. Then she said,
and I remember this most clearly, 'I don't have time for games
and intrigues. And I have even less for the people who attempt
them.' " Wendella shook her head. "My lord, you are lord, and
you must handle your lands and your affairs as you see fit. But
I see great danger in opposing this sorceress without great
power behind your cause." The brown-haired woman paused,
then added, "I fear that power great enough to break the bitch
sorceress will be great enough to destroy us." 
"That was your bargain… to seek my loyalty to her! You would
bind me! No harmony in you, Wendella. Was that why your
brother, the honorable Mietchel, was so agreeable to letting you
become my consort?"
"I pled, and I groveled, my lord. I told her that your son had
not seen you in half a year… that I had not seen you in that
long."
"And out of kindness, she just released you? I find that as
improbable as a spade on a sow."
Wendella flushes.
"As impossible as a beard upon you. Yet you would shave me
for your release from Falcor." Dencer straightens, and his eyes
glitter. He steps forward, and his hand lifts.
"Is it wrong to tell you what I saw, my lord? Is it wrong to tell

you that she is most powerful?" Wendella watches Dencer's
eyes, not the hand that strikes her cheek.
"Do not tell me how powerful she is! You do not deceive me,
Wendella. Your tongue slithers like that of a snake. Your words
are smeared in filth. You have betrayed me. You have betrayed
Stromwer and Morra." His hand falls, and he looks at it. "I feel
unclean."
The dark-haired woman, a welt the shape of an open hand
rising on her cheek, continues to watch Lord Dencer. She
mechanically pats the child who has begun to sob. "I did not
make you unclean. I hate and despise the bitch regent. I offered
you truth, my lord, and you have struck me for that. I can do
nothing. You are lord. Yet I fear for us both should you oppose
the sorceress-regent."
Dencer lifts his hand, then lowers it. "You should fear me,
Wendella. I am lord in Stromwer, and I will be lord." His voice
hisses, and his eyes glitter more darkly.
"You are lord," Wendella acknowledges, but she does not turn
her eyes or her head.
"You will have new quarters, my lady." Dencer lifts the brass
bell, and it clangs off-tone. "Then we will see. Indeed, we will
see."
10
IN the dim early-morning light of midwinter, Anna studied her
face in the washroom mirror. The hair remained blonde with a
trace of curl, the nose still fine and straight. No lines or bags

circled her eyes, even without makeup, not that she had any
left except half a tube of lip gloss. The chin and neck lines were
firm.
The cheeks were another question, deep and sunken, as though
she were starving. Her eyes seemed sunken as well, and there
was a darkness behind the blue. Was that the darkness of
having seen and experienced too much?
The regent and sorceress washed and dressed in the green shirt,
over-tunic, and trousers that she'd adopted as her official
working uniform. In hotter weather, though, the tunic went.
Gowns and dresses were for rare formal dinners and state
occasions not requiring riding.
A last look in the mirror confirmed that she had to eat more,
and that she should refrain from spells as much as possible for a
time, except one to get clean water. She just couldn't bear the
thought of drinking more vinegar.
With a deep breath, she finally headed out the door, trying to
ignore the black rectangle on the stone wall that reminded her
too painfully of her last attempt to look across to earth-the mist
world-to see her daughter Elizabetta. Before coming to Erde
and becoming a sorceress she never would have dreamed that a
mirror could explode. Or that her grief over her older
daughter's death would have left her open to sorcerous
transport to Erde.
The fire-etched stone also reminded her of the need to create or
have built a reflecting pool. She couldn't keep destroying
mirrors.

Blaz and another guard-Lejun, if she recalled correctly-followed
her along the corridor and down the stairs to the receiving
room.
"Good morning, Skent, Resor."
"Good morning, Lady Anna." Both pages bowed, and Resor
opened the door for Anna.
Dythya stood to the left of the doorway, across from the pages,
waiting for Anna.
"Come on in, Dythya." Anna nodded toward the doorway, then
led the way into the room, still cold despite the low fire in the
hearth.
The Regent cleared her throat, wondering whether to crack the
window to dispel some of the smoke, or to leave it closed and
hope the chimney's draw would improve as the receiving room
warmed.
Dythya stood, waiting.
Anna looked at the platter on the worktable, with a sliced and
already browning apple, hard white and yellow cheese,
rock-hard imitations of crackers, and, thankfully, a small loaf
of dark bread fresh enough that it still steamed in the chill air.
Then she turned to Dythya. "Where do we stand?"
Dythya extended a sheet of brown paper. "This is the reckoning
you requested, lady. The top part shows the coin on hand, the
recent receipts, and the liedgeld owed. The bottom shows what
we have spent since the harvest, what we have received, and

what I would guess we will have to spend before the next
harvest."
Anna gestured to the seat across from hers. "Please sit while I
study this." In turn, she seated herself, and took one of the
apple slices and chewed it, then reached for another.
Almost absently, she coughed, trying to get her throat clear,
before singing the water spell to ensure the water in the pitcher
was pure. Clean water was scarce anywhere in Defalk, as she
supposed it was in any medieval-type culture. Even before she
finished, she felt dizzy.
Damn! Damn! Damn! One lousy water spell, and she was
reeling. Anna forced herself to set down the paper and eat
several mouthfuls of the hot bread, and two slices of cheese.
After filling her goblet, she followed the cheese with a swallow
of water, and then more of the apple slices, and more bread.
Finally, as the worst of the dizziness began to subside, Anna
checked the liedgeld owed. Arkad of Cheor hadn't paid.
Neither had Gylaron of Lerona. Dencer had paid half. So had
Lord Sargol, after sending a complaining scroll. Lord Vlassa of
Fussen had died, and his twin sons were still sorting it out,
probably with blades, and liedgeld was doubtless low on their
priorities. Four other lords had various reasons for not paying.
Then she laughed, ironically. The holding of Mencha had not
paid. As the Sorceress and Lady of Loiseau and as Brill's
successor, she owed herself, as Regent, liedgeld, and she
probably couldn't raise it, although at two hundred golds, it
was less than half of what almost all the others owed.

"My lady?"
"Dythya… I owe myself liedgeld, and I doubt I can raise it. I've
let some of those who wished to remain continue to live there,
but there's not even anyone there now to run the lands."
"You owe liedgeld?"
"I ended up as the Lady of Loiseau and holder of Mencha."
Dythya's mouth went into a O. "I am sorry. I should not have
put that on the list."
Anna shook her head. "I'm not angry. It's another problem. I
probably needed to look into that as well." Along with
everything else. Who can I get to manage the place? Surely a good
manager could raise enough for the liedgeld and even some coins
for my personal use.
Who could she have manage Loiseau? What had happened to
Gero, Brill's personal assistant? Or Serna and her daughter
Florenda? Anna remembered how good Serna's breads had
been. Quies, the stablemaster who had thought Farinelli would
be a good mount for her-he and his son Albero, who'd taught
her the basics of using a knife-they'd been among those who
had petitioned her to allow them to return to Loiseau. But some
of the others, she'd scarcely thought of, and they were people,
too.
She forced her mind to the paper before her. "Have the golds
for the Ranuan Exchange left?"
"Three days ago, lady. Even with good roads, it would be

another five days to Ranwa, and two on the river. With the
ways as they are…" The accountant shrugged. 
"A month?"
Dythya looked puzzled, and Anna corrected herself. "Two
weeks? Or four?" From what Anna could figure, months didn't
exist on Erde, just seasons, each twelve weeks long. That made
the Erdean year shorter by a month than the year on earth, she
figured, since she couldn't tell any real difference in the length
of the day. With twenty glasses in a day, a glass was longer
than an hour, but how much longer? Who knew?
"It is possible."
"We've done what we can. Now, we need to send a scroll to
Lord Birfels, telling him that we have taken steps to ensure that
he can obtain seed grain. If he has any more trouble, he should
let me know as soon as possible."
"I can have that scroll for you to seal this afternoon, lady."
"Good. I take it you feel that it's important."
Dythya nodded.
"So do I." Especially since Birfels and Geansor are the only ones I
even halfway trust in the south of Defalk. "And we probably
ought to send one to Lord Geansor as well. Is there any other
lord who might have that sort of concern? Oh, Lord Hryding,"
she answered her own question before Dythya could speak.
"Sorry."

"Perhaps Lord Sargol of Suhl," suggested Dythya. "There are
rumors."
"Can you do that?"
"It will be done, lady." Dythya rose as Anna did. Once the
accountant or bursar or whatever Dythya was-minister of
finance?-once she left, Anna turned to the now cooler bread and
cheese, forcing herself to eat more than her stomach said it
wanted by concentrating on how thin and almost anorexic
she'd appeared in the mirror, and how dizzy the simplest spell
had left her. By the time she finished the apple slices and four
more chunks of cheese, each mouthful was an effort, each
swallow leaving her feeling as though she would gag. 
"Arms Commander Hanfor and Lord Jecks are here." 
Her mouth full, Anna motioned Resor to send the two in. She
stood and swallowed, grateful to put off eating for a few
moments more.
"Lady Anna."
"Lady Anna," Jecks said a moment behind Hanfor.
"Please be seated." She gestured and sat without waiting,
knowing both men would stand until she took her seat at the
table. She looked at Hanfor. "I never did ask you about the
Sand Pass fort."
The graying arms commander smiled. "The Ebrans repaired
most of the outer walls before they left. Lady Gatrune's levies
included some masons 

Anna nodded, recalling the big woman who had been the first
landholder, as administrator for her late husband, to recognize
Anna's regency.
"… and Alvar managed to get the rest of the rents in the outer
walls patched, and one more quarters' block usable. The Ebrans
had restored two. The walls won't hold off more than
brigands…"
"But that's an improvement, and we won't have to worry about
an attack from there for at least another year."
"Perhaps next fall, Alvar could finish the job," Hanfor said.
"Do you think we should put a small force there?" Anna asked,
looking from Hanfor to Jecks.
"We do not have many armsmen here in Falcor," pointed out
the white-haired lord.
"I wasn't thinking about the best armsmen," the sorceress said.
"Just a few to keep an eye out, and to show that the regent cares
about the area."
Jecks and Hanfor exchanged glances.
Then Hanfor nodded. "A squad with a graybeard who has seen
enough, perhaps." He paused. "They will need some silvers for
supplies."
"Figure out how many and talk to Dythya." Anna didn't shake
her head. Everything she thought about cost silvers, but an
abandoned outpost on the eastern border wouldn't help
impressions at all, not even if Ebra were still prostrate. "Have

we heard about those blades in Encora?"
"Not yet, lady. I would not expect a reply for another week at
the earliest." Hanfor inclined his head slightly.
Jecks nodded.
"I've been thinking about roads," Anna ventured.
"You have mentioned them." A glint entered the arms
commander's eyes.
"After my recent… experience with the bridge," Anna spread
her hands, "I have been cautioned to be somewhat more…
careful."
"Far more careful," suggested Jecks mildly.
"I would like your thoughts on something. If we could get large
piles of rocks beside the roads, that would make my sorcery
much easier. Is there a way to encourage that on the part of the
holders and lords?"
Jecks fingered his chin. "I would gladly do that on the roads to
market."
"But some of the market roads go through swamps and rivers,"
Hanfor pointed out. "The roads we need for armsmen and
lancers should follow the ridges where possible."
"The high roads," Jecks added. "But the holders will not wish to
have their tenants and freeholders work on roads that offer
them no benefit, nor will the farmers-"

Anna held up her hand. "Even I can't rebuild a fraction of the
roads in Defalk, not in years. Three sorcerers couldn't."
"I did mention that, lady," Jecks said.
Even if he were as handsome as any movie star, Anna wanted
to clout him for the condescending tone, but she smiled
perfunctorily instead. "Which roads are most important-and
which sections of those roads? I'm talking about fords or places
that turn into swamps or where we've lost bridges?" She
gestured vaguely, wishing she could articulate what she meant
more clearly, but she'd been a singer and an opera professor,
not a sorceress or an engineer. She needed a Regency engineer,
a Regency weapons smith, a Regency schoolmaster and tutor,
not to mention an agronomist, along with a chief of players.
That didn't count the expertise she needed and didn't know she
needed. "The bridge at Elhi…" began Jecks. "The ford at
Sorprat or the road to Denguic-"
"Gentlemen," Anna said with a laugh. "Gentlemen. I think you
need to get together with Tirsik and with Himar and Alvar and
Lady Essan and Dythya. Then bring me a list, with the most
important part of the most important road at the top."
"The lady Essan?" asked Hanfor.
"She was Lord Donjim's consort, and she rode with him on
many of his early campaigns. She will know the roads as well
as anyone, and she will know which roads used to be important
and why they are not." She's also likely to be far less biased. The
problem was that Hanfor was relatively unbiased, but didn't
know Defalk well enough, and Jecks knew Defalk, but would

still lean toward benefiting Elhi. She wanted to shake her head.
Instead, she smiled once more. "Surely, you can get together
and figure that out for me?" She looked at Jecks. "You did say I
should be cautious. Would you also think about how we can
persuade the lords and others to carry rocks to places beside the
important roads?"
Jecks returned the smile, a glint between amusement and anger
in his hazel eyes. "Yes, Lady Anna. We should be able to
provide such a list." 
Anna stood. "Thank you both."
For a moment after the two men had left, Anna looked at the
platter and the remaining crackers and cheese. She couldn't eat
any more, not for a while.
Instead, she took out the grease marker and a sheet of the
coarse brown paper. What should a road look like? If she
recalled correctly from that long-ago ancient history course, the
Romans had built their roads on yard-deep stone-and-gravel
bases, and surfaced them with long smooth Paving blocks
nearly a foot thick. She began to sketch.
How wide? Enough for two wagons abreast? But could she
physically sustain that much sorcery?
You'd better limit it to key bridges and marshes or things like
that," she murmured. Defalk wouldn't have the resources to
build good roads for a decade without sorcery, but the country
might not last a decade without a better internal transport
system. She sighed, and set aside the sketches, then lifted the

spellsong folder that had come from Brill's workroom in
Loiseau. She began to read. Perhaps there was something in his
spells that would help. Perhaps. 
"The player Liende," announced the dark-haired Skent,
sometime later, peering around the door as if afraid that Anna
would snap at him.
Anna gestured for Skent to have the player come in.
"You summoned me." Liende bowed as she entered the
receiving room.
"I did." Anna gestured to the seat across the worktable from
her. "Please be seated."
The player sat on the front edge of the wooden chair, stiffly, as
though she had been summoned for her own execution. Anna
decided to plunge right in, since no amount of reassurance
without substance was likely to relax the horn player.
"Liende… although it was not my intent, I stole from you what
you wished for most." Anna forced her eyes to meet those of the
gray-and-red-haired player. "What Lord Brill had intended for
you, I received. When he was dying, I went to his side, and he
thought I was you. And he made me young with his
death-song."
"I know." The words were scarcely a murmur.
"I did not ask for that, and I tried to call you, but you were
hurt… and then it was too late. For that, I am sorry. You have
every right to be angry with me."

The silence was broken only by the sound of rain against the
window and shutters at the back of the receiving room. Anna
waited, her eyes on the horn player.
"At first." Liende paused and swallowed. "At first, I was angry. I
was most angry, and I watched, and I would hear nothing
good of you-"
"You don't have to-"
"Hear me, Lady Anna. Let an old woman have her pride."
Anna swallowed. Liende couldn't have been over forty, and she
thought she was old? Then, on Erde, forty was old.
"I would hear nothing good of you. But Lord Jecks almost wept
when he described how you stood alone against the Ebrans.
And he said how you dealt fairly with him and how you stood
against the Ebrans alone a second time. And you restored
Jimbob's heritage to him. But still, I avoided you. You came to
Elhi, and I thought you were cold and aloof. Then they carried
you back, and-you wept in your sleep, and a healer walked
twenty deks to try to help, and grown men sobbed as though
they might lose their consort or their mother." Liende
swallowed.
Anna waited, wondering, wondering how the woman could
forgive her.
"Lord Jecks sent a scroll. It was the bridge, Lady Anna. No one
who cared not for Defalk or Falcor would spend herself on
replacing a bridge.
You gained nothing from that. I was ashamed." Liende's eyes

were damp. "I am here. Do not shame me further." 
Anna's throat was thick, and she had to swallow again. "I won't
shame you. I never thought of that. I was the one who was
ashamed and guilty because you had stood by Lord Brill,
asking nothing. You only hoped, and I was the one who dashed
those hopes." So often, Anna thought, so often had others
dashed her hopes, and she hated being the one who had dashed
another's dreams.
"Life does not happen as we hope," Liende said slowly, "and
you did not ask for what you received. Nor did I." She smiled
wryly. "Thank the harmonies. For without you, all of us would
have been lost, and like as not, I would have been used by
every Ebran armsman, then tossed aside, if I had even endured.
Far better I live, in hope and well-fed, than to have been young
for a few days and perished in rape and slaughter."
Anna wanted to protest, but something stopped her. Could she
really have done what she did without the strength of her
second youth?
"Even now, you doubt, lady?"
"I've come to doubt a lot," the sorceress finally said. "There's not
much in life that's as simple as we think."
After a nod, Liende asked simply, "What did you wish of me?"
"I have no right to ask," Anna said, "but I need your help. I
cannot save Defalk without it."
"My help? What have I that is so precious that the greatest
sorceress on Erde must beg?"

Anna wanted to smile at the involuntary bitterness that Liende
still harbored, wanted to hug the woman for being human.
Instead, she answered. "Your skill as a player, your knowledge
of players. I'd like you to become the leader and teacher of the
Regent's Players. You will be honored and safe. I can't risk
losing you or your knowledge."
"I play a good woodwind horn. I am not a leader of players."
The brown eyes met Anna's.
"You could be."
"A woman lead player?" Liende's eyebrows arched.
"A woman regent?" Anna asked softly in return.
Liende smiled faintly.
"It is not just a favor," Anna added. "I will pay you for finding
and organizing the Regent's Players."
"Coin… and kindness. Neither can I afford to turn down, lady."
"Two silvers a week to start. Three a week, and two golds
bonus, if you can gather enough players for two groups." Anna
paused. "And you don't play for battles. What I had in mind is
several groups of players, if we can find or train enough. A
group that will learn and perform the songs for building,
another group for battle songs, perhaps a third for other
functions."
"I know much about building songs," Liende said. "Could I not
lead such a group?"
"As long as you're not close to battles." 

"Lady… the others would think ill-"
"It's not kindness, or favoritism." Anna shook her head. "I made
a mistake with Daffyd, a terrible mistake. I should not have
brought him with me to the battle with the Evult. I can teach
singing, in time. I cannot teach players. I cannot make
instruments. If anything happens to my lutar… who would
replace it?"
Liende smiled. "A strange sorceress you are. You hazard
yourself, but would save others less valuable. Yet… I will not
protest. While Kinor is near grown, Alseta is but twelve and
young for her years.''
"I did not know. They are welcome here, and you will have
quarters large enough. Alseta and Kinor could join those being
schooled."
"To me, lady, that be worth as much as the coins."
"Then you accept?"
"How could I refuse?" Liende smiled. "Palian will join me, and I
trust Kaseth will. Jaegel will not. He could not play under a
woman." She shrugged. "You will see. I be no bargain."
"I can help you with conducting," Anna said. "I already have
many of the songs, both my own and some from Lord Brill. I
can guide you, but I can't be a sorceress and a lead player at
the same time."
"You have led players before?"
"I've studied leading players, and I have led large groups of

singers," Anna admitted. Her conducting classes were far
behind her, but she doubted many in Liedwahr had had even
that much training. She paused. "Can you read Lord Brill's
notations?"
"No. He kept those to himself. Most sorcerers do, I understand."
Anna understood, but it was just something else to make her
plans- and life-a little harder. "Oh…" She shook her head.
"There's one violino player I've found. He's barely adequate, but
we don't seem to have much choice. His name is Delvor."
"I do not know of him, but I will hear him."
Anna reached for her belt wallet and extended a gold. "This is
to help get you and your family here. Dythya is the accounts
mistress, and she'll pay you and your players."
"Dythya I know."
Of course, Anna thought. After the battle of the Sand Pass,
Liende had found refuge at Elhi, Lord Jecks' holding.
Anna took out the quill pen, and carefully, most carefully,
wrote out a short note to Dythya, explaining Liende's
commission, and pay, and that she would need two to three
rooms in the players' quarters.
Both the ink and the brown paper ensured that the note would
take time to dry. While it did, Anna pointed to the paper and
added, "This note-please give it to Dythya-it explains that you
are the chief player and requests that she give you all possible
assistance." Anna paused. "How soon can you start?"

"Why… now, lady. Alseta and Kinor can travel here as they
can from Elhi. Lord Jecks often sends a few armsmen and
messengers."
Anna nodded. "Then get settled, and talk to Delvor and check
his playing. Later this afternoon"-Anna fumbled as she tried to
convert hours to local time-"around the eighth glass, please
come back with your horn, and we'll go over several of the
spellsongs we'll be using. One or two you may know, but I
want you to be familiar with the main ones." Anna took a sip
from the goblet, then continued. "Can you send for Palian and
any others? If you need a scribe, see if Dythya can help." 
Liende bowed her head slightly. "You do not lag, my lady."
"We'd better not." Anna said. "We have to be ready." Exactly
what she was readying Defalk for, was another question, but
her intuition told her that it was necessary, and whenever she'd
doubted that intuition, she'd found trouble and more trouble.
Anna waved the short note a last time in the air, and seeing that
the ink had finally dried, stood and extended the paper to
Liende. "Until the eighth glass."
"Thank you, Lady Anna."
Anna paused, then said, "Liende. I am not being short with
you. I am not displeased. I am gratified that you are here. I am
asking you to pardon me if I seem short, or if I do not spend
more time being courteous and gracious. In time, I hope I will
not feel so rushed. Now there is much to do, and I know so
little." And I'm still tired, damned tired.

A smile played across the thin lips of the player. "Most rulers
would not explain, but I thank you. Alseta will also be grateful."
She bowed again, then slipped out.
Anna still felt embarrassed by the situation, but what else could
she do?
She had yet to deal with a reflecting pool-and where to put it.
The small room across the corridor? No one had been living
there since the Neserean forces had left, and it was probably
better not to guest strangers too close to her quarters.
Still, that would have to wait, since it would take sorcery, and
she dared not try anything significant for a few days yet.
Why was everything so fucking difficult? She'd replaced one
lousy bridge, and she'd been a basket case for over a week.
Why? Why had the bridge been so hard? Had it been because
she'd done Darksong with Wendella just before?
Anna just sat at the worktable, slowly chewing through a hard
cracker, knowing she was stalling, almost not caring. She
finished the cracker, then looked at the papers on the corner of
the table.
Her nails clicked together, and she looked down, surprised that
her old nervous habit had resurfaced. Were things getting that
bad?
11
DUMARIA, DUMAR

THE broad-shouldered man in the gold-trimmed red tunic lifts
the dagger, momentarily balancing it on his forefinger. "It's not
right," he murmurs to himself before half turning to the
window and the gray downpour outside. "A gold, and it's not
balanced right."
The man in the gray cloak waits on the hard wooden chair.
The red-clad man leaves the window and sets the knife on the
dark wooden writing table, beside the flickering oil lamp. He
picks up the scroll once more and studies the words before
setting it on the desk and letting it rewind itself. "And why will
your master not come himself, the honorable soul that he is?"
"The bitch sorceress knows his likeness, Lord Ehara." The man
in gray shifts his weight on the hard chair.
"-and she holds his consort and heir. I know. Too bad that he
cannot put his consort aside and take another. Heirs are easy
enough to come by. The harmonies know, I've got enough of
them." Ehara's bass laugh booms off the walls of the small
study. "Your master writes that the lords in the south of Defalk
would willingly swear to me. Yet he does not say why this
should be so. Perhaps you could explain that, Master Slevn."
Ehara's voice drops into an almost silky bass as dark as his
beard and hair.
"Not a one of the southern lords of Defalk have much love of
the bitch, save perhaps Geansor, and he's a cripple who can't
live forever."
"I had heard Birfels supported her."

"For lack of a better alternative, Lord Ehara. He has removed
his older son from Falcor, you may have heard. His younger
remains in Abenfel. Only his daughter is hostage to the
sorceress."
"You say that Birfels is hostile to the sorceress. Why, pray tell, if
he did remove his sons, would he leave his daughter?" Ehara
again turns his back to Slevn.
"She must find a consort, I would imagine," Slevn says slowly.
"None of Birfels' neighboring lords have sons of an age. I do
know that Birfels told the sorceress that he had no love of the
sorceress's efforts to educate the daughters of lords at Falcor.
Nor of allowing the widowed ladies to hold their dead lords'
lands. I understand you have no love of such thoughts, either."
"What of Lord Gylaron?" asks Ehara abruptly.
"Gylaron has been brooked too often by Lord Geansor, and by
those in Falcor who side with the cripple in order to keep the
south weak and divided." A faint sheen of perspiration coats
Slevn's forehead.
"Oh… so your lord would be the overlord of the south under
me, relying on my armsmen and their blades and blood? Why
did he not write me such a proposal?"
"He did not say such, my lord Ehara."
"Yet he thinks such, or you would not have voiced it." Ehara
laughs again. "Tell your master that I ask much of my
overlords. More, I wager, than he would dream or wish."
Another laugh follows. "What of Lord Arkad? His lands are the

key to the south of Defalk."
"Lord Arkad is ailing. His seneschal runs his lands. They are
rich lands, perhaps the richest in Defalk." Slevn blots his
forehead with the back of his hand when Ehara half turns
toward the window and the continuing rain. "And he has no
heirs, not ones close enough to worry about."
"Your master would tempt me, then? Ha! Defalk once was rich,
and may be again. Now it is but a ruin of a land, governed by
a madwoman for an underage boy and lords who do not know
that the world must change." Ehara touches his black beard,
and the blue eyes flash for a moment, although his voice drops
into an even tone as he finishes. "It must change before the
ships of Sturinn flood our coasts. One way or another, we
cannot ignore the Maitre of Sturinn."
"Now is the time to take Defalk, then, and you can reap the
riches of its rebirth," suggested Slevn.
"Poetry now? Riches of its rebirth? Your master is known for
his turn of phrase. Did he suggest you use that phrase?"
"No, Lord Ehara."
"You coined it? Then, coin no more phrases in the hearing of
Lord Dencer. He might not take it well." Ehara glances from
the table to Slevn. "I must think about what you have
suggested. Tell your lord I am strongly considering his proposal
and I will inform him shortly after your return to Stromwer.
You may go." The lord pauses. "Who knows of this?"
"Only my lord and you, sire."

"That is for the best." Ehara nods, then extends his hand, which
bears both a golden coin and a small sealed scroll. "These may
speed your passage."
"Thank you, Lord Ehara."
Ehara waits until Slevn has left the study before he beckons to
the officer waiting outside.
When the door shuts again, the Lord of Dumar turns to the
lancer in the red uniform of Dumar. "The man in gray will be
set upon by brigands or thieves when he reaches the
Sudbergs-or if he talks to anyone who seems of import. Then
the thieves will slay them both. Is that clear?"
"Yes, sire."
"Good."
The red-clad lancer departs, and Lord Ehara beholds the rain
and clouds once more.
12
Anna pushed away the plate that contained but one scrap of
meat and a crust of bread. She felt totally gorged, and yet she
knew she'd be ravenous in another few hours-another few
glasses, she mentally corrected herself, still trying to adjust to
Erdean terms. Glasses instead of hours, deks instead of miles,
except a dek was much closer to a kilometer.
Across the cleared space of the receiving-room worktable, Jecks
took a sip of wine from his goblet, then spoke. "Were I to eat

half what you do, Lady Anna, in a few weeks they could stuff
me and serve me to all Elhi, and there would be leavings for the
dogs."
Hanfor, seated beside Jecks, finished a last scrap of cheese, and
nodded in agreement with the older man.
"If I ate half what I'm eating, I'd die of starvation in two weeks,"
Anna said dryly.
"I know. Your cheeks are still too thin."
"I'm still paying for rebuilding that bridge, but it's a good thing
I did. The Fal is rising. No one would be able to ford it now, and
probably not for the rest of the year, if ever."
Jecks looked to the window and the gray clouds outside, then
back to the table. His eyes did not quite meet hers when he
spoke. "Lady Anna, much as you wish to help all, you cannot.
You did rebuild the bridge, and it has taken half a season for
you to recover. As you told the fosterlings, not even the most
powerful sorceress in Liedwahr can do everything that needs to
be done. Not even you can do all that needs must be done in
Defalk or even in Falcor itself."
Then who will? Anna wanted to ask, even as she answered,
"That's the problem."
"All rulers have that difficulty, lady." Jecks laughed, a short but
warm sound. "That is why I grow increasingly glad that I am
not a regent or a ruler."
"Careful, I might just resign in your favor. After all, you are the

grandsire of the heir."
"No one would let you. They trust you more than they do me.
They will let you kill yourself on their thoughtless behalf, but
that is another kind of sheep."
That's always the way people treat the willing horse… or regent-
flog her to death with overwork.
"We're nearing spring, and I'm even more worried about the
liedgeld, and especially about this lord Arkad." Anna decided to
change the subject slightly. "All the others have either made an
effort or faced extraordinary difficulties." She laughed. "The
difficulties may or may not be real, but a prudent ruler should
move cautiously in those cases, I think." She turned to the
handsome Jecks. "What do you think?"
"I doubt both Lord Arkad and Lord Gylaron of Lerona," Jecks
said slowly, "and Lord Dencer, as you know. The troubles of
the others seem real enough, and all have made some effort
except for Lord Vlassa's heirs." A wry smile crossed his face. "A
regent should avoid conflicts between heirs unless you mean to
kill all but one."
Anna winced. "I'm not up for that." Yet. "Gylaron's effectively
Dencer's northern neighbor, isn't he? I don't care much for that.
There seems to be a disproportionate number of southern lords
who are reluctant to pay."
"I had noted that before."
"Arkad is the closest. Perhaps we should visit him."

"You wish to remind him personally of his obligations?"
"None of my other reminders have worked, have they?"
Jecks shook his head.
"How many armsmen should I bring?" Her eyes went from
Jecks to Hanfor and back again.
"As many as you can spare, I would say," answered Jecks. "I
would have your spells and instrument ready as you ride
toward his gate."
"I would that we had more archers," added Hanfor.
"You think Arkad is likely to rebel?"
"If he has not paid his liedgeld, he has already rebelled," said
Jecks dryly. "Best you put an end to it quickly."
"Do you think the other lords will regard any action against
Arkad as too high-handed? Or me as the madwoman of
Defalk?" asked Anna.
"Better to be thought headstrong and high-handed than weak."
Jecks touched his chin and the hazel eyes twinkled. "And those
lords you worry about already say you are headstrong."
In Defalk, having an opinion meant a woman was headstrong.
Anna took a swallow from her goblet. "Another week, if the
roads don't get worse?" She glanced to Hanfor.
The veteran nodded.

"Lady…" Jecks coughed.
Anna turned toward her local equivalent of a movie star.
"I might suggest that Jimbob be with us." Jecks covered his
mouth and coughed.
"To give an impression of friendliness-or to convey that the
Regency is acting on his behalf?"
"Both, and to give him a greater understanding of how frail a
lord's loyalty can be."
"Is it wise to have us all together?"
Jecks laughed. "It matters not. If you fall, so do we all."
Hanfor nodded. "He must see things as they are, while he is still
young enough."
Anna wanted to wince, even as she recognized the truth of the
two men's observations, even as she wanted to protest that she
was scarcely that important. Except, Lord knew how, she had
become just that.
The door creaked ajar, and Cens peered inside. "Counselors
Dythya and Menares, as you requested, Lady Anna."
"In a moment," Anna said. "I'll ring."
Cens nodded and closed the door.
"Dythya will never return to Elhi," Jecks said. "Not since you
have made her a counselor."

"I needed someone to put Menares in his place, and I couldn't
keep ordering him to work with her." Positions and prestige
and titles were almost as bad in Defalk as they had been in
academia, except in Defalk a lot more was at stake.
"And will you find someone to do that to me?" Jecks' tone was
somewhere between idle and playful.
"I already have. When I need her, Lady Essan will do quite
nicely."
"Ha! You are a dangerous woman."
Anna doubted that. In order to stay alive, she'd done what had
been necessary, and as a result, got stuck doing a very large job
that she didn't know nearly enough about. The one saving
grace was that no one else alive knew the job, either. The bad
part was that those who knew the job had died trying to do it.
The sorceress lifted the bell and rang, and the door opened. She
waited until Menares and Dythya had seated themselves
around the table.
"You sent word that we had gotten an answer from the Ranuan
traders, the Exchange or whatever?"
"Yes, Lady Anna," answered Dythya, half rising from her seat
and extending a scroll.
Anna took it. "What does it say?"
"They will extend credit to the southern lords for this crop year,
and they hope that the debt can be resolved after harvest."

"That means we have to come up with another thousand golds
by next year at this time."
Menares and Dythya nodded. Jecks frowned.
"Has there been any response to our scrolls and messages for
artisans and smiths?"
That got two headshakes.
"It is early," Dythya said.
"Very early," Menares added. "Those who might seek another
situation would not do so until the roads clear."
Always, it was the roads, the damned roads. Anna shrugged.
"Can you two write some messages for my signature to Birfels
and the other southern lords noting that I've made the
necessary arrangements for them to obtain seed grain on
credit?"
"Who might the others be?" asked Menares smoothly.
Anna wanted to grin and smack Menares simultaneously. The
former counselor to the late and unlamented Lord Behlem still
tended to ensure that Anna spelled out anything that might
reflect unfavorably on him later-a great tendency for an
academic or a bureaucrat, but not exactly what she wanted.
Still… it made her think. 
"Lord Geansor, out of courtesy, although he probably won't
need it. Lord Dencer, Lord Sargol, and Lord Gylaron. Maybe,
the other lord down there-Arien…"

"Tybel," supplied Dythya.
"Thank you. That should do it." Anna pursed her lips. "And in
the scrolls to Sargol, Dencer, and Gylaron, add a few words
about how this should help in ensuring that they pay the
remainder of the liedgeld they owe."
Jecks smiled. Hanfor grinned.
"Is that all, Lady Anna?" asked Dythya.
"For now," Anna answered. "Thank you."
"By your leave?"
The sorceress and regent nodded.
After the two had left, Jecks spoke. "The reminder to the three
lords will be helpful. You are telling them that you've done
them a service and suggesting that they've failed in their
obligations without quite directly saying so. You would not be
disturbed if I sent out a few scrolls to some of those more
friendly to the Regency, pointing this out along with some
other news?"
"Heavens no." Anna wished she'd thought of that.
Hanfor shifted his weight in his chair, and Anna suppressed a
smile. The senior armsman still wasn't much for meetings.
"I don't think that there's anything else right now." She rose
with a bright smile. "Thank you both."
"My pleasure," said Jecks, warmly enough to have meant it.

"Thank you, lady," said Hanfor.
After they left, Anna shook her head. The sparks were there
with Jecks, but the situation wasn't exactly wonderful. Not
when he was the grandsire of the underage Lord of Defalk for
whom she was regent. And, more important to her, there were
so many differences between their backgrounds. He wasn't the
chauvinist that most of the lords of Defalk were. He actually
respected women of talent-or seemed to-but Defalk was still a
macho culture.
Before long, once again, the door to the receiving room opened,
and Barat gingerly eased his head around the heavy oak.
"There is a messenger with a scroll from Lord Hryding, Lady
Anna. He insists he must deliver it personally."
"I'll see him. Have Giellum and Blaz accompany him in." Much
as she disliked it, there was no sense in taking unnecessary
risks, even with a messenger from Hryding, who had
supported her when she had been recovering from her first
battle.
A dark-haired young man dressed in leathers and a pale green
sash with an empty sheath at his belt entered the receiving
room and bowed. "A scroll from Lord Hryding, lady."
Blaz and Giellum stood behind him, hands on blade hilts.
"Thank you." Anna struggled to remember his name. Why did
she have so much trouble with names? She'd ridden all the way
from Synope to Falcor with the young man, and the name, on
the tip of her tongue, still escaped her. 

"How has it gone with you since our ride?" she asked. "And the
others?"
"Well enough, thank you, Lady Anna." The young armsman
smiled. "Stepan is in charge of the levies, and Markan is over all
the armsmen now that Gestatr has returned to Ebra."
"Returned to Ebra?" Anna puzzled through the names, then
almost nodded. Fridric had to be the younger armsman before
her. Stepan and Markan had been the two others who had
escorted her to Falcor when she had pledged her support to the
Prophet-before he had turned on her.
"His family served the Lord of Synek before the Dark Ones,
and the youngest son has returned. Synek was Gestatr's home,"
Fridric explained.
"I see." Anna nodded and lifted the scroll slightly. "If you would
wait, Fridric, while I read this?"
The young armsman nodded.
Anna broke the seal and began to read silently. "Regent Anna,
Lady and Sorceress, and Protector of Defalk…"
Anna paused. She definitely didn't like messages that opened
with flowery titles. They generally meant bad news of some
sort, like memoranda from Dieshr had, with all the flowery
praise at the beginning and lousy course assignments or forced
moves from a desirable voice studio to a less desirable one.
It is with deep concern that I am writing you at the behest of
my consort, the Lord Hryding. He has fallen gravely ill, and

beseeches that, should he not recover, you will continue to
honor his requests regarding Secca and the preservation of
Flossbend and the lands of Synope…
While we all pray and trust in my lord's return to health, in the
interim, I am administering the holding in his interests, and
request, in deepest admiration, your support in this endeavor.
Both Jeron and I stand ready to do your bidding and that of
our lord.
The seal, on maroon wax, was that of Lord Hryding, but the
signature read, "Anientta, his consort and servant."
Anna let the scroll close and glanced to Fridric. Too many
things, far too many, were making a sense she didn't like.
Markan, while intelligent and honest, was still young for a
lord's senior armsman, and probably those older had been
among the ones who had perished at the Sand Pass. Fridric had
been sent because he knew Anna, but also because he was loyal
to Hryding. She hoped that Stepan and Markan didn't meet
with some form of "illness" or "accident." And Anna had never
trusted or liked Lord Hryding's consort, especially the way
Anientta had spoiled her sons while almost turning out poor
Secca in rags. That had been one reason why Anna had invited
the little redhead to Falcor as a fosterling, at an age far younger
than Anna herself thought generally advisable.
Anna lifted the bell and waited for a page. This time the
sandy-haired Barat peered into the receiving room.
"Barat, would you find the young lady Secca? I believe she
should be at lessons with Tirsik in the stable."

"You wish to see her now?"
"Yes."
Barat bowed and vanished.
"And how has the past year treated you, Fridric?" Anna looked
back to the young armsman.
"It has been quiet, Lady Anna. Most quiet until Lord Hryding's
illness."
"Do you have a consort?" Anna had an idea.
"Oh, no, lady. I am much too young for that."
"And what about Stepan and Markan?"
"They don't, either. Calmut does. He has not forgotten you,
lady." A smile played across Fridric's face.
"I imagine not." Anna had been forced to soak the sour young
armsman with buckets of cold water applied through sorcery in
order to get access to Lord Hryding-and now it sounded like
Hryding was dying. "What about young Jeron?" Anna
watched Fridric's face closely.
"Jeron? He is Lord Hryding's heir."
The tightness of Fridric's face and words told Anna enough. The
armsman didn't much care for Jeron.
"Young Secca has been here, you know," Anna added.
"She was a sweet child," Fridric said, his voice even, but without

an edge.
"She has been sweet here, as well, and she seems very bright."
The door opened, and Barat peered in.
"Fridric? Would you wait outside for a moment?" asked Anna,
before turning to Barat and standing. "After the armsmen
leave, please have Secca come in."
Fridric nodded and bowed. "Of course, lady."
Anna waited as the armsman stepped out, followed by her
guards, and, after a moment, the petite redhead stepped
gingerly into the receiving room.
"You sent for me, Lady Anna. Have I displeased you?" Secca
looked almost ready to cry, and Anna was reminded that the
child was barely ten, and that Secca wouldn't have been at
Falcor except for Lord Hryding's plea, and the debt Anna owed
him for his early support.
"No, Secca, you haven't displeased me or anyone. You have
been very good, and I've enjoyed your being here." Anna
paused, wondering how she should break the news. "I've just
received a scroll from your mother."
"I saw Fridric. He didn't come for me, did he?" The redhead
went to her knees. "Please don't send me home, Lady Anna."
Anna stepped around the table. "You may stay at Falcor so
long as you wish. At least while I'm regent," she added. "But
that was not the message. Your father is sick. He's very sick." 
For a moment, Secca stared at Anna, silently. After a moment,

the girl's eyes misted. Then tears welled up and oozed down her
cheeks, and she began to shiver.
"I'm sorry." Anna stepped forward and hugged the child. "I'm
sorry, Secca."
"Poor Papa… poor Papa…" Secca kept repeating the words.
"Poor Papa"? Does she suspect what I suspect? Of her mother?
Anna managed to keep from shaking her head. After a time of
holding the redhead, she finally asked, "Do you want to go
home?"
Secca shivered more violently, shaking her head against Anna's
shirt and sash. "Papa… he said I should stay with you. I should
stay even if times are bad. Will you let me stay?"
Anna wanted to shiver herself, fearing that Secca had
confirmed her suspicions of Anientta. Instead, she just hugged
Secca again. "You can stay as long as you want." At least while
I'm regent… or Lady of Loiseau. "As long as you want…"
Anna finally sat down, drawing the still-sobbing child into her
arms, wondering how she'd ended up with another little
redhead.
After the scattering clouds and shifting light from the window
had played across the wall for a time, Secca gave a last sob, a
cough, and blotted her eyes.
"You really won't send me back to Flossbend?"
"You can stay here so long as you wish. If I'm no longer regent,

you may come to Loiseau with me… that's if you want to."
"Can we play Vorkoffe soon? Tonight?" Secca asked.
"A short game," Anna conceded with a laugh. The game was
similar to the box game Anna had played in college, where
whoever got the most boxes completed won, but in Liedwahr
the object was to distribute stones by twos, and the complexity
made the outcome less certain.
"You must have a lot to do." Secca straightened. "And I want to
play tonight." She looked straight at Anna, and her eyes
watered again. "You are good. Papa said you were." She
swallowed. "I'd better go."
After Secca had left, Anna took out the smooth brown paper
that was so expensive in Liedwahr and the quill, and began to
write the response to Lady Anientta, slowly and carefully, to
avoid smudging the ink that seemed to take forever to dry.
Once she finished, she reread the key parts in a low voice.
"… share your grief at the illness of one with whom you shared
so much of your life…
"We also regret deeply that a lord so able and supportive of
Defalk and the Regency is unable to fulfill his duties, and trust
you will continue in his tradition…
"In accordance with Lord Hryding's wishes, as expressed
directly to me, and to Secca, she has asked and will remain in
Falcor to complete her fostering and education… 
"In this time of grief and turmoil, Secca sends her love to her

father, to you and to Jeron and Kurik…"
It wasn't perfect, but it would have to do. She rang the bell.
"Yes, Lady Anna." Skent peered in.
She lifted the scroll. "Skent, would you please make a copy of
this, right now, and then return both to me?"
The page's eyes widened.
"Dythya says you're quite capable of copying and that you
have a fine hand."
"Yes, Lady Anna." Skent crossed the room and took the scroll.
"Send Fridric in on your way out."
The page inclined his head.
Fridric bowed as he entered. "Lady Anna."
"I will have a scroll for you to return to the Lady Anientta. At
this time, I am adhering to Lord Hryding's wishes that Secca
remain in Falcor."
Fridric bowed.
"You and Stephen and Markan are also welcome here, at any
time," Anna added, deciding against being too explicit.
"Thank you, Lady Anna." Fridric stopped, then swallowed.
"We serve Lord Hryding."
"Lord Hryding is a good lord," Anna answered, "and I know

you will serve him well."
Fridric looked relieved.
"If you wouldn't mind waiting outside for the scroll…"
"Oh, no, Lady Anna." The young armsman practically backed
out of the receiving room.
After Skent returned with the two scrolls and she signed and
sealed the original and sent Fridric off with it, Anna glanced at
the sandglass on the wall stand, nearing the eighth glass of the
day. Four o'clock, earth time, she converted mentally, and time
to meet with Liende to go over the spell songs.
Her eyes passed across the piles of paper, and she wanted to
groan. Was she really doing anything? Or was it all an illusion?
Jecks was right. She had to think about efficiency. She hated
the very word. It had been one of Avery's watchwords, and
Sandy hadn't been much better.
Clearly, creating things almost from scratch-like the damned
bridge over the Falche-took a lot of effort. But what about
rearrangements? Would it take less effort to rebuild houses or
shops? What if she started fixing up abandoned houses in
Falcor? She shook her head. They couldn't be gifts. Gifts never
worked, not with children, friends, or enemies. Was that it?
Dwellings for artisans and craftspeople-in return for services to
the liedstadt and to entice them back to Falcor?
She looked at the sandglass. Time for working out more of the
spell arrangements with Liende. She stood and stretched,
trying not to think about all the problems she still hadn't

resolved, from roads to liedgeld, to dead and possibly dying
lords, and hostile countries on almost every border of Defalk. 
Followed by Blaz and Lejun, Anna hurried out of the receiving
hall and across the courtyard to the players' quarters and the
large room that had become Liende's rehearsal hall.
The strains of the building song, played by several violinos and
the clarinet-like woodwind of Liende, seeped through the
planks of the stained-pine door. Anna paused to listen, with her
guards standing behind her.
One of the violinos was slightly off.
Abruptly, the woodwind quit.
"Enough." Liende's voice came through the door. "Delvor,
you're not holding the pitch. You have to follow Kaseth. This
sorceress is more forbearing than most, but if you do that when
she's casting a spell, she's not going to be pleased. I won't be at
all happy, because you're endangering the rest of us. You need
to practice more. If you don't, I'll tell the regent you can't play
well enough."
"Please… master player. I'll practice. I'll practice more,"
promised Delvor.
"You must practice better."
The regent suspected the wavering words belonged to Kaseth,
who had been Lord Brill's lead player. Anna still wondered how
Liende had persuaded the older man to play under her.
The sorceress knocked on the plank door, then opened it, and

stepped into the cool room, lit by only two candles in glass
mantels. The flames of both candles wavered with the door's
opening.
The three string players rose, Delvor scrambling rather than
merely standing.
Anna looked at the youngster. "If Liende doesn't think you've
improved enough in two weeks, you will leave. Do you
understand?"
Delvor's lower lip trembled. "Yes, Lady Anna."
"Delvor… I may not look it, but I've practiced and trained for
nearly thirty years." Anna kept her voice cool. "My oldest
daughter was almost old enough to be your mother. Music and
sorcery aren't things you just play at." She gave a perfunctory
smile. "If the rest of you wouldn't mind, I need a few moments
with Liende."
The three string players bowed. Kaseth met her eyes briefly,
and gave the faintest of nods, as did Palian. Delvor's eyes were
on the floor.
Once the door closed, guarded on the outside by Blaz and
Lejun, Anna turned to the woodwind player. "I hope you didn't
mind, but it's better that I'm the bad person. Then you can
seem reasonable."
"I have told him." Liende shook her head. "The young, they do
not understand."
"No, they don't," Anna agreed, thinking of all the students

she'd taught over the years, and how few ever truly understood
the difference between adequacy and perfection. In sorcery, or
music spells, competency was barely enough, and a mistake
could be dangerous or fatal. "If you think he isn't up to it, then
send him away."
"He might practice now," the red-and-white-haired woman said
with a short laugh.
"Or he might sulk and think we're unreasonable," Anna said
dryly. She'd certainly seen that type before.
Liende waited.
"I'm going to need you for a building spell, the second one.
How soon can you have that ready?"
The woodwind player frowned. "We have just started, and it is
different with only four players. A week, perhaps?"
"All right." Anna had hoped for a date earlier than that, but
Liende seemed reasonable, and Anna hadn't yet learned
whether the player was one who was too cautious, or too
optimistic, or relatively accurate in judging timing. Another
thing she needed to learn.
And… she'd promised Secca a game of Vorkoffe.
Was there ever time for what needed to be done?
13
ESARIA, NESEREA

THE brown-haired officer in the maroon uniform of a Lancer of
Man-suur drops to one knee, and looks up to Rabyn. "Your
grandsire the Liedfuhr has pledged us to your service, Lord
Rabyn."
"To my service, Overcaptain Relour?" asks the dark-haired
youth, leaning forward slightly, and almost indolently, in the
gilt throne chair.
"To the service of the Lord of Neserea, and the Protector of the
Faith or the Eternal Melody," answers the overcaptain,
standing and turning to his left to face Nubara. "And, of course,
following the counsel of the hand of the regent, Counselor and
Overcaptain Nubara."
"Of course," echoes Rabyn, smiling broadly. "You are indeed
most welcome here in Esaria, and I am certain that
Overcaptain Nubara will ensure that you and all of your men
are quartered and fed. Then, we must talk, the three of us,
about the Liedfuhr's wishes on how we are to defeat the evil
sorceress of the east."
"That is one reason why I am here, my lord. We await your
pleasure, and that of the hand of the regent." Relour bows, but
not deeply. "By your leave?" 
"By our leave." Rabyn smiles again, leaning back in the gilt
chair. "We are most glad to see you and your lancers, and we
look forward to ensuring their use against our enemies."
Relour offers a last head-bow before turning.
The doors to the winter receiving-chamber close behind the

lancer commander, leaving Nubara and Rabyn alone.
"You may be lord and prophet in name, Lord Rabyn," Nubara
says quietly as he edges up beside Rabyn, "but his lancers are a
greater force than any single one you have left in Neserea."
"Did you know that the Prophet's Guard has seventyscore
armsmen?" asks Rabyn, his tone guileless as he turns and looks
at Nubara, his eyes wide. "That's what Captain Gellinot told me
yesterday. He is the cousin of the late captain-Zealor, was it?"
"Zealor is his cousin. Or was, until the sorceress killed him,"
Nubara replies.
"Do you think he will make a good captain of the Guard?"
"He is loyal to the throne, and to you." Nubara's voice is
smooth.
"Do you like him, Nubara?"
The Mansuuran officer laughs, softly. "Lord Rabyn, I have
liked men who would have killed me, and disliked those who
have given their life for me. Liking does not matter. Trust does.
If you cannot trust someone, you must control them. You can
like them, but never count on liking when blades are drawn."
"You are wise." Rabyn cocks his head to one side. "Should
rulers like anyone?"
"You can like who you wish. Just don't confuse it with trust."
"Can we trust Overcaptain Relour?"

"He will do as he has been ordered by your grandsire. That you
can count upon." Nubara shrugs.
"And what are his orders?"
"We know he has been ordered to protect you and the borders
of Neserea."
"But not to support an attack on Defalk and the sorceress?"
"No." Nubara smiles widely, but only with his mouth. "Not
until your forces are stronger. And that will not be too long.
Overcaptain Nitron reports that the Mittfels Foot is at full
strength-"
"Why is he still an overcaptain?"
"Because he was the most senior officer who remained loyal to
your father and to you. And he did bring back not only his
levies, but the rest of your forces."
"Those who didn't desert," snaps Rabyn. "What about the
Prophet's Lancers?"
"Reforming is slower there," admits Nubara. "Most of the senior
officers remained in Defalk. Overcaptain Relour might be
persuaded to lend an officer or two…"
Rabyn frowns, then nods. "If you would ask him…" 
"I'm sure he would be most pleased. Most pleased."
"I'm hungry." Rabyn gathers the green cloak around him and
slips off the gilt throne.

14
EVEN with the candles in the wall sconces lit, as well as the
lamp on one side of the writing-desk table, Anna's quarters
were dim, and the black etched rectangle on the stone outer
wall, next to where her replacement scrying mirror hung,
seemed to shift with the flickering light.
Anna moistened her lips. How long, how many seasons, or
years, before she dared to use the mirror to see Elizabetta?
Would a spell even work anymore? The last attempt hadn't,
and the heat and explosion had nearly killed her. Would
another attempt, after a season or two, be any better? Would
the reflecting pool she planned across the hall make it easier?
Her eyes dropped to the redheaded child on the other side of
the table, a brown woolen shawl wrapped around her narrow
shoulders.
Secca looked at the two black stones in her hand, then at the
game board with the intertwined lattices, and the grooved slots
designed to hold the stones.
Anna glanced from the white stones before her to the window,
and the darkness outside the panes she'd installed a season
earlier. Sorcery had some benefits. Then her eyes went back to
the redheaded fosterling across the table from her. Secca's hair
was the color of Elizabetta's, but her face was thinner, more
intense, and her eyes were amber, unlike the green of
Elizabetta's.
Secca stared intently at the game board, then placed her stones
in adjacent slots in the lattice at the edge of the board to Anna's

far left. "There!" She grinned.
Vorkoffe was similar to NIM or NEM-at least that was what
Anna thought it was called. That was the box game Anna had
played in college, where whoever got the most boxes completed
won, but on earth you'd completed boxes with a pencil. In
Liedwahr the object was to distribute stones by twos. Five
stones completed a lattice. If you surrounded an opponent's
lattice, it became yours.
Tonight, Anna was losing, though she'd held her own recently.
Is that because your mind's not on the game? Imagine that.
Winning or losing wasn't that big a deal, no great gain or loss,
but she hated to seem incompetent. Anna put her two stones on
the board and completed the big center lattice. 
"That's wasn't fair, Lady Anna." Secca offered a hint of a pout.
"You're pouting again." Anna laughed. "Do you know that
when I was your age…"
"I know." Secca sighed. "You put your lip out so far that your
mother said she could ride to town on it."
Anna wondered if she were repeating herself too much. Early
Alzheimer's? Or stress? "I don't want you to have that lip stuck
out all the time."
Secca completed a corner lattice. "There! You need be careful."
"The way you're playing tonight, that's for sure." Anna juggled
the two white stones, looking at the ten-year-old who munched

on a corner of the dark bread. Secca certainly hadn't wanted to
go home to Flossbend-not at all, even with her father ill, and
that tended to confirm Anna's suspicions about Anientta.
Anna started a secondary lattice beside the center one by
putting one white stone on each of the open side slots.
Secca shivered again.
Anna looked at her. "You're cold."
"I'll be all right."
Were her lips actually blue? The sorceress stood, and walked
over to the hearth, where the wood was stacked, then back to
the corner where the lutar lay on the chest. She began to tune
the instrument.
"You shouldn't do sorcery, lady."
"Just a little spell." Anna stepped toward the hearth, then began
to sing.
"Fire, fire, burn so bright 
in this hearth tonight, 
burn well and warm and light 
and have the chill within take flight."
The hearth flared into flame, not a roaring blaze, but a warm
glowing steady set of flames. Anna smiled to herself.
"Oh… you didn't have to do that," Secca said.
"You're cold. I could tell that." Sparkles flashed before Anna's

eyes. One little spell? I can't even do a spell to warm a child?
Wanting to scream in frustration, instead she turned so Secca
couldn't see her face and carried the lutar back to the chest,
setting it down gently, despite her trembling hands.
"I wish…" Secca shook her head.
Anna slipped back to the table, with the game laid out upon it,
and eased into her chair, trying not to sit heavily, trying not to
show the lightheadedness. Slowly, she reached for the bread
and broke off a chunk.
Secca sat up straight in her chair. "Are you all right, Lady
Anna?"
"I'll be fine."
The redhead reached for the pitcher and, standing on tiptoe,
refilled Anna's goblet. 
"Thank you," Anna said after she swallowed the mouthful of
bread. She reached for the goblet.
"Would the cheese help?" Secca's voice was small.
Anna had to smile at the concern. "I'll have some in a moment."
She took a swallow of the water. "The fire does feel good."
"I like fires when it's cold," answered the little redhead, in a
voice that reminded Anna all too much of Elizabetta.
"So do I." Anna put a small chunk of cheese into her mouth,
wondering how much she'd have to eat to dispel the
lightheadedness.

15
AFTER a last vocalise, the regent and sorceress cleared her
throat. She looked down and studied the drawing of the
reflecting pool. Then, the sketch in hand, she stepped from her
chambers into the corridor. Lejun and Giellum straightened as
she appeared. The five waiting players shifted from one foot to
the other on the stone floor tiles in the dimness of the corridor,
holding their instruments loosely.
Anna walked past the players, her boots nearly silent on the
stones, to the open doorway. She glanced through the squared
arch to the piles of granite and limestone resting on the floor
stones of the empty chamber that had once been used for
guests-or relatives of the lords of Defalk.
With a nod, she turned to Liende. "Are you ready? The second
building song?"
"We are ready, lady." Liende's voice was firm, if low. Kaseth, as
lead string player, stepped back even with the others. Anna
recognized Palian and the thin-faced Delvor. The other, a
young woman, she did not. All four players lifted their
instruments.
Anna hummed, more to herself, took a last look at the sketch to
fix the image of what she wanted in her mind, then nodded.
The four violins began, then the woodwind, with the
smoothness of practice.
Anna began the spell. Strophic again, a small voice in her
thoughts reminded her. But aren't all spells with more than one

verse strophic? She forced her mind to the job at hand, and the
words and melody, simultaneously holding the mental image
of the reflecting pool.
"Shape this pool in solid granite stone. 
Ensure its reflection for me alone.
Smooth the base, and let it shine, 
when the water holds this sorcery's design… 
"Let the water be; let it see. 
Keep from others this pool to be…"
A small tremor shivered through the liedburg, and a cloud of
dust swirled up, obscuring the former guest room.
Anna staggered slightly, feeling some energy leach out of her,
but she straightened immediately. Sorcery was definitely easier
with players, and when it was Clearsong. She bowed to Liende.
"Thank you, Liende, Kaseth, Palian… all of you." She forced a
smile, then stepped forward into the room, looking at the
circular pool that rose smoothly from the floor to a height not
quite waist-high. The stones were smooth and polished, almost
black, although they had been more of a reddish brown when
rough-stacked on the floor, and there was no sign of any joints
between them. Now she wouldn't have to worry about the heat
of far-seeing blistering her mirrors. The water might boil,
though, she realized. In time, she might even be able to sneak a
look across the worlds at Elizabetta.
Not for a long time. She shook her head and studied the
reflecting pool.

The basin, about a yard and a half across, was filled with
silvered water that gave a nearly perfect reflection of her as she
looked down. Anna frowned, and so did her image. Her face
remained too thin, and her eyes, though not sunken, were too
dark.
A whispering rose behind her, in the corridor.
"… where did she go…"
"… stepped inside and vanished…"
The sorceress took a deep breath. Once again, whatever she'd
done had been more than she had anticipated. Slowly, she
turned and left what had become her scrying room.
"See!" Delvor closed his mouth sheepishly as Anna stepped
through the doorway. He brushed back the lank brown hair
from his forehead.
"I didn't mean to surprise you," Anna said. "It turned out just
fine." She smiled. "We'll be doing more spells now. Building
spells, mostly, I think. Thank you."
Liende offered a smile in return, mostly of relief, Anna
suspected. "May we go?"
"Of course. I'll need to talk to you later, Liende, about some
more spells."
Anna still felt slightly lightheaded, but nothing like the way
she'd felt after rebuilding the bridge. Then the reflecting pool
had been much smaller, and accomplished with players, and
she hadn't done any Dark-song lately.

She took her time going downstairs to the receiving hall, and
the meal that someone-Skent?-had ensured was waiting for her.
The bread and cheese and the water helped the
lightheadedness, enough that she felt almost normal by the
time Dythya arrived with the accounting charts and papers. 
"Again, I must thank you, lady." Dythya bowed, and added,
with a twinkle in her gray eyes, "My father was surprised that
he had raised a counselor to the Regent of Defalk."
"So was Menares," Anna said, wondering if Dythya's father
Herstat had to be faintly envious. "But you work as hard as he
does, and I need you both." Actually, Dythya worked harder,
but that wasn't something that needed to be said.
"Menares… he knows the intrigues. I know the accounts."
Dythya spread the brown sheets on the table.
Anna wished she had the equivalent of a finance minister or
liedstadt accountant. Then, wasn't that what Dythya had
become? Anna still had to make the decisions on how to spend
the funds-or how not to-and there was so much that she didn't
know.
Anna stood so that she could see the numbers on the charts
Dythya had hung from the easels. She forced herself to go over
each account slowly, comparing what she had budgeted
against current expenditures line by line. Some discrepancies
were obvious-such as coins budgeted for the weapons smith the
liedstadt still hadn't been able to find.
Then came the revenues. There was no change there. Those

who hadn't paid liedgeld the last time, including Lord Arkad of
Cheor and Lady Anna of Loiseau, still hadn't paid. Anna hadn't
done anything about arranging to have someone manage her
lands. Quies and Albero were doubtless trustworthy, but
neither had broader experience, and others would resent their
being chosen. Gero had some experience as Brill's assistant, but
he was barely more than a boy. She took a deep breath.
Perhaps Jecks could recommend someone.
The tax levies on the merchants of Falcor, more like a tithe,
actually were revenues from Jimbob's holdings. Until Jimbob
was of age, Jecks and Anna had agreed that they would be
handled as part of the liedstadt accounts, since the Regency was
there solely to protect the youth's patrimony-and needed every
possible gold to do so. Again, that was something else Anna
wasn't totally happy with, but it had been Jecks' suggestion,
and she had accepted it, at least until matters improved.
"What isn't in these accounts?" Anna asked warily. 
"How many players do you plan to have, Lady Anna?" asked
Dythya. 
"Players? I'd hoped for at least twelve."
"At what you are paying, that will cost you over a hundred
golds a year, and that does not count their food and clothing
and any supplies you must provide."
"Two hundred golds we hadn't counted on," Anna admitted. 
"I have guessed that a weapons smith will cost fifty golds a
year, and another hundred in materials," Dythya added. "I did

not guess that you would spend two hundred golds on blades."
"Another two hundred," Anna said wearily. "If we actually get
them. We still haven't heard from Ranuak." 
"You know about the five hundred for the Ranuan Exchange,
and the thousand that must be paid after harvest."
That was almost two thousand golds-and her reserve had been
a thousand. Add to that around two thousand golds in liedgeld
that had not been paid, and the government of Defalk-the
liedstadt-was in big trouble. Unlike the United States, Anna
reflected, with currency being solid metal coins, she didn't have
the option of printing more money.
She turned to Dythya. "I need two more lists. No, three. One
should be a list of all the items we've spent coins on that we
didn't budget for. The second is a list of the liedgeld we don't
still have, and the third is a list of items where you think we 
might be able to spend less. You should talk to Lord Jecks,
Arms Commander Hanfor, Tirsik, and anyone else who spends
coins and might have ideas." Anna paused. "They'll all tell you
spending less is impossible. You tell them that we won't have
the coins by the end of the year, and if they make a decision
now, then they get to suggest what would be best. Otherwise,
I'll have to choose." Anna smiled. "Try to get across the idea
that you're looking out for their interests and giving them some
advance word."
"Advance word?" asked Dythya, then nodded.
Anna kept forgetting that some expressions didn't translate.

Dythya was barely out of the receiving room before the door
opened again.
"There is another messenger from Synope, my lady,"
announced Giel-lum.
"Escort him in." Anna had a feeling about the message and
messenger, and seated herself in the official gilt chair on the
dais.
The messenger was none other than hatchet-faced Calmut. He
bowed and extended a scroll. "Regent Anna, a message from
Synope."
"I'm glad to see you in good health, Calmut." Anna nodded to
Giellum. Lejun stepped up beside Calmut as the younger guard
took the scroll and carried it to the regent.
The sorceress broke the seal and began to read, her eyes
catching the important words and phrases. "Regent Anna,
Lady and Sorceress, and Protector of Defalk…"
Anna pursed her lips-still the same sort of flowery opening that
meant that the trouble presaged by Calmut's arrival was bad
indeed.
It is with the deepest regret that I must inform you that my lord
and consort, Lord Hryding, has passed into the harmonies
beyond Liedwahr. His last wish was that I again beseech you to
honor his requests regarding Secca and the preservation of
Flossbend and the lands of Synope…
Until you have made a decision regarding his lands and

holdings, I will continue to administer Flossbend and its lands
as temporary custodian for Jeron. In deepest admiration, I beg
of you your support. Both Jeron and I stand ready to do your
bidding and await your response. 
The wax seal remained that of Lord Hryding, but the signature
was somewhat different from the last scroll, reading, "Anientta,
his consort and administrator for his heir, Jeron."
While Anna couldn't prove it, she doubted Hryding's death was
from natural causes. The whole business stank, and it created a
real problem. She'd already set the precedent of letting consorts
administer for children, and now she had a consort who could
be a disaster, but with no way to prove it.
"I am indeed sorry to hear of your lord's death," Anna said to
Calmut. "He was a good man and a good lord."
"Yes, Lady Anna. Many regret his death." Calmut's voice was
low, properly respectful, and Anna didn't trust him in the
slightest.
"Lejun, would you have one of the pages make sure that
Calmut is fed and given a place to rest while we consider Lady
Anientta's request?" Anna smiled professionally. "And Giellum,
would you have one of the pages summon Lord Jecks?"
Her smile faded once the three armsmen left and the door
closed. She read the scroll again, then set it down and finished
the last of the bread and cheese, and drank almost another full
goblet of water before Jecks arrived. She waited until he sat
across the table.

"Lord Jecks… you may have guessed. Lord Hryding has died."
She shook her head. "I probably should have gone to Synope."
"You could not have reached there on these roads before he
died."
Jecks gave a sad smile, "You feel not all was as it was presented,
lady?"
"Anientta's a scheming bitch, from what I saw. Her son Jeron is
a living replica of Nero. Actually, both her sons are. Kurik's not
any better, and-"
Jecks' brow furrowed.
"Sorry. Sometimes, when I get angry I use names from earth.
Nero was a ruler whose mother schemed to get him to be
emperor. In gratitude, he poisoned her."
"You think highly of both of Hryding's heirs, I see."
"I thought highly of Lord Hryding, and Secca shows promise."
Anna shook her head. "There's no way she's ever going back to
Flossbend." Hryding had known-or at least suspected.
"Lady Anna, you cannot solve all problems. Even if you had
gone to Flossbend, and you had reached there before Hryding
died and saved him-then what would you have done? Could
you prove he was poisoned? And if you did not kill Lady
Anientta, what would have saved him the next time? If you did
kill her, without proof, how many consorts would welcome you
to their holdings? How would other lords feel?"
The room darkened as clouds outside covered the late-morning

sun. Anna wondered if Falcor would get more rain. From the
amount she had seen over the winter, she was beginning to
appreciate just how much moisture the Evult's sorcery had
withheld from the land-and how long I it might take to recover
from the years of drought. 
"That still gives me a problem. Anientta's scheming against me.
That's what I feel, but I don't have any real evidence of that,
either."
"Perhaps you should visit her."
"That's a possibility. But we need to visit Lord Arkad first."
Anna thought. If they followed the Synor River, they could go
to Synope after Cheor, and then come back along the Chean. If
she took the players, they could rebuild the ford at Sorprat, and
perhaps repair a few stretches of highway or bridges.
She certainly wasn't accomplishing the rebuilding of Defalk by
sitting in the liedburg.
"You have a certain… look, Lady Anna," Jecks said warily.
"The same one you had when you decided to cross the Ostfels
and take on the Evult by yourself."
"That may be." Anna smiled brightly. "You suggest I do
nothing except confirm Lady Anientta as regent for her son for
the time being?"
"You might suggest that, as in all other cases, you will visit her
and discuss her administration periodically." Jecks' forehead
crinkled. "I will tell a few other lords that you are not allowing
consorts who hold their lords' lands to do so without some

oversight."
"That should make them happy."
"Less unhappy," suggested Jecks.
Anna lifted the bell. "First, I have an unpleasant duty."
"Secca?"
Anna nodded as the door opened.
"Resor, would you find the young lady Secca for me? I need to
talk to her."
Resor nodded, and the door closed.
Anna turned back to Jecks. "While we wait, I have another
question."
"Yes, Lady Anna?" A glint of a smile appeared on both Jecks'
lips and in his eyes.
"I find I am the Lady of Loiseau, and I owe liedgeld. As you
might have guessed, I have no one to manage the lands, and I
haven't the faintest idea of who I could trust to do a good job."
"You need a steward."
"That's pretty clear," she admitted. "Do you have any ideas?"
"Hmmm." Jecks frowned. "You should send a messenger to the
tenants, at least. Suggest that they only owe half what they
paid last year because of the troubles. See what coins you get. I
also do not think that anyone would find it remiss if you

excused Loiseau from last harvest's liedgeld because the
previous lord had died in defending Defalk and because the
succession had not been established." The white-haired warrior
gave a crooked smile. "You may have to do that for Lord
Vlassa's heirs in Fussen before it's all over. In both cases, do it
quietly."
Anna understood that part. What Jecks said made sense, but
she didn't like it. She sighed.
"You do not like not paying your debts-even those you owe
yourself."
"No. I don't see an alternative right now. I didn't even know I
was the Lady of Loiseau… I mean, I sort of knew, but I didn't
understand that accepting the lands meant I owed liedgeld. I'm
not exactly from Defalk, you know."
"No one would ever question you on that, Lady Anna."
Again, Anna could feel the sparks smoldering between them.
What was she going to do?
This time, she was saved by Secca's arrival.
"You sent for me, Lady Anna?" Secca bowed as she stepped
into the receiving room. Her eyes were dark and sunken.
"She did," said Jecks softly, rising. "If you would excuse me,
ladies?"
Anna nodded, appreciating Jecks' tact. She stood and stepped
around the table, waiting for the receiving room door to close.

"Secca? I've had another message from your mother…"
"Papa's dead! I knew it… I saw Calmut, and I knew it."
"Yes," Anna said quietly.
As the girl sobbed, Anna held her-for a long time.
Once Secca left, Anna requested more to eat. She was worried
and emotionally drained. Between the financial worries, her
concerns about her attraction to Jecks, and Lord Hryding's
death and Secca's grief, she was exhausted-and lightheaded
once more.
When she finished with the cold slabs of meat, the bread and
hard yellow cheese, she stood. She had to walk around,
somewhere, somehow, just so she could digest everything she'd
stuffed inside herself.
Followed by Lejun and Blaz, Anna walked down the lower
corridor and into the main hall, where her fosterlings and pages
sat at the long table, young men at the right end, and young
women at the left. Her eyes traversed the familiar faces-Skent,
Barat, Cens, Hoede, Jimbob, then Cataryzna, a subdued and
blotchy-faced Secca, Lysara, and Ytrude. The two new faces
were those of Alseta, Liende's strawberry-blonde daughter, and
Kinor, Liende's son and a wiry redhead taller than most of the
others, except for Skent and Ytrude.
Several sets of eyes went to her, but Menares was facing the
map on the easel and continued to lecture.
"Dumaria is divided into two areas, the higher meadowlands

and farms, and the lower and drier grasslands. Dumaria itself is
situated almost on that point where these two regions meet and
where the F.nvar River joins the Falche…" Menares' pointer
went to a spot on the brown map where two blue lines joined.
'Lady Anna." Menares turned from the map, lowering his
pointer. 
"I'm sorry to interrupt your lesson." Anna wasn't so sure she
was sorry. "Please go ahead."
Menares coughed, then shifted his feet.
"… Ah… there are two major cataracts above Dumaria. The
second cataract is the farthest north and marks the end of the
Great Chasm. The first is where the higher section of the
northern highlands end…" 
When Menares got to the geography of Ebra, Anna slipped out
of the hall and walked slowly back to the receiving room-the
empty, chill, and desolate receiving room. Suddenly, she
grabbed her lutar, and marched back out and up the stone
stairs to the new scrying room. Lejun and Giellum followed her,
stationing themselves outside the door. She stepped inside,
closing the door behind her with a thud.
For a time, she looked at the blank waters. Then she tuned the
lutar and hummed through the spell, mentally fixing the words
in her mind. Finally, she strummed and sang.
"Water, water, in this my hall, 
Show me those in power who seek my fall, 
Show them bright, and show them fast, 

and make that strong view well last."
Eight images appeared in the pool, each a circlet portrait of the
individual. There were eight-five men and three women.
The ones she recognized were Nubara-the Mansuuran lancer
who'd been Cyndyth's advisor in Falcor and who was now
effectively young Rabyn's regent; Lord Dencer; a dark-haired
youngster in an ornate green cloak who resembled his mother
too much to be anyone other than Rabyn; and, of course,
Anientta, Lord Hryding's widow.
At the sight of Anientta, Anna snorted. The woman was not
only a poisoner, but stupid, since Anientta wouldn't have lasted
a moment as Regent of Flossbend under a male lord of
Defalk-or under any of those who wanted to conquer it.
The ones she didn't recognize were a big black-bearded man
dressed in red, another man in sky-blue with mixed
brown-and-silver hair, a black-haired and dark-eyed woman in
deep green with a heavy chain and seal around her neck, and
another heavier dark-haired woman with red lips dressed in a
loose-fitting powder-blue robe.
From what she'd heard, she figured that the man in red was
probably Lord Ehara of Dumar and the one in blue was
probably Konsstin, the Liedfuhr of Mansuur. The two
women-they could have been from Ran-uak and Wei, but
which came from where was another question and what roles
or positions either held, she couldn't guess, although she
suspected the older woman in green was more likely from Wei.

Anna took a deep breath and studied the likenesses again,
trying to fix the images in her mind. Finally, she sang the
release spell.
"Let this scene of scrying, mirror filled with light, 
vanish like the darkness when the sun is bright."
The pool turned silver, vacant, empty of the images of those
who plotted against her. So… what else was new? Someone
from every country that surrounded Defalk-except Ebra-was
plotting her downfall. And her sorcery showed that Anientta
was, too. Anna still wanted to scream.
She didn't have enough armsmen, enough golds, enough
supplies, or enough strength to do all the sorcery required to
rebuild Defalk. She also didn't have enough time, and she
hadn't really the faintest idea of where to start, and she couldn't
exactly blurt that out to anyone. After all, she was the sorceress
and regent, the powerful one, who'd done the impossible.
What made it worse was that nothing looked that bad at the
moment. Anna could feel how bad it was going to get, but no
one understood feelings, and she didn't have any way to
explain why she thought things were going to get a lot worse.
Hanfor? Could she get him to talk? Perhaps he'd offer an
insight that she could build on. She replaced the lutar in its
case, then decided to leave the instrument in the scrying room.
She found Hanfor in the courtyard, sweating as he practiced
with Himar with a rapier-or so it seemed-wrapped in some kind
of coarse cloth.

Both officers stopped.
"Lady Anna?"
She forced a bright smile. "Nothing." With a nod, she turned
and left, knowing she left both officers with puzzled looks on
their faces.
How could she explain?
The walls were still closing around her, and she walked quickly,
too quickly back into the main building and up the stairs. She
knew she was behaving like a madwoman, and she wanted to
scream. But sorceresses and regents weren't supposed to
scream. And she wasn't a man who could beat at someone with
a sharp-or blunted-weapon.
Guards still trailing her, Anna walked to the north end of the
corridor and rapped on Lady Essan's door.
"Oh… come in, Lady Anna." Synondra backed away as she
opened the door, trying to bow simultaneously.
"You may go, Synondra," Essan said from her chair before the
low fire.
"Yes, ladies." Synondra slipped out between the two guards,
and the door shut with a clunk.
"No sorceress I, but these old eyes can see the fires fly from
you," said Essan.
Anna settled into the straight-backed chair across from the
white-haired widow. Questions swirled through her mind, and

she settled on the easiest. "Is there some color that the Ranuans
wear?"
"They wear many, just as we do," said Lady Essan. "I'm told
the Matriarch often wears bright colors, but the Sisters of the
South-I think they're also called the SouthWomen-wear pastels,
often blue. I once met Sister Merthe, but that was years back,
and she's dead now. The previous Matriarch had most of the
Sisters killed after they stormed a ship from Sturinn and slew
the crew." 
Anna wanted to sigh. One question-just one question-and the
answers gave rise to at least two more. Was it always going to
be like that? "Sturinn?" she asked. "Why Sturinn?"
"The Sturinnese keep their women in chains. Some chains are
little more than jewelry, but many are heavy links. A merchant
from Sturinn who lived in Encora whipped two concubines to
death, and fled to the ship before a mob. The captain refused to
return him to the Sisters. They stormed the ship. Almost all the
women were killed, but none of the Sturinnese survived."
And Anna had thought the situation in Defalk had been bad.
"Why did the Matriarch have the others killed?"
"Trade. Far Sturinn has hundreds of ships that ply the Western
Ocean, and most are heavily armed. Should the Sturinnese
choose, they could blockade Ranuak easily, because almost all
the trade comes from the port at Encora. The port at Sylwa is
distant and small and hard to use in bad weather."
"And Ranuak depends on trade."

Essan nodded.
"Why not the other countries in Liedwahr?"
"Donjim told me it was because Mansuur has many ports, and
they do not need much sea trade. Wei has many ports, and
almost as many ships as Sturinn."
Anna nodded. In time, she might sort it all out. "Dumar only
has one good port, but it doesn't need trade."
"Dumar is famous for its wool." Essan smiled, and lifted the
corner of the heavy shawl. "Donjim had this brought from
Envaryl for me. The isles of Sturinn are warm, compared to
Liedwahr."
The sorceress shook her head.
"You are still upset, sorceress-woman. Would you care to tell
me why?" Essan lifted a goblet of her apple brandy and sipped.
Anna swallowed, then began to speak. "We are surrounded.
Defalk is, I mean, and everyone except Ebra is plotting how to
take us over. The Liedfuhr has sent lancers to Neserea. The
Lord of Dumar is up to something, and so are those women in
Wei and Ranuak, some of them anyway. We don't have
enough coins for the year…" Anna spread her hands. "Our
roads are so much of a mess so that we can't move armsmen or
messages or goods or anything very well, and I've got a
handful of lords who don't even want to pay liedgeld-"
"Defalk has never been much different," said the older woman.
"You think being a sorceress would change that?"

"No." Anna almost laughed at Essan's dry tone. "What bothers
me is that everyone says just that… as if nothing can be
changed. If I can't change things, then Defalk will fall. I'm a
sorceress, not a miracle worker."
"Already you've worked miracles." Essan lifted her brandy
goblet again, almost as in a toast. "People expect more. Donjim,
he put down a peasant uprising, then another. The second one
happened because the lords, they thought that they could
abuse the peasants and he would bring in his armsmen and
back them up." The white-haired woman took a solid swallow
of the amber liquid. "Those uprisings killed Senjim and broke
Donjim's heart. I rode with them, on the first one, you know.
Better they had killed me." 
"You're too tough for that," Anna said.
"I was then. Not now. I sit in front of a fire, and look at you.
This is a hard land, sorceress who looks like a girl. A hard land
with hard lords. Aye, hard lords and selfish ones." She refilled
the goblet. "You must be hard, too, Anna, or they will break
you and your heart, just as they broke Donjim, and Barjim,
and Brill."
"You must be hard." Was that what it took? To be stronger and
harder . . . perhaps more cruel? Anna shook her head.
"You say no, sorceress-woman, and that means, should you
succeed, you'll end up being harder on yourself than on
anyone." Essan laughed softly. "I know about that. I do. So do
you, I'd wager."
What am I supposed to do? That was what Anna wanted to ask,

but she didn't, because ... it didn't matter, she realized. She had
to do what she could, what she thought best. The only question
was where to start. The sorceress took a deep breath.
"Aye, and this weather helps not," Essan continued. "Damp,
like once it was, and good for the trees and crops, but not for
old bones."
"Not for young ones, either," murmured the regent, sitting
back for a few moments to listen to Lady Essan reminisce.
"Years ago, in the times of snow . . . those were truly cold years.
. . ." Later, even after visiting with Lady Essan, perhaps even
more so, Anna could feel the walls of the liedburg closing in
around her. She had to get out, rain or no rain. The more she
tried to do, it seemed, the more isolated she got because
efficiency-damned efficiency-meant delegating, and that meant
she saw fewer and fewer people.
Back down the stairs to the receiving room she went, ignoring
the looks between Lejun and Giellum. Once there, she looked
around, glanced to the window. The clouds were scattered,
white and gray and Puffy. Good!
She rang the bell-too loudly, but she really didn't care. Skent
peered in, keeping the door between him and Anna. "I'm going
riding," she announced. "If Alvar is free . . ." She paused. Is
Alvar training armsmen this afternoon? Could you please find
out, ^kent, and let me know? I'd like you to come as well." "Yes,
lady." Skent's face brightened. 'Oh, and let Fhurgen know, if
you would."

The door closed, and Anna glanced around the receiving room,
then departed herself. She reclaimed her floppy brown riding
hat from her Jo, as well as a riding, jacket, and the lutar from
the scrying room. Her fingers went to the dagger and
truncheon she wore at her belt whenever she left the liedburg.
Then she headed for the stables. 
Within the southwest corner of the outer walls, the stables held
the familiar odors of straw, horses, and manure, although the
scents were mild, and the packed-clay floors swept clean. Tirsik
saw to that.
The wiry stablemaster, who looked far older than Anna and
probably wasn't, greeted her. "That great beast has been asking
for you."
"Unless I ride him into the ground, he's always complaining."
"Riding's good for the soul, and the harmonies," Tirsik
observed. "For horses and rulers."
"I hope so," answered Anna.
"Do young Skent good as well."
"He's already here?"
"Like a bird, he flew out here."
Anna grinned, then headed for the stall.
Whuff!
"Yes, I know. It's winter, and I've been neglecting your riding.

Grooming isn't enough for you."
Farinelli stepped sideways as she picked up the brush and
entered his j stall, then offered a second whuff, more subdued
than the first. She finished grooming and saddling Farinelli,
and the blond gelding fairly pranced as she led him into the
courtyard where Fhurgen and a squad of guards rode. Skent
sat upon a bay mare and smiled at her.
She smiled back, checking her gear. The lutar was strapped
behind her saddle, and she mounted, with an ease she still
found surprising.
"Where to, Lady Anna?" asked the dark-bearded armsman
who had replaced the unfortunate Spirda as the head of her
personal guard.
"Falcor ... the merchants' shops south of the liedburg." She
might not be able to shop, but she could look and listen ... if
anyone would talk.
Hoofs clicked on the damp stones of the liedburg courtyard as
the group rode out under the raised portcullis.
Anna nodded to the armsmen at the gate, but neither moved.
Hanfor's training-or Alvar's or Himar's, she suspected.
The flat expanse outside the gates that separated the liedburg
from the buildings of Falcor was a good hundred yards square.
The damp clay was level with the stones of the roadway that
led to the gate, but it had taken most of the winter to remove
the piles of dirt and debris that the Evult's flood had swirled
through the eastern parts of the town.

Anna turned Farinelli south. Once past the open space, she rode
slowly down the street. Various structures, shops on the lower
floors and dwellings above them, filled both sides. Even in the
chill, small handfuls of people gathered here and there, talking.
". . . still the best spices in Falcor . . ."
". . . hot fowl! Hot fowl on a chill day . . ."
". . . you sure there's no worms in that flour?"
Anna wanted to smile when she neared the cloth merchant. In
the window were the deep-green velvets she remembered from
the hot summer day when she'd taken her first ride through
Falcor, young and stiff-necked Spirda beside her. She had
wanted to stop, but she'd decided that the Erdean equivalent of
shopping wasn't a good idea on her first ride. Now, as regent
and sorceress, she actually could afford to shop even less.
A thin girl, her brown hair braided into a roll at the back of her
neck, looked at the sorceress from the cloth merchant's door.
Anna reined up, then dismounted, and handed Farinelli's reins
to Fhurgen. She walked toward the girl, who seemed frozen in
place.
Fhurgen handed the reins to another guard, a blond, and
vaulted down to stand just behind and beside Anna.
"You know," Anna said conversationally, "I've ridden past here
many times and I've always wanted to stop. Is this your
family's shop?"
"Yes, lady." The girl's voice quavered.

A squat figure appeared in the door, that of a gray-haired man
with drooping mustaches. "How might I help you, lady?"
"Is this your daughter?" Anna asked.
"My niece, my sister's daughter. Sirlina, my sister, she was
taken by the fever after the flood last fall." His eyes went to the
armsmen and to Skent, all except Fhurgen still mounted in the
narrow street, then back to Anna. "Forgive me, my lady. What
would you have of us?"
Anna forced a smile as genuine as she could. "I've often
admired your shop, and I just wanted to stop and look. I've
never had the time."
"Everything we have is yours." The shopkeeper's forehead was
damp, despite the cold.
"No. It's yours. When I need something, I'll buy it, just like any
other customer." She smiled. "You work for what you earn, and
you pay your levies. I'm not about to make your life harder."
The street darkened as one of the puffy clouds drifted across the
sun, and the girl shivered in the slight breeze. Anna found the
thin jacket more than warm enough. Winter, even late winter,
in Defalk was far warmer than even parts of fall and spring had
been in Ames, but not nearly so windy and gray.
The cloth merchant frowned. "Our velvets and woolens are the
finest-"
"I can see that." Anna took a deep breath and looked toward
Fhurgen, fumbling at her belt wallet. She had some silvers and

golds that were hers personally, mostly left from the expenses
she'd received from Behlem half a year earlier. "I'd like to look
here for a moment."
The black-haired Fhurgen marched past Anna and the
merchant, looking around the shop before nodding at Anna.
The regent stepped inside and turned to the girl. "What's your
name?"
"Kirla, lady."
"Kirla, can you tell me about the velvets?" Anna gestured
toward the bolt of green.
The girl glanced toward her uncle. The shopkeeper offered a
thin smile, then said, "Go ahead, Kirla."
"Well . . . lady. The green, that's a cotton velvet, and it's from
Sylwa. The cotton is pale green, and they dye the threads first
before they go on the looms. The red is from the Ostisles, and
Uncle says that it's not as good because they dye the fabric
after they cut the pile." She glanced back at her uncle again,
who nodded. 
"What about the blue?" prompted Anna.
"The blue is like the green, but the blue dyes don't hold as well
because the cotton is dun, not green or blue. I mean, with the
green, lady . . ." Kirla opened her mouth, then shut it helplessly.
"I think I understand. Because the green is dyed over a natural
light green cotton, it holds its color better over time. Is that it?"
The brown-haired girl nodded. "Yes, lady."

"How much is the green?" Anna turned to the shopkeeper.
"Normally, that is?"
"Ah . . . last year, last year, before the troubles, the green was
five silvers a yard."
Anna managed a nod, even as the cost of the cloth staggered
her, momentarily-a yard of velvet more than a half-year's
earnings for a peasant. Still, from what history she
remembered, before steam looms cloth had been equally
expensive on earth.
Anna glanced to Fhurgen, then to the girl. Neither seemed
surprised. "But you haven't sold any since then?"
The shopkeeper looked down. "No, lady."
Anna thought. She could use another gown-she only had three,
and a regent needed more. Sorcery would turn the cloth into a
gown, when she had a moment, and she'd already worked out
the spellsong. For what she had in mind, she'd need a good four
yards, maybe five.
"Do you have five yards?" she temporized.
"Lady, I have ten," the shopkeeper blurted.
"Ten, I can't use. Two golds for five yards." That would make a
serious dent in her personal funds.
The shopkeeper looked stunned. "I would give you a mere five
yards."
"No. All I ask is that you pay your levies and ... be a good

person." She'd wanted to ask him to be a good citizen, but that
concept didn't really exist in Liedwahr, not in the way she
would have meant it. Anna dug out the two golds and extended
them. "If you wouldn't mind cutting the fabric and delivering it
to the liedburg . . . ?"
"Of course, Lady Anna. Of course." He sounded as though he
had finally realized exactly who she happened to be, but Anna
had to take his hand and actually put the coins there.
He looked down at the two golds as if he could not believe they
were real.
"They're real. No sorcery." Anna looked to the girl. "Thank you,
Kirla."
Kirla bowed. "Thank you, lady."
Anna smiled. "I've always wanted to come here. I just never had
time."
She didn't know what else to say. So she inclined her head
slightly, still smiling, and left.
Outside, once she had remounted, Fhurgen leaned toward her.
"They will tell everyone, and that will be good."
Good? That she had paid for what she needed, and not taken it?
Anna took a deep breath, thinking again about the high cost of
the velvet, then waved to Kirla who stood in arch of the
doorway. The thin-faced girl returned the wave with a deep
bow.

Anna managed to smiled, even as she thought how much there
was to do-in so many ways.
16
WEI, NORDWEI
THE dark-haired spymistress glances from the desk-table
where she sits in the black high-backed chair toward the single
wide window. Through the open window, Ashtaar notes the
rebuilt harbor piers that define the well-dredged juncture of the
river Nord with the Vereisen Bay and the two-masted
Norweian ships loading at those piers.
The door opens, and a woman with close-cropped golden hair
steps inside, walking slowly toward Ashtaar. She bows.
"You may sit, Gretslen."
The seer sits.
"What have you to report?" Ashtaar's fingers slip around the
polished black agate oval on the desk.
The blonde seer bows her head slightly, then straightens. "The
soprano sorceress has finally created a reflecting pool in the
liedburg at Falcor."
"That is worthy of note?"
"She has begun to gather more players." Gretslen clears her
throat almost silently. "We cannot see the pool, nor her when
she employs it. It is as if she is not there." Gretslen's green eyes
flicker downward. "This has not happened before."

"Where this sorceress is involved, a great deal seems to have
happened that never occurred before." Ashtaar's fingers caress
the black agate in her hand.
"Yes, Ashtaar."
"What else?"
"The sorceress re-created the bridge across the Falche at Falcor,
so that the city will not be isolated from the fertile lands east of
Falcor. A hundred masons would have taken a year to do what
she did in an afternoon. Even her it prostrated, but she has
recovered. She plucked the very harmonies in doing that." 
Ashtaar's eyes leave Gretslen and go to the unfinished bridge
across the Nord, the one being rebuilt to replace what had been
destroyed by the Evult's other flood-the one he had loosed on
Wei.
Gretslen waits until Ashtaar's eyes refocus, then continues. "The
bridge will outlast Falcor."
"An eternal bridge?" Ashtaar turns her hand to look at the
black agate oval, caresses it a last time one-handed, and then
sets it back on the desk. "More, if you please."
"The Lancers of Mansuur have arrived in Esaria, and the
South-Women of the Matriarchy are pushing to isolate Ranuak
from the rest of Liedwahr."
"Again… how droll. The last time that happened in Ranuak
most of them died. People never learn. What of Ebra?"
"The lands in the east around Dolov have sworn to Bertmynn.

Hadrenn has asked for no pledges, but many around Synek
would follow him because of his lineage."
"Do we know how much coin the Liedfuhr Konsstin has sent to
Ebra?"
"There have been messengers with heavy purses, going from
Mansuur to both Synek and Dolov, but no strongboxes that
Kendr or I have scried."
The spymistress's brows wrinkle for an instant. "You have
missed something, Gretslen. I do not know what it may be, but
I sense trouble, great trouble, for us." Ashtaar's smile is cold. "I
am not a seer, nor have I your talent, nor Kendr's. I only know.
Watch the sorceress closely, and Konsstin. They are the great
players here."
Gretslen bows her head. "As you wish, Mightiness."
"I wish I were," murmurs Ashtaar, in a voice so low that only
she can hear the words, before adding in a louder tone, "You
may go, Gretslen."
17
Anna forced herself to finish the last of the heavy dark bread
and the white cheese. The look in the mirror that morning had
shown her that some little bit of the sunkenness in her cheeks
was beginning to vanish. Lord! How much food did it take?
She swallowed and glanced across the worktable to Hanfor.
"How many armsmen should go with us to Cheor?" She took a
long swallow of water from her goblet, then refilled it from the
pitcher she'd order-spelled earlier in the day. 

"As many as possible," he answered, running a scarred hand
through his gray thatch.
"You said that before," Anna said with a laugh. "How many is
that? Fivescore? Six-?"
The arms commander fingered his gray-and-white clipped
beard. "If I send Alvar with tenscore to accompany you, that
will leave sixscore here. That is, sixscore that are trained, with
another threescore that I would not trust anywhere-not yet."
The sorceress and regent wanted to laugh. Her standing army
consisted of a few more than three hundred armsmen-not all of
them even trained-and Konsstin had just sent a thousand
trained lancers to Neserea. "We need more armsmen."
"We need more armsmen, even more recruits," Hanfor
admitted. "And more arms. Konsstin has fiftyscore lancers in
Esaria, and I would wager that Nubara will move them to
Elioch as soon as possible. That doesn't count the two
hundred-score armsmen left in the Prophet's forces. We've
barely twenty-five-score everywhere in Defalk. More than a few
score of those I wouldn't want anywhere near a fight. Not yet."
"We're going to need more than three times that, you said."
"I did." The arms commander fingered his white-and-gray
beard. "And I could use fiftyscore-or more. Easily." He laughed
harshly. "Except we have no weapons and no weapons smith
for that many."
"No word from Ranuak?"

Hanfor shook his head. "The roads…"
Damn the roads!. "What about the levies?"
"If all the lords honor their commitment to the liedstadt, you
could marshal two hundred-score in levies. I wouldn't want
even to try to use them in one place."
"You could put some under Jecks, and some under Firis," Anna
suggested. "Aren't there other lords who are trustworthy?"
Hanfor raised both eyebrows.
Anna nodded. There might be, but neither of them knew who
they might be. Perhaps Jecks did, but right now, they didn't
need to know. iet. "Besides the roads, why can't we get more
recruits?"
"You have been too successful, lady."
Anna looked at her arms commander.
'When crops are bad, when trade is poor, then the peasants, the
farmers, the younger sons, they will accept the risk of arms for
food and shelter and the few coppers paid raw recruits." Hanfor
offered a wintry smile. There is rain again in Defalk. They hope
the crops will sprout and all will be well again in Defalk."
Another instance where she was a victim of her own success.
Anna Wanted to groan. "Don't they see it won't last if we can't
protect Defalk?"
"You are the mighty sorceress. You will protect them." Hanfor's
tone was sympathetically ironic. 

"No. You're right. They don't care. No one's ever cared for
them." Anna frowned. Where was there adversity?
"What about Ebra? Could we have Jerat… Has that group left
for Mencha? The ones to regarrison the Sand Pass fort?" she
asked, remembering that detail inadvertently. "Are you
counting them?"
"They leave the day after tomorrow. Jerat is pleased; his sister
lives there." Hanfor smiled. "He knows enough to start training
any recruits he may find, and he has some extra coins to pay
them. That's another score, and I didn't reckon them in the
numbers I told you because half wouldn't be that much good in
a battle. They'll be some help in repairing the Sand Pass fort."
"Do you think Jerat can find some more armsmen or recruits?
Across the border in Ebra?"
"There were more than a few who disappeared after the Sand
Pass battle. I told him to be very careful of any men who
wanted to join who looked experienced. I will suggest that after
he obtains those he can in Defalk, to make inquiries in Ebra."
Hanfor laughed harshly. "He will be careful, but I'd wager he
can round up a score or more easily." The veteran shrugged.
"After that, we will see."
A score? What was that against the hundreds of scores of
Defalk's enemies? Anna wanted to shake her head. Instead, she
repressed the gesture… and found she was clicking her nails
again. A wry smile crossed her face. The nail-clicking had
driven Sandy crazy, she thought, but he'd never said anything
before he'd left. Not like Avery who'd given her a lecture on

repressed anger.
She forced her thoughts back to the immediate
problem-armsmen. Even if Hanfor could find another fiftyscore
armsmen or the equivalent of lancers, how would she pay
them?
"Every score counts, and it is better to build a force slowly, and
train them as you wish," pointed out the arms commander.
"You can also call on the levies of the Lady Gatrune and of
Lord Jecks. They are almost as good as professional armsmen."
"That's only another thousand."
"You are their commander, and that counts for far more,"
Hanfor said. "Far more."
Perhaps… if everyone doesn't attack at once from every border. "If
I can employ sorcery," she answered. "I'd feel better if we had a
force that could stand off one enemy without me."
"Before the end of the year, we will," promised Hanfor.
"I wish I had your confidence, Arms Commander."
"I have seen what you have done to large forces who opposed
you. Men will fight for you who would not have fought for
Defalk before."
"Let's hope so." Anna took another swallow of orderspelled
water. Even in the chill of winter, she needed more liquids than
others. Then, that had been true on earth as well. She'd always
been prone to dehydration.

The graying veteran took a sip of wine from the goblet Anna
had provided, then looked at his empty plate. "I will groan all
the way back to the stables, and you ate twice what I did."
"I wish I didn't have to." Anna smiled. "The stables?"
"I am leading the lancer training this afternoon."
Anna felt guilty for keeping him. Like her, he was trying to
handle too many things. Except he didn't complain, and she
felt she was always complaining, if only to herself.
"Lady Anna?" Skent stood in the doorway.
Anna nodded for the page to enter, recognizing somehow that
he needed a moment with her. Hanfor stood, but Anna raised
her hand, gesturing for him to wait a moment.
"There is a woman in the courtyard. She has a babe and a
child, and she says she is the sister of the player Daffyd." Skent
offered a puzzled look.
Anna's guts churned. Dalila. Daffyd's sister and the woman
who had taken her in when no one else would after the Sand
Pass battle-and whose consort had tried to rape Anna. Anna
shook her head. She'd placed a spell on the man-Madell-and
had worried about it ever since.
Then, while she was recovering from the battle with the Evult,
Anna had sent some golds and a message about Daffyd's
death, but Dalila wouldn't have traveled to Falcor, not unless
something was wrong, terribly wrong.
"I'll see her. Now."

"Perhaps I should go," suggested Hanfor.
"Not yet. Something might have happened in Synope."
As Anna recalled, Dalila was brunette and stocky and stood
barely above Anna's shoulder. The pertness Anna remembered
was gone, replaced by hollow eyes and exhaustion. Her face
was smudged with dried mud, and her trousers ragged above
shoes barely held together with thongs. Dalila cradled an
infant, mechanically rocking the child. The dark-eyed,
dark-haired Ruetha clung to her mother's dusty and tattered
cloak. Ruetha's cheeks were streaked with dirt, a combination
of dust and tears, Anna suspected.
"Dalila," the sorceress began, "what happened?"
"Lady…" Dalila sank to the polished stone floor and bent her
head, as if unable to speak.
"Dalila," Anna said slowly, "you're welcome here. You
welcomed me, when I had nowhere to turn, and you'll always
be welcome. I don't know what happened, but you are
welcome."
Only the faint shudders betrayed the silent sobs.
After a moment, Anna spoke again. "Is there… trouble in
Synope? Because of Lord Hryding's death?"
A choked "No," was the only answer, followed by more sobs.
Dalila did not look up.
Anna lifted the bell, rang it, and waited for Skent, then
addressed the dark-haired page. 

"Skent… Dalila and her children need food. They'll be staying
with us. For the moment, after they eat, put them in one of the
larger rooms in the players' quarters for now. And make sure
they have some water and some towels to get cleaned up."
Anna paused, and added, "Dalila took me in when no one else
did. I'd like you to take care of all of this personally."
Skent nodded, his face impassive.
The sorceress stepped forward and reached down, slowly
helping Dalila rise.
"Lady… I… be… so… No one else…"
"Dalila… I told you, and I meant it. You are welcome here."
Anna squeezed the too-thin shoulder gently. "When you are fed
and rested, we'll talk some more. Now you and Ruetha and the
child need food and rest."
Dalila began to sob again.
Anna hugged her. "You'll be all right. You'll be safe." What else
could she say? "Now, go with Skent. He'll make sure you get
fed, and you have a room to rest and recover." Her eyes went to
the page, fixing him. "They'll need to eat regularly. Make sure
they get fed with the players for now. But they must eat. All
right?"
"I understand, Lady Anna." Skent's eyes went to the pair,
softening as they rested on Ruetha.
Anna helped Dalila to the door, and Ruetha tottered beside her
mother, one hand still holding the tattered cloak. "And see that

they have some clean clothing, too." Skent nodded again.
When the door closed, Anna found Hanfor smiling. Anna
raised her eyebrows in inquiry.
"You do not forget kindnesses, lady, and you repay your debts.
I am glad I decided to remain in Defalk."
"So am I," Anna said. "But I'm not sure I've repaid all the
kindnesses I've received."
"You will."
Anna wondered. "Will you make the arrangements for which
armsmen will accompany us?" She paused. "Lord Jecks and
Jimbob will be going with me."
"Twelvescore, then," Hanfor said firmly. "I held back some to
protect the young lord."
"I'll be taking the players. I hope I can do some repairs along
the way."
"You are still determined to travel to Synope after Cheor?"
Hanfor asked.
"If I don't have too much trouble. I'd thought about stopping at
Arien to see Lord Tybel, but Jecks thought that might not be a
good idea, not after dealing with Arkad."
"He suspects you will have to use sorcery on Arkad."
"I hope I don't."
"If you really believed that, Regent Anna, you would not have

to undertake this journey." A faint smile creased Hanfor's lips
as he stood.
Anna grinned sheepishly.
"I will talk to Mies, to make sure you have two good supply
wagons." Hanfor inclined his head before he left.
Alone, Anna walked to the window and looked down on the
courtyard. Didn't the paving stones ever dry in the winter?
Had Madell driven Dalila out? Why hadn't anyone been
willing to help her? Synope had to be three weeks by foot, if not
longer with two children. Anna could feel herself seething.
Every time she thought she'd come to understand and accept
Erde, something like this reminded her how much women were
looked down upon and abused.
"It's still that way on earth," she murmured to herself. Some
places were worse than Defalk, although she didn't recall
anywhere as bad as- where was it?-Sturinn? Where they still
chained women? She shivered, hoping that she didn't have to
deal with those people anytime soon. That would take more
than simple sorcery.
Sorcery… that reminded her. She'd need players if she meant
to do road and bridge work on the trip to Cheor. She hurried
out of the receiving room, this time with Giellum and Lejun
following her.
Anna crossed the courtyard, placing her boots carefully on the
damp stones. Had she really understood how much rain Defalk
had gotten before the Evult's sorcery had created the drought?

Defalk in winter seemed more like… parts of Oregon, perhaps?
Except it had more sunlight. Already the water level of the
Falche where the Fal and the Chean met was two-thirds of
what the older armsmen said was normal, and, based on the
shape of the banks and the traces of old river beaches and the
dried-up oxbow lake to the northwest of Falcor, they seemed to
be right.
Liende wasn't in the rehearsal room, nor in her own room.
Anna finally caught up to her on the top of the north tower.
The player looked out on the grayness that was Falcor in
winter, with thin trails of smoke rising from scattered
chimneys. Liende turned at Anna's boots-or Lejun's-on the
stones.
"Regent…"
"I wanted to talk to you." Anna turned to her guard. "Lejun… if
you would wait at the foot of the top stairs."
Lejun nodded stiffly and eased out of sight.
The sorceress had begun to understand why public figures
became recluses, especially those who were more than
figureheads. Then, sometimes, when so many things seemed
beyond her control, she felt more like a figurehead than a real
ruler.
Anna stepped toward the red-and-white-haired player.
"Your wish, Lady Anna?"
At times, especially in dealing with players, Anna wished for a

little less deference and a bit more warmth. You'll have to get
used to it, she told herself, forcing a smile. "We will be traveling
to Cheor in several days. I would like you and the players to
accompany us." 
"I can only vouch for the two building spells right now. We
might have the third one ready by then." Liende did not meet
Anna's eyes.
"It's harder than you thought," Anna said.
Liende looked down.
"It's hard because I'm asking more than Brill did," Anna said
quietly. "I'm asking you to use harmonies, and that makes it a
lot harder. It makes stronger spells, but it's not easy."
"You are not saying that to ease my fears?"
The sorceress shook her head. "I mean it. I talked to Brill about
harmony, but he wouldn't consider it. He said it was too
dangerous, but I think that's because he wasn't trained with
harmonies. He didn't understand harmony."
Anna had realized that for most people on Erde, even players,
the term harmony had a far more general meaning in
Liedwahr-something akin to "not creating dissonance" rather
than the earthly technical musical meaning of parallel chords
or supporting lines of music distinct from the melody line.
Then, she supposed a lot of people on earth thought of the word
in the same way.
"He did understand much," said Liende. "And he would use

Darksong. Mayhap he had reason to distrust this… use of
harmony."
The sorceress had to remind herself that Brill had been Liende's
lover, and that Liende would hear little about his shortcomings.
She paused, then spoke carefully. "Any sorcerer can only do so
much. Lord Brill could do many spells I have not even tried. I
have been trained in some he did not know. All the spells I have
used with the lutar are based on chorded harmony."
Liende nodded slowly. "You risk more than your players."
"Can you have your players ready?"
"We will be ready with those spells, lady."
"That's all I ask." That was all she could ask, Anna reflected,
and, as usual, it wasn't really as much as she needed. "Thank
you."
She headed back down the tower stairs.
Instead of remaining in her office in the receiving hall, she
stopped there only long enough to reclaim the lutar. She
carried it up the main stairs. She felt strong enough to engage
in some limited sorcery, although she wanted to be at full
physical strength when she began the journey to Cheor.
The smooth waters of the reflecting pool confirmed that she had
gained back some weight. Her eyes were no longer sunken, nor
her cheeks so hollow.
She took the lutar from its case, fingers caressing the smooth
wood. Her eyes burned momentarily as she thought of its

maker, poor Daffyd, entombed in lava in the valley of Vult-all
because he'd summoned her to revenge his father's death.
With the grease marker, she made the changes to the mirror
spell, then hummed through them-without the words. Then she
strummed through the chords. Finally, she put it together. 
"Water, water, in this my hall, 
Show me now that Konsstin who seeks my fall, 
Show him bright, and show him fast, 
and make that strong view well last."
Konsstin still wore the sky-blue tunic, but no cloak. The
Liedfuhr sat behind a dark wooden desk, outlined by the light
from windows behind him. A map-what appeared to be
Liedwahr-was spread before him. As he studied the map, he
frowned, but his lips did not move.
Anna strummed the lutar again, singing the brief couplet to
end the view in the pool.
Konsstin apparently remained where he had been, Mansuus,
presumably, but was studying a map. In preparation for what?
Anna wished she knew.
She checked the lutar-it still had a tendency to slip out of
tune-and changed the spell for Dencer.
Dencer was riding, wearing a breastplate and carrying a lance.
Anna watched the image in the pool only long enough to see
that he was practicing thrusting the lance at a target as he rode
by it. He'd been working hard. That was obvious from the red
face and the shimmer that indicated sweat.

The sorceress released the image with the couplet and exhaled.
One was studying maps and the other improving warlike skills.
Not conclusive, but not exactly reassuring. But unless she
wanted to spell all her strength all the time following them in
the pool, it was about as good an indication as she was likely to
get at the moment.
Wasn't anything easy?
For you, of course not. She immediately felt ashamed of the
thought. Lots of people had it far harder than she had. Like
poor Dalila, exhausted, with nowhere to turn, and ashamed of
having to prostrate herself at Anna's feet.
The sorceress pursed her lips. What else had she meant to
check? Oh, the question of harmony. She looked at the books
on the shelf-the ones she'd moved in right after she'd finished
the reflecting pool. The first handful of the leatherbound books
were those Brill had let her use in the workroom he'd lent her at
Loiseau-Boke of Liedwahr, The Naturale Philosophie, Proverbes of
Neserea, Donnermusik.
She pulled out Donnermusik, searching for the sections that had
alluded to harmony, hoping her memory had been correct, but
worried about Liende's dubious looks.
… harmonic variants be most important as a musical
consideration, for they must in truthe effect a change of musical
resemblement through the constant repetition, with most
suitable variants, of the bass pattern… through trommel… 
… the relationship between the thunder, and that needs must

be represented by the falk horn, supplemented by a continuous
bass provided by a trommel, and the lightning… must be
joined by a melodic line of the violincello…
She remembered those lines and skipped ahead to another
section. Nothing there, except more discourses on storms.
Another few pages… Where was it?
Anna took a deep breath. You've got to slow down. You won't
find anything just flipping through pages that are half Old
English and half bastard German.
Another breath, and she forced herself to read more
deliberately. Ten pages farther on, she found what she thought
she'd remembered.
… in truthe the greatest of sorceries shulde result from
dissonant clothing played with gewalt equal to that gewalt of
the spell melodic… The players of each parte needs must kraft
their resemblements… Any endliche resolution… must needs
embodye harmonic consonance…
Her head aching from puzzling through the archaic language,
she slowly closed the book.
Leaving the lutar in the scrying room, she slowly walked back
along the corridor toward Lady Essan's room, trying to ignore
the guards that followed her.
"So… another venture you be off on," said the white-haired
widow, even before Anna settled into the chair across the low
table from Essan.

"Why do you say that?" Anna took a handful of the sugared
nuts from the dish, then another, realizing that, again, she was
hungry.
"Synondra told me that you rush hither and yon, back and
forth. That stern arms commander works with Mies to make
sure of the finest wagons and teams, and blades clash all the
time on the practice quarter. My ears are still sharp, would-be
daughter."
Anna laughed. "Just like a mother. You know what I'm about
even if I haven't told you."
"And you were saying, sorceress-girl, my daughter you'd be."
Essan grinned over the brandy goblet.
"So I did."
"What be on your mind, seeing as much there'd be you would
be doing?"
"What do you know about Lord Arkad?" Anna asked.
"He was a problem for Donjim, and he must be one for you,
too. You asked about him a time back." Lady Essan sipped her
brandy.
"He hasn't paid his liedgeld," Anna admitted.
"If any lord could afford liedgeld, Arkad could. Donjim envied
those lands, you know, but Arkad always supported him. He
even sent more levies than he had to for the second peasant
uprising. I didn't ride with Donjim then. I should have, broken
leg or not. Donjim wasn't ever the same after that. He died

right after he returned." Essan fussed the embroidered pillow
behind her back.
"I'm sorry."
"You had nothing to do with it. Long before your time,
sorceress-woman. You were having your own children then,
like as not, never dreaming you'd be here."
Anna certainly hadn't ever expected she'd end up on a world
she once would have regarded as a total fantasy.
"He couldn't understand it. No, he couldn't, my poor Donjim.
Twenty years of peace, prosperity, and the very peasants he'd
supported rebelled." Essan snorted. "Some foolishness about
land reverting to the lord if a man had no direct heirs. All
stirred up by those high and mighty women in Encora, I
thought."
"Do you still think so?"
Essan laughed, more a cackle than a true laugh. "I was right,
and I was wrong. It was women from Encora, but not the
Matriarch, or the traders, but those crazy ones, the Sisters of
the South. They were so crazy their own Matriarch had to turn
her own guards on them. The Sturinn thing, you know. Did I
tell you about that?" Her eyes glazed over momentarily. "That
be the problem with growing old. You talk, and you don't
remember."
"You said that some group… the Sisters of something…
stormed a ship from Sturinn…"

"Sisters of the South-they were the ones. They sent blades to the
women of Stromwer and Sudwei and Lerona. Terrible mess, it
was. Now, some say, the crazy women have a new name, the
South Women, excepting they're still the same, not even
remembering what happened to the last bunch." Essan took a
hefty belt to drain the apple brandy in the goblet, then refilled
it from the crystal decanter without looking at Anna. "Terrible,
it was, back then, and old Wassir's son used those very blades
to try to overthrow his father. That was Aaslin, not Geansor.
Blood everywhere, Donjim said. Wassir died, and Donjim killed
Aaslin himself, and Geansor near died. Might have been better
had he. Geansor's other brother, the youngest one, he was
killed by raiders, but that came later."
The more Anna heard, the worse it got. If Lady Essan were
right, then all her consort had gotten out of twenty years of
decent rule was heartbreak and revolt. If she were wrong, then
Defalk had been in turmoil for far longer than the past decade.
Neither thought was exactly comforting.
18
DUMARIA, DUMAR
THREE men enter the audience chamber, led by a tall and
rangy man in a heavy brown woolen jacket. Under the open
jacket, he wears a short-sleeved white tunic, and white trousers.
His face is tanned. The two men who accompany him are also
rangy and tanned.
Ehara stands before the gilt chair upholstered in red velvet.
"Greetings! Welcome to Dumaria."

"We are pleased to be here." The tall man answers in a heavily
accented voice, bowing. "I am Sea-Marshal jerRestin." He
gestures to the two who flank him. "Sea-Captain jerKillek and
Sea-Captain jerHallin."
"A small token for the warm welcome we have received." The
Sea-Marshal lifts the small chest he carries and offers it to
Ehara. "From Sturinn to Dumar."
Ehara, looking burly before the rangy Sturinnese, accepts the
chest, a wooden box no more than two spans long and one
wide that is almost lost in his overlarge hands. The sides of the
chest are carved with intertwined serpents rising out of a
mother-of-pearl surf, and the top bears the crest of Dumar-the
mountain ram on a tor, wrought in rubies and gold. "You are
welcome, and my thanks for such an artistic treasure."
"Please open it."
Ehara does, and glances at the unset rubies, diamonds, and
pearls in the small container. "A most generous and artistic
treasure." He closes the case gently. "And to what do I owe the
pleasure of your company and such a small token of
appreciation?"
"We merely wished to meet the famous Lord Ehara."
"My fame as ruler of the smallest nation in Liedwahr has
carried all the way to the lands and isles of far Sturinn?" Ehara
laughs self-deprecatingly.
"Your fame has carried farther than you would have imagined,
Lord Ehara," returned jerRestin.

"What have I done that merits such notice?" Ehara's eyes
narrow ever so slightly.
"We understand that you are considering efforts to strengthen
your northern border, Lord Ehara," suggests the Sea-Marshal,
the accent in his voice stronger.
"I've never mentioned such an action to anyone." Ehara smiles
easily-"Are you Sea-Priests able to read the tides of the future?"
"When the tides run strongly and pluck at the very harmonies
of Erde, then anyone who stops to look can see where they will
take the unwary." The Sea-Marshal offers a bland smile.
"What is this disturbing tide of which you speak?"
"We understand that the Regent of Defalk is also a sorceress,
and one who would change all of Liedwahr. Surely, that is a
tide you would watch . . . and have watched."
"I wasn't aware that the Sea-Priests bothered themselves with
the petty affairs of poor and distant Liedwahr."
"We look on Dumar as a bulwark against this riptide of
destruction that will change all you-and we-hold dear. That is
why we offer a mere token of friendship and appreciation."
"I see." Ehara tilts his head to the side fractionally, still holding
the carved chest. "And in return for such generosity… what
must poor and lowly Dumar provide to mighty Sturinn?"
"Only friendship, Lord Ehara. Only friendship."
"You value my friendship highly."

"It is said that those who share enemies must be friends. Our
fortune-seers have declared that the Regent of Defalk is our
enemy." JerRestin shrugged. "Since she is also your enemy, we
must be friends and allies."
"What of the Liedfuhr of Mansuur?" Ehara's voice carries a
tone between bemusement and curiosity.
"The Liedfuhr is preoccupied with his own concerns and has
expressed little interest in the friendship of Sturinn." The rangy
Sea-Marshal shrugs. "We must seek friends among those who
would have friends."
"So you must. So must we all." Ehara laughs once more. "And I
bid you welcome, welcome as friends and allies." He sets the
chest on the red velvet of the chair, then steps off the dais and
embraces the Sea-Marshal, who refrains from flinching.
19
AFTER discussing the last of the arrangements for the next
day's journey toward Cheor with Hanfor, Alvar, and Jecks,
Anna waited until the receiving-room door closed. She stood
and stretched, then took a deep swallow of cold water from the
goblet, draining it.
As she lifted the pitcher to refill the goblet, her eyes went to the
window, and to the gray-and-white clouds she could see. What
else did she need to take care of before she left?
It had been two days and she still hadn't seen Daffyd's sister
Dalila. That didn't seem like Dalila, but, then again, with all her
preoccupations, Anna might not have seemed that

approachable.
With a deep breath, she lifted the bell and rang it, standing and
gathering herself together. 
Her dark-haired page, Skent, appeared.
"Skent, would you take me to the room where Dalila is?"
"She's in the players' quarters, like you told me, Lady Anna.
And I have made sure she and the child have gotten food."
Skent's lips pursed.
"You've had to take it to her?" asked the regent.
"Yes, lady. She won't leave the room-except for the jakes."
Skent flushed. "I guess… I mean… I don't know."
Anna laughed wryly. "I understand." She added, "Thank you. I
knew I could count on you, and I appreciate it."
Skent flushed. "You… you keep your word."
"I try." You try… but how long will you be able to? You said
you'd' be there for Elizabetta, and… She pursed her lips and
forced herself tof keep walking. Only Skent, of all her pages,
would have trusted her enough to say that, a good harbinger
for what she hoped of him.
They crossed the courtyard, the wind whipping the purple sash
Anna had forgotten to remove and leave in the receiving room.
Behind them followed Giellum and Blaz.
"The second door, lady." Skent gestured.

After marching up the narrow staircase, Anna rapped on the
door to the second-level room.
Dalila opened it, falling back. "Lady… I am…"
Anna shook her head as she stepped inside and closed the door,
leaving Skent and the guards in the narrow passageway.
"Dalila, you've seen me in your robe and dusty boots doing
laundry. Do you think I've changed that much?"
The brunette's eyes remained on the plank floor, and her
shoulders slumped in a posture of defeat. Behind her, on the
bed, sleeping in a faded gray blanket, lay the baby.
Ruetha looked up from the floor by the single wide pallet. The
girl's fingers clutched a rag doll, and she hugged the cloth
figure to her, taking her eyes from Anna.
"I said we'd talk, Dalila. I'm sorry… things have been busy, but
I'm here."
A soft snore came from the bed, and Anna smiled as she
glanced at the sleeping infant. The smile faded as her eyes
returned to the defeated looking Dalila.
"I should not… I would not have come… but where could I
turn? If it were just for me…"
Anna could hardly imagine walking for weeks on end with two
children. She could remember once, when her own mother had
taken Anna to visit the back holler where her grandparents
lived, how her mother had carried the heavy suitcase along the
half-dry creek bed for a hundred feet or so, and then come

back and carried Anna those hundred feet, time after time. And
that had only been for a few miles!
"You have to think of the children. Mothers always do." And
now you can't. The image of the black-lined rectangle on the
wall of her room slipped into Anna's mind momentarily.
Again, Dalila did not look at the sorceress or speak.
"Tell me what happened." Anna feared she already knew.
"When did he leave? What happened?"
The silence lengthened in the late afternoon, but Anna forced
herself to wait, forced herself to remain calm despite all the
items she needed to deal with before dinner, before riding out to
the south in the morning.
After a time, Dalila began to speak, her voice barely audible
above the light breeze that whispered past the single shuttered
window. "Madell . . . After you left, he scarce would come
home. When Anandra- please don't be angry with that-when
she was born, he yelled… He told me I wasn't even good for
sons…" The words broke off into sobs.
Anna stepped forward and put her arms around the smaller
woman, holding her as she cried. Dalila was scarcely more than
skin and bones, and Anna wanted to call down all the
harmonies and disharmonies on Madell. Instead, she swallowed
and waited. "I'm not angry. I'm sad for you, and flattered that
you would do something like that." Would anyone on earth
even remember her name? Or would she be remembered as the
mother or grandmother or whatever, who just vanished? Anna

swallowed.
In time, when Dalila's sobs had subsided into small shivers,
Anna stepped back and prompted gently. "And after that?"
"Then… I got your scroll about Daffyd-and the golds. You
bespelled Madell so he could not touch me. But he took the
golds, and he sold the house and his share in the mill to Reuten-"
"Reuten?" Anna asked involuntarily.
"His older brother. Reuten never cared for me. I was not from
Synope." Dalila took a deep breath. "Madell took his clothes
and left. No one saw him again. Reuten said he went to Dumar.
He claimed that I drove him away."
Anna didn't think much of Reuten, either. "And the house?"
"Reuten told me I had to leave. The house was his, and I had no
sons."
Sons again! Damn masculine-dominated society! Anna
swallowed. "So you left?"
"What else could I do? Lord Hryding was ill, and I was turned
away at his gate."
Another mark against Anientta, Anna reflected, and another
reason to stop at Flossbend on her return from Cheor. Assuming
things go as planned and nothing else goes wrong. She swallowed
the sigh. Something else would go wrong. She just didn't know
what it might be. Lord Hryding would not have turned you
away, but he was so ill that he died."

"They say he was a good lord." Dalila's voice was flat. 
"He was, and I'll miss him. But we can't change what's already
happened. And you can't change what's happened to you."
Anna forced a smile. "There's a place for you and the children
here."
"Lady… the silvers you gave me for the children, I had to use
them." Dalila looked down as though Anna would spell her or
strike her.
"To get here?"
"Aye." Dalila's voice was low.
"Then they were well spent."
"You say… a place for me… me? I am no player like Daffyd."
The brunette's eyes darted to the sleeping Anandra, and then
dropped to the plank floor. "What can I do? I have the bairns."
"Dalila? Can you write?"
"I know my letters. Da made sure of that. He beat me when I
missed." The woman shivered.
"A sorceress can only do so much. Will you help me? I will pay
you, like all those who help." Anna forced herself to be patient,
recalling that no one had been exactly patient when Avery had
dumped her. She'd still had to get up and go to work, to teach
not only the willing, but the whining students, and there'd been
too few of the good ones and too many of those who sat there
like lumps and said, in effect, "Teach me. I don't have to learn;
it's your job to make me learn."

"How could I help?"
Anna laughed softly. "There is so much to do, and I'm only one
person. One of the problems I have is that too few people know
their letters, and they learn them too late. They should learn
them when they are not much older than Ruetha. I would like
you to teach letters to the younger children. For that, you
would get your room and food and a half-silver a week."
Dalila sank onto the floor planks. "For teaching the letters to
children. You are too generous. I cannot… That is too much."
Anna thought, then added, "You can also, if you wish, help in
the kitchen. You cook well, and Meryn is always complaining
that she doesn't have enough help."
Dalila nodded. "I can cook."
"I'll let Meryn know." Anna paused. "I am leaving tomorrow,
and you will have to talk to her yourself. We won't be able to
work out your lessons until I return." She lifted her hand. "But
you'll be paid starting on one-day."
"You are good, lady."
"No. I am not that good. Had I not come to Synope, you would
still have Madell, and your brother. I owe you at least this. You
can help me. I wish I could do more, but Defalk's a poor land,
and there's only so much that I can do."
Dalila shook her head. "My father sent me away. My consort
deserted me, and his brother turned me out. My lord could not
help me. You are a stranger, and you have offered more than

all of them." She bowed her head. "I am glad I named Anandra
after you."
Anna swallowed. "Thank you." What else could she say? What
else could she have done after all the damage that followed her?
20
STROMWER, DEFALK
LORD Dencer." The young-looking Dumaran officer in red
bows to the taller and slightly older man who stands by the
ornately carved desk. "Gortin, captain of lancers for Lord
Ehara." The tall and gangly Dencer nods his head sharply, and
a lock of thinning brown hair droops across a too-high
forehead, almost screening his left eye. "To what do we owe the
courtesy of a visit from a neighbor to the south?" His eyes
flicker imperceptibly to the pair of armsmen in tan leathers at
the door, and the one who stands by the tall bookcase to his left.
"A sad courtesy, a sad one indeed." Gortin bows again. "We
were led to believe that one traveler by the name of Slevn came
from Stromwer. He paid a courtesy visit to Lord Ehara, and we
had thought he returned to Stromwer."
"You had thought this… visitor… had returned?" Dencer's
eyebrows rise, and he brushes the wayward lock of hair back
and across his balding pate.
"Until we discovered he had been beset by bandits. He was
traveling alone." Gortin shrugs. "Even in a land as ordered as
Dumar, when one reaches the Sudbergs, there are places for

evildoers to hide." The red-uniformed Dumaran extends a
pouch. "We returned his effects to you, as his lord, since we
were headed to see you."
"How convenient," Dencer responds mildly, taking the large
canvas sack and setting it upon the desk without opening it.
"It was the least we could do. We were already riding this way,
andit appeared that this fellow had been heading home."
Gortin smiles blandly.
"I am curious. How did you know this… person… was the one
who visited Lord Ehara?" 
Gortin bows. "I could not be precisely certain, my lord, but
there were certain indications. This Slevn wore a gray cloak and
trousers, and so did the unfortunate we found. His purse was
gone, but he had tucked a scroll with Lord Ehara's official seal
inside the lining of his cloak, and a shiny fresh-minted gold.
Lord Ehara sent the scroll with him. It was still sealed, and we
didn't open it, seeing as it was addressed to you. It be in the
pouch."
"The bandits did not slit or take his cloak?"
"It was covered with blood, Lord Dencer. They were hasty,
from the signs."
"Tell me," says Dencer, standing erect by the desk, cranelike,
but a predatory crane. "Might anyone in Dumar know why
this-what did you say his name was?-this fellow went to see
Lord Ehara? Was he a trader or some such?"
Gortin shrugs. "None would know but Lord Ehara. Lord Ehara

saw him alone. That is why, when we came across his body, I
had thought to inform you when we arrived."
"My thanks for your… rectitude, Captain." Dencer frowns.
"Surely, you and your squad did not ride all the way from
Dumaria merely to return the effects of an unfortunate traveler."
"No, ser." Gortin bows again, and extends a scroll, trimmed in
gilt and sealed with both red wax and a scarlet ribbon. "Lord
Ehara sent us to offer his friendship. Lord Ehara understands
that all must be neighbors and friends in these unsettled times."
"There is friendship, and there is friendship," Dencer observes.
Gortin turns and takes a velvet pouch from the lancer who
stands behind him, then extends that. "A token of the quality
and sincerity of Lord Ehara's desire to demonstrate his most
earnest desire to establish friendship between his lands and
yours of Stromwer."
Dencer lifts the pouch. "He makes a weighty gesture indeed."
The pouch goes beside the first on the desk. "Your lord has a
way with gestures." He smiles, although the hard glitter does
not leave his eyes. "After riding so far with such a generous
gesture, you must join us for the evening meal. Your lancers
will be fed with my armsmen."
"I would be most pleased. I understand you have a most
talented consort."
"Ah, yes, I do." Dencer's smile vanishes, and he looks down at
the polished wooden floor. "Alas, she is indisposed, and will not
be joining us. At times, I fear for her health. These times have

weighed hard upon her. You know that she was held in Falcor,
and she has yet to recover from the… effects of that… stay."
"Oh… I had not heard. I am so sorry…" Gortin offers a
solicitous smile. "Lord Ehara had said that these times have
indeed fallen hard upon some of Defalk."
"We do what we can, and we can but hope that the
surroundings here will ensure her full recovery."
"With such a burden, Lord Dencer," says Gortin gravely, "I
could not impose upon your hospitality. That would be asking
far too much of your charity and goodwill."
"Nonsense, your presence and news will divert me. Surely, you
would not gainsay me that in, as you put it, this time of
trouble?" Dencer offers a tentative smile.
"Are you sure of that? We would not add any burden to those
you already bear."
"I would be most pleased to hear of your lord and of how
matters fare in Dumar these days. Most pleased." Dencer nods,
and then brushes back his unruly hair.
THEMA
* * * * * * *
21
ANNA stood in the saddle for a moment, trying to stretch her
legs. After just two days in the saddle, her legs ached-youth

spell or no youth spell.
The fine, cold rain that had begun to sleet around her and the
others in the last glass, just before midmorning-when they were
nowhere close to any real shelter-didn't help her mood much, or
her legs. The warm rains of the previous week had heralded
spring, according to Skent and even Ytrude, but the mist that
fell around her was anything but warm.
"Spring?" she said, more to herself than anyone.
"It is spring. You can see some shoots in the fields," answered
Alvar, riding beside her. "The roads have almost dried." His
fingers stroked the leather of his reins, almost absently.
"Let's hope they stay that way. The last thing we need is more
muddy roads."
"Indeed, lady." Captain Alvar nodded, then touched his black
beard with his left hand.
Anna's eyes went to the Falche River, a muddy swatch of water
that filled perhaps a third of the riverbed to her left. The scrub
by the river's edge, and the rushes and grasses, remained
tannish brown and bent downstream-the legacy of the Evult's
flood of the past harvest season. A pair of teals paddled in the
backwater formed by a sandbar, apparently indifferent to the
chill mist-rain.
Farinelli whuffed and tossed his head, as if to fling dampness
out of his eyes… or something. Anna didn't pretend to know
much about horses, except how to feed, saddle, and groom the
big palomino gelding and to pay attention to the signals he

sent. She didn't always understand them, but she'd learned that
Farinelli had a reason for anything he did. Then, she supposed
most horses did, unlike people, who all too often seemed to act
against their own best interests, or for no reason at all.
She laughed softly to herself. Were her thoughts getting to be
like those of the horsy types who seemed to prefer horses to
people? Those people she'd never thought she'd understand.
Alvar looked over from his mount inquiringly.
"I'm beginning to understand why some people prefer horses to
people."
"Horses don't talk back unless you mistreat them," the veteran
armsman said. "For most mounts, kindness goes farther than
with people." He readjusted the oiled leather poncho, and
driblets of water skidded off the dark leather toward the
rain-darkened clay of the road. So far, the rain hadn't been
heavy enough to turn the road to mud-yet.
"How much farther to Cheor?" Jimbob rode behind Anna and,
for the past few deks, beside Jecks. 
Anna smiled at Jimbob's question to his grandsire. The
impatience of the young with journeys hadn't changed between
worlds or universes. Of her own children, Mario had been the
worst, especially on the long drives from New England back to
Cumberland to visit family, the trips that Avery had avoided
whenever he could.
Now… now she was ruling a kingdom, and she couldn't even
use her sorcery to see Mario or Elizabetta. In a season, maybe?

Brill had said that he had been able to see the mist worlds-earth
mostly-in his reflecting pool if he were sparing in his attempts.
The sorceress shrugged her stiffening shoulders.
"Two days, mayhap three. Or four, should the rain fall harder
and the roads turn to mud." Jecks' words were clipped, as
though the white-haired and hazel-eyed lord's thoughts were
elsewhere.
Anna respected Jecks, his honesty, his comparative
open-mindedness, and his intelligence. And there was definitely
chemistry between them… but there was also a huge cultural
gap-and the endless problems of the country she'd ended up
ruling as regent for his grandson.
Anna glanced up at the indistinct grayness. Was the rain
lessening? How could she ask for it not to rain, when Defalk
had suffered such dryness for so long? Especially in the case of
a gentle rain.
"There might be a way station at Hygris," Jecks offered, easing
his mount onto the shoulder of the road and drawing abreast of
Anna. He gestured at a group of buildings emerging out of the
mist and rain ahead.
"There wouldn't be any real shelter for the lancers, would
there?"
"Not likely. The old inn burned three years ago."
"We'll stop for a little rest," Anna said. "But we might as well
push on. There's no point in having armsmen sit in the rain and
get wet so I can stay dry."

"I thought you might say that." Jecks laughed. "Just like Alasia."
"We're similar, but not exactly alike." Anna wasn't sure she
wanted to be thought of as Jecks' daughter. "For one, I'm a little
older. And I'm not…" She broke off the sentence with a rueful
laugh. "Let's leave it at that." She didn't want to state blatantly
that she had no intention of being treated as his daughter.
"No, you're not," Jecks answered with a grin. "As your actions
often declare."
Alvar struggled to keep a straight face. So did Anna, almost
forgetting the rain that misted around her and the column of
armsmen and wagons that followed.
22
ENCORA, RANUAK
THE two women stand at the edge of the crowd in the
wind-swirled square. Behind them rises a canvas banner that
flaps in the wind, proclaiming in bright blue lettering, 
SouthWomen: For Eternal Harmony!
"Mother warned you, Vena," says the slender brunette. "She
only said that it was unwise to distrust someone in accord with
the greatest of the harmonies. This sorceress is nothing more
than another power-hungry woman of the north who will turn
on anyone at the first need or opportunity. She also supports a
man's claim to rule Defalk. She will not even rule in her own
right. There is nothing worse than a woman serving as a
stalking goat for men. Better an honest man than a deceitful

woman." Veria's words are low, but intense. "Mother or
Matriarch, she did not say one word against my joining the
SouthWomen."
"Not in so many words, but it was a warning."
"Why are you here, Alya? To act as Mother's spy?"
"Mother didn't send me." Alya coughs twice, then continues.
"I'm here because you've always heard what you wanted to
hear and seen what you wanted to see."
"She has you spying on me."
Alya laughs. "She knows what you're doing. She needs no
spies. She has let us choose our own way. This way is wrong,
and in time, you will pay dearly for it."
"Then let me pay in my own coin. Why should you care?"
"You are my sister, and you will suffer."
"You've never cared that much before. Why now?"
"Because Mother and Father care, and when you suffer, they
will suffer."
"You really believe that rubbish about the harmonies? That a
power-hungry woman from the mist worlds really cares about
anything we hold dear? How could you?"
"It's very simple, Veria. Very simple. Simple enough for you to
see… if you would. Let me ask you this-on the important
events, has Mother ever been wrong? Have she and Father ever

been wrong about what has happened?"
"They did not foresee the very sorceress they caution against
opposing."
"Then see as you will." Alya shakes her head. "Do as you will.
Only recall that I have tried to caution you. Those blades you
will buy-if you have not already-will cut you more dearly than
any of you would wish." The noise of the crowd rises as a tall
woman steps onto the platform below the banner. Alya's eyes
flicker toward the speaker as the crowd subsides. When she
looks back beside herself, Vena has slippe away. 
23
ANNA stretched surreptitiously in the saddle, then shifted her
weight to ease the continual soreness in her posterior, a
posterior far more slender than it had been a year earlier. Her
stomach grumbled slightly, reminding her to take another of
the hard biscuits from the cloth pouch tied to the front saddle
ring.
The road followed the ridge west of the Falche River, and the
higher tilled fields between the road and riverbank already
showed signs of green. It was barely past dawn, and the lower
fields were still clothed in ground fog. The green sprouts in the
higher fields, though, she could clearly see, unlike those outside
of Falcor pointed out by Hanfor days earlier.
"Not too much farther to go," said Alvar.
"Do you think Arkad knows we're coming?"

"If he has seers, he could see us on the road." The captain
straightened his burly frame and turned in the saddle as if to
check on whether someone watched.
"But he wouldn't know where we're headed. Not yet."
"Not yet," added Jecks.
Anna peered through the morning mist toward the river,
toward the buildings rising out of the white ground-fog beyond
the stone bridge that arched over the Falche and into Cheor
itself.
Supposedly, Synfal-Arkad's liedburg-lay farther north of Cheor
on a low hill that overlooked both the Falche and the Synor
Rivers. That meant crossing the river and then riding back
north.
"How much farther to Cheor?" Jimbob asked from Anna's
right. As it neared the river town, the road had widened enough
for Anna's force to ride four abreast-if no one happened to be
headed north out of Cheor.
Anna smiled again. Definitely, some things remained constant
with human nature, like the impatience of the young, although
Anna had to admit that Jimbob hadn't asked that question until
after the second unlike Mario, who had asked it ten minutes
after the car left the house.
Within two deks, the ridge the road had followed began to
slope into bottomland, dark rich soil tilled recently and filled
with green sprouts. The ground fog began to dissipate with the
growing warmth of the spring sun.

Anna gestured toward the fields that seemed to stretch
westward from the river for deks and deks, looking at Jecks.
"Corn and maize here-even some sorghum, about the only
place in Defalk. We grow more barley. Heartier stuff."
"Barley is better for beer," offered Alvar.
Anna hadn't seen that much beer in Defalk, and she glanced at
Jecks. "Do you brew much beer at Elheld?"
"Some. More in recent years. We lost many of the old vines."
Were the vineyards another casualty of the Evult's drought?
Along with how many other crops and people you don't even
know about?
The road curved over the next dek to head directly toward the
river. An arched bridge with three spans and two heavy stone
piers in midstream offered the sole access to Cheor from the
west-a bridge that had been far enough downstream to survive
the Evult's floods of the fall before.
The dark-brown clay road widened even more closer to the
bridge, as the riverbanks narrowed and deepened and the
muddy water filled the entire streambed. From what Anna
could see, when the Falche was full, the river would be nearly
ten yards deep. The battered clay levees on both sides testified
that the Falche had indeed run deep in the past and that it had
not recently, not with the gaps in the banks in places.
As they rode closer to the bridge, Alvar leaned toward Anna. "I
would suggest a van."

A van? Anna paused, then finally had to ask, "A van? I'm not a
military person, Captain…"
"A forward guard, lady. We do not know exactly how
friendly…"
"Of course."
"Just a half-score," suggested Jecks.
Alvar nodded.
"And you might have your instrument and a spell ready,"
added the white-haired lord, turning to Anna.
"First ten from the purple company!" called out Alvar. "Form a
van!"
As the armsmen eased their mounts onto the shoulder of the
road and around Anna, she twisted in the saddle and extracted
the lutar. What spell could she use for defense? A variation on
the repulsion spell? She hummed the melody, mentally trying
to fit the words into the tune.
A single-horse wagon groaned over the stone paving blocks of
the bridge and toward the column. The driver looked up at the
line of riders, and immediately drove the cart south along the
crude way formed by the levee.
"He didn't like our looks," observed Alvar.
"Would you?" asked Jecks with a laugh. "With near two
hundred horse?" He glanced at Jimbob, and added in a lower
voice, "Most tradesmen and farmers will flee armsmen. They

fear losing their goods and life. Never give them reason to fear.
Remember, armsmen grow nothing and create nothing. They
only allow you to hold what others grow and create. Farmers
and tradesmen are the heart of a land." 
Anna nodded, almost to herself, then glanced at Jimbob, who
nodded at his grandsire's words, but with a nod that meant he
heard the words, not necessarily their meaning.
Jecks glanced at Anna.
She shook her head and offered a faint smile.
He shrugged in return. "We say what we must."
"As often as we have to," she answered.
Alvar nodded slowly, but a vaguely puzzled expression
remained on young Jimbob's face.
As Farinelli's hoofs clicked on the stones of the bridge, Anna
one-handedly readjusted her felt hat, a copy of the one she'd
lost at Vult, comfortable, but scarcely stylish. She doubted she
looked stylish event without the hat, not in pale green trousers
and tunic, although the green' leather riding boots might have
offered a hint as to her station.
Station? You're worried about that? She smiled to herself.
From the height of the second arch, Anna could sense that
Cheor was an old town, clearly older than Falcor. Less than
fifty yards past the stone-paved approachway to the bridge, a
hodgepodge of buildings began. The houses were not stone, but
mainly of yellow bricks. Some were coveredf with stucco, once

whitewashed, but now dingy and gray. The roofs were made of
a dark red tile, and more than a handful of the roofs showed
cracked and missing tiles.
The vanguard rode silently off the bridge and down the main
thoroughfare, if a street paved with cracked stones, with weeds
sprouting intermittently, and open sewers on each side of the
pavement, if that constituted a main thoroughfare. The sound
of the main force behind on the bridge echoed down the
constricted street.
A calico cat sidled up to a damp-sided rain barrel on the right,
then vanished into the adjacent alley. On the left side of the
narrow street, before a shop that bore a weathered green sign
with crude line drawings of a basket and a barrel, stood a dog,
straining at a heavy rope tied to a post that supported a
sagging porch roof. The dog continued to growl as the riders
neared.
From the basketmaker-cooper's porch, a scar-faced woman
glared as the column neared. Anna met the woman's eyes, and,
after an instant, the woman looked away, her mouth moving,
but with words inaudible to the sorceress.
Anna took a slow deep breath as she passed the basketmaker's,
and wished she hadn't. The stench reminded her of an
ill-tended jakes-or certain public banos she'd encountered on her
sole South American tour.
Two women bearing large baskets glanced up at the clacking
of hoofs, then darted down a side alley.

Farther toward the center of the town, a man with wispy white
hair stared from under a tattered gray awning that sheltered
three tables as they passed and rode into the open square.
The square of Cheor held a low yellow-brick platform roughly
thirty vards square. The platform was empty except for a
bearded man covered with a ragged gray blanket and slumped
in one corner. His mud-covered feet were bare. A rope ran from
his hand to a yellow dog who lay on the bricks, his eyes on the
riders.
The street around the platform was cobbled, except for a
handful of irregularly spaced potholes, each partly filled with
rainwater.
On the far side of the square was another cooper's, with a
man-sized barrel over the door, bound with twisted willow
rather than with iron hoops. The sound of hammering echoed
from the general direction of the cooper's shop. Beside the
cooper's was a larger structure, bearing the crossed candles of a
chandlery. On the other side of the cooper's was another shop,
or something, which had no sign.
On the short side of the square-to Anna's right and beyond the
restaurant or cafe under the awning-were four buildings, each
two stories high, and narrow. The windows and doors of the
last building were boarded closed, and one of the second-floor
shutters of the adjoining building hung at an angle, as if held
only by a single hinge.
A heavyset red-haired woman peered from the window of the
second building, one with a white sign bearing the image of a

pair of boots. At the sight of the horses entering the square, her
mouth formed an O, soundlessly, and her head vanished.
Alvar eased his mount toward a gangly figure standing by the
mounting block before the building Anna would have called a
dry goods store. The red-painted shutters were drawn back to
reveal an unglassed window, behind which were bolts of cloth
displayed on a rack.
Anna reined up, waiting, and behind her the column slowed.
Is this a good idea? We could be sitting ducks… or whatever. Her
eyes flicked around the square, but she could only see what she
would have expected to see-women carrying bundles, a young
woman half holding the hand of a toddler, half dragging him
toward the cooper's, a youth carting a plank into the cooper's.
"Which way to Lord Arkad's?" asked Alvar.
"Ah… I couldn't be saying, ser armsman." The man swallowed
almost convulsively. "His holding's north somewhere, they say.
Me… I never been there."
"You've never been there?" asked the captain flatly.
"No, ser. No, ser."
Anna recognized the signs. No retainer of Arkad's would reveal
anything, fearing the wrath of a local lord far more than that of
even armed men who would pass and might never reappear. It
also meant Arkad was indeed feared, and that bothered her.
She turned in the saddle, and her fingers ran over the lutar.
Then she sang. 

"Tell the truth and tell us true, 
all we've asked of you…"
The gangly man's mouth opened, then closed.
"You haven't met the regent, have you?" said Alvar with a
smile. "She doesn't care much for those who'd lie to her."
"The… north… road… there, by the coppersmith's."
Anna's eyes blurred, and, again, for a moment, she saw two
images of the gangly man. She shook her head, trying to clear
her sight. Then she massaged her forehead for a moment.
The double image faded, and Anna's eyes went back to the
narrow building in the far left corner of the square, where a
copper pot glittered in the early morning sun. In the instant her
eyes shifted, she could sense that people were easing out of the
square, or back into buildings, anywhere away from her
armsmen.
Alvar gestured toward the street by the coppersmith's, and
Anna flicked Farinelli's reins,, trying not to frown. The
truthspell-was it Darksong? Was that why she'd gotten the
double image?
Even before she passed the coppersmith's, riding behind a
vanguard clearly more alert, the square had emptied.
The echo of hoofs was the only sound as they rode northward
and away from the center of the town.
Was it her imagination, or were most of the shutters of Cheor
closed as they rode northward through the town? Anna

glanced this way, and that, but the street wais empty. Even the
dogs and cats seemed to have vanished.
"Guilty, they are," said Alvar. "Not a good omen."
"Not at all," agreed Jecks.
"This didn't happen when we rode through Elhi," Anna said.
"I had nothing to fear or hide," pointed out Jecks, with a smile.
"That's true." Anna smiled back momentarily. Jecks' directness
remained appealing, as did his smile.
A dek or so north of the square the houses spread more widely,
with patches of ground, and gardens around each. The
majority of the outlying houses were of unstuocoed yellow
brick, and many had thatch or split-reed roofs.
Anna pushed back her felt hat, already getting battered, and
wiped her forehead. The sun had burned away the earlier mist
and ground fog, and the day, early as it was, was getting
warm. She eased off her jacket and thrust it through the saddle
loops, then took a deep swallow from her water bottle.
Still wearing his leather jacket, Jimbob glanced from the water
bottle to Anna, clad in a pale green linen shirt and a green
sleeveless lunic, and then to his grandsire.
"She is from the mist worlds, Jimbob," Jecks said quietly. "They
must be chill indeed." The redhead turned to Anna. "Are you
really warm now?"
"I would be if I kept the jacket on." Jimbob shivered.

Anna almost smiled. Another thing that was hard to believe.
On earth, it had seemed that, except in the summer in Iowa,
she had been cold more often than not. In Liedwahr it was
usually just the opposite.
Outside a small hut, a dark-haired woman, barefooted, hoed at
the dark soil of a garden row, as if to prepare it for planting.
With almost every stroke of the hoe, she struggled with a
toddler tied to a rope wound around her waist. Several gray
geese pecked along the crumbling yellow bricks of the wall of
the old house. The woman scarcely looked up at the column of
riders.
Anna understood. Mario had been a handful at that age, and
there had been times when she wouldn't have cared if a row of
tanks had rumbled past the little house outside Williamsburg, if
only her son had given her a moment's peace.
She shook her head. Now what you wouldn't give to have that
time back? Her eyes burned for a moment. Careful… just get it
together. You're the sorceress. You can do this.
As they continued northward and Cheor receded behind them,
Anna studied the fields-all rich dark bottomland formed in the
area between the two rivers. Had it once been a swamp? It was
flat enough. What Papaw wouldn't have given for land like
this, rather than the rocky patch around the holler.
There were low hedgerows around many of the fields, but no
stands of trees, except in the distance to the east. A single horse
pulled a plow guided by a stocky figure in the fields off to the
right. The farmer was nearly a mile away-more than a dek and

a half, Anna correctly mentally, trying again to keep her
references in Liedwahran terms.
To the left were several other figures, carrying baskets and
pointed sticks. Planting? Anna wondered.
Ahead, a low yellow-brick wall stretched across the fields,
forming the southern side of a rough square that looked to be
almost two deks on a side. In the center of the square was a low
hill whose base was encircled by a second and higher
yellow-brick wall. On the crest of the hill was a sprawling,
high-walled complex-also of yellow bricks.
"That's Synfal," Jecks announced. "It's been home to the lords of
Cheor since before there was a Defalk."
A skeptical look crossed Jimbob's face, and Anna wanted to say
something, but she bit her lip. Now wasn't the time, not in
public, especially. "Big place," offered Alvar, from where he
rode slightly ahead of Anna, Jecks, and Jimbob.
"Aye. Only a rich holding could support that."
As they continued toward the nearer wall, Anna looked more
closely. The first wall, almost waist-high, was rough-formed,
and covered in places with vines, showing a few new leaves. By
full summer, it would vanish into the green of the surrounding
fields, Anna suspected. There was no gate where the road met
the wall, nor any sign of one. The wall just ended in a tumbled
pile of bricks on each side of the road. 
"Wall from the old days," explained Jecks. "From when this was
part of Suhlmorra."

Anna raised her eyebrows-another part of Liedwahr's history
no one had bothered to mention. "How long ago was that?"
Even Jimbob turned in the saddle as Jecks answered.
"So long ago even the poets don't count the years. Synfal"-Jecks
gestured toward the keep on the hill a good two deks
ahead-"was the northern march and the place where the Corian
lords and the Morran lords usually met in battle." He grinned.
"The Corians usually won."
"I take it your ancestors were Corian," Anna said dryly.
"How did you guess?"
"And that they were proud folks, too."
Jecks flushed.
Anna grinned.
Jecks shook his head.
Beside his grandsire, Jimbob merely looked puzzled, and Anna
and Jecks let him remain that way.
As the column neared the second wall, a barrier Anna could see
was at least four yards high, she reclaimed the lutar from the
left saddlebag. As she tuned the instrument, her eyes went to
the walled edifice ahead, a structure nearly twice the size of the
keep at Falcor, if with brick walls, rather than more solid stone.
Could they just demand admittance? Jecks had said that was
the right of the Lord of Defalk-and thus Anna's, especially with

Jimbob beside her. But would Arkad accept that right? Or
would she have to use one of her destructive spells to enforce
that right?
She really didn't like the idea of tearing up the keeps and holds
of lords disloyal to the Regency-or killing their armsmen-not
until all the other lords perceived that such action was a
necessity. The missing lied-geld was less than two seasons in
arrears-not enough to create such a perception on earth. Here,
everyone assured her, it was an obligation of honor, and two
seasons' default was more than dishonorable enough for Anna
to act.
Even for a woman regent. She wanted to snort. Instead, she
adjusted a tuning peg and turned in the saddle, leaning toward
Jecks, and saying in a low voice, "You know I've hesitated to
put Jimbob into trouble, and here I'm putting him forward."
The white-haired and clean-shaven Lord of Elhi shook his head,
leaned back toward her. "Best he learn under your protection."
Anna still wasn't sure how much Jimbob was really learning,
and how much the redheaded heir was pretending to learn.
Mario had been like that, too, playing the game until he was
out from under her .control-or Avery's.
Her eyes went to the road ahead, and the second wall. The
taller wall ended at each side of the road in a set of pillars. On
each pillar were rusted iron brackets, four of them, that had
once held gates. Of the gates rhere was no sign. 
"No guards here." Alvar cleared his throat and looked toward
Anna. "Should we… the banner?"

"Yes." She should have thought of it herself, but she still wasn't
fully accustomed to Defalk. Less than a year wasn't time
enough to learn all that was necessary, whether she was a
sorceress or not.
"The banner! Forward!" ordered the swarthy and wiry captain.
"Forward."
Anna watched as the purple banner with the golden crossed
spears and the crown, with the R beneath, billowed for a
moment in the light breeze, then drooped, even as the young
armsman she didn't know rode to the head of the column
bearing the standard.
"We should stop before we get within bow range, Lady Anna,"
Alvar offered.
"How much farther is that?" Anna had no concept of bow
range. She knew Alvar had brought a half-score of archers and
considered himself lucky to have so many in his command.
Good archers seemed to be rare. Not so rare as sorcerers, but
rarer than any other kind of armsmen.
"By the waste ditch there." The spot where he pointed lay
another thirty yards ahead on the road.
A faint odor wafted toward Anna on the light breeze out of the
north. "How about stopping right here?" She reined up.
Jecks grinned, but said nothing.
"Column halt!" Alvar reinforced the command with a raised
blade.

As Alvar rode back to ensure some form of order, Anna, lutar
held ready, ran through a vocalise, while idly looking toward
Synfal. The entrance to the keep was by a gate partway up the
hillside, perhaps five yards above the flat of the plain.
Alvar rode back and reined up as Anna finished the second
vocalise.
"That hill's not natural."
Jecks frowned.
Anna didn't know that much geology, but she did know that it
was highly unlikely that one isolated fifty-foot-high hill would
rise out of bottomland as flat as a lake. Had some earlier lord
built the mound? Or had a series of holds resulted in the hill?
Did it matter?
The walls of the keep, unlike the outer and untended walls,
were over eight yards high and clearly in good repair, although
Anna sus-Pected that the yellow bricks were more susceptible
to sorcery or to the cannon she didn't have than stone would
have been. The twin gates, doubtless with a portcullis behind,
were of heavy oak, iron-bound, and closed.
"You must request entrance, lady," Jecks said softly.
"He won't grant it."
"Still…"
Anna understood and turned to Alvar. "Do you have someone
you can send closer?" 
Alvar gestured to the standard bearer, and the young armsman

eased his mount up beside the four. "What would you have him
say?"
Anna cleared her throat. "His lordship Jimbob, the regent
Anna, and the lord Jecks… here to see Lord Arkad of Cheor."
She looked at Jecks. "What else?"
"You request hospitality on his honor."
Anna nodded. "His lordship Jimbob, the regent Anna, and the
lord Jecks… here to see Lord Arkad of Cheor. We request his
hospitality, on his honor."
The armsman repeated the phrase, then eased his mount
forward and past the waste ditch, halting on the gently rising
road about fifty yards from the closed gates. He raised his voice
and declaimed Anna's words. For a time, there was silence.
Then a voice replied, words spoken too faintly to be heard.
Anna eased Farinelli forward, but halted short of the wooden
planks that served as a bridge over the waste ditch, steeling
herself against the pungency that rose from the dark liquid that
oozed toward a pond to the right.
The armsman repeated his message.
"How do we know you're who you say?" demanded a
round-jowled man in purple from a parapet over the gates.
"You know the banner. Who are you to deny the regent?"
snapped Alvar.
"The servant of Lord Arkad."

"A nameless servant, and you would deny two lords and the
regent?" responded Alvar. Anna nodded.
The round-jowled figure drew himself up. "I am Fauren, head
seneschal and counselor."
Anna could see that she needed Arkad and his scribe or
counselor in hearing distance before she could cast a spell. She
also had another problem, and that was that Liende and her
players, farther back in the column, didn't know enough of the
spellsongs Anna used to be useful. That meant spells had to be
supported only with the lutar, and that meant Anna couldn't
afford to waste any.
Still, there was no sense in delaying. Fauren-two syllables-the
same as the word "armsman." Anna rode forward another few
yards.
Jecks accompanied her, but waved Jimbob to stay back.
"Enough," he suggested to Anna.
She glanced toward the walls rising above them, then cleared
her throat. She strummed the chords, then sang.
"Fauren right, Fauren wrong. 
Obey this regent's song, 
Open all gates strong…
"Faithful and obedient be, 
to Anna and the Regency!"
Silence followed the song. A silence Anna welcomed with the
faint throbbing that had invaded her skull with the spell-and

another double image of the hold before her. She slowly
extended her free hand to the water bottle and fumbled it open,
drinking slowly.
Beside Anna, Jecks shifted his weight on the dark stallion. The
broad-shouldered and black-haired Fhurgen urged his mount
forward and before her, as if to act as a human shield. Farinelli
sidestepped two steps.
Then a creaking followed, and the dark gates swung open. The
iron portcullis lifted.
"Do we ride in?" asked Jimbob, who had slipped forward and
reined up behind his grandsire.
"No," said Jecks. "Lord Arkad must come to us. Especially after
this." He looked to Anna. "Can you offer another spell?"
"If I have to," she answered, again lifting her water bottle
one-handedly.
" 'Have to'?" Jimbob's freckled face reflected puzzlement.
Anna ignored the expression and drank once more, then
replaced the bottle. Jecks bent over and extracted the travel
biscuits from the bag tied on the left saddle ring, offering her
one. She took it and began to eat, trying to swallow all the dry
crumbs. Then she took another swallow of water.
Her headache was mild, and the double vision had faded, but
she'd need both the energy and the water.
Behind them, horses milled, and the low buzz of conversation
sounded like the beehive in Papaw's back field.

Shortly, Fauren limped out and stood in the shadow of the
open gates. "My master bids you enter."
"Return with your master, Fauren, and have him bid us
welcome and enter. On his honor," snapped Jecks, the first time
Anna could recall hearing anger in the white-haired lord's voice.
"I bid you welcome for him." Fauren bowed, almost
obsequiously. "He is indisposed and ill."
"Then have him carried here." Jecks' voice was cold.
"Alas…" pleaded Fauren.
Anna caught sight of movement on the walls. Was that an
archer? She cleared her throat and lifted the lutar, glad she'd
thought about the spell earlier.
'All within this faithless hall 
forever serve in lifelong thrall 
the regent and the lord she serves… 
Defalkan order she preserves."
Anna tried not to wince, but the rhyme scheme was the best
she'd been able to do. 
A horrified look crossed the seneschal's face, and his hands
curled toward himself, and his heart, and he staggered. His
knees buckled, and then he collapsed, writhing, on the road.
A single figure plummeted over the wall and landed with a
sickening thud on the ground beneath the walls.
Anna reeled under an equally sickening thud that seemed to
rock her skull. Her eyes watered, and she could see clearly, side

by side, two images, as if her brain could not integrate the
separate visions from each eye-except that the left image
seemed "warmer" and the right one "cooler." Her once mild
headache was scarcely mild, and her free hand grasped the
front of the saddle to steady her.
"Are you all right, Lady Anna?" asked Jecks in a low voice. "I
will be." And I have no intention of collapsing before Arkad's
gates because of a little spell.
"Perhaps you should send a squad to see the keep is safe,"
suggested Jecks, his eyes still on Anna. 
"Fine."
"Our job, Regent." Alvar stood in the saddle and turned. "Green
company! Forward!"
With Fhurgen's and his men surrounding them, Anna, Jecks,
and Jimbob waited as the twoscore lancers rode around the still
figure of Fauren and through the open gates. Not an arrow
flew. Not a blade flashed, buts Anna kept shifting her weight in
the saddle.
Finally, she reached for the biscuits again. Her head still ached,
and her eyes still saw double. Jecks leaned from his saddle and
reclaimed the bag. "Here."
She ate and drank. Alvar rode out through the gates alone, a
wide smile on his face. "Your spell worked. You'll not have any
trouble."
Anna finished the last of her water and stowed the bottle back

in the loops. "You're sure?"
"Some of the thralls and peasants were smiling. Some of the
others… you'll see." Alvar turned his mount back toward the
keep, raising his' blade, and gesturing for the rest of the column
to follow.
Anna still glanced at the heavy dark gates apprehensively as
they rode through the heavy brick walls and arch and into a
courtyard below the main keep. Two more bodies lay in the
courtyard, both purple-clad, like Fauren.
As Anna reined up, the two armsmen by the double oak doors
to the keep prostrated themselves on the stones. "Lady Anna…
Lady Anna."
"Impressive," murmured Jecks.
Jimbob's eyes went from the Synfal armsmen to Anna, then
back to the armsmen. "I don't understand." The youth leaned in
his saddle toward the sorceress. "You didn't use a slaying spell,
but some people died. Can you slay without asking for death?"
"That's why I don't like to use sorcery." Anna took a deep
breath. Just one reason of the many I keep discovering. "Jimbob…
some people. They feel strongly. If I cast a spell that compels
them to feel something against their nature, some will die
rather than change their nature."
"A good thing, too, young Lord Jimbob," rumbled Fhurgen
from where he sat on his mount directly behind Anna. "Anyone
who's so against you and the regent's better dead."

Once, Anna had wondered about anyone being better dead,
but after seeing what had happened to Madell-and Dalila and
her children-she wasn't so sure if Madell wouldn't have been
better off dead. Certainly, everyone else would have been better
off it he were. She absently massaged her forehead. "Now
what? I suppose I need to find Lord Arkad-if he's alive."
"We'll find him," Alvar affirmed. "You wait where you can be
guarded." He vaulted off his mount, gesturing for several
armsmen to follow, and unsheathed his blade.
Anna glanced toward the walls, but while the handful of
armsmen watched her, none seemed more than curious. Some
had seated themselves in patches of shade afforded by the
walls. Anna closed her eyes as she sat on Farinelli. That way,
she didn't see double, and the faint sense of nausea and vertigo
that went with the double vision disappeared.
In time, Alvar reappeared with the armsmen.
Anna opened her eyes and looked at the captain, pleased that
the sick feelings didn't reappear, although the double vision
remained.
"Lord Arkad is alive. He sits in his receiving chamber. He be
alone." Alvar shook his head.
"Is it safe?" Jecks asked, his voice so slow it almost rumbled.
"We found no armed men, and all the servants wish to please.
Your sorcery was most effective, lady."
Anna hoped so. Her head still ached, and seeing two images of

everyone was a strain. She almost wanted to take a swig of the
medicinal alcohol in her pack, but that wouldn't have been the
best idea. Perhaps Lord Arkad had good cellars and a decent
wine. That she could use. Definitely.
"We will escort you both," Alvar added.
Jecks nodded. Anna dismounted first, deliberately and
carefully, fear-mg that her balance was not what it should be.
The white-haired lord and Jimbob followed her example. After a
moment, she decided to bring the lutar.
Jecks held the door as Anna entered the cavernous hall, an
echoing chamber that held little but dust, and the odor of mold.
They were greeted by a serving girl, thin and nervous, who
bowed once, twice. "Lady Anna, Regent Anna, this way to Lord
Arkad's chamber." She bowed again.
Behind the hall was a corridor running perpendicular to the
hall, and the serving girl turned right. Fhurgen stepped up
beside her, blade unsheathed, his head turning from side to side.
Alvar walked on Anna's right, Jecks on her left, both with
blades out.
Anna frowned. The entire experience seemed almost surreal.
Walking through an ancient castle or hold in dim light,
surrounded by armed men, treating her like an ancient queen
to be protected. Yet her sorcery had apparently turned the
keep's defenders into allies, unwilling or not. And you can't take
a step without wondering if you'll fall over.
Her fingers tightened around the lutar, her thoughts skittering

into the burning spell. She didn't want to flay anyone with fire,
but she could if the need appeared. Correction. You hope you can
.
The serving girl stopped at the foot of the massive yellow brick
staircase, turned, and bowed again. "He's up the main stairs
here, in the upper room, Regent Anna."
Anna nodded, then followed the girl.
Fhurgen, Jecks, and Alvar kept abreast of her, with Jimbob
lagging, his eyes darting from side to side. Close to a score of
armsmen followed the group, but the only sounds were the
echoes of boots on brick.
At the top of the stairs, under a huge portrait of a man in
unfamiliar armor on a white horse, they turned right, down
another brick-walled corridor for perhaps twenty yards to an
open doorway.
The time-stained door was open into a square and
high-ceilinged room nearly ten yards on a side. At the right end
of the room was a raised wooden dais. On the dais was a carved
chair, nothing more. An old, white-haired figure sat on the
chair.
Jecks slowed slightly, gesturing for Jimbob to do the same.
Anna, flanked by Fhurgen, stopped short of the dais, squinting
in trying to make out Arkad. Her nose itched. Mold? Dust?
"Pay homage to the regent," growled Fhurgen.

Arkad looked up from the carved chair at Fhurgen, then to
Anna. "I honor you, Regent. I honor you. I honor you." Tears
seeped from the rheumy eyes, disappearing into the
food-stained and tangled white beard.
Anna paused. Something didn't feel right. She lifted the lutar
slightly, her fingers feeling for the strings.
"I honor you," cackled Arkad, a line of saliva drooling out of the
left corner of his mouth. The Lord of Cheor tottered erect and
bowed his head. "I honor you."
Anna glanced toward Fhurgen momentarily. Did Arkad seem
as… mad… as she thought?
The ancient figure stumbled down from the dais toward Anna.
"Honor you!"
With the flash of silver Anna threw up her right hand and
jumped aside, trying to protect the lutar and herself from the
blade. A line of fire grazed the side of her hand.
"Bastard!" Fhurgen's bare blade slashed, and the knife clattered
on the stones. The guard's second effort threw the tottering
figure onto the bricks.
Arkad did not move, and blood began to pool on the stained
yellow floor bricks. Then the ancient figure twitched once and
was still. Anna knew he was dead. 
After a moment, Anna looked at the gash on the side of her
palm. "Good thing you brought the alcohol," she murmured to
herself.

"I am sorry, Regent." Fhurgen's voice almost broke.
"It wasn't your fault, Fhurgen. I was careless." She shook her
head. Sorcery doesn't protect you if you don't use it… or if
someone's so twisted and mad that the spell has no effect… or if
you're seeing double and don't react.
"There's a bottle wrapped in green cloth in my saddlebags.
Would you send someone for it?" She looked back down on the
emaciated white-haired figure in the stained maroon tunic
lying in already-drying blood.
Fhurgen nodded to the blond armsman behind him. "You
heard the regent, Rickel."
Jecks looked to Anna.
"I'll be all right. It's not much more than a scratch." She shook
her head. "What a mess. What a fucking, dissonant mess."
24
DUMARIA, DUMAR
EHARA swings into the saddle of the roan, glancing from the
stable back at the white limestone of the palace, then urges his
mount toward the parklike preserve that stretches from behind
the white stone building to the top of the bluffs overlooking the
Falche River three deks to the east and to the north gate little
more than a dek away, where the road winds down the steep
hill past the mansions of the wealthy traders. The gray-haired
lancer officer spurs his mount to catch up with the Lord of
Dumar.

"You're a lancer, Overcaptain Keasil. It took you long enough
to catch me." Ehara's voice booms across the turf that leads to
the woods.
"You are known as an excellent horseman, sire." Keasil's voice is
lower than Ehara's as he settles his mount into a walk beside
Ehara. "You asked me to accompany you?"
"Away from the palace and the ever-listening ears. I'm sure you
understand." Ehara urges his mount into a trot.
Keasil manages to react quickly, and the two men ride side by
side toward the tended woods. 
"Keasil…" Ehara turns in his saddle and grins. "Send a token of
our appreciation to Lord Sargol in Suhl. You can select
something from the chest, a diamond or two, I think, when you
come to my study later. Siobion prefers the pearls and rubies. I
will have a scroll ready for you shortly after I return to my
study. I'll send for you."
"Lord Sargol? Not Lord Dencer?" Keasil's bushy gray eyebrows
lift in inquiry.
"Lord Dencer would be our agent. He has made it quite clear
how he would be both agent and overlord in southern Defalk."
Ehara shakes his head, in mock sadness. "That is why Captain
Gortin rode to Stromwer. He looks younger than his years, and
that was not by accident. I am not fond of agents. They place
their interests above mine."
"That can be so."
"It is so. Remember that."

"Yes, sire." Keasil frowns as he guides his mount clear of the
marble walled fountain that sits alone in the grass.
"You look displeased."
"Oh, no, sire. It is just that…" He pauses and guides his mount
closer to Ehara's. "Your pardon, lord, but if I am to act
properly…"
"Yes?"
"Would it not be wise if I had a general idea of what message I
am to convey?"
"A scroll to Lord Sargol." Ehara reins up short of the first line of
trees.
The officer inclines his head to Ehara. "I will do my best, ser."
"I will probably convey my felicitations. A good word,
felicitations. My felicitations about the situation in which he has
been placed. I might suggest I sympathize with his uncertain
condition, mentioning in passing a sorceress unfamiliar with his
particular situation as a regent for a boy whose forebears were
scarcely distinguished. That might be viewed as unsettling,
even without having neighboring lords with loyalties regarded
as close to rebellious by such a regent. And I will offer him
friendship."
"That is all?"
"That is what you need to know, Keasil." Ehara smiles. "The
scroll will be spelled. Don't try to read it."

"Yes, ser. No, ser, I won't, I mean."
"I know what you meant." Ehara smiles. "No more talk of
scrolls and messages. Let us ride."
25
After Fhurgen walked through the chamber, blade out, Anna
glanced around the guest quarters-a large room with an
adjoining bath chamber. Like everything else in the hall, they
smelled, as if the bath chamber had never been used, but they
smelled less than either Fauren's quarters or those of the late
Lord Arkad.
The walls were yellow brick, covered with plaster that had once
been whitewashed and now looked more like dirty yellow,
either from the brick showing through or from an
accumulation of dirt, smoke, and grease. The light from the two
narrow windows was further darkened by heavy brown drapes
that drooped from wrought-iron brackets set above the
casement and by inside shutters. Two wooden armchairs were
pushed against the outer wall.
A double-width bed, with a dirty brown quilt and two lumpy
pillows, a bedside table with a candle and smudged glass
mantel, and a writing table with a wooden straight-backed
chair completed the bedchamber furnishings.
The regent's boots scraped, as though on sand, as she crossed
the brick floor to the nearest window and pulled back the
drapes and opened the shutters.
"Khhhchew!"

Anna rubbed her nose, then sneezed twice more, before
opening the shutters of the second window. "Damned dust…
bed's probably worse."
Fhurgen had retreated to the half-open door, watching as Anna
studied the room, one hand touching the full black beard
momentarily.
She turned as another set of boots echoed down the corridor.
Jecks stepped into the room, followed by the redheaded Jimbob.
"We have inspected the strong room and the lower levels."
Had it taken her that long to disinfect the wound and inspect
the top floor of the keep?
"How be the hand?"
"It hurts." Anna shrugged, her eyes going to the dressings.
"Other than that… Other than being stupid…" She shook her
head. "This place stinks."
"No worse than many," Jecks said.
"I'll have to have it cleaned it up to sleep here." She eased herself
into a straight-backed chair.
Jecks nodded. "There is much to be done here."
Anna had the feeling Jecks wasn't talking about cleaning. "Does
Alvar have the hold under control?"
"Your spell did that. Your armsmen hold the gates and the
ramparts, but the servants are obeying willingly. So are the few
crafters." 

"Good." Anna started to rub her forehead, to massage away the
headache, but doing it left-handed felt subtly awkward.
"Lady Anna?" Jimbob's voice was uneven.
"Yes, Jimbob."
"Might I ask… ?"
"How Lord Arkad managed to lift a knife against me?"
"Yes, lady."
"It's simple and it's complicated," Anna said tiredly. "Spells like
the one I cast on the holding only work on a mind that's
healthy. Lord Arkad was not well. I don't know if he was
spelled or old or insane, but he didn't know that what he did
was against the spell." And you didn't cast it to make an attack
physically impossible.
"Everyone talks about how your spells stop people or kill
them." The youthful face screwed up in puzzlement.
Jecks started to open his mouth, and Anna shook her head,
then took a deep breath, trying to gather her thoughts. She
really needed something to eat. "Jimbob… someday you will
command an army. It might happen that a lord will refuse to
pay liedgeld. I hope not, but these things can happen. He has
an army-many armsmen, and many other people behind his
walls. What will happen if you use all your armsmen-or
sorcery- to kill that lord and all his armsmen and people?"
"They'll die."

"And who will harvest the crops? Who will ever wish to
surrender to you, if they know they'll die? How many of your
armsmen will die? How will you replace them?"
"I'll use the golds from the rebel's strongbox."
Jecks nodded. "And then more lords will rebel. Will you destroy
them? And if you do, who will stand behind you?"
Jimbob's eyes went from Jecks to Anna to Jecks, as if he could
not believe that his grandfather was supporting Anna.
"Jimbob…" Jecks said softly. "Armsmen and sorcery do not
create crops or golds. They can sometimes seize it, but such
seizures must be seldom, and every man must think that you
were right to use armsmen and sorcery."
"But Lord Arkad was evil," protested Jimbob.
"You're right," Anna said, "but I'm a stranger in Defalk, and I
didn't know he was evil. Do you think most of the other lords
thought he was evil?"
"They will now."
"Some will," Jecks said. "Some will yet protest the regent's
efforts to secure your future. All would have been angered if the
regent had brought the hall down around Lord Arkad and his
seneschal."
"All of them?"
"All of them," Jecks repeated. "Now… off with you. The regent
and I need to talk." The white-haired lord of Elhi glanced

toward Fhurgen. "Can you ensure him a guard?"
"Yes, sire." Fhurgen grinned.
"And find us some wine and something to eat?"
"Yes, Lady Anna." Fhurgen was still smiling as the door closed.
Once they were alone, Anna shifted her weight in the chair.
"It is good he is away from Galen," Jecks said.
"I wondered when I met… his tutor."
"We do what we can. I should have spent more time with
Jimbob when he was at Elheld, but I trusted Galen. Now…"
Jecks shrugged, then seated himself on the brick window ledge
closest to the writing table, ignoring the chairs.
"You suggested we needed to deal with more than a few
things." Her nose still wrinkled at the smell as a gust of wind
swirled from the windows through the chamber. "There's who
gets the holding." To whom could she entrust the custody of
Lord Arkad's lands? Arkad had no heir, not according to Jecks.
None of her would-be proteges were old enough nor
experienced enough. "And what else?"
"You should settle that soon," Jecks said. "I also question
whether we should continue to Synope."
"We have a day or two to consider that. First, we have to deal
with this mess. We can't just leave Synfal without someone in
charge," she mused. "What do you suggest?"

"You could rightfully administer it," Jecks answered. "You
could have someone act as saalmeister or seneschal."
His emphasis on "rightfully" did not escape her and confirmed
what she had in mind. "No. It has to be someone clearly
perceived as being of Defalk. Right now, it has to be a man."
"You were considering a woman?"
"There will be ladies in the future, but I doubt Defalk is ready
for such a shock for the first lord I replace. Besides, I can't even
find someone to run my own estate." She lifted her right hand
to set it on the table, and managed not to wince. She didn't
think any muscles or tendons had been cut, but it still hurt. "I
was thinking that we'll need both an heir and an administrator."
"Both?" Jecks lifted his white eyebrows.
Anna smiled. "What about Jimbob as the heir?"
"What?"
"Make Herstat the saalmeister and administrator in Jimbob's
absence."
"My Herstat?" Jecks laughed. "You will take every talent I
possess."
"Not every one." She made a gesture that she cut short as the
combination of double vision and pain reminded her of her
wounds-seen and unseen. "These are rich lands, and they will
give him income and a greater impression of independence…"
"He is young…"

"They're his upon his maturity. Have Herstat present a yearly
report to me and to any lords interested enough to come to
Falcor to hear it. Any changes or improvements Jimbob wants
to make will have to be approved by you and Herstat." 
"Not you?"
"Definitely not me, and everyone should know that."
"Again, Lady Anna, you surprise me."
"Why? One of Donjim's and Barjim's problems was that they
didn't have enough income and were too beholden to the
Thirty-three."
"When others discover your intentions…"
"It will only confirm what they want to believe," Anna said
wearily. "Besides-tell them that Jimbob benefits, not me." She
cleared her throat. Something in the air was affecting her
allergies. Brill's youth spell hadn't taken care of that problem. "I
don't think we should announce it for a time, maybe not until
we return to Falcor. I should be considering who will be the
heir."
"Some would find that indecisive."
"Let them. If I announce Jimbob right now, everyone will say
that it's all a pretext for me to take over lands of the old guard
and use Jimbob as a puppet. That's another reason why you'll
need to get Herstat here quickly, before I announce the new
heir." She rubbed her nose, hoping she wouldn't sneeze. "Did
you find out who was Fauren's second in charge, or whatever?"

"His name is Halde," Jecks ventured, his voice thoughtful. "He
waits in the corridor."
"You sound puzzled."
"Best you speak to him first."
Anna nodded. Jecks wanted her to form her own view.
Halde was dark-haired, with a trimmed beard that concealed
his comparative youth. He couldn't have been much past his
early twenties. "Lady Anna, Lord Jecks." He bowed,
deferentially, but not obsequiously.
"What was your position here in Cheor?" Anna asked.
"I was an assistant to Fauren, the saalmeister, lady." Halde's
light gray eyes met Anna's. "I did as he asked."
"What sort of duties?"
Halde glanced warily from Anna to Jecks. "Whatever Fauren
asked. I was in charge of the account books, and the strongbox
room. And of all the supplies for Synfal. Irkiik, he was the one
who inspected the fields and collected the tariffs. He also could
use the scrying glass a little. Onnbor maintained the armory
and trained the guards."
"Did you agree with Lord Arkad's decision not to pay liedgeld
to the Regency?"
"I was not in a position to question the lord, lady. Fauren would
caution us that even the saalmeister dared only so much."

"Where is your family?" asked Anna.
"My mother lives with my uncle in Cheor. He is a cooper. I
have no consort." Halde offered a quick and wry smile. "Fauren
did not leave us much time for dalliance."
"What do you think should happen to Cheor?"
"You must decide that, lady, I would hope that those who
served will not be punished severely."
Anna nodded to herself. Whether they knew it or not, all those
in Synfal had indeed been punished. Her spell would hold for
all but the mad, at least as long as she lived. "I hold Cheor until
a new lord is appointed. For now, Halde, you will act as…
saalmeister." Anna struggled for the word. "Someone must
ensure Cheor continues to prosper. If it does, and you perform
well, I will find some suitable reward."
"You are most charitable, lady."
"No. Despite Fauren's faults, it is clear that Cheor was well run.
People know their business and seem happy. Generally, that
means a good… saalmeister. I will let the hold know."
"Thank you, my lady." Halde turned to Jecks. "Grace to you,
Lord Jecks."
"What do you think?" Anna asked after the door closed behind
Halde.
"It is the best choice for now."
"Once Herstat takes over, and learns all he needs to know, we'll

have to replace Halde, I think."
"You would punish him?"
Anna shook her head. "Find a job for him in Falcor or
somewhere. I just think that the top people here should be loyal
first to Jimbob, and then to Synfal."
Jecks rubbed his chin. "That will take time."
"Which we don't have," Anna admitted. She hoped things with
Halde would work out, but something had to be done, and she
just had to trust her instincts… again.
"What other thoughts have you?" Jecks smiled. "Besides taking
every good servant I have?"
Anna frowned. "If there is a large surplus in Arkad's
strongboxes- or his late seneschal's-I think half should go to the
liedstadt to fund our efforts… this expedition. There's no reason
the liedstadt has to pay for rebuilding Defalk."
"Two-thirds," suggested Jecks. "Leaving a third will make you
seem generous. By rights, you could claim everything of a rebel
lord. You could take up to half personally."
Anna smiled crookedly. "Could I claim a few hundred golds
half-personally, to pay my liedgeld? Or would that upset the
Thirty-three?"
"I am certain that no one would object to the regent using a
small part of the spoils to pay yet more coins to the depleted
treasury of the liedstadt. Especially not after rebuilding the
major bridge at Falcor."

"All right." Anna hated the maneuvering. "We'll pay me three
hundred golds for sorcerous construction, and that comes from
Arkad's treasury, and two hundred goes back to the liedstadt
for Loiseau's liedgeld."
"Take a thousand," Jecks said. "The servant who handles
Arkad's accounts said there are more than six thousand golds in
the chests. Your crops and levies may not be that great this
year." 
"A thousand?" Anna sighed. He was probably right about that.
If she didn't start building some of her own funds, she'd be in
the same position Barjim had been and the one she was trying
to get Jimbob out of. But it bothered her, and she wasn't sure
why. "Let me think about it."
Jecks smiled. "You may think as you wish. It is a decision only
you can make."
Like everything anymore. Anna wanted to groan, but regents
and sorceresses didn't groan. They smiled, like singers. So she
did, still trying to ignore the disconcerting double vision.
26
MANSUUS, MANSUUR
THREE ships from Sturinn are docked at Narial, and a group
of the Sea-Priests traveled to Dumaria to meet with Lord
Ehara." Bassil inclines his head.
"I told you, Bassil! Doesn't anyone see tomorrow's sunrise?"
Konsstin turns toward the windowed door that leads to the

study's balcony. "They refuse to treat with me, or with the
northern traders, and here they are sneaking into Dumar.
They'll establish a regular trade route. Then they'll undercut the
shipping tariffs charged by the traders and provide grain
cheaper than the bitches of Ranuak… or than our farmers and
the traders of Cealor. That's for now."
"How do you know that? All your seers know is that Ehara met
with the Sea-Priests." Bassil's voice is resonant, but neutral, and
he continues to stand before the desk even though Konsstin has
walked toward the balcony door.
"A sea-tiger doesn't turn into a cow because it says it does.
Sea-tigers don't change their stripes just because they're in
Liedwahr and not Sturinn." Konsstin purses his lips, puts his
hand on the door lever, then lifts it without opening the balcony
door, and turns.
"What will we do?"
"What would you suggest, Bassil?" asks the Liedfuhr. "We
cannot match the Sea-Priests upon the ocean."
The raven-haired aide frowns, then scratches behind his left ear.
"Yet if you attack Dumar, after sending fiftyscore lancers to
support your grandson…" 
"No one will even pay any attention to what I say about
Sturinn. They might even send assistance to Ehara and the
dissonant sorceress of Defalk." Konsstin offers a sound between
a laugh and a snort.
"Do you have any choice? You must attack and take Defalk

before the Sea-Priests can turn Dumar into their first conquest
in Liedwahr."
"Your words make the task appear so easy, Bassil." The
Liedfuhr snorts. "The Evult squandered five hundred-score in
armsmen, and Vult is buried under molten rock. I have no
desire to follow that example. Do you?"
"You would rather attack Dumar?"
"It would be much easier."
"But the sorceress… ?"
Konsstin fingers the trimmed silver and brown beard. "We
appeal to her sense of survival-and her instincts as a woman.
For now."
Bassil shakes his head, his eyes narrowing as a shaft of light
from the setting sun momentarily blazes through the western
windows.
"The Sturinnese keep their women in chains. Much of that is
ceremonial pigswill, but it is clear that this lady Anna dislikes
men who try to subdue women."
"How do you know that?" The black-haired aide blinks against
the glare.
"It is obvious, for those who have eyes to see. Even without
reflecting pools." Konsstin raises his eyebrows, then continues.
"We will have Nubara shift the lancers to the south, on the
other side of the Sudbergs from Envaryl, and we move some of
our own forces to the west. More than a few. We send a

message to the Regent of Defalk explaining our concerns with
the incursion of the Sea-Priests." Konsstin pauses, "It won't hurt
to send scrolls like that to the Council of Wei and the bitches of
the south. In the one to this lady Anna, we also say that our
intention all along was to move the lancers south, but a gesture
was needed to affirm Rabyn's reign over Neserea."
"She won't believe that," points out Bassil.
"No. But she's likely to believe that we're trying not to give
offense, and that we feel that the Sea-Priests are a far greater
danger to Mansuur and Liedwahr than she is. We also point
out that she should be concerned about the possible customs of
the Sturinnese being implemented in Dumar."
"What customs? The chains?"
"We don't say what customs. If she has to inquire, then it
makes our point stronger."
The room dims as the western clouds again shade the dropping
sun.
"You want me to draft these scrolls?" Bassil adds quickly, "How
soon?"
"Draft them immediately, but do not date them. Yet."
"As you command, sire."
"There's no point in hurrying. The Sturinnese will strike at the
sorceress first. Let us wait until she is under attack. Then any
gesture we make will seem more reasonable." 
Bassil waits.

"If… if she is successful against Ehara and her own southern
lords, then we will see. I'd wager there others besides Dencer
and Gylaron, perhaps Sargol of Suhl, quiet as he is. Some of
them will throw in with Ehara, I'd also wager. If she is
successful, then Defalk will be further impoverished, and
perhaps she will even be wounded or killed. If she is
unsuccessful, Ehara and the Sturinnese will be weakened. In
either case, we wait. Until the time is ripe." Konsstin pauses.
"You can start arranging for supplies and wagons. That way
we can move immediately when we must."
"Yes, sire."
"Well… Bassil… get on with it."
The dark-haired young officer bows, then turns and leaves the
Lied-wahr's study.
Konsstin smiles, then turns to look at the rose-colored clouds
that frame the blaze of twilight. He nods to himself.
27
"I NEED a tour of Synfal." That was what she'd said, and now
Anna was descending worn yellow-brick steps, lit only by
intermittent candles, into the depths of the oldest section of the
hold. The scooped-out edges of the steps indicated that the
hold's age was considerable.
Anna found herself using her left hand to steady herself from
the disruptive impact of the double vision, while still trying to
ignore the disability she hoped was temporary.

At the base of the stairs, Alvar stopped and gestured to a
stooped and gray-haired man with a wispy goatee, dressed in a
clean but faded gray tunic and trousers. "This is Vierk, Lady
Anna. He does the accounts for the liedburg."
"Were you with Lord Arkad long?" Anna asked.
"We were boys together, lady. I did what I could, but… in the
recent years, he listened but to Fauren." Vierk's eyes dropped to
the brick floor.
Was everything in Synfal brick?
Anna glanced down, realizing that she had still had blood
across the cuff of her shirt. In the press to take charge of Synfal,
she'd forgotten that. You're worried about that, now? "Did he
talk with you?."
"Not often, lady. And he talked about the past, and how
Fauren and he would make Synfal great again, as in the days
of Suhlmorra. Then he laughed." Vierk shivered.
"What about Halde? What did he do?"
"He did the ledgers in the strongbox room, and he checked my
accounts. Fauren was most firm that two must check all
accounts."
"Let's see the strongbox room." Did everyone everywhere
romanticize the past? She hoped she didn't… but would she
ever know?
The strongbox room met the conditions of its name. Two iron

gates, one on the outside of the archway that pierced the
three-foot-thick wall, and one on the inside, stood open,
guarded by four Defalkan lancers, besides Fhurgen and the
other lancer who followed her.
Five small chests and ten large ones stood on four sturdy and
ancient oak tables. All were iron-bound. Before each of the
large chests was a leatherbound book.
Anna glanced at Alvar, then Vierk. "How much is there?"
"The first nine large chests contain a thousand golds each. I
would have to check the book for the last. The small chests,
those are for trade. Each has fifty golds, but they can hold three
hundred."
Anna figured-nearly ten thousand golds stashed away, with the
winter already gone, and the rents for the next harvest yet to
come. And Arkad, or Fauren, hadn't paid liedgeld-a mere nine
hundred golds.
Anna stepped forward toward the table and the nearest large
chest. She opened the cover of the well-thumbed book, turning
the pages until she reached the last one with entries on it.
"… ten silvers… rents from Gerhing, farmer in the north
quarter of Ashfaal, for ten morgens of good land."
Anna frowned. Morgen meant morning in German, but the
farmer wasn't renting mornings. Another term she didn't
understand. "Lord Jecks, how much land is a morgen?"
Jecks frowned momentarily. "It is the amount of land a farmer

could plow in a morning. I would say a square sixty yards on a
side."
That didn't seem all that much for a morning's work, until she
thought about Papaw and how long it had taken him in the
holler with old Barney. Anna nodded. "Are these rents high?"
Jecks glanced over her shoulder at the entries. "A silver a
morgen? That is a gold a year for this peasant. My farmers
could not raise that. This land must be rich indeed." He began
to look through the ledger before the adjoining chest.
Anna frowned. Doing math, even approximations, in her head
required concentration. Defalk was roughly seventy leagues
from east border to west, and eighty leagues from north to
south-say four hundred miles by five hundred-twenty thousand
square miles. A morgen was smaller than an acre, something
around two-thirds, she'd guess, and a square mile had six
hundred forty acres-she remembered that from somewhere.
So… nine hundred morgens to a square mile… something like
eighteen million morgens in the country… and if only ten
percent were farmed by tenants, that still totaled close to two
million silvers in rents at the rate charged by Arkad or Fauren.
And she had trouble collecting eight thousand golds-equivalent
to eighty thousand silvers. 
"You look displeased, Lady Anna."
Anna glanced at Alvar. "If you would escort Vierk up the stairs,
Alvar?"
"Yes, Lady Anna."

Anna waited until she heard boots and sandals on the bricks. "If
only ten percent of Defalk brings in rents, and every lord
charged like Arkad, each of the lords of Defalk would each get
something like… five or six thousand golds a year."
Jecks nodded. "But that is not the case. I would say that more
like two-thirds of Lord Arkad's lands are rented, from what
these books show." He coughed almost apologetically. "Elhi… I
am fortunate, and Herstat says that one in five morgens brings
in rent, but only five coppers a morgen."
"So your rents are around ten thousand golds a year," she said
quietly.
"Lady Anna… you are dangerous."
"Dangerous? It's only taken me a year to understand what a
good accountant would have figured out in a week."
Jecks offered a puzzled look at the word "accountant," but
answered, "I doubt Barjim ever understood."
"I'd bet your daughter did." Better than I do. Anna wanted to
shake her head. She'd paid close to thirty percent in taxes,
between social security and income taxes, and these high-living
lords were complaining about a tax of what… less than ten
percent?
"You look angry."
"I am. I'm beginning to understand, and I'm going to get very
upset if I get any more excuses from people like Arkad. Or his
seneschal." She also felt a lot less unhappy about claiming a

thousand golds for her own efforts.
Jecks glanced back to the iron gates where Fhurgen and the
two lancers stood, almost as if he wished he had gone with
Alvar.
Unhappy? Anna had to wonder. Jecks had told her the
strongbox room held six thousand golds, and Vierk had pretty
clearly indicated the total was closer to ten. Had Jecks been
mistaken, or had Vierk underestimated originally, or was
something else going on?
She took a long slow breath. What was it that Herod Agrippa
had said in I, Claudius? "Trust no one." Does it come to that?
She hoped not, but she'd hoped for a lot of things that hadn't
turned out as she hoped.
She closed the ledger or whatever the book was called.
"I'd like to see the stables and the kitchens next." Anna glanced
to Jecks and turned. "Fhurgen? Can you make sure this is
well-guarded, and that it all remains here? I'd hate to have to
use sorcery." She kept her voice sweet, but the last phrase was
for the guards, and she hoped both Jecks and Fhurgen
understood.
"Yes, Lady Anna." Fhurgen suppressed a smile.
Anna began the climb up the three long flights of brick steps,
Jecks and Fhurgen and two guards behind her.
The stables were to the left of the main building, left as one
entered the hold, built as in Falcor against the outer wall.

Anna sniffed as she neared the brick arches where two more
armsmen stood with a thin young man in brown trousers and a
sleeveless leather vest. The area smelled clean, and that was a
good sign.
"This is the ostler, Lady Anna."
"You're young for the head ostler," Anna observed, noting that
the man didn't seem as old as Mario, and she wouldn't have
trusted her son with the horses of an entire liedburg. Then,
people grew up faster in Liedwahr.
"My da was stablemaster till the fever took him last year."
"Lady," suggested Fhurgen.
"Lady," the man added with a glare.
"What's your name?" Anna asked.
"Bielttro… lady."
"Will you show me your stables, Bielttro? I've only seen where
Farinelli's stalled, and I wasn't really paying attention. I need to
groom him."
"The big gelding-he's yours, lady? You groom him?" The
surliness vanished from Bielttro's voice.
"He makes sure I do. He doesn't let many others near him,"
Anna said dryly, reflecting that Farinelli was a better diplomat
than she was these days. "He deserves it. He's saved my life a
few times. If he wants me to do the grooming, that's a fair
trade. More than fair," she added.

"You are the lady Anna?"
"She is," Alvar said.
Bielttro shook his head as Anna eased into the stall beside
Farinelli. She loosened the girths and slipped off the saddle,
awkwardly because her hand hurt, but managed to get it over
the rack on the stall wall, sloppily because the double vision
didn't do much for depth perception.
Bielttro glanced from the saddle to the dressing on her hand.
"Lord Arkad tried to slice me up. I wasn't expecting it. It makes
lifting heavy things awkward."
"You always saddle and unsaddle… him?"
"Sometimes, others have unsaddled him," Anna admitted.
"When?" asked Alvar from beside the ostler. "The last time I
recall was after you destroyed the dark army. I got his saddle
off, and he almost killed me. He'd eat and drink, but that was
about all."
"I wasn't in the best of shape," Anna grunted. "Easy, there." She
slipped off the bridle and scratched Farinelli's forehead.
Whuuuff…
"I know, fellow. You're hungry." She looked over the
shoulder-high wall, brick, of course. "Do you have any grain,
oats, that sort of thing?"
"I will get some."

Alvar shook his head after the stablemaster left.
"Horses-stablemasters judge people by their mounts." 
"It's not a bad way," reflected Anna, struggling slightly with the
curry brush in her left hand.
Whufff!
"Sorry. I'm not as good with this hand." The gelding turned his
head slightly as if to offer assent.
"Thank you," Anna said. "I'm so happy you agree."
"This should help." Bielttro reappeared with a wooden bucket,
which he poured into the manger while leaning over the stall
wall. Farinelli just watched.
"He likes you," Anna observed.
"He doesn't dislike me," the stablemaster corrected. "You really
are the sorceress?" He studied Anna frankly.
Anna sighed. "Bielttro, it's hard explaining, but please believe
me when I tell you I have a son your age. He's the youngest of
my children."
The dark-haired man glanced at Alvar and Jecks. Both nodded.
"I saw her soon after she came to Liedwahr," Jecks said. "She
was beautiful then, but one could see that she had experienced
much."
"All say you never lie, Lord Jecks." Bielttro met the older man's
eyes for a moment. "Still… it is hard to believe."

"Watch and listen for a time. Then you will believe," suggested
Alvar.
Fhurgen, standing farther back, nodded, and Anna felt like a
third party being discussed. She set aside the brush and
stepped out of the stall. "If you would show me the rest of the
stables… ?"
"I would indeed." Bielttro smiled and started down the line of
stalls. "The big mounts, they go in the front stalls, and the
workhorses. The roof is higher." He pointed to a shaggy beast
that was a good four hands taller than Farinelli. "That is Hoofa.
That is what I call him. He is the lead for the big wagon team."
Hoofa lifted his head and regarded the stablemaster placidly.
"And there is Olaaf… he is younger and works best beside
Hoofa."
Olaaf's coat was lighter than the deep reddish brown of
Hoofa's, and his big head turned toward Anna and Bielttro
more quickly.
"… next are the stalls for the favorites of Lord Arkad… he rode
until the year before the last…"
Anna just nodded as the young stablemaster walked her
through the entire complex, nearly twice the size of those at
Falcor, but every bit as well-organized and clean, if clearly
older. All the straw seemed fresh, and both stable boys she saw
smiled, rather than cringed.
"Thank you, Bielttro," she said as they neared the front

archways to the stables. "It's very impressive." She smiled.
Bielttro glanced at the bricks.
Anna understood, and wanted to kick herself. He was young,
and he was afraid he'd be replaced.
"Bielttro…" she said softly. "I am not the one who will hold
Synfal, but I will put in a good word for you."
That got a shy smile. "Thank you, lady."
"If you keep working the way you have, I don't imagine you'll
have too much trouble in convincing the new lord of your
worth." She paused. "I may end up grooming Farinelli at odd
hours-glasses, I mean. My schedule is not always what I would
like."
"I will make sure he has grain."
"Thank you."
"He is young," Jecks observed as the group walked back across
the courtyard, followed by Fhurgen and another armsman.
"He'll kill himself for those he respects, and you can't buy his
respect," Anna said. "Jimbob will need to know that. If it doesn't
work out, I'll find him a place."
Jecks raised his eyebrows.
"I do have a holding, remember."
Jecks chuckled. Behind the older lord's shoulder, Alvar smiled.
Anna reflected on the stables, trying to cross-check her feelings

against her observations. As in Loiseau, and at Falcor, the stalls
were all swept and filled with clean straw. The mounts
appeared well-fed and without whip-marks or signs of abuse.
After his initial coldness, Bielttro had been positively voluble,
and clearly the young man loved horses.
She shook her head. Synfal remained a puzzle.
A group stood in the late-afternoon shadows in the
courtyard-the players.
Anna walked forward. "Liende… do you all have quarters?"
"Lady Anna." Liende wrinkled her nose. 
"They smell?" asked Anna. 
"The rooms are large enough, but not pleasant."
"I'll have some work for your players. I'd like to have you
gather them in my quarters with their instruments in another
glass."
"As you wish, lady."
"Thank you." Anna wondered if Liende would ever be more
than cordial, or was it Anna? Everything pushed her toward
being pushy and bitchy. She'd tried not to level Synfal, and
nearly been killed by a madman, and was still fighting
impaired vision. She'd been lenient with Ma-dell, and the result
had been disaster for Dalila. She wanted to shake her head.
Instead, she added, "I'm sorry. I'm not being clear." Anna
paused. "I'd like to use a spell to clean out my quarters and then
your rooms. That way, we'll all sleep better. But… I have to

think about it… I haven't done cleaning spells." That got a faint
smile.
"Liende…" Anna added. "Please bear with a regent who's
trying to do too much too quickly. I'll see you all in a glass."
Liende offered another smile, less tentative. "We will be there."
"Now, the kitchens," Anna said quietly to Alvar.
Jecks merely nodded.
The kitchens were at one end of the main holding building, and
five women stood in the middle of the recently-swept floor. All
bowed as Anna entered. 
"Regent Anna."
"Thank you." Anna took a long and slow look around the main
room of the kitchen area-two large hearths, and two small ones,
and what appeared to be a third hearth containing several iron
doors. Bread ovens?
One of the hearths contained a number of iron brackets for
spits or something similar.
"Do you roast a lot of things?" she asked.
"We used to, Lady Anna. Lately, it's been bullocks for the
guardsmen. Lord Arkad, all he could eat was boiled fowl, not
even game birds." The heavyset and gray-haired cook half
nodded as she finished her statement.
"Did his illness change things beyond the kitchens?" she asked.

A puzzled look passed over several faces.
Finally, the heavyset cook spoke. "Not so as we'd notice.
Excepting that he would have none in the main hall save the
cooks. No maids, none."
That answered-partly-one question. Anna nodded. "How many
can you feed at once?"
"One time we fed twentyscore and we'd not have strained to
feed twice that." The cook pointed to the narrow hallway to the
right. "There-down that… I be showing you, lady. Not meats…
those come from the animals and fowls in the old side
bailey-that's the sunny one with the grass. Had a hard time
making that clerk Fauren understand the need for grass." She
snorted.
Anna followed as the cook escorted her down the hallway,
opening doors.
"Beans-the black ones, more than a hundred scheffels here.
White beans here… lentils… Fifty's more than enough."
The sorceress tried to keep an amused smile from her face as
the head cook continued to point out all the dry supplies.
"Dried and shelled maize here, then the flour in the next one,
next to the barrels of the hard wheat, and then the next ones are
the soft cake flour…"
They came to a staircase.
"Down here be all the roots." The cook took a candle from the
holder, and with a deft motion of the striker hanging beneath

it, lit the taper.
Anna, Jecks, Alvar, and the armsmen followed her down the
narrow brick staircase.
"Potatoes, I used to keep two hundred, but right less than half
that now…"
"Beets-one of the few roots the lord wouldn't eat. Could have
fifty scheffels, but just ten or twelve, for the soup for the holding
folk…
"Onions… three bins here, white, purple, and yellow. White
keep best. Yellow turn mushy… have to watch them closer…".
Anna grinned in the dimness.
When they emerged into the fuller light of the storage corridor,
the sorceress was convinced that not only could the cook feed a
small army, but that she had provisions for years. 
"You are… ?" Anna finally asked. "I mean, your name."
"Me? I'm Hilde. Always been Hilde, lady. Always will be."
Of that, Anna had no doubts. "Thank you, Hilde. You have
been very helpful."
"You know yet who our new lord will be?"
"That hasn't been decided yet," Anna said. "But there won't be
many changes in the people who work here. Not unless they
don't feel comfortable with the new lord."
"So long as he lets us run the kitchen, don't matter too much."

Anna nodded. "I'll let whoever it is know that."
"Be a fool to change us."
The sorceress agreed, if not for quite the reasons Hilde probably
had in mind. One thing Anna had noted. There were no locked
cupboards or closets. No guarded storerooms. She frowned.
Again, she was missing something.
"Are there any official chambers?" she asked Jecks as they took
the door that led along a narrow back corridor to the main
entry hall.
"I did not look." He shrugged.
"There is a large dining salon," Alvar said, "and some larger
rooms. They are very dusty."
What might have once been a state dining room held a long
table and matching benches, although Anna had to lift the
blanket-like coverings to look at both. The ornately carved
wood was dark, but Anna had no way of knowing if that
darkness were because of age or stain or natural coloring. An
odor of mildew clung to the coverings.
"Khhchew!" She stepped back and rubbed her nose.
The hall adjoining the large dining area was empty, except for
several twice-life-sized paintings of men in armor, several faded
tapestries, one of which appeared to be a rendition of Synfal
itself. The floor, unlike the others in the holding, which were
either polished stone or brick, was wooden.

"Odd," she murmured.
Jecks was frowning. "Abomination…"
"What?"
"I had heard, but one never believes all one hears."
Alvar nodded, but both Fhurgen and the armsman acting as
guard looked as puzzled as Anna felt.
"I may be regent," Anna finally said, "but I don't know what
you're talking about, and I have the feeling that I should."
"Dancing," Jecks said. "This is a… place for dancing. I knew the
Suhlmorrans were decadent, but…"
Anna managed to keep her jaw in place. Her talents didn't lie in
that direction, and she certainly wasn't the world's best dancer,
but why would anyone call dancing decadent?
"It's a misuse of the harmonies," Alvar added. 
The sorceress wanted to shake her head. Dancing, a misuse of
the harmonies? How could movement in time to music be a
sacrilege? Just when she thought she might understand
Liedwahr, something like this popped up. How many more
surprises were there?
Too many. "Are there places on Erde where dancing still goes
on?" She finally asked, not wanting to say anything directly
about dancing.
"They say that the Sea-Priests use it in some of their
ceremonies," Alvar said.

Jecks was still shaking his head as he turned and surveyed the
room. "They didn't even hide it."
"They obviously didn't think it was evil," Anna ventured.
"I am glad Arkad died without heirs." Jecks' voice was cold.
Anna wanted to shiver. Just as she'd thought he was
approachable… "We can't do much now," she said quickly.
"Jimbob or Herstat could turn this into something more…
appropriate."
"They must-before Synfal is acceptable for guesting."
Anna moved toward the arched double doorways. After a
moment, Jecks and Alvar followed.
The next hall was smaller, and contained a dais, with a covered
chair or throne upon it, and a series of straight-backed chairs
lined up around the wainscotted walls. Bronze sconces on all
the walls held age-discolored candles behind relatively clean
glass mantels. The receiving room would have held two of the
largest halls at Falcor.
"Another remnant of the Suhlmorrans?" Anna wondered if
agreeing to give the holding to Jimbob was wise, or whether he
would get delusions of grandeur. She and Jecks definitely had
some educating to do.
"It would seem so."
There were other smaller chambers, including an intimate
dining room almost off the kitchens and a library that held
more empty shelves than volumes-or so it seemed to Anna. But

there were no more surprises, just rooms, all of them dusty.
By the time they finished the inspection and returned to the
second floor, the players were gathering outside the guest
quarters Anna had adopted for her use.
"I'll be a moment," she told Liende. "Why don't you tune while
I check out the spell I'll need?"
"I will wait outside," Jecks said.
Anna nodded, aware she was getting distant again, but
fighting fatigue and discomfort took some toll. Once inside the
smelly guest quarters, she rummaged through the folder she
carried in the lutar case. Where was the basic spell?
She wondered if part of the room's smell weren't coming from
one sorceress, dirty from days on the road. It probably was, but
the place was so dirty that she couldn't be sure.
After using her knife to sharpen the grease marker, left-handed
and awkwardly, she sat down on the chair and pulled it up to
the small table, making sure the chair didn't touch the bed she
was certain was vermin-ridden. How could she adapt one of the
spells the players already knew?
It has to be short. That meant the shorter building spell.
After studying the spell for a time, she shifted the marker to her
right hand. She finally closed one eye, trying to see the paper
well enough to read as she wrote.
Abruptly, she stopped.

"Idiot! Why do you have a headache and double vision?" 
Because the damned spell you used on the keep was Darksong…
"And what are you doing now?" Drafting a spell that will do the
same thing.
She rubbed her forehead again. All she wanted to do was rest
and sleep, and she wouldn't get either in the pigpen that
Synfal's main hall had become. And she didn't want to ride
elsewhere. She took a deep breath and closed her eyes, trying to
think.
She'd killed thousands, without the impact on her that the
truthspell or the loyalty spell had created. So a spell that
created death wasn't necessarily Darksong. Manipulation of
living things-or once-living things?
"Wait a moment." Anna considered the structure of her battle
hymn. After a moment, she smiled… if grimly. It was simple,
and it was clear, and it was insane. Her battle spells had only 
moved inanimate objects against animate objects. Even her
household spells had impacted inanimate objects.
So you can kill… Don't even think about it! Just figure out a
quick way to clean this pigpen with Clearsong… and only
Clearsong.
Anna managed to ignore the stabs of pain in her hand as she
wrote slowly, and with one eye closed. Writing was one thing
she couldn't do well left-handed.
Finally, she rose. The words weren't wonderful, but they fit, and
she'd just have to visualize strongly.

Anna turned to Fhurgen as she opened the door. "After we
leave here to clean some of the other rooms, could you get
someone to fill that tub in the washroom?" She paused and
smiled. "Not your armsmen. Someone here should have that
duty. I'm sorry, but…"
Fhurgen nodded, not grimly.
Jecks stepped forward, almost beside Anna, concern in his hazel
eyes, saying in a low voice, "Should you… ?"
'I think I can… Don't want to sleep in filth, and from what the
cook said, there's no one to clean up." Anna gestured toward
the players. If you'd play right outside the door. I'm going to
try to extend the spell to cover some of the rooms on this end of
the hall."
She waited until they rearranged themselves. "The first building
spell, the short one."
Liende gestured, and the melody rose. Anna sang.
"Clean, clean, the bricks and wood and lesser things, 
And take the dirt until all shines and spotless sings… 
The very air and song… ensure all filth and vermin gone."
The impact was as though a silent whirlwind had rushed
through the spaces, and every surface glistened.
Anna staggered, and Jecks slipped his arm under her left to
steady herj She took a deep breath. It definitely smelled better,
and her head didn'if ache any more than it already had. Nor
was her double vision any worse. She wanted to smile. She'd

managed it without doing Darksong… so far.
She smiled directly at Liende. "Now… the players' quarters,
ahead."
As the players headed for the stairs, Jecks turned to Anna. "Is
this wise?"
"I can manage one more spell."
"Are you certain?"
She nodded and began to walk toward the steps. She did let
Jecks steady her.
Jecks paused to look in his spaces as they passed. He smiled at
Anna and shook his head. "That is much cleaner."
"I'm glad. I'd rather not use sorcery for cleaning, but there are
times when it's almost easier."
The quarters Alvar had found for the players were up on the
third level, smaller, dustier, and with an even less appetizing
aroma. Anna shook her head as she stopped.
"This definitely needs sorcery."
Even Kaseth smiled.
Beside her, Jecks did not.
"Let's do it." At the bewildered look, she added, "The spell."
There was more enthusiasm in the playing on the third level. 
Amazing how much better it gets when it helps you.

Her head ached after the spell, but her vision remained
unchanged-still double, but no worse. She turned to Jecks, still
helping her unobtrusively. "I would like to wash up. Then
maybe we could find something to eat." She paused. "Can the
kitchens feed all our armsmen and players? They need to eat,
too."
"I have already made those arrangements, Regent Anna, as you
requested," Jecks added.
She hadn't requested that, but she appreciated Jecks' covering
for her.
"They will eat at the tenth glass." Jecks nodded to Alvar and
Liende.
"Thank you, again, all of you," Anna said to the players.
She got a scattering of smiles before they dispersed.
Liende slipped up to Anna. "I thank you."
"I'm glad I could do it."
"You will have more playing for us?"
"I'd planned on it. Not here, but I'm told that the bridge on the
other side of Cheor is ready to fall."
"We will be ready." With a brief smile and a bow, Liende
stepped away.
"I'm ready for a bath," Anna said. "What about you?" She
blushed, realizing that she hadn't quite said what she'd meant.

A twinkle flashed in Jecks' eyes, but his voice was evenly
modulated as he answered. "I look forward to washing up."
They walked down to the second level, where Jecks bowed after
he had escorted her to her own door. Then he turned and
entered his quarters.
Anna closed her door behind her, glad in a way that there were
guards outside her door. The more she'd seen of Synfal, the
more puzzled she'd gotten, because of the conflicting
impressions she'd received.
Was it because of her own preconceptions?
She sat on the chair in front of the writing desk for a moment,
pouring herself a goblet of water, and drinking.
In some ways, Liedwahr was so like her image of a medieval
culture that she'd assumed it was one. Bad assumption. She
glanced down at her hand. Luckily the cut had been shallow
and relatively clean, and her alcohol had seemingly been
effective in disinfecting the wound. Not painless, but better
than the alternatives.
Finally, she stood and walked to the bathchamber and the tub
filled with murky cold water. She winced as she thought about
the necessary spells, but walked back to the main room and
retrieved the lutar.
Her head and her hand were throbbing before she had the
water clean and steaming and the lutar replaced in its case, and
the wound had oozed more blood on the dressing.

More alcohol. She needed more alcohol for internal, not
external, purposes. But she had a deep swallow of orderspelled
water instead.
Finally, thank God, she could ease into the tub. Thank God?
From nowhere, seemingly, came another thought. There were
no churches in Liedwahr. She hadn't seen one, anyway. Why
not? In every culture on earth there was a worship of some
form of supreme being. Why not on Erde?
Yet Jecks had been truly appalled at the idea of a ballroom and
dancing, and Alvar had been upset as well, more in a disgusted
sort of way, as though dancing were obscene, rather than evil.
She washed slowly, hoping the hot water would loosen the
stiffness in her shoulders. The heat helped, but not enough, by
the time the water was cooling, and she pulled out the plug.
She still found it amusing that the few tubs for the well-off all
had drains, but were filled by buckets. It made sense, in an
offbeat way.
She forced herself into a clean set of riding clothes. Laundry of
the old set could wait, would have to wait.
At least she'd been able to get her room clean and disinfected,
even if it had taken all her players, and the spells involved had
given her a splitting headache. But no more Darksong side effects
.
Finally dressed, and with her wound resterilized and
rebandaged, she poured another goblet of orderspelled water
and took a long swallow, then another, and refilled the goblet.

After that, she ate one of the hard biscuits left over from her
travel provisions. She could almost feel the worst of the
headache subside. 
Food and more food-you're always eating.
Was the room dimmer? She laughed. Of course it was. It was
twilight, twilight of one of the lengthiest days she'd spent in a
long time. Finally, she sang the candle spell, and the wall
candles lit. Her head only twinged.
At the thrap on the door, she stood. "Yes?"
"Lord Jecks to see you, Lady Anna," Fhurgen announced.
"Oh… please come in."
"My lady." Jecks wore a clean blue tunic, and had washed up.
He looked more handsome than ever.
"Lord Jecks." Anna wished she were more in the mood to
appreciate him. "Please sit down."
Instead of sitting on the window seat, he pulled one of the
wooden chairs over to the side of the writing desk opposite her.
"Jecks?" she ventured. "Will you humor me and answer some
questions?"
"I would well humor you after all you have done for Jimbob."
She wished he hadn't put it quite that way. "Even after my
railing on about the greediness of the lords of Defalk?"
"You did not rail. You frowned." Jecks laughed. "That was

enough." He paused. "Vierk said that there were six thousand
golds. I told him you were the sorceress. Then he said there
were ten, and that some of the rents had not arrived." Jecks
shrugged. "I have never seen ten thousand at once, not in the
whole time I have held Elhi. Some farmers, they can offer no
coins, and I have accepted fowl and beeves, even. Such help
feeds the hold."
"I have another question. It doesn't have anything to do with
golds."
"You have many questions. That is why you are regent." The
white-haired lord's voice was wary.
"Do people believe in a god here?"
"A god?"
"A supreme being… a supernatural… entity… in charge of the
world?"
"An almighty Lord of Harmony, do you mean?"
"Something like that."
"There are some." Despite her concerns, his slightly crooked
smile warmed Anna as Jecks shifted his weight on the plain
wooden chair. "The… women of Ranuak believe that harmony
is governed by the earth mother. The Sea-Priests, they believe
that harmony and disharmony flow with the tides of the great
oceans. The Pelarans, who might know? The Evult thought he
was the Lord of Harmony, until you appeared." Jecks offered a
wider smile, somehow tentative. "Some are saying you are the

Lady of Harmony."
"Me?" asked Anna involuntarily.
"So they say." 
"Not me." A growling from her stomach reminded Anna of
other necessities, and rescued her. "I need to eat."
Jecks stood immediately. "If I might join you? Alvar ate with
Jimbob already. Jimbob sleeps now. He still is young."
"Of course." Anna offered a smile, hoping her concerns didn't
show through too much. "I had thought you would. Earlier, I
mean. And I understand about Jimbob. Sometimes you forget
he's only twelve."
The Lord of Elheld nodded, then stood as she did, and they
walked silently down the wide main brick stairs.
They sat at a corner of the large table in the intimate dining
salon beside the kitchen. The three lit wall sconces gave a dim
but adequate light. Two platters rested on the table, one of a
roasted fowl, uncut, evenly roasted brown, and oozing golden
drippings, and a second of sliced meat over thick noodles,
covered with a white sauce.
Anna could smell the duck. Was it as greasy as it looked? And
smelled? Then, she'd never cared that much for either goose or
duck. She helped herself to the noodles, her mouth watering.
She'd really eaten far too little over the course of the day.
She'd almost finished her first helping before she spoke. "You
saw the kitchens."

"Yes?" mumbled Jecks.
"And the stables?" Anna paused. "They were well kept, better
kept, and cleaner in many ways than the rooms people lived in
here."
"I do not think anyone has lived here for some years, except for
Lord Arkad. Alvar said Fauren's quarters were with the
armsmen." Jecks took a hefty swallow of wine from his goblet,
then reached for the pitcher to refill his goblet. "Those are clean."
"I wonder." Anna carefully lifted the goblet and took a small
swallow of wine, since she hadn't felt like orderspelling any
water besides that in her quarters. The pewterlike goblet was
heavy, and she wasn't used to using her left hand. "I had the
impression that Fauren was the evil plotter behind a weak and
crazy old lord. I suppose it doesn't matter now. Except it does."
She pursed her lips.
"Lord Arkad had some greater plan, you think?"
"I don't know. He kept the ballroom-the dancing room-and the
old throne room. He was gathering huge amounts of golds, and
outside of the main part of the hall, everything is clean and in
good condition."
"Our weapons difficulties may be slighter, now," Jecks said
after taking another mouthful of the duck that had proved too
greasy for Anna.
"There was an armory somewhere?"
"Over two hundred good blades, and close to a hundred lances.

A number of bows. Those I did not count."
"Won't that leave the liedburg's armsmen without weapons?"
she asked.
"Those were racked below. The armsmen have their blades."
Anna nodded to herself. One way or another, the blades needed
to go to Falcor. "That will help Hanfor. And if we can get the
ones from Ranuak…" 
"A blade in the hand is worth two in the forge."
Anna yawned. "I'm sorry. I didn't realize I was so tired." She
shook her head.
"You amaze me. You have ridden nearly two leagues, cast
numerous spells, been wounded, and taken over a strange hold,
and you are astonished that you are fatigued." Jecks' eyes
twinkled as he stood and offered his arm.
Anna took it. "It makes sense that way."
Not much else does, but that does. She stifled another yawn and
took I the first step toward the stairs, glad for his stability in an
unstable world.
28
WEI, NORDWEI
ASHTAAR glances at the black agate oval, then at Gretslen,
who sits in the chair before the flat desk. "Send a message scroll
to Menares."

"He has not acknowledged any previous instructions and
messages, and he fears the soprano sorceress so greatly that he
will not admit to receiving anything from Wei." The blonde
seer's voice is matter-of-fact.
"His fear of her is exactly what I am counting on." The
spymistress smiles. "Ehara is being courted by the Sea-Priests.
What can we do about it?"
"There is little we can do, not with the Bitter Sea yet frozen, not
until the spring gathering."
"We can ensure that she knows."
Gretslen frowns.
"Do we want the Sea-Priests to get a foothold in Dumar, and
then in Ranuak?" Ashtaar sighs. "I should not explain, but I
will. Ehara reckons to use the Sea-Priests' coin to take over the
south of Defalk. He sends arms and golds to Lord Dencer.
What the ambitious-or desperate-Lord Ehara does not know is
that the Sea-Priests will cast him aside as they can, and Dumar
will become where their ships port in Liedwahr. First will come
their control of the wool trade, and then of the grain."
"You think the sorceress can do aught about this?"
"If she knows that Lord Dencer is receiving golds from Ehara,
she must act. Provided she knows this is happening-"
"Menares will not tell her."
"Oh, but he must. Should she ever discover that he knew of the
threat and did not inform him, what would his life be worth?

No, she would not kill him. She would do worse. She would
send him back to Neserea, or to Wei." Ashtaar picks up the
stone that is deeper and blacker than night. "Draft the scroll. I
would see it by evening."
"As you wish, mightiness." Gretslen's voice remains neutral.
"You doubt my desire to warn her? Even the Council would
not. With a known danger in Dencer and Ehara, she will not
move north. Nor can she consider taking territory in Ebra. She
is strong enough to bring down Ehara, one way or another,
and that will bring her into conflict with both Konsstin and the
Sea-Priests."
"And you feel that she will use her sorcery against them?"
"She will not have any choice," predicts Ashtaar, glancing
down at the black agate oval she holds. "She never has had that
choice. Nor do we.
"Why can she not see what we see? She is a greater sorceress
than any of us…"
"How many seers do you have in the tower, Gretslen?"
"Five, besides myself," admits the blonde.
Ashtaar smiles. "There is but one of the sorceress, and she needs
must hold her strength for the mighty works required of her.
Also, strength is not skill. There is much she does not know,
much she cannot yet know."
Gretslen frowns momentarily, smoothing the expression away
before Ashtaar looks up.

"Draft the scroll."
29
IN the bright midmorning spring sunshine, Anna eased
Farinelli to a halt on the rutted and packed clay of the road that
led to the bridge across the Synor River. She smiled, glad that
she could see again, undoubled, unimpaired. Two days of rest
had helped. Can you count on days of rest after every major bit of
sorcery? She pushed the thought away.
On her right rode Liende, as her chief player. On the left rode
Jecks, and immediately behind them, Alvar and Jimbob. A faint
line of clouds rose on the southern horizon, but the skies
overhead were clear, and a light and pleasant breeze gusted out
of the south.
"There is the bridge," Jecks announced. 
"It looks as rickety as Halde and everyone said," the blonde and
youthful-looking regent acknowledged.
"It has served for many years," Jecks said.
"It won't serve us that many more. Not unless the river goes
dry," Anna answered. She glanced at the road and the bridge
again, then toward Alvar. "Let's keep everyone back from the
bridge until I'm done. Send a squad across the bridge to the
other side. When they get there, have them set up a post…"
"A picket line?"
"A picket line a good hundred yards from the bridge." Anna
cleared her throat, hoping the spring tree pollen wasn't going to

trigger her allergies. Brill's youth sorcery hadn't done anything
for that. "The last thing we need is someone trying to cross a
bridge while I'm trying to replace it."
"Yes, Lady Anna." The swarthy captain nodded and turned his
mount away, riding back toward the lancers who had halted
perhaps five yards behind the players, in turn five yards behind
Anna and Liende.
Jimbob eased his mare up beside his grandsire.
"Liende?" asked Anna. "Would you have the players wait here
for a moment? I need to see where I want you all to play. It
may take me a little bit to get ready, but I hope it won't be too
long."
"We stand ready." Liende nodded.
Anna flicked the reins gently, and let Farinelli carry her off the
road and closer to the edge of the slight bank overlooking the
lowland and the river itself. When she reined up, to her right
was low timber structure that served as the main crossing of the
Synor for more than fifty deks. The last scattered houses of the
easternmost part of Cheor lay a good two deks westward, along
the road she had just traveled from Synfal.
While the Falche-to the west of Cheor-was wider than at Falcor,
and much wider to the southwest after it was joined by the
Synor, the Synor itself was a narrow river. The water flowing
under the old bridge wasn't much more than twenty yards
wide, with grasses and rushes extending a few yards beyond.
As Jecks had pointed out, though, for the forty deks upstream

of Cheor the Synor ran deep enough that it was well over the
head of even a mounted rider, with several yards to spare.
Despite the flatness of the land, she had noted that there were
scattered boulders, some sizable, along the river, probably
either from beneath the delta or carried downstream over time.
She was counting on there being enough for her sorcery.
Otherwise… she shook her head. You do what you can.
Anna continued to survey the river and the bridge, pondering
how the old timber bridge had lasted. She thought she could
see it waver even as her lancers crossed it and then set up a
picket line to keep the road and bridge clear.
Farinelli whuffed and sidestepped as Jecks eased his mount up
beside Anna. Jimbob halted his mare slightly farther back.
"Are you sure this is wise?" Jecks frowned.
"We don't have any battles to fight. I have a set of players, and
that means I'm not doing it all myself. And that bridge is the
key to all the lands in the south of Defalk, isn't it?"
"Except for Morra, that is true. Still, your bridge will also let an
enemy march north to Falcor."
Anna smiled grimly. "If an enemy gets that far, we won't be
around to worry."
"A regent who does not retreat." Jecks gave a short laugh. Alvar
and Fhurgen had reined up slightly behind Jecks and Anna,
but neither spoke as the sorceress continued to study the river
and the bridge. "When we fight on their lands, our people don't

suffer as much." Anna wondered where she'd thought of that,
even as she said it.
An expression flicked across Jecks' face, too fast for Anna to
identify it. Was it surprise? Or dismay? She wasn't sure she
liked either. She turned in the saddle, absently patting Farinelli
on the neck. "Alvar, I think the lancers should keep everyone on
this side back, say, as far as that path that joins the road there.
That should provide enough of a margin of safety." You hope.
"Yes, Regent Anna." The captain turned and rode back toward
the lancers, and the cart and wagon they had detained. "All
squads back. Back behind the cross-path there."
Anna dismounted and extracted the two sheets of paper she
had prepared earlier-the spell and the sketch of the bridge.
Then she looked at the still-mounted Lord Jecks, then at
Fhurgen. "If you would not mind hanging on to Farinelli,
Fhurgen?"
"He has not troubled me before. Let us hope he does not today."
"I hope not." She turned to Jecks.
"Have you a task for me?" The white-haired lord smiled, a faint
twinkle back in his eyes.
"No. This time, you and Jimbob can just watch."
"You… I… we will watch."
Anna wondered what Jecks had been about to say, or why he
hadn't. Offer a compliment? Was she that formidable? "Thank

you." She tried to make her words warm, and she smiled.
Jimbob smiled back, almost with a puzzled cross between a
smile and a frown, and Jecks returned the warmth.
Then Anna walked to the top of the low rise where she could see
both river and bridge. On the far side, her armsmen were
stretched out. Two had stopped a cart drawn by a pony, and a
woman leading two sheep.
She hummed the spell tune, then started through a vocalise.
"Holly, lolly, polly… pop…" She coughed up mucus. It was
going to be one of those days. Thank goodness, or the
harmonies, it wasn't a battle or some other disaster.
The youth spell hadn't really returned her to youth, not her
own youth. She'd never had bad allergies when she'd been
young. Brill's dying effort had rejuvenated her current body,
given it strength and a youthful form, but she was still
struggling with allergies and intermittent mild asthma. 
Clearing her throat, she tried another vocalise. Her voice didn't
feel clear until she'd run through four vocalises, and she tried to
ignore the impatience she felt was building around her.
Across the river the lancers had stopped another wagon, and on
her side, Alvar had halted a cart and a shepherd with a dozen
sheep.
Finally, Anna turned and motioned to Liende, and waited until
the red-and-white-haired woodwind player rode forward. "I
think about here would be right." The sorceress added, "We'll
use the long building spell. Warm up and run through it a few

times while I finish getting ready."
"Players to position," said Liende, with a gesture to the others to
dismount and circle around her.
Anna walked forward a few steps, looking at the sketch of the
bridge and trying to visualize it over the waters and the
still-brown rushes of the Synor.
While the strings and horns began to tune behind her, she
began to sing the notes of the spell, using "la" instead of real
words, and visualized the stone arch she wanted to replace the
rickety wooden span that had seemed to sway and sag even
under a single wagon earlier.
After one run-through, Anna concentrated on just the drawing
of the bridge the spell was supposed to create, ignoring the
cacophony of tuning and the creaking of yet another wagon
nearing the river.
Then, as the players waited, she finished a last vocalise and
mentally went over the spell melody and the words. Finally, she
nodded to Liende "The long building spellsong."
Once the melody rose, Anna sang, not belting, but with full
voice.
"… replicate the blocks and stones. 
Place them in their proper zones… 
Set them firm, and set them square 
weld them to their pattern there…
"Bring the rock and make it stone…"

The ground around the river shuddered, but Anna held her
mind on the image of the new bridge and the stone
approachway to it, keeping her voice open and clear.
The shiver in Erde's underlying harmonies seemed less
pronounced. Was that because the players were stronger? Still,
there was a flicker of lightning across the half-clear sky-again
visible to but her, she suspected. The few puffy clouds did
darken into a heavy gray.
Anna swayed on her feet, feeling dizzy, lightheaded, but she
caught herself.
Damn it all! More rest before we get out of here. All she ever did,
it seemed, was cast spells and get weak and recover in time to
cast more spells. Her eyes narrowed. The new bridge seemed
solid, although the stones shimmered as if they had been
glazed.
"Lady Anna?" Jecks stood beside her, offering her both her
water bottle and a biscuit bigger than his fist.
"Thank you." She took a swallow from the bottle and then a
bite of the crumbly biscuit, and another… and another. After a
moment, she realized she'd eaten the entire biscuit. She was still
lightheaded, but didn't feel as though she'd fall over any
moment, and she had no problem with double images.
With a smile, Jecks offered another biscuit.
"Thank you," she said again, taking it, and chewing off a
crumbling corner.

Alvar eased his mount toward her. "My lady? The bridge? Can
it be used?"
"They can use it," she confirmed.
"Another bridge that will outlive us both," Jecks said, with a
shake of his head.
"Better bridges than battles," she mumbled as she finished the
second biscuit and lifted the water bottle.
30
ESARIA, NESEREA
I WONT. I can't." The girl sits up in the bed, and swings her
legs over the edge, letting the sheer green cotton fall away from
small and well-formed breasts that shimmer in the faint light
that comes through the door from the outer room.
"You're sure?" Rabyn's voice is concerned, warm. "I can't…"
She shakes her head. "That… that's awful."
"I'd hoped you'd be sweet to me."
"The other…" She shakes her head. "Not that…" The
dark-haired youth sits up beside her, offers her a goblet of wine.
"Here. It's all right. I didn't realize it would upset you."
"You're so young. You're not old enough to think like that.
How…" She takes a swallow, and her mouth puckers slightly.
"Sweet. Too sweet." Another smaller swallow follows.
"Honey. I like my wine sweet. I like girls sweet, too, Dylla."

Rabyn offers a smile.
"Sickening… sweet." She wipes her lips with the back of her
hand, and her mouth puckers again. 
"I like things sweet. That's why you should have done what I
asked," he adds slowly, taking the goblet from her, as her
hands begin to tremble.
"You…" Her mouth opens spasmodically, and she begins to
choke.
Her hands reach for him, but the trembling increases, and
Rabyn steps out of her grasp easily.
"You should have been sweet to me," he repeats as he stands
and steps away from the bed, carrying the goblet.
Dylla slumps, then topples forward, and her nude form, lying
half, across the green braided rug and half across the cold tiles,
twitches and; shudders for a time. She also moans softly, softly
only because she cannot make a greater effort.
Before long, twitches and moans cease.
Then Rabyn pulls on his tunic and trousers, and a pair of gold
threaded sandals, and walks into the antechamber where he
rings the crystal bell and waits by the single flickering candle.
"Yes, sire?" answers the page as he opens the door.
"I would like to see Nubara. Now. Here."
"Now?" The servant glances toward the dark window, then at
Rabyn.

"Yes, sire." '
The door closes.
Rabyn goes back to the bedchamber and amuses himself for a
time,waiting for Nubara.
When he arrives, the hand of the regent does not have himself
announced, but throws open the door and marches through
and into the) bedchamber.
Rabyn smiles. "She wasn't nice to me, Nubara. I don't like
people I who aren't sweet to me."
Nubara looks at the naked body on the floor. "Was that
necessary, I Rabyn?"
"Lord Rabyn," corrects the dark-haired youth. "She wouldn't
do what I wanted. She didn't make me feel good." Rabyn
smiles. "You said she was only a peasant."
"I beg your pardon, Lord Rabyn." Nubara's voice is cold. "She
still had family, and they will not be happy. Neither will their
friends."
"Tell them she died of the flux. It does happen. Offer them a
few golds as consolation. Every peasant loves golds." Rabyn's
lips curl. "They see few enough of them."
"Would you be so kind as to help me dress the body? It might
be easier to explain."
"I'm the Prophet, Nubara. I'm sure grandsire wouldn't wish
anything to happen to me. You know that, don't you?" Rabyn

pauses. "Her clothes I are on the chair there."
Nubara compresses his lips, then walks to the chair and picks
up the silken trousers. His eyes go to the still form. "What a
waste," he murmurs to himself.
"She should have done what I wanted," Rabyn repeats. "You
will, won't you, Nubara?"
Nubara forces a smile. "Of course, Lord Rabyn, of course."
31
Anna looked out the guest-chamber window at the low clouds
and the driving rain, then walked back to the table and picked
up a flaky roll-better than a biscuit-and began to eat slowly as
she sat down.
She finished the roll with a sigh, and topped off roll and sigh
with a long swallow of water. Her eyes flicked toward the
window and the rain outside.
"You still wish to travel to Synope?" Jecks asked from the other
side of the writing table.
"After the rain lifts, assuming it does lift, yes, I do. I worry
about Anientta, and I don't like the idea of her controlling
Flossbend."
"That is a hard ride of eight to nine days," Jecks pointed out.
"You know that there is little you can do about this consort of
Lord Hryding's right now. If you are worried about repairing
the ford at Soprat, you could turn north at the wide bend in the

Synor and travel straight north. That would save almost five
days travel in returning to Falcor."
"Why are you so worried about time? You and Hanfor
practically insisted nothing was going to happen for
months-seasons, I mean."
"You have spent more time in Synfal than you had planned."
"There has been more to do than I expected." Anna took
another sip of water. "You want me to get back to Falcor to
announce that Jimbob will inherit Synfal?" She grinned. "I
thought we'd agreed that should wait a bit."
Jecks looked at the time-dulled oak of the table, then gave an
embarrassed smile. "Menares sent a message scroll to you
through me."
Anna frowned. Again… it had to be bad news. No one wanted
to tell her that sort of thing directly.
"What's the trouble?" she said, reaching for another roll.
"There are two troubles." Jecks coughed. "You had best read it
yourself." He handed Anna a scroll.
She began to read, skipping over the flowery salutations.
… I have not made any contact with the ladies of Wei. This you
must know and convey to the lady Anna. Yet they have taken
it upon themselves to impart information, and I have enclosed
their very message scroll as proof. The lady Anna must know
this, and yet I fear that she will not believe I have acted in good
faith. 

Still if what they have sent is true, and they have not lied about
what has happened elsewhere in former scrolls, you both
should know the contents…
My humble best to you and to the great and glorious regent,
whose fairness has become legendary…
Anna laughed. "He knew you'd give this to me, the scoundrel."
"His last words are sung in your direction," Jecks said. "They
are true, but they are a plea."
True? What's true is that no man around here would plead to a
woman. Damned few, anyway. "He addressed his plea through
you."
"Most men would."
"It would be better if they didn't." Anna managed to keep the
words polite -barely- reminding herself that Jecks wasn't the
problem. He'd dealt with her directly from the beginning. Was
that because he'd had a strong daughter? Had his consort been
like Alasia? She pushed that thought away.
"I would not wager against that." Jecks smiled broadly.
Anna smiled back, momentarily. "Let's see what the ladies of
Wei have to say." She unrolled the second scroll.
Menares, honorable counselor to the Regent of Defalk,
We think it advisable that you inform the lady Anna, sorceress
though she be, of a matter of grave import of which she may
not be aware. The Sea-Priests of Sturinn have sent an envoy to

Lord Ehara of Dumar, with a chest of precious stones and gold.
Lord Ehara has already sent officers of his guard to Lord
Dencer of Stromwer and Lord Sargol of Suhl. These officers
bore coins and tokens of friendship.
If Lord Ehara be acting on his own or at the behest of the
Sea-Priests, that we know not. Neither is to the interest of
Defalk, Nordwei, or Liedwahr. We trust you will follow your
own good judgment and convey this information to your
regent and sorceress.
A sealmark without lettering-just a four-pointed star with an N
above the topmost point-was set in black wax below the
carefully scripted letters.
"That is the seal of Nordwei," Jecks said.
Anna clicked her fingernails together. They were getting
ragged again. Thank heavens she'd had a nail clipper in her
purse, now in the large green leather pouch-wallet attached to
her belt. She hoped she never had to use a knife the way she'd
seen Jecks trim his nails. "Why would they send me that kind of
message?" 
"It is in their interest that you fight for them." Jecks shrugged.
"If the Sturinnese can gain a foothold in Liedwahr, and one
with a good port, such as Narial is supposed to have-"
"Narial-that's the one south of Dumaria?" Anna was trying to
recall her too-recently-acquired Erdean geography.
"That is the main seaport. The Falche is wide and deep and slow
enough that smaller seagoing vessels can sail all the way up to

Dumaria. I would doubt that the larger vessels of Sturinn
could."
"The traders up in Wei want me to stop Ehara and the
Sturinnese? Why would they think I'd want to get involved in a
war there? Defalk is still a mess. Muddy roads, lords who don't
want a woman as regent, debts…"
"They may feel you have no choice, and they would warn you."
No choice?
Her face betrayed her thoughts.
"If Lord Ehara uses the coin of the Sturinnese to buy rebellion
in Defalk, you must fight-either in Defalk or Dumar."
"What do the Sturinnese have against Defalk? We don't have a
port. We haven't offended them." Anna frowned.
Jecks shifted his weight in the chair, like a boy with a secret. He
even looked boyish for a moment, and Anna wanted to smile.
Except he was uncomfortable, and that bothered her. She
found herself clicking her nails again, and she clinched her
fingernails into her palms for a moment, then forced a long
slow breath before she spoke. "You're worried about telling me
how I've offended the Sturinnese. What is it?"
"It is not the Sturinnese. It is their Sea-Priests." Jecks shifted his
weight in the chair again. "Some seafarers, they have great
concern about having women on board their ships."
"I doubt somehow that the Ranuans and the traders of Wei

have those concerns."
"No, lady, they do not. The Sturinnese do."
"There's more than that."
"They feel women are the agents of dissonance, and they chain
them."
"They do what?" Anna wasn't sure she'd heard Jecks. "They
chain some of their women?" Something… something…
someone else had told her about chains.
"All of them, Lady Anna, from what I have heard. Some wear
chains that are little more than adornment, but most wear
heavy links."
"Chains as adornment. Adornment." Rather than speak more,
Anna stood and walked to the window. Lady Essan had
mentioned that, and she'd hoped not to have to deal with the
Sturinnese. Why? Why did she always have to deal with what
she'd rather not? The perversity of the universe? Mercury in
retrograde, except there wasn't any Mercury in the skies of
Erde. Darksong in ascendence? Was that the local equivalent?
The red moon of darkness?
As the thoughts cascaded through her mind, the rain still fell,
and the gray clouds seemed to touch the dark and recently
tilled fields. 
Had any place on earth chained all its women? She shivered.
No wonder the traders of Nordwei were confident she would
try to stop Ehara, if not the Sturinnese. Then, how much did
the traders of the north know of her? Too much, it seemed.

She turned back to Jecks. "You must know how I feel about
women in chains."
"I cannot see you favoring the Sea-Priests." Jecks' tone was wry.
"Or Lord Ehara, if he is bound to do their bidding."
"I thought things were bad enough with Konsstin threatening
to take over Neserea." She paused. "How do we know that this
isn't a ploy to get us tied up down here?"
"That, we do not know, save that the Norweians have not sent
their armies into any other land in memory."
"That means they aren't likely to invade. That's if things don't
change. They could still want us to fight a war to weaken us, or
keep us from invading them."
"The Council of Wei has been known for such." Jecks' voice
remained wary, but Anna wasn't certain the wariness was from
deliberation or concern that she might still explode over the
customs of the Sea-Priests.
"Lord Sargol still owes half his liedgeld," mused Anna. "So does
Dencer." She half flushed as her stomach growled.
"Lord Gylaron has paid none, is that not so?" asked Jecks,
politely ignoring her audible signs of continual hunger.
"There's more behind your question. Doesn't he hold the lands
between Stromwer and Suhl?"
"You mark my meaning." Jeck laughed.
"I'm not sure I do. I'm missing something. The two lords north

and south of Gylaron have paid half their liedgeld, but
Gylaron's paid none. Dencer would like to see me dead, but he's
paid half. I don't know anything about Sargol, but Ehara's
courting both of them."
"I doubt Gylaron is our friend."
"Nor Dencer. Nor Sargol." She shrugged. "Let's see what the
glass will tell us."
Jecks rose.
"No. I'd like you to watch. You may see something I don't."
"You are not wary of revealing-"
Anna laughed. "You've heard me sing enough spells. Those
were far more deadly than mirror spells. You've probably
heard your share of spells, anyway."
Jecks nodded, his eyes twinkling momentarily. "A few."
"So why don't you sing any?"
"Spellcasting is untrustworthy for the untrained."
"Like handling a blade?"
"It is more dangerous, from what I have seen." Jecks leaned
back slightly in the straight-backed chair and steepled his
fingers together. "Once, I'd not have said that. Now…" he
shrugged. "Now?"
"Barjim's forces fell to sorcery, and so did those of the Evult's."
Jecks' brow furrowed. "What do you plan?"

"To see what the mirror will show me. I have an idea."
Jecks nodded and sat back, as if to wait.
Anna took a deep breath, then ran through one vocalise, then
another. Her voice wasn't as clear as it should have been.
Allergies from the rain and the mold that had to infest the
ancient pile of bricks that was Synfal?
She cleared her throat and tried again. Finally, she picked up
the lutar, then stopped at the quizzical expression on Jecks'
face. "You don't see this in public, all the time it takes
sometimes to be able to sing."
"I have seen you cast spells…"
"Without all the preparation?" Anna nodded. "Half the time I'm
afraid they won't work when that happens. Sometimes they
don't. That's how I ended up defending myself with a knife."
She shivered as she recalled how she'd gutted the poor young
armsman whose only real fault had been following the orders
of the wrong person.
Jecks offered a half-nod, turning in the chair to be able to see
the mirror.
Anna turned to the dark wood framed mirror on the yellowed
plaster of the wall. Her cleaning spell had not been enough to
return the plaster to any semblance of white, assuming it had
ever been white.
"Mirror, mirror on the wall, 
show me now Lord Dencer's hall. 

Within its gates, Wendella show me fast 
and make that spell well last…"
In the silvered oblong on the wall was an image of a
brown-haired woman. She sat, alone, almost slumped at a table
in what appeared to be a tower room. Her hair was braided,
but she turned and appeared to look at Anna and Jecks. The
red eyes were sunken in dark circles. Those, and the barred
window, told Anna enough.
After a moment, the sorceress released the image with a quick
couplet, almost a chant. A moment of dizziness followed, but
the lightheadedness vanished almost as swiftly as it had struck.
"You asked to see her, not Dencer."
"I had a feeling." What Anna had felt was that Wendella's
situation would reveal more than seeing Dencer. Had it? She
wasn't sure.
"Better that she had remained in Falcor," said Jecks, leaning
forward in the chair. "Dencer fears you have suborned her."
"That's not likely. She hates me."
"He fears your sorcery."
"He fears any woman who will stand up to him." Anna took
another swallow of water and forced herself to eat the last roll.
"Why do so many men fear women here?" 
Jecks cleared his throat.
Anna waited.

"There have always been more sorcerers than sorceresses." The
white-haired lord coughed.
Anna let the silence continue.
"The sorceresses have always been more powerful. The Evult…
he was perhaps the greatest sorcerer ever-and you destroyed
him." Jecks forced his eyes to meet Anna's. "All know you have
yet to claim fully the power that is yours."
"I've almost been killed twice, and nearly killed myself more
than that," Anna pointed out.
"No one else would have survived the smallest portion of your
travail." Jecks gave a strained smile. "Do you wonder that
Dencer, or the Sea-Priests, or Konsstin, all fear you?"
"I've never been out to build an empire. All I've tried to do is to
preserve Defalk."
"When folk hate, they do not think," mused Jecks. "That is why
a thinking warrior, if he can survive the first few moments
against a madman, will triumph."
"If there are enough madmen," suggested Anna, "like the dark
ones…"
"Then there is no time to think."
"Great." Anna set down the lutar, realizing that it felt heavy,
too heavy. "I need to eat-again. So do you." She looked at Jecks.
After a moment, he returned the smile, boyishly, despite his
white hair, and Anna almost wanted to hug him. For that

instant, the warrior lord was a cross between a teddy bear and
a movie star.
"I could use some food," he admitted gruffly. "Not so much as a
certain sorceress."
Anna walked to the door and opened it.
Fhurgen stood there, waiting.
"If you would, Fhurgen, could you have Captain Alvar join us
here? And see if you can get someone to put together a platter
with enough food for the three of us." She didn't want to try
another spell without eating. "Don't you do it, either. Have the
kitchen handle it." She flashed a smile, trying to convey
warmth.
"We can manage that, Lady Anna." Fhurgen's dark eyes
twinkled for a moment.
"Thank you." Anna closed the door and walked to the window
to join Jecks. They both watched the rain, falling less forcefully,
and more like a cold mist. She could sense just how close he
was, and she started to reach out. No… you can't muddy things.
Play like the virgin queen. But she was all too conscious that she
didn't want to be a virgin queen or regent-not in the slightest.
She stepped back and sideways to look at the mirror on the
wall. The finish of the ebony wood around the glass showed
bubbles and discoloration. 
Then she recovered the lutar. "I'll try one more while we're
waiting for Alvar and food."

Jecks turned so that he could watch the mirror.
Anna retuned before she sang the mirror spell.
"Mirror, mirror, on the wall, 
show me now Lord Sargol's hall. 
Within its gates, show Lord Sargol fast 
and make that spell well last…"
The mirror swirled white, then blanked.
Anna frowned, then she shook her head. The way she'd
composed the spell wouldn't allow showing Sargol if he weren't
in his hall.
She lowered the lutar. How could she change it? It took several
attempts with the grease marker before she had something.
After humming through the tune to fix the new words, she
looked at Jecks.
"It's not as easy as it looks to outsiders." Then she lifted the lutar.
"Mirror, mirror, in your frame, 
Show me Lord Sargol in his fame, 
Where'er he may ride or be, 
Show him now to me…"
The second image centered on a gray-haired and slender man,
with a trimmed gray beard and a regular tanned face. A darkly
handsome figure, Anna decided. Lord Sargol rode a gray
mount, with a gray cloak half open.
Behind him rode armsmen. How many, Anna could not tell
from the image presented in the wall mirror. Nor could she tell

where he rode. She wanted to stamp a foot, childish as it felt.
She needed better spells-more precise ones… or something.
Her eyes went to Jecks. "Have you seen enough?"
"Yes, Lady Anna."
Anna released the spell. This time, the dizziness didn't pass
immediately, and she walked slowly back to her chair, setting
the lutar on the bed behind it.
She sat and took a long swallow of water, hoping it wouldn't be
that long before Alvar and supper, or whatever a late-afternoon
meal might be called, arrived.
"You need to eat more," suggested Jecks, mildly, not quite
meeting her eyes.
"I know. I know." She closed her eyes for a moment, but that
only got her white sparkles against the red-tinged darkness,
and she opened them nearly immediately. "Do you know what
it's like to have to eat all the time? To worry that you'll die if
you can't eat?"
"Once… many years ago, I had to eat much more." Jecks
laughed, half humorously. "Now, I wish I could. Always, we
wish for what we have yet to reach or what we have left
behind." 
That was true enough. With a gust of damp air, Anna looked
toward the window. The rain had picked up again, and she
could hear it splatting against the outer walls of Synfal.
It wasn't that long before a thrap on the door. Jecks rose, and

Anna let him.
Alvar followed the two serving girls and the heaped platters
into the room. He glanced around, then slipped out, only to
return with another chair from somewhere even before the girls
left.
On one platter was a variety of white and yellow cheeses, as
well as slabs of cold meat. The second platter held noodles of
some sort, covered with a steaming brown sauce. There was a
large basket with a long dark loaf of bread, and a smaller
basket with three apples.
Anna felt her mouth watering. She tried some of everything,
and found herself wolfing down the mint-spicy noodles, not
caring that much that her eyes were watering.
Again, she ate twice what either man did, and then had some
more of the white cheese and the dark bread. After that, she
sliced up the tart apple and ate that, and more cheese.
"Good food, and I thank you, Lady Anna," Alvar said as he
finished. "I, too," said Jecks, adding, "Sorcery is wearying work.
More wearying than wielding a blade from what I see."
"I never would have thought it," Anna admitted, reaching for
the last crust of the hot dark bread.
Finally, with her headache and dizziness gone, she picked up
the lutar again. "Let's see what other sorcerers are following
me." Alvar swallowed as she began to sing.
"Of those with power of the song 

seek those who'd do me wrong 
and show them in this silver cast 
and make that vision well last."
This time the images in the glass were fewer, far fewer. There
was the blond seer from Nordwei whom she'd seen from the
beginning, a hawk-faced man in white who had to be one of
the Sea-Priests, and a young black-bearded man with intense
eyes that burned.
She turned to Jecks and Alvar.
Jecks shook his head.
As she could smell the heat of the mirror's wooden frame, Anna
released the images.
The looks of hatred on the faces of both the Sea-Priest and the
unknown young man bothered her. She couldn't prove it, but
she felt those looks were directed at her, and she'd learned the
hard way what happened when she didn't take into account
her feelings. 
At the same time, she had to wonder. Were there that few with
power who would do her wrong?
"The woman's from Nordwei. She's been following me ever
since I got here, I think. Is the man in white one of the
Sea-Priests?"
"I do not know, lady," answered Alvar.
"I would say so, from his garments," said Jecks.

"What about the young man?"
"He looks like a dark monk or a commoner," answered Jecks.
Why would a commoner hate her? Should she investigate
more? She frowned. She couldn't sing spells for everyone who
opposed her-not all at the same time. Still carrying the lutar,
Anna walked over to the table and finished the last of the water.
She'd need to orderspell more. That could wait.
What else should she scry? Dencer? She took a deep breath.
How could she craft a better spell?
"Lord Dencer, show me then and now, 
what he does 'gainst me and how, 
Show the scenes both far and near 
and show us what one should fear."
The mirror obligingly split into three scenes. In the one in the
upper left third of the glass, Dencer sat on a low ridge watching
what appeared to be lancers practicing something. From what
Anna could see, there were hundreds of lancers, far more than
she had. In the left-hand side of the glass, Dencer stood beside a
desk, holding a velvet pouch. Across the desk was an officer in
a crimson uniform. The lower scene showed an aerial view of
the land. Anna didn't see anything familiar. There was a road,
flanked by several hilltops, and fields and perhaps a keep or
holding in the distance.
After several moments, she turned to Alvar. The captain lifted
his shoulders. "Lady Anna, I do not understand."
"It is a vision from the heavens," Jecks explained. "That could be

anywhere in southern Defalk. I do not see anything I recognize,
but the land is softer and greener than in the north."
As heat radiated from the wooden mirror frame and it
threatened to burst into flames, Anna released the spell. As she
looked at Jecks, a crack broke the silence. Black lines split the
mirror into three sections, still held by the frame.
"I think I need another mirror."
"You are hard on glasses." Jecks glanced at the window as rain
splattered into the room. "Perhaps the shutters?"
Anna nodded.
Alvar used a striker to light the candles, while Jecks stood and
went to the window to close the double shutters.
"The armsman in red-you think he was from Dumar?" she
asked in the flickering light from the candles. 
"Ehara's lancers are said to wear red." Jecks sipped the amber
wine.
Anna thought she might have some… later. "Ehara's sending
golds to Dencer, like the Norweians warned me."
Alvar gave a single sharp nod.
"And he's training a lot of lancers." Anna thought. Maybe she
should go straight back to Falcor. Or follow Jecks' advice and
just repair the ford at Soprat. If the southern lords were
preparing revolt, she might need quick access to and from the
east. Anientta would have to wait-like a lot of things. "You may

be right, Lord Jecks. This is not the time to visit Synope." She
paused. "Do you have any idea where that last scene might be?"
"No, Lady Anna. I do not. It has to be south of here, because
there were red quince trees on the hillside, and they do not
grow north of the Synor."
"I hope Hanfor's had some luck in finding armsmen and blades
for them to bear." She shook her head. "We'd better make plans
to leave as soon as possible."
"I feel that is wise, lady." Jecks cleared his throat. "I would also
feel happier if you would wear a breastplate."
Alvar nodded.
"Armor?"
Jecks looked down. "If… Arkad had been younger… If you are
caught unaware… you can recover from injuries to limbs, if
anyone can."
"I suppose I should learn to wear a helmet, too?" She softened
her tone and added, "I'm sorry. I'll give it a try."
"You are Defalk, Lady Anna," Alvar said slowly.
Now she had to worry about armor? And another fight? She
didn't want to use sorcery against Dencer, but would she have
any choice? He didn't seem likely to listen to reason, and she
certainly didn't have a large enough army to avoid using it. In
any case, she needed to be in Falcor… or somewhere not so out
of touch as Cheor.

She took a deep breath, then reached for the pitcher of wine.
She needed it. She hoped she wouldn't need it too much in the
days ahead.
32
STROMWER, DEFALK
DENCER opens the iron-bound door and steps into the narrow,
stonewalled room. Wendella looks up from the table, then
stands, and inclines her head. "My lord, what wish you?"
"What wish I? What wish I? What sort of fool do you take me
for? What wish I?" He lifts the leather quirt in his hand. "Do
you see this? See you this?"
"Yes, my lord." Wendella's eyes meet Dencer's.
"The sole good you have done, the sole good is my son! Better I
had your tongue ripped out."
"My lord?"
"You said you made no bargains with the bitch!"
"I said I made none, and I made none."
"You lie. You lie as rushes on a peasant's floor." Dencer reaches
out with his left hand and rips off the thin shift that Wendella
wears. She stands erect, motionless as his second motion rips
away her smallclothes, leaving a red scratch across her hip.
"I told you no lies, my lord. I suffered captivity for you. Never
did I agree to anything."

Smack! Dencer's hand rocks the brown-haired woman's head
back.
"Will you never stop lying to me?"
"I… did… not… lie." Her words are evenly spaced.
"You lie as rushes lie." He slashes the quirt-whip across
Wendella's bare buttocks, leaving a line of red. "You made a
bad bargain with the bitch sorceress. Tell me you did!"
"I made no bargains."
"Then why does Lord Ehara send an overcaptain to proffer
friendship to that gray pig Sargol? Why does he spurn me with
a stripling captain and a handful of golds? What bargain did
you strike with the bitch?"
"My lord, I offered nothing." Wendella's jaw remains firm,
though tears seep from the corners of her eyes.
"Liar!"
Wendella does not speak.
"Liar!" Thwipp! Thwipp! The quirt strikes again, and again…
and continues until she lies on the stone tiles.
Then the door shuts.
33
With the midafternoon sun streaming down, Anna took off the
floppy felt hat and blotted her forehead. Although Jecks and

the others still wore riding coats, she had doffed her jacket. That
still left the breastplate and a feltlike pad and a light green shirt.
All of that made her feel hotter. She hoped she could get used to
wearing the breastplate. Or was this the first step in getting her
used to a lot of armor? Did Jecks see her as an overage Maid of
Orleans? Despite the heat, she shivered. She didn't fancy
following that example. She just wished she could stuff the
armorplate into her saddlebags, along with the discarded jacket.
She glanced ahead. The road clay remained mostly damp from
the heavy rains, but two days of steady sunlight had dried
patches to the point where hoofs raised some dust.
Two days… and we're still less than halfway to Soprat.
Destroying the Evult's army under Eladdrin had been the only
way to stop the invasion of the Ebrans, but the spells necessary
had also ripped out the ford, and Anna was definitely
beginning to regret the destruction of the only decent crossing
point on the Chean River west of Pamr. Some things don't
change. You make a mess, and you're the one who gets stuck
cleaning it up. Why do some people never have to pay for their
mistakes? And why do you feel you always pay double?
She shook her head. She doubted that she'd ever be able to
answer that question. Once… just once in her life she'd offered
a really thoughtless plea. Anywhere but Ames, Iowa! The
harmonies or gods or fates had laughed and granted that wish,
and poor dead Jenny's spell had hurled her from earth to
Liedwahr. How many years would she pay for that? With
fights and angry men, and children she'd never hold again?

She tried to push those thoughts away, at least for a time, and
forced her eyes to the sprouts of green in the fields to the right
of the road.
While Alvar rode beside her, immediately behind rode Jecks
and Jim-bob.
"Who will inherit the lands of Synfal, grandsire?" Jimbob's
voice was still a boyish tenor, but the redhead had started to
grow, and Anna knew his voice would deepen before long.
"That's for the regent to decide, Jimbob. You watch how she
handles it, for you may have to do the same one day."
"Why didn't she just announce whoever she wanted?"
"How would you feel if a ruler killed a lord and before the body
was cold declared a new lord?"
After a moment of silence, there was an, "Oh. I'd think she'd
planned it all out."
"Do you think she did?" Jecks asked.
"No. Even I know she doesn't like killing. That's why her hand
got cut up." 
For someone who doesn't like it, you've certainly done your share,
Anna thought. After brushing away a persistent fly, she looked
to the north, at the line of trees less than a hundred yards north,
across the rushes and marshy ground that bordered the river
proper.
That the road ran south of the Synor River, on the northern

border of Lord Sargol's desmaine, bothered her somewhat, but
the marshes and swamps appeared even larger on the northern
side.
"It is dangerous to be too bloodthirsty," said Alvar quietly, his
voice barely audible above the sound of hoofs and
conversations, "but even more dangerous to be too merciful."
"Have I been too merciful, Alvar?" Anna asked.
"No, lady. You have not sought blood that did not need to be
spilled, either." The swarthy captain lifted his shoulders in a
shrug. "I worry. Some of the lords in this land see wisdom as
mercy."
"You mean, they see failure to slaughter all of a rebellious lord's
armsmen as weakness?" Anna used a tattered green cloth
square to wipe her forehead, then gave Farinelli a pat on the
neck. "Hope you're not as hot as I am, fellow."
"Even Lord Behlem was not that stupid," Alvar said. "Dead
armsmen cannot fight for you, and most armsmen will fight for
whoever can give them silver."
"I hope you're not sticking with me for my vast supplies of
nonexistent silver," Anna said with a laugh.
"You do not waste armsmen. That is worth more than coin."
Alvar frowned, and his eyes narrowed.
"What's the matter?"
"The tracks in the road. They came from that path there." Alvar
gestured back at the narrow lane they had passed, which

emerged from a woods several deks to the south and crossed
the tilled fields to join the main road.
"Horses, and a cart, heading the same way we are," added
Jecks, easing his mount up to Anna's left.
Even Anna could see the clear outlines in the damp clay, once
she looked down.
"A big cart, sire?" asked Jimbob from where he trailed them, his
voice serious.
Anna wanted to smile at the politeness Jimbob demonstrated
when he knew his words were heard by her, but she refrained.
Jecks shook his head. "Their mounts are well-shod. Not traders."
Anna studied the tracks in the road. The wheels seemed to have
created a fairly deep rut. "Is that a heavy cart?"
"Heavier than most," opined Alvar.
"The wheels are too narrow," added Jecks. "A wider rim is better
for a working wagon on these roads."
"For supply wagons, too," said Alvar.
That made sense to Anna, although she'd never thought about
how wide wagon wheels should be. 
"Too wide or too narrow is hard on the horses," Jecks continued,
half turning to Jimbob. "That's why a lord needs good
wagonmasters and wheelwrights."
Anna smiled, her eyes drifting along the road as it turned south

and away from the river, presumably because of another
marsh or soggy ground. Less than a dek ahead on the south
side of the road rose a low hill, half covered with fresh-leaved
trees in lines, an orchard of some sort. She peered ahead. A line
of hills, each slightly higher than the one before, lay along the
south side of the road. Most appeared to have orchards.
"The peaches of the south," confirmed Jecks.
"How did you know that was what I was wondering?"
"You near fell from the saddle straining to make them out." The
white-haired lord smiled. "Tybel is said to make a fine brandy
from them."
Tybel? Anna strained to put the name with the lands. "He's the
Lord of Arien. We sent him a scroll about the seed grain. I don't
think we ever heard from him."
"Better that than hear as from Lord Dencer."
"I still don't understand. Not really." Anna reached for her
water bottle and took a long and deep swallow. Even the
minimal armor made her normal dehydration problems worse.
"Lords only talk to rulers and regents when times are bad or
when they want something." Jecks laughed. "Best not to hear
from them."
Except for close friends, isn't it that way with most people? In
Lied-wahr, people are like people everywhere. "When you put it
that way…"

"They want something," Jecks continued, with a look at Jimbob,
to make sure the youth was still listening, "and if you deny
them, they get angry. You grant it, and every other lord wants
something, or gets angry because you granted something to
the first."
"You make ruling sound hopeless," Anna ventured.
"Unless one has great power that inspires fear, ruling often has
proved hopeless," Jecks said mildly.
They were back to fear and power again. What was it that
Machiavelli had said? Better to be both loved and feared, but
feared rather than loved? Some things didn't change from place
to place, even universe to universe. Somehow that depressed
her. She could understand it, but she didn't have to like it.
"Is that why the Liedfuhr has so many armsmen, grandsire?"
asked Jimbob.
"Yes. And why the Sea-Priests have so many ships, and the…
Ranuans so many golds piled up."
Anna took another swallow from the water bottle and then
replaced it in the holder, giving Farinelli another pat on the
neck. She got the smallest of snorts in return, as if the big
gelding were suggesting that he deserved more than affection
for his efforts. "You do," she said quietly. 
"Halt!" Jecks raised his arm, and his voice boomed out.
Anna reined up and followed Jecks' eyes to the right. Behind
them harnesses jangled, and horses whuffed. Had one

whinnied, complaining about another's jostling?
Anna rubbed her nose as dust rose around them in the still and
warm air.
On the bare ground above the orchard on the next hill-the one
less than a dek away-were a handful of figures. Some bore
items-violins, horns? Anna squinted. Were some of them
players?
Her stomach twisted at the thought of sorcerers preparing that
sort of unwelcome welcome for her.
Something was anchored-or attached-to a squat pole set in the
ground, and two men struggled with a lever or crank. As they
did, the sounds of a faint melody drifted downhill.
Anna watched as a figure turned the triangular shape toward
them, her mind spinning. What was the gadget, and why was
she so fearful? She should know or recognize what was
happening. Why couldn't she think quickly?
Farinelli sidestepped, whuffing,
"Some sort of crossbow. Too far to be accurate, but we'd better
hold up." Jecks turned. "Alvar! Send a troop after them." Then
his eyes went to Anna. "Best we ride back."
"Green company! Forward!"
As the lancers trotted past them, Anna could sense Fhurgen
easing his squad around her and Jecks and Jimbob. One of the
newer guards- Rickel-stood slightly in the saddle, looking

toward the mound. His thick bowl-cut hair resembled a
strawberry-blond helmet.
Fhurgen stood in his stirrups for a moment. "Don't like this
none, Lady Anna," rumbled the black-bearded chief of her
guard.
Anna glanced back, but she couldn't move Farinelli, not with
her guards so close around her.
The strains of the distant music crescendoed, almost drowned
out by the sound of the lancers' mounts. Through the dust,
Anna could see the two men fall away from the crossbow.
Her stomach twisted, and her right hand darted for the blade at
her waist yanking it out and up.
A knife against an arrow? Anna wanted to laugh but didn't
have time or breath. She only knew she had to get the knife out
and up, and there wasn't time to think about it.
Her right hand jolted. Fire slashed along her arm, and a
hammer smashed into the light breastplate Jecks had insisted
she wear. As in a dream, she felt herself being lifted from the
saddle by the power of that hammer.
What. . . ? How could an arrow . . . ?
She could sense Farinelli's scream, and her back bouncing
against another mount, and then the compacted clay of the
road.
For a time, she lay on her back, feeling pressure on her chest.
Pressure and fire welling out from her wounds. 

Jecks was beside her, kneeling.
"Alcohol… elixir… bathe the wounds…" she gasped.
"Frigging quarrel."
"Get it out," Anna said slowly, forcing each word. "Use the
alcohol."
She could sense his puzzlement, but each word was an effort.
"Get Liende. Pour… the alcohol over the wounds… Clean it…"
She was getting dizzier. Lord, why… why…
"Went partway through the metal. Shouldn't have done that."
Jecks fumbled with the breast plate. "Went across…"
"Get it out." Anna clamped her mouth shut as Jecks worked the
black shaft free. Her eyes were having trouble focusing.
"There."
"Alcohol. In my saddlebags."
The splash of the liquid burned worse than the arrow had.
"Arm… too."
The second line of fire was too much, even as Anna fought the
combination of dizziness and blackness.
34
PAMR, DEFALK

GOOD morning." The dark-haired young man in brown nods
to the two older and full-bearded men who enter the chandlery.
"Good morning, Farsenn. Rastr said we ought to stop by…
Something about wanting… You know, I don't remember."
The taller and ginger-bearded man who has led the way into
the building bobs his head.
"I think I know," Farsenn says quietly. "It's in the back room.
Let me check." He smiles politely, and steps through the
doorway out of the dimly lit main room.
The ginger-bearded man picks up one of the leather saddlebags
on the table. "Better stuff than old Forse. He was more
interested in what woman he could get out back. Farsenn looks
after the stock more than his father did."
"He liked the women, Forse did, all kinds," answers the other
brown-haired farmer. "Till that sorceress turned him into a
bonfire."
"Bitch… Don't like uppity women like that. Next thing you
know, Mostan, she and that Lady Gatrune be telling us how to
wear our trousers." A raucous laugh follows. 
The sound of a low drum rumbles from the back room, getting
louder as Farsenn returns, leaving the door open. "Deurn,
Mostan… I'd like to show you what Rastr was talking about."
As the three enter the small windowless room and Farsenn
closes the door, the young drummer in the corner beats his
drum slowly… thu-rummm… thurumm… thurummm…
thurumm …

On the pedestal is a life-sized statue of a slender blonde woman,
breathtakingly beautiful and so lifelike that the spun golden
hair seems to move in the faint movement of air caused by the
door's closing, and the open blue eyes seem to follow the men.
The statue-or the woman- totally naked, does not move.
"Real pretty, Farsenn."
"… like it better were she real… Ha!"
"That's the way sorceresses should be." Farsenn's voice remains
warm and friendly. "Now… if you'd listen for a moment…"
"Sure… Let me look…"
Farsenn begins to sing, his bass voice weaving around the
rhythm of the drum.
"Men of Pamr, heed no woman's song, 
for Farsenn will make you proud and strong 
so put your trust and all your heart 
behind the chandler and his part…"
When he finishes, Farsenn smiles slightly. "You see? We men
need to stand together these days, don't we?"
"Sure do. Whatever you say."
"Like your statue, young feller."
As the drumbeat dies away, Farsenn blinks rapidly and shakes
his head, as if to clear it, then offers a conspiratorial grin. "Just
don't tell any of the women… you know what I mean?"

Both visitors grin.
"It was good of you to come to see me." He makes a vague
gesture toward the door, and both men turn as though
commanded. The chandler follows them back into the main
room of the chandlery.
"Got to tell Enslam about this," remarks the ginger-bearded
Mostan.
"You can tell your friends," says Farsenn conversationally. "It
would be better if you didn't mention it to any of Lady
Gatrune's armsmen. They might not take it well." He shrugs.
"No sense in stirring up trouble."
"Makes sense." Deurn picks up the worn leather saddlebag.
"How much?"
"Silver and a half. Might let it go to you for a silver…"
35
ANNA opened her eyes gingerly, glancing around the
too-familiar guest quarters in Synfal. She could feel a
comfortably warm breeze, coming through the open shutters.
The sun lit a rectangle of yellow-brick floor.
Yuarl-a young string player Anna didn't know beyond her
name and expertise-sat at the writing table. She stiffened as she
realized Anna was awake. "Can I get you anything, my lady?"
"Something more to drink… and eat," Anna rasped. Her voice
was hoarse, her chords clearly swollen.

The trip back to Cheor had been a nightmare. That was the
way Anna had felt, neither awake nor asleep, filled with chills
one moment, and fired with fever the next. She recalled talking,
but not what she had said.
The wounds in her arm and chest had burned continually, and
they still did, if not quite so greatly.
She vaguely recalled insisting on eating and arguing with
someone- Jecks-about whether she should be eating. She even
remembered seeing Synfal from the fields.
Her next memory was that of waking in the dark, with only a
lone candle flickering, and trying to drink wine laced with
something, and wondering why she had so much trouble
staying awake and concentrating. For the next day, or days-she
wasn't exactly sure-she had drifted in and out of consciousness.
Anna straightened herself against the lumpy pillows, resigned
that all pillows in Defalk were lumpy. She took a sip, then a
swallow, of the sweetish wine that Yuarl had offered, then
another swallow. Sweet or not, it calmed her throat.
"Might… might I summon the chief player?"
"And Lord Jecks." The words were enough to bring up some
mucus, and Anna coughed once, and then again. The two
coughs sent a searing pain through her chest, and she pressed
her arms against her rib cage. "Shit… shit…" The words
dribbled out, both from the pain in her chest and from the
lesser ache in her bound right arm.
Yuarl, her eyes still on Anna, went to the door, opened it, and

spoke to one of the guards outside.
Anna tried to look down at her wound, but even under the
loose shift could only see a bulky dressing and radiating bruise
lines that appeared to be turning yellow.
Despite the pain that had finally begun to subside, she had to
wonder about her wounds. The arrow she'd taken outside
Loiseau almost a year earlier had been far more serious, and
she'd barely made it, despite Brill's sorcery. So why was she
having so much trouble with a slash on her arm and a
relatively superficial chest wound? All the bruises wouldn't
account for her dizziness and fevers. Poison? Anna shivered. 
"Are you all right, lady? Can I do anything?"
"Just thinking." Anna managed to suppress another cough. She
knew she probably needed to cough the garbage out of her
throat and lungs- but it would hurt-a lot. She tried clearing her
throat. That didn't help much. A gentle half-cough helped, but
she almost choked on the mucus.
Damned asthma! Damn . . . She felt like screaming and crying
simultaneously. Neither would help her or her image as regent
and sorceress. At that thought, she wanted to damn her image
as well. Instead, she tried to clear out whatever was in her nose,
throat, and lungs.
Yuarl watched, almost wide-eyed.
Before either Jecks or Liende arrived, a young strawberry-blond
armsman lurched through the door. Rickel bore a tray which
Yuarl intercepted and then carried over to Anna. The sorceress

studied the platters-slightly wizened apples, hard white cheese,
something that looked like an egg custard, and two bran
muffins. She sniffed the custard and decided that whatever had
been done to the eggs wouldn't set all that well. Slowly, she
picked up one of the muffins and nibbled a corner. Her mouth
watered at the hot and moist nutty taste, and she slowly ate the
entire muffin.
Then she had more of the wine. As Anna forced herself to eat
the second heavy bran muffin, the door opened, and Liende
slipped inside. "Good day, Lady Anna."
Her mouth full, Anna nodded as the player with the
white-streaked red hair pulled up one of the chairs and sat
beside her bed. Liende waited without speaking.
With a quick look at the two women, Yuarl slipped out the
door, and shut it behind her without a sound.
"How many days?" Anna finally asked into the stillness.
"You rode in the gate the day before yesterday," Liende
answered.
Yesterday? It felt like she'd been out of commission a lot longer
than three days. "Just yesterday?"
"You are stronger than most warriors."
Anna doubted that. "It looks like I owe you again. Thank you
for helping save me. Again." She started to shake her head,
then decided against it. She certainly owed Jecks for insisting
that she wear the plastron or breastplate or whatever it had

been. And Fhurgen… and… Alvar and all the armsmen.
"You owe yourself." Liende smiled. "The elixir… it helped much
in cleaning the wound." The smile vanished. "The quarrel had
been smeared in foul matter. Most do not survive those
wounds."
Anna wanted to wince. "Could there have been something else
there?" From what she recalled, bacteria wouldn't have been
able to act fast enough to give her a fever within moments, and
she'd have to watch the Wounds for any signs of sepsis or
infection. That would really be a joy.
"You suspect poison?" 
"Yes."
"The quarrel was smeared with a tar. It could have been mixed
with any substance." Liende gave a half-smile. "Your elixir, and
your own strength, surmounted whatever was upon the
quarrel."
"I don't feel like I've surmounted much."
"More than most," Liende answered.
"Are the players still here?"
"Where else would we be?" asked the player gently.
"Sorry. I'm still not thinking that well." Anna gave a small
headshake, a very small headshake. "Can you start them
working on the next two spellsongs?"
"We have started."

"Good." Anna glanced around the room. "In a day or two, I'll
hear them. There's room enough to practice here."
"We will not be soon returning to Falcor?"
"I have not decided," Anna temporized. She wasn't about to
decide anything until she found out from Jecks exactly what
the situation was.
Liende nodded, then stood as the door to Anna's quarters
opened.
Jecks stepped into the room, his eyes going to Anna. Since he
didn't i look shocked, he must have looked in on her a few
times. That, or Anna was beginning to look human. She
suspected Jecks' lack of surprise wasn't because of her improved
appearance.
Liende moved away from Anna with a nod. "By your leave,
Lady Anna?" 
"Until later, Liende." 
Jecks inclined his head to Liende. "My thanks to you, chief
player."
"We did as we could, but she is strong, and her elixir is
powerful," Liende acknowledged before easing out the door.
"Lady Anna." Jecks stepped toward the bed.
"Lord Jecks." What could she say that wouldn't sound stupid or
helpless or hopeless? Anna glanced at the white-haired Lord of
Elheld. There had been times when she had wished him in her

bedroom, but the present didn't qualify, even if she did need to
talk to him.
"I am pleased to see you are awake. Are you still fevered?"
"Sometimes, but it seems to be getting better." She frowned.
Without antibiotics, a fever should have worsened. She
gestured toward the chair with her left hand.
He nodded. "Good." Then he sat down.
Anna still hadn't figured out exactly how the damned arrow
had gotten her, especially since Jecks and Alvar had said that
they'd all been beyond range. She was also less than pleased
about being a target for the second time in less than a year.
"That arrow…"
"The arrow was ensorcelled," Jecks said.
"Spelled somehow?"
"Aye. It curved. That I saw."
Anna wanted to beat her own head-again. Not having been
born on Erde left her blind to the simplest matters. She'd been
required to use huge spells, and ones that took all her ability
and strength, so often that she'd totally overlooked the
simpler-and still potentially deadly use of spells. You aren't
devious enough, either. You're not used to poisons and other local
nasties. 
"You are troubled," offered Jecks.
"Troubled and angry," Anna said. "I didn't think about spelling

arrows or poisoning them. Even when I saw those players, it
didn't really dawn on me." Stupid!
"The quarrel was tainted?"
"It had to be poison. I wouldn't have gotten a fever or chills
from… filth that fast."
"You are fortunate-or enchanted."
You're a damned fool, Anna. She shook her head slowly and far
from vigorously. "I still don't know enough. I've been incredibly
lucky."
"You were prepared. You had the elixir."
"And that breastplate." She met his hazel eyes. "How did you
know about the breastplate? That I'd need it?" Anna forced
herself to take another slice of the white cheese. At least it was
hard and cold, rather than soft, moldy, and mushy, like so
much of the white cheese Brill had favored.
Jecks glanced at the yellow brick floor. "I was fortunate. We
were fortunate."
"There's something you're not telling me, my lord Jecks," Anna
said wryly. "Why not?"
The white-haired lord shrugged, but did not speak. Finally,
Jecks answered. "At times… I feel as though I know things.
Sometimes I am wrong. Most times, I was right to fear. I have
feared this journey from the day you first spoke of it." His eyes
did not meet hers.

"What else do you fear?" she queried.
"I have no feelings of danger now." He smiled his movie-star
smile.
Anna wanted to smile back. She didn't, though she hoped he
was right. "That's good."
"I still worry." The smile vanished with a frown.
"So do I." She coughed gently, trying not to wince.
Jecks' frown deepened.
"I'll be all right." You hope.
"You should not strain yourself."
Anna tried not to bridle at the male condescension in his tone.
"Was it Lord Sargol?"
"We do not know with certainty. I did not feel we should spare
armsmen to chase those on the hilltop. Your safety was more
important." Jecks shrugged. "Once well… I thought you would
be able to find out."
"If I got well, then I'd be able to find out. If I didn't, you and
Jimbob had bigger problems." Anna forced a smile.
"You surprise me, even when I expect it."
She did not answer immediately, but sipped more of the wine,
wishing she were strong enough to orderspell just plain water.
Could she have someone boil some? How would she know if it
had been boiled enough, or put into something that was clean

enough not to be contaminated? "I suppose we'll have to do
something about Sargol now." 
"There is no hurry," Jecks said.
"You mean, there's no hurry beyond the time when I'm strong
enough to bring his whole holding down around him?"
"You cannot bring down every holding in southern Defalk."
Anna understood that. She wasn't sure she could, but even if
she could have, razing them all except for Geansor's keep
wouldn't help in welding Defalk together. She had the glimmer
of another idea.
The damned arrow had actually given her an answer-use
sorcery to influence what was-like arrows. That approach
would take far less energy. It took as much skill, but skill wasn't
her problem. Energy was. She pursed her lips. There might be
a problem with finding archers, lots of them, but she didn't
need marksmen, just people who could put a lot of' arrows into
the air at the same time.
She'd also need to craft some defensive skills. Why does
everything keep getting more complicated?… Because it always
does, no matter what, she answered herself.
Before she could actually implement her ideas, she needed to
get well, and get stronger. While she was healing, though, she
could work out the spells.
She glanced worriedly at Jecks. "The lutar?"

"I put it in the chest there." He inclined his head toward the
carved chest at the foot of the bed. "It was not damaged."
Anna released her breath slowly, but it still hurt.
Damn! If she had anything to say about it, one Lord Sargol and
one Lord Dencer, and their allies, were going to pay dearly for
their shenanigans. Except their actions were far worse than
shenanigans.
She could see Jecks stiffen as he watched her. Would it always
be that way? Would men always back away when she looked
determined? Why didn't they understand that she had no
choice? Even as they didn't think they had to understand
women, they always wanted women to understand.
She snorted… softly.
36
OUTSIDE the keep of Synfal, rain sleeted from the gray clouds
down onto the thirsty fields and the wet brick walls, a warm
rain that turned into mist where it struck yellow brick. The
shutters to Anna's quarters were half closed-held that way by a
casement bar, a compromise that allowed some fresh air
without too much water splashing inside and onto the polished
brick floor.
At the writing table, Anna finally pushed away the pile of
accounts that Dythya had sent with the scrolls that had begun
to appear with a semblance of regularity.
Of course, Gylaron hadn't paid his liedgeld, nor Dencer and

Sargol the remainder of theirs. Lord Vlassa's heirs continued to
quibble, and she'd heard nothing from Lord Birfels about
whether Birke would return to Falcor for more education. She
and Jecks had sent for Herstat, but even the message to Elheld
summoning Jecks' saalmeister-accountant would take days to
get there.
Time slipped by while she recovered. About the only physical
things she could manage at first were an awkward one-handed
grooming of Farinelli and short walks around the corridors,
chafing at the time it took her wounds to heal. She knew that
the Sea-Priests of Sturinn were probably weaseling their way
into Dumar, while Lord Ehara continued his mischief in trying
to subvert Defalk's southern lords. Konsstin was up to
something, massing more troops in Neserea, or worse. And
who knew what the traders of Wei were trying?
And you can't afford more than an occasional mirror spell that's
shown nothing new. Or one for clean water. What a place-it takes
magic even to get clean cool water.
She recalled Shakespearean England had been like that, too.
After a small shudder, she pushed the accounting paperwork to
the corner of the table and reclaimed her spell folder. She
concentrated on the crude brown paper, trying to work out the
spell, murmuring the first words.
"All the arrows we have shot into the air, 
Have them strike…"
She pursed her lips. Trying to create the spells without writing
them made it too hard to remember all the parts. Finally, she

lifted the grease barker and crossed out several words,
humming the tune again.
"Those arrows shot into the air, 
Oh, make each strike one armsman there…"
The first lines would do, if she could find another couplet that
would define which armsmen were to be struck. After a long
slow exhalation she sipped the too-sweet wine, then swallowed. 
Then she froze. Arrows? What were arrows?
"Shit!"
The damned arrows were metal arrowheads fitted onto wood
shafts and fletched with once-living feathers. She cradled her
head in left hand propped on the writing table. She couldn't
even direct arrow without getting into Darksong. But how had
they ensorcelled the arrow?… She wanted to shake her head. It
had been a crossbow quarrel and all metal.
She looked at the crude brown paper. Back to the drawing
board-literally.
Her right arm ached only slightly, if somewhat more at the end
of tt day. After more than a week, the gash on her chest,
thankfully above herj breasts-lower would have been a real
mess-was beginning to heal, and all the bruises had turned
faded green-and-purple.
Sometimes, she felt as though all she did was either get
wounded and| recover, or kill someone and recover, and most
of the time was spent trying to deal with some administrative
mess or another.

She had the gist of an idea-maybe-when someone thrapped on
the door.
"Yes?" She tried to conceal the irritation in her voice.
"Lady Anna?" Fhurgen peered in. "Halde would request a
moment! with you."
Anna understood Fhurgen's body posture. Her chief guard
didn't trus| totally anyone of Synfal. "Escort him in."
She straightened in the chair.
"Lady Anna," Halde began almost before he stopped opposite
the| writing table. "In the past several years, Fauren and Lord
Arkad left the higher fields fallow. Those were the ones where
the ditches from the rivers did not reach. We have had much
rain this past season." The acting saalmeister of Synfal glanced
down at the yellow-brick floor.
"You're thinking of planting them, but it will take coins and
seed and time, and the crops will be later, and you should have
thought of it earlier." Anna waited.
The dark-haired acting saalmeister flushed and said nothing.
"Halde," Anna said gently, but firmly, "I do not punish
questions or honest mistakes, provided they aren't repeated. I
do get angry at people , who do not speak what they mean and
people who try to deceive me." She paused. "What would you
plant, and why? What would it cost? How late would the crops
be?"

The flush faded. "Lady… I would not plant maize. It drinks too
much water, even in the wettest year. Wheat corn, I think, and
some barley. The hard wheat can weather periods of drought."
Corn? Anna remembered from somewhere else that corn meant
grains like wheat and barley and something else. The Corn
Laws of England had been to protect British agriculture. She
nodded after a moment. "Go on." 
"We have enough seed corn, but it would draw down our
stocks."
"Go ahead," Anna decided, then added, "Heavy rains won't
hurt early in the year, will they?"
Halde shook his head. "Rains at harvest, yes, they could destroy
the crop. And a rain right after planting could wash away
everything."
"We'll take that risk. We'll need the grain."
"Thank you, lady." Halde stood silently.
"What else?" Anna tried to keep from grinning. Halde had his
way of conveying that he wanted more.
"Some of the tenant women have asked that they be allowed to
plant the silt marsh flats with melons."
"Is that a good idea?" Anna countered.
"Lord Arkad's sire allowed it, according to the record books, if
they would provide one in five of the melons to the keep."

"But Fauren didn't?"
"No, lady."
"Why not?"
"He told Vierk and he told me that we would spend more time
arguing over melons than we would receive."
Anna laughed. "He was probably right. We won't argue."
Halde looked at her quizzically.
"Tell them they can plant, on the old terms. We'll trust them. If
I find that trust is misplaced, they won't plant again." She
smiled. "You don't have time to count melons. Oh… and tell
the armsmen and a few others that half the melons that the
keep gets will go to them one way or another. You can figure
out how, later."
The skeptical look on Halde's face at Anna's last words made
her want to sigh. "Halde, I don't know that you'll stay as
saalmeister. I won't lie to you. I do know that I can't afford to
waste talent and loyalty. My arms commander, the head of my
personal guard, and Captain Alvar, all served Lord Behlem.
My chief player served Lord Brill. You do a good job, and
you'll have a good position. Talk to any of my people, if you
doubt me. Make up your own mind." She took a slow breath.
"Is there anything else?"
"No, lady. Thank you." Halde bowed and turned, followed by
the silent Fhurgen.
Before the door closed, she could hear Fhurgen's voice.

"Saalmeister, best you listen…"
Anna smiled faintly, wondering what Fhurgen might say, and
whether Halde would listen. Then she went back to the arrow
spell. What about spelling the arrowheads? Would a spell that
dragged the once-living matter of the shafts and the fletching
be Darksong? She frowned. She didn't know why, but she
thought that might work. She could test it, at least.
She had another version of the second couplet almost worked
out when there was another knock on the door.
Jecks stepped into Anna's room, followed by Hanfor. 
"Hanfor?" Anna looked up from the table, but did not stand.
"What are you doing here?"
The gray-haired arms commander bowed. "Lord Jecks
suggested I bring those armsmen I could spare, and I thought
that might be wise. We can return with greater speed and reach
Falcor before any others can reach it-though I doubt any will
try."
Anna gestured to the chairs on the other side of the writing
table. "I'm glad to see you, but that means trouble."
Jecks' eyes twinkled momentarily as he seated himself. "You
see, she is almost recovered."
"That's the story of my life. Get wounded so I can recover and
survive." Her eyes went to Hanfor. "Which problem do you
want to start with?"
"There is another difficulty," Hanfor said slowly. "It is not so

great a problem as I feared. Now that you hold Synfal and
Cheor."
She held Synfal? That was a laugh. Synfal held her. For the
first few days, she'd even had trouble holding a mug or a knife
to cut meat for any length of time. "Oh?" she offered cautiously.
"The armory here has many good blades," Hanfor added.
"Enough to spare for our armsmen."
For now, thought Anna. "Still no weapons smith and no
blades?"
"No smiths have answered our scrolls." The veteran paused,
then added, "You recall the blades in Encora? All were sold
before our offer was received. Or so we were told."
Anna frowned. "I don't like that. How many?"
"Over three hundred."
Anyone who wanted and could afford three hundred blades
was definitely serious about something. Not that many
people-or even lords- had five hundred to a thousand golds to
spare. Anna certainly knew that. "Did our man find out who
bought the blades?"
"A trader in Encora. A Ranuan trader."
That bothered Anna, but it was a feeling she couldn't attribute
to anything logical. "What else?"
"There are rumors that the Liedfuhr is sending more armsmen
to Neserea."

"Just rumors?" She glanced at Jecks.
He nodded.
"What else?" she asked tiredly.
"Bertmynn has attacked an outpost held by Hadrenn's forces."
Anna frowned, trying to remember who was who. "Hadrenn's
the one who holds the west part of Ebra?" She pursed her lips,
remembering Hryding's messenger Fridric. "The one Gestatr
went to serve, that's right."
Hanfor inclined his head, waiting.
"So we have troops massing on our western borders, an
uprising in our own south, and a civil war starting to our east."
She forced a wry grin. "Have I missed anything?" Then she
added, "Besides the fact that someone in Ranuak is buying lots
of blades, and our neighbor to the southwest is being supported
by an enemy that wants to see every woman in Defalk in
chains?"
"I think you have stated the situation clearly," stated Jecks.
Anna's eyes hardened, even as she forced her voice into an
unnatural sweetness. "You might recall that I suggested this
would happen."
Hanfor and Jecks exchanged glances.
She shrugged, glad that there was but a twinge in her chest. "It
doesn't matter. We'll do what we have to. Hanfor… can you
round up several hundred men who can shoot arrows? They

don't have to be accurate, just strong enough to get the arrows
released with force in the right direction all at the same time."
"Most of our armsmen could do that now," admitted the arms
commander with a rueful laugh. "They just cannot hit
anything." He frowned. "I do not know about bows and
arrows."
"Round up as many as you can."
Hanfor's eyebrows rose.
"If Sargol can spell one crossbow quarrel, there's no reason why
I can't spell several hundred arrows in return." You hope.
Hanfor swallowed.
So did Jecks.
"Gentlemen." Anna smiled. "I've learned that fighting here is a
nasty business, involving poisoned arrows, assassinations,
sorcery, and economic coercion. Surely, you do not think I
should limit my efforts out of a sense of misplaced chivalry?"
"But the armsmen… They are not…"
Anna looked at Hanfor. "I know some didn't have much choice,
but they did choose. And if we don't end this rebellion quickly,
we won't have a land left to protect." She turned to Jecks.
"You've led me to believe that destroying keeps and everyone in
them is unwise. Is that still true?"
The white-haired lord fingered his chin before answering.

A stronger gust of wind hurled rain past the half-open shutters
and onto the yellow-brick floor.
Finally, Jecks answered. "If you were to destroy many keeps
with sorcery, some of the lords of the north would feel you
would turn on them. I cannot say how many."
"Would they turn if I were a man?"
"Some would."
"Just not so many." Double standard-again.
Anna glanced back at Hanfor. "We either kill armsmen or lose
support."
"Always the armsmen pay," murmured the arms commander.
It had been that way back on earth, too, Anna recalled. "It's
true on all worlds. That's because people are people."
After another silence, Hanfor asked, "Have you other duties?" 
"No." Anna softened her voice. "I am glad you came, and I do
value your skill and advice. It's just that we don't seem to have
many choices."
"That be not your fault, lady. I will do as we must." Anna could
hear the unspoken words-"but I do not have to like it." Hanfor
rose. "By your leave."
"I'll try to spare those I can," Anna said. 
"You do, and they may fight for you." 
Anna had thought about that, too. 

After Hanfor bowed and departed, Jecks said quietly, "It will
get worse, first, I fear."
"All the lords are afraid that they'll lose their privileges and
power."
"In this uncertain world," answered Jecks with a short laugh,
"does not every man fear loss?"
"Armsmen and peasants and women lose their lives every day.
Lords worry about golds and power." Anna sighed. "I suppose
that if any of the others had power and golds, they'd fear losing
them, too."
"You have seen the hard life, have you not?"
Anna hesitated. "Yes and no. Earth is different. I've had to work
hard, but I've never been poor the way people are here." Then,
Uncle Garven and Papaw had been close to it.
"You have seen enough. And you have seen to know that
change may be good." Jecks shook his head. "In Defalk, for
many years, change has always heralded trouble. Can you
blame them?"
Yes, but it won't do any good. "They'll have to learn."
"I wager you will see to that." Jecks handed Anna a scroll, still
sealed. "This should cheer you."
The sorceress glanced at it warily.
"It's from young Secca."

Anna broke the seal, noting the carefully impressed S on the
blue wax, and the thin strip of blue ribbon.
My dear Lady Anna,
I must write this quickly. Please forgive the poor letters. You
must get well. All of us feel you must.
Now you are all I have. Please take care and eat a lot. I love
you. I hope we can play Vorkoffe when you come home.
Anna's eyes blurred, and she set down the scroll on the writing
table, shivering.
"I thought you would be pleased." Jecks' voice was puzzled.
She did shake her head, not able to see him through the tears.
She'd; lost her own little redhead-Elizabetta. And Irenia, and
Mario. Now, she! had another redhead, one she'd practically
ridden off and abandoned. Was she going to lose her, too? '
She shuddered, unable to stop the sobs that burst forth.
37
A hot and damp breeze slipped through the open window of
Anna's quarters. A gust of wind rattled the large replacement
mirror on the wall. Even though she was the Regent of Defalk,
she still didn't feel comfortable in the "throne room" used by
Arkad, and probably never would. Besides, for dealing with her
small traveling staff, her quarters were fine.
Anna glanced across the writing table at Jecks, then at Hanfor.
"I think it's time to name the heir to Synfal. I've decided. Lord

Jecks had nothing to do with this."
Hanfor raised his bushy gray eyebrows.
"No… I'm not giving Synfal to him. I am giving it to Lord
Jimbob, under the same terms as the Regency, except Herstat
and Jecks will administer Synfal, but Jimbob will have some
small say to begin with."
Surprisingly, Hanfor nodded. "That is most sensible. A lord
must have coins enough to support his realm in times of
trouble, and the lands adjoin each other."
"I've also made Lord Jecks agree to part with Herstat as part of
the bargain, to be saalmeister here. Halde will stay on to assist
him, but only for a time, until Herstat is comfortable." Anna
turned to Jecks. "What have you discovered about Halde?"
"He is honest, according to all. He works hard. He does not
appear to listen, but he does." The white-haired lord shrugged.
"A courtier he is not. That is why he would have remained an
assistant, I would judge."
"The armsmen of Synfal speak of him in a like fashion," added
the Arms Commander. "They respect him. They do not like
him, but they do not dislike him."
"Well… let's get this over." Anna raised the iron bell and rang
it, wincing at the off-key clang.
Fhurgen opened the door.
"If you would ask Halde to come in…"

The dark-bearded acting saalmeister entered the chamber,
closing the door gently but firmly, and bowed. "Lady Anna,
lords."
"Halde," Anna said, wondering how she was going to handle
telling Halde he was about to be replaced.
"Yes, Lady Anna?" The black-haired young man bowed again.
"I will be naming the heir to Synfal shortly."
"That is your right as regent."
"The heir will have his own saalmeister."
"That is his right."
"Halde," Anna repeated, adding slowly. "Everyone in Synfal
believes you are hardworking, good at the work of your job,
and honest. Most find you cold and difficult to talk to. I
promised you a good position if you worked hard and well, and
I will honor that promise." 
"All say you honor your word." Halde bowed his head.
"Halde… I have a request."
"Your word is my command."
Anna wanted to stamp her boots or slap the young saalmeister.
Instead, she forced a smile. "Herstat will be arriving to become
saalmeister. He will need your assistance to learn all he needs to
know about Synfal quickly. He would learn it in any case, but
your assistance would make matters easier." Anna waited.

"I will offer all assistance I can," promised Halde, his light gray
eyes meeting Anna's.
"My request is that you also learn from him. Watch how
Herstat talks to people, how he makes them feel good without
giving away what he must not." Anna's eyes focused on Halde,
and she emphasized the next words slightly. "If you will learn
from Herstat, if you work at knowing people as you know the
keep, then I will indeed reward you."
For the first time, Halde appeared uncertain, and his hand went
to the neatly trimmed dark beard. "Lady…"
"You have talent, Halde, and I need talent. But I need someone
who does not make people feel like tools. People need to feel
like people. That is not weakness; that is another skill." Anna
cleared her throat. She wasn't good at this sort of lecture, but
she was desperately short of people who were good at what
they did. "Do you understand?"
Halde nodded, then swallowed. "Might I ask… of the heir?"
"I'd ask you to say nothing until I make the announcement."
Halde nodded. "The heir will be Lord Jimbob. The past lords of
Defalk have been weakened because they didn't have enough
coin or lands. That left them unable to protect their people.
After the heir is named, I will not have any part in the
day-to-day running of Synfal. That will be up to you and
Herstat. Now, and when Lord Jimbob visits in the future, as he
will more frequently as he gets older, he will learn all he can."
Halde inclined his head. "In these times, few could fault your

decision. Some lords may rage behind their walls, but few will
say so where any can hear."
"What of those in Synfal?" asked Jecks.
"Already, it is clear that the regent is fair and just. That is rare
as well, and most call themselves fortunate."
"Most?" asked Anna.
Halde smiled ironically. "I have not found anyplace where all
agree, even in my father's house."
"Do you have any questions?"
"Do you know, lady, when I might expect this… Herstat?"
"Within the next two weeks, Halde. And no," she anticipated
the question, "I do not know how long he will need your
assistance. I do know that he is just and fair, and as kind as he
can afford to be."
"Thank you, lady." Halde bowed again.
"You may go, Halde. Thank you for all your help and hard
work. I do appreciate it." 
After the door closed, Hanfor shook his head. "He listened. I did
not think he would. You are a wonder, Lady Anna."
Anna just felt tired.
"What have you in mind?" asked Jecks.
"I need a saalmeister for Loiseau, and I need someone who can
put it back together so that it works without sorcery." She

reached for her goblet and took a long swallow of water. "I
hope he can learn. I'm asking a lot."
"He has skill," Hanfor added.
"But can he learn about people?" Anna turned to Jecks. "Was I
right about Herstat? I only have met him once."
Jecks smiled broadly and shook his head. "One would never
have guessed that. You described him well. At times, my lady,
you indeed astound me."
"Then, let's hope he can teach young Halde." Anna coughed.
Her chest still hurt when she did, but it was far more of an ache
than the stabbing pain it had been. "We'll need to draft a
proclamation or what-ever's necessary to grant the lands to
Jimbob…" Jecks nodded.
"We'd better talk to Jimbob, first, too, before he hears
something."
"I will get him." The white-haired lord walked swiftly from the
quarters.
Hanfor looked at her once the older lord had left.
"Am I risking disaster, Hanfor? Probably. Except that the
alternatives are worse. These lands are too old and too
traditional to give to you or someone else who isn't from an old
family in Defalk. If I hold them, it will make more lords
rebellious, and if I grant them to Jecks, it will be seen as a
scheme of some sort." She shrugged.
"When you speak that way, it does ring true." The veteran

coughed. "Will the power not affect the boy?"
"I'm going to try to stop that."
Hanfor nodded. His face went blank as Jecks returned with
Jimbob.
"Lady Anna?" The redhead bowed. "Grandsire said you needed
to speak to me."
"I do." Anna waited until the door closed. "You had asked the
other day who would inherit Synfal. Your grandsire said I
could not make an announcement immediately. Do you
remember that?"
"Yes, lady."
"I'm going to inform the heir," she continued with a smile, "and
I thought you should know."
Hanfor's eyes twinkled as Jimbob's face took on a puzzled
expression.
"Once you have the age and experience, these lands of Synfal
will be yours, along with those of Falcor, and eventually, I
would guess, those of Eldheld."
Jimbob's mouth almost opened. He swallowed.
"I would ask you not to speak of it. I will make the
announcements within the next few days." 
"Yes, lady."
Anna turned to face Jimbob, and her eyes fixed his. "I want to

make some things clear, Jimbob. First, while you will be the
lord of Synfal, the lands will be administered for you by
Herstat while you learn about them and everything else you
need to know. Second, your word, unless it is supported by
your grandsire or Herstat, is not yet law. Do you understand
that?"
Jimbob frowned. "Then why, Lady Anna, are you naming me
now?"
"To settle things as quickly as possible. And as smoothly. So the
people have a chance to get accustomed to you, and so that you
can learn what you need to know."
The red-haired boy nodded, as if he were unsure.
Anna looked from Jecks to Jimbob. "There are a couple of rules
I will insist on. Until you are of age, you will never contradict
Herstat or question his actions or judgments in any public
place. Nor will you question me or your grandsire in public
about what we have done. I expect you to ask questions-that's
one way of learning-but in private chambers, never where you
will be overheard." Her eyes went to the youth. "Is that clear?"
"Yes, lady."
"Second, if you strongly disagree with an action Herstat has
taken, you will talk first with your grandsire. If he feels it is
necessary, he will come to me. Third, you will keep in mind
that most people will do what's necessary if you make it clear
what needs to be done and that you respect them. They also
must respect you." Anna's eyes focused directly on Jimbob.

"Your sire and mother were respected, your mother especially,
because they knew what had to be done and how to do it.
Authority and power-or birthright-will never inspire true
respect. Knowledge, skill, understanding, and strength will.
You need to learn more of these. Herstat will help you learn
that, and to keep you from making too many mistakes."
"Yes, Lady Anna."
"I would only add one thing to what the Lady Anna has said,"
Jecks remarked. "By granting you Synfal, she has given you
the chance your sire never had. She has also given you even
greater power to destroy yourself." He grinned at his grandson.
"But if you look like you're going to try that, I am still not too
old to knock you back into your britches."
Jimbob swallowed. "I will do my best, grandsire… Lady
Anna…"
"You will do better than that, lad," said Jecks, the smile
vanishing. "You will do better than you think you can."
Jimbob glanced from Jecks to Hanfor to Anna, then back to
Jecks. Then he straightened his shoulders. "Yes, grandsire. Yes,
sire."
Anna suppressed a smile. "You may go, Jimbob. We'll talk
more about this once Herstat arrives."
"In the meantime," added Jecks, "not one word."
"No, sire."
Not more than a few moments after Jimbob left, after a heavy

thump on the door, Fhurgen peered inside. "A scroll for you,
lady, relayed by messenger from Falcor."
Hanfor slipped out of his chair and claimed the scroll from
Fhurgen, tendering it to Anna as the guard closed the door.
Anna glanced at the words. "Hadrenn?" she murmured. The
name was familiar, but he wasn't one of the Thirty-three of
Defalk. Then she wanted to shake her head at her stupidity. He
was one of the two fighting it out in Ebra. She opened the scroll
and began to read. After reading through it silently, she
repeated the key phrases to Jecks and Hanfor.
"… times have changed, and we of Ebra must change with
them or perish… I would propose an arrangement of mutual
benefit, pledging the lands of Synek, my ancestral lands, in
fealty to the regent and Regency of Defalk. In turn, if the
Regency could see fit to recognize me as one of the Thirty-three
when that would be appropriate…
"… maintaining such fealty will initially be most difficult…
particularly given the recent coins and arms provided by the
Liedfuhr of Mansuur to the usurper Bertmynn…
"… Ebra can no longer stand against the rest of Liedwahr, nor
should it… Synek, and in time, all of Ebra, would be most
benefited to share arms with Defalk…"
"He is begging for any sort of aid you are willing to provide,"
said Hanfor. "We have little to provide."
"There have always been thirty-three lords," Jecks said
deliberately. "Changing that might be difficult, especially in

these days."
"We don't change it," Anna said. "Cheor belongs to Jimbob,
right? Now, doesn't he count as the Lord of Falcor, and the
Overlord of Defalk?"
A smile crossed Hanfor's face, quickly vanishing, as he raised a
hand to cover a mock cough.
Jecks nodded, his lips crinkling into a smile as Anna continued.
"We actually lack at least one lord now. Also, if we grant
lordship to this Hadrenn, that might make it more difficult for
anyone else to claim lordship over Cheor."
"In theory, Lady Anna."
"Do we want to fight in three lands?" asked Hanfor.
"Why can't we get Hadrenn to fight there for us?" responded
Anna. "We can spare a little coin. We'll tell him that most of the
Thirty-three have paid between eight hundred and a thousand
golds a year in liedgeld, once their times of trouble have passed.
We'll promise help as we can, knowing that we must swim
together or sink separately." She wondered where she'd come
up with the last phrase. She didn't even like swimming. A
quizzical look passed across Jecks' face.
"Coins? How do we know he won't turn on us?" asked Hanfor.
"You buried part of his land in fire and molten rock, and
devastated the rivers. Yet now he would turn to you, and you
would send him coin?" 
"Right now, we don't know if he will be trustworthy.

Remember… I didn't oppose him, but his enemy the Evult.
And besides, he has nowhere else to turn, does he?" Anna shook
her head. "If he's asking us for coin,; I'd bet that this Bertmynn
is getting golds and weapons from some of our i other
friends-like Konsstin and maybe the Sturinnese. Why else
would 't Hadrenn turn to us? He can't have anywhere else to
turn."
"Can a mountain cat so cornered be trusted?" Hanfor touched
his trimmed but graying beard.
"It's a risk, but I'd think it's worth it. He's not going to invade
Defalk, not with Bertmynn knocking at his door to the east."
"I do not know," mused Jecks. "We know nothing of him."
Anna could see that nothing she said would make much
difference at i the moment. Instead, she stood, walked to the
chest where the lutar rested, and began tuning the instrument.
Then she stepped over to the mirror and lifted the lutar and
began to sing.
"Those in Stromwer strong, 
those who'd do me wrong now 
show them in this silver cast 
and make that vision well last…"
Even before the notes died away, an image filled the glass.
From what Anna could tell, well over two hundred large tents
clustered below the walls of Stromwer-or whatever Dencer
called his keep. A banner with a gold big-horned sheep or
something similar poised on a peak, backed in crimson, flew

from a pole amid the tents in what had to be a stiff breeze.
"Dumar-Ehara's banner," said Jecks. "Outside the walls. Dencer
does not fully trust so many armsmen."
Anna glanced at Hanfor, who stood and stepped forward,
peering at the image. After a time, he nodded, and she released
the spell.
"How many armsmen are there?" she asked.
"A hundredscore at least."
"Most are from Dumar?"
"It would seem so."
Anna raised the lutar again, and did the second spellsong.
"Those in Suhl so strong, 
those who'd do me wrong…"
The next image in the glass showed a second keep, of stone and
red brick. Below the keep's outer wall, nearly a dek from the
wall, hundreds of men labored at an earthwork-or a mound.
Beyond them milled several hundred lancers.
Anna snorted. She suspected another outsized crossbow would
be mounted there, or something similar, with the lancers for
distraction or cover.
"And here," she asked after releasing the spell.
"Twentyscore," suggested Hanfor.

Anna tried a third rendition, one for Lord Gylaron.
The image was equally clear-a gray stone keep with what
appeared to be catapults mounted on the walls, and with
armsmen on every wall.
Fighting lightheadedness, Anna set aside the lutar and reseated
herself, taking a swallow of water and crunching through two
already stale biscuits before she felt more steady. She still
wasn't back to normal, and the world didn't seem to want to let
her recover before rushing in on her.
At the same time, Anna wanted to smile. She was one small
woman who could do sorcery, a regent with perhaps three
hundred armsmen, and the three southern lords acted as
though she were the scourge of the earth-or Erde.
"Do you still want to turn down potential allies?" she asked.
"One that could not hurt us unless we were beyond help?"
"What do we gain?" asked Jecks.
Anna could see, once again, she was running against tradition.
Defalk had always been the thirty-three lords within their
mountain walls, and Jecks consciously or unconsciously was
resisting any change.
"In time, we eliminate forever an enemy to the east." That
seemed simple enough. If she could co-opt Ebra in time… and
do something about Dumar to stop the Sea-Priests. She shook
her head. What was she thinking? Just about trying to take
over large chunks of Liedwahr when they were practically
under siege from every side.

Hanfor nodded. "We have little to lose."
"If you think best," Jecks finally grudged.
"I'll write something, and then let you read it," Anna said. "You
would know better what phrases would work best." She offered
a smile, and got a faint one in return. Lord, politics again, even
with Jecks.
The white-haired lord nodded politely.
"We'll have to work out something to deal with Suhl," she said.
"That would be wisest," Jecks offered. "Something that will not
endanger you."
"I had figured on that." Anna coughed again. "Let's think about
that. I need to take care of some things. How about in another
glass or so?"
After they left, she looked at the closed door, wondering once
more how she'd ever gotten into the mess, or how everything
she did seemed to hurt the best people.
Life wasn't ever fair. By all rights, Daffyd, who'd been loyal,
supportive, and talented, should have been in charge of her
players. He and the players who had supported her early on
were all dead. Jecks' daughter Alasia should have been
planning the campaign that lay ahead, but she was dead. Lord
Hryding should still have held Flossbend, and Anna didn't dare
take the time even to investigate that mess.
In the meantime, at least, she could send a scroll to Flossbend,
reserving her right to name another administrator in place of

the bitchy Anientta for her spoiled son Jeron. That would keep
Anientta from causing too much trouble, for now, anyway. She
sighed, reaching for the parchment. At least, she could do that.
38
MANSUUS, MANSUUR
I have scrolls from both Nubara and from Rabyn," Konsstin
says wearily, his large right hand pushing a lock of
brown-and-silver hair off his forehead. "Would that Kestrin
were older."
Bassil nodded.
"I found Jyrllar too late, after Kandeth, and so my heir is
younger than Rabyn. Would that he will be more perceptive
and less vicious."
The younger man nods once more.
"What do you think they say?" Konsstin leans back in the
heavy silver chair, his eyes flicking toward the window to his
right, and the gray clouds that seem to hover not far beyond
the balcony.
"Neither is happy with the other?" suggests the raven-haired
officer in the lancer's maroon uniform.
"Brilliant! Absolutely brilliant." The Liedfuhr stands and lifts a
scroll from the slightly smeared polish of the walnut surface.
"The snake and the lizard, and they do not like each other."
"You feared this," Bassil says quietly.

"I feared it, and what we fear too often comes to pass. Is that
because we fear it, and that fear becomes embodied in our
lives?"
"That I could not say, sire."
"You repeat my words and refuse to offer judgment. How
judicious of you. Are you, too, becoming a courtier?"
"I would hope not, sire."
"You would hope not?" Konsstin laughs harshly. "What would
you advise, my dear advisor Bassil?" asks the Liedfuhr. "My
own sworn agent, the good Nubara, advises me, most
delicately, that my grandson is indeed the viper that his mother
was, except worse. My loving grandson informs me, most
properly, that his guardian is intent on assuming full rule in his
own name in Neserea, and that Nubara is a scaly lizard who
oozes oily charm to disguise his claws."
Bassil swallows.
"So what should I do?" Konsstin's voice is level. "What do you
advise, oh, forthright Bassil who would not hope to be a
courtier?"
After a long moment, the officer answers. "Let the two of them
make enough of a stew that the Neserean people will welcome
your presence."
"You would advise me to let the situation worsen?" Konsstin
sets down the scroll, and it rerolls itself and skitters off the desk.
The Liedfuhr ignores it, and his eyes burn down at the lancer

officer. "To let a poor situation worsen?''
A faint sheen coats Bassil's forehead, and he swallows. "Yes,
sire. If you take sides now, you are seen as interfering, and the
Neserean people will oppose you, as will either Nubara or
Rabyn, depending upon whom you back and how."
"So… I should do nothing for now?"
"Send each scrolls telling them that you believe that they
should work together to ensure the continuity of the line and
the stability of Neserea. Suggest that the growing presence of
the Sea-Priests means they should cooperate."
"You are more devious than Rabyn, Bassil," says Konsstin
almost lazily, glancing toward the drizzle outside for a
moment. "And what of Dumar in this dissonant mess?"
Bassil swallows again. "Ah… I would let the sorceress deal with
that."
"She lies wounded, and you would have her be our shield
against the Sea-Priests?"
"If you order the lancers south now, will they go? If they are
loyal to Rabyn, he would not wish that. Nor would Nubara, if
they are loyal to him. I have no better answer, sire."
"Nor I, Bassil." Konsstin smiles wickedly. "We will have to move
quickly, and before long. Convey my order to the third and
fifth lancers to be ready to leave Mansuus within the next three
weeks. Send a scroll to the eighth and tenth in Deleator
requesting that they stand ready."

"And the scrolls to the sorceress, the Council of Wei, and the
Matriarchy?"
"We will wait a little longer. Timing is everything, Bassil.
Everything." The Liedfuhr nods.
Bassil bows and departs.
In the growing dimness of his study, Konsstin turns back to
view the darkening storm.
39
ANNA wanted to wipe her forehead in the heat of the shuttered
quarters at Synfal. With the shutters closed, she got a brighter
image in the wall mirror, but she wished she had a reflecting
pool.
Stop wishing for what you don't have, and keep your thoughts on
the spell.
She and Jecks studied the image in the wall mirror. Hanfor held
a grease marker over a large section of heavy brown paper on
the table. The arms commander sketched rapidly, his eyes
darting from the mirror to the paper and back again.
"There is the mound where they would use their evil weapon,"
the white-haired lord pointed out.
"We're not going to get that close again." Anna's chest still
throbbed at times.
"What if we marched down this side road?" Jecks asked. "We
could come up on the flat here. The ground rises here, it looks

like."
"We would do well to stay farther north. I would not want to
have the horse too close to the ditches and the creek there,"
Hanfor pointed with his left hand momentarily, before he
continued sketching. Despite the heavy tunic, he looked cool
and composed.
Anna envied him. She felt overheated, sweaty, and bedraggled,
and it was barely midmorning.
"Then we could move across the lower side of the field," Jecks
suggested, as he glanced toward Hanfor.
The gray-haired veteran armsman nodded. "There would be
room to wheel, even if we were surprised."
"We'd better not be surprised," Anna interjected.
"It can happen," Jecks cautioned.
Anna supposed it could, but the idea behind using the mirror as
an aerial observer was to avoid such unpleasant surprises. She
held out a hand, feeling the heat building in the dense wooden
frame. "That's enough for now." She released the spell after she
spoke.
"I have much, but I have not all of it," Hanfor said.
"Later," she promised, opening the shutters, and standing in
front of the light breeze, then turning to let the air dry the
sweat-soaked back of her shirt.
"I am glad you thought of showing such an image on the

glass,"' Hanfor said. "Is it possible to do that in the field? Can
you do that without straining too much?"
"I would think so," Anna said, "if I don't have to hold the image
long. I'd be closer to what the mirror displays."
"She must use such skills far enough from the traitors that she
can regain her full strength before… confronting them." Jecks
coughed once, then turned to study what Hanfor had drawn.
Anna frowned as she realized that none of them had even
mentioned negotiating with Sargol, Gylaron, or Dencer. Her
eyes dropped to her linen shirt and the thin dressing beneath.
She didn't feel like negotiating or being charitable. She'd been
charitable to begin with, and it had gotten her nowhere with
the rebels.
She laughed, thinking that she sounded like one of the Vietnam
war-hawks that Avery had been so opposed to back in their
student days. Somehow, your perspective changed when you
were the target.
Jecks lifted his eyebrows, but Anna didn't enlighten him. She
didn't want to try to explain hawks or doves or Vietnam, even
in general terms. How could she explain a war where the
generals weren't allowed to be generals, where the side that
won lost almost all the battles, and how people Jecks would
have regarded as peasants forced an end to the fighting.
"How long before Herstat arrives?" she asked.
"Another few days. He will hasten."

Anna hoped so. There were too many things still left undone.
"Jimbob can remain here with Herstat and a small detachment."
Jecks frowned, then rubbed his chin. The hazel eyes grew
distant, almost glazed over as they did when he disapproved of
something but would not voice his disagreement.
"I did spell the entire hold for loyalty to the Regency," she
pointed out. "And it's farther from Neserea and Nordwei."
"It is closer to Sargol."
"None of them have armsmen beyond their own lands." Anna
shrugged. "If I fail, you can get to him sooner. If we both fail,
distance won't save him."
Hanfor continued to sketch from memory, not looking at the
lord and the regent.
After a silence, the hazel eyes refocused on Anna. "That is true."
Anna refrained from telling him that was what she'd said to
begin with. Why antagonize him? Besides, he was doing better
than most in accepting her as a person of intelligence in a
culture that automatically devalued women. She frowned
momentarily. Actually, over time, she hadn't done that badly
with those lords she'd been able to meet with, although she had
her doubts about Birfels and Nelmor. Then, that was always
the problem with prejudice. It was based on stereotypes, and
women were certainly stereotyped in Defalk, and kept out of
decision-making. Stereotyping was always easier when you
didn't work with people. Most of the people she'd had trouble
with in academia were those who'd never come to her recitals or

seen her direct her operas.
"How are we doing for bows and arrows?" Anna directed the
question at Hanfor.
"If we strip the armory here at Synfal, we can raise fivescore
uncertain bows," said Hanfor. "Very uncertain bows." 
"Just so they can get the arrows into the air strongly on
command. I hope that will be enough for Sargol. We'll need
more for Dencer." Anna stretched slightly, trying to lift the
damp cloth away from her skin.
"I would that we had a source for more blades." Hanfor paused,
as if he wished to ask a question.
"Yes?"
"I did wonder. You built a bridge…"
"Whether I could create blades through spells?" Anna frowned.
"I don't know. I hadn't thought about that. I was worried more
about Dencer."
"Dencer?" Jecks frowned.
"We have to find a way to take Stromwer quickly," Anna
answered. "There's no point in waiting. Dumar can pour more
ten times the armsmen we can raise into Defalk," Anna pointed
out. "They're less likely to do that if we hold the rebel keeps and
lands."
"And others will think twice about revolting," said Hanfor.
"That is true," Jecks mused. "Still…"

"I know. It's foolhardy," Anna answered. "Everything I do is
foolhardy. Attacking the Evult was foolish. It's just that
everything else would have been more foolish." Even as she said
the words, she wondered. Are, you right about that, really?
There's so much you still don't know. So; much. … As events
kept proving. She shrugged, trying to shift the slow-drying
linen-cotton shirt away from her skin, away from her shoulders
and back. The breeze helped, although it was moister than in
Falcor or Mencha.
"About the blades?" Hanfor suggested.
"I'll see what I might be able to do." That was all Anna could
promise. Theoretically, she could see no problem-but no one
else was creating blades through sorcery, that she knew of, or
that there was any record of, and when people didn't do things
that seemed obvious, there was, usually a reason. Unless it's
something no one thought of… or thought possible. But she
didn't know.
Anna moistened her lips. Another thing to add to her endless
lists try to create swords.
Hanfor stood and carefully rolled up his de facto map, then
bowed. "Have you any other need for me at the moment, Lady
Anna, Lord Jecks?"
"Not right now," Anna said.
Jecks shook his head.
With a last nod, Hanfor closed the heavy door behind him.

"Are you worried about this?" Anna gestured toward the blank
mirror that showed only a reflection of her quarters at
Synfal-the writing table, the chairs, the bed she'd rid of vermin
with sorcery. "Sargol, I mean?"
"I do not worry about Sargol. Nor even about Gylaron or
Dencer.
Lord Ehara and the Sea-Priests, they concern me." Jecks
scratched the back of his head momentarily. 
"What about them?" Anna pursued.
"Your former lords, they do not understand your power. They
deceive themselves. Even so, they do not wish to destroy
Defalk. Or Liedwahr." Jecks' lips turned into a crooked smile.
"The Sea-Priests would see as much destruction and death as
possible."
"I doubt they want to spend too many golds," Anna suggested.
"That does stand between us and all their ships and armsmen,"
Jecks admitted.
"I understood that they worry about Mansuur and Nordwei."
"Not about Mansuur. They could not conquer the Liedfuhr, but
he has few ships and less trade. The traders of the north have all
too many ships, and their council is mostly of women."
"So… the Sea-Priests can't afford to spend too many ships on
poor Dumar and Defalk?" questioned Anna.
"I do not know. I would think not. Have you any spell that
would show such?"

"No." Anna shook her head. "Getting a spell to show something
is still partly a matter of luck. I'm just trying to get a better feel
for things." Feel was about all she had sometimes. 
"If you do not need me…"
"Not right now. I need to think."
For a time after Jecks left, Anna sat at the writing table, looking
vacantly first at the empty sheets of brown writing paper and
then at the window, and the shutters. The shutters reminded
her of the house in Richmond, the one that had been perfect-for
all of three months-until Avery had decided they needed to
move so that he could be closer to New York. He'd only gotten
one role with the New York City Opera, not even the Met, but
that meant that the whole family had to move, and that had
meant she'd left the job with Eastern, one of the few places that
had treated her well.
Irenia had been eight then. Lord, had it been that long ago?
Now… she was dead, Mario was in Texas, and Elizabetta at
school in Atlanta. At least, she hoped her littlest redhead had
gone back to Emory-as her only letter across the worlds had
indicated.
Anna's eyes burned, and through the tears she saw the
black-edged rectangle on the stone wall of her quarters at
Falcor, the rectangle that proclaimed that even the most
powerful sorceress in Defalk couldn't see her daughter. Not
even as an image in a mirror or reflecting pool. Maybe later…
Brill said… But Brill was dead, too.

"Enough." She shook her head, and blotted her eyes. "I can do
this, I can."
She looked at the paper and lifted the grease marker. Almost a
glass later-and with one new spell roughed out-there was a thrap
on the door.
"The player Liende," announced Rickel, inclining his head. The
heavy strawberry-blond thatch did not move. 
Anna inclined her head and rose, waiting by the writing table.
The chief player stepped into the quarters and walked toward
Anna, then stopped and bowed. "Lady Anna."
"Liende." Anna smiled. "Thank you again. I'm almost fully
healed, and there won't be that much of a scar."
"You healed yourself."
"I know who helped." Anna shook her head. "Again."
"Alvar says that you ride again to battle. We would ride with
you.". Liende's voice was firm, if soft. "You are proud, lady.
Often too proud to ask."
That came of her French and Indian forebears, Anna suspected,
a though her Irish ancestors hadn't been known for their
humility. "I told you I wouldn't ask that of you. Alseta-"
"Without you, Alseta will have no future. Nor will I." The player
smiled apologetically. "If you fail, she will wear chains, or her
daughters will."
"Chains?" Anna murmured.

"All Liedwahr must know by now that Lord Ehara backs the
insurgent lords, and the golds of the Sea-Priests are behind
Ehara."
"And what does all Liedwahr know about Lord Ehara?" Anna
asked, adding quickly, "Remember I'm not from Liedwahr,
and people always think I know more than I do about things."
"Lady Siobion is his third consort, and his favorite for now.
Lady Gestorn he joined for her coins, and she perished of the
flux." Liendel snorted softly. "Lady Eligne-she had two
daughters. She drowned in a boating accident. Lady Siobion
bore him five sons in twice that many! years, and all are
healthy."
How healthy is Lady Siobion? "He sounds charming."
"By all accounts he is handsome and charming."
Anna nodded. "His image gives that impression."
"He is strong, and he would have Dumar be more than it has
been."
Another conqueror, another male ruler who thought that more
force would make things better. "There seem to be a lot of lords
like him in Liedwahr."
"There have been many." Liende's lips quirked momentarily.
"But few rulers like you willing to stop such. What would you
have of your players?"
Anna forced a smile in return. "I'd have nothing, if it were my

choice. It isn't. I'm going to try some things less catastrophic
than in the past. Some songs against spelled weapons and some
spells to make ours more effective. The tunes are simpler than
the building spells."
"That is good."
Anna wasn't sure. She'd have liked more harmony-it was
stronger, but she was no composer, and tunes that she had to
create from scratch were simpler, much simpler than those she
had been able to adapt. "Are you sure, Liende?"
"I would not see Alseta in chains, even gilded ones."
Anna could not argue that.
40
THE morning sun was already hot, and Anna could feel the
sweat oozing down her back as she glanced to the players,
arrayed well back from the wall across the middle of the fields
to the south of Synfal, to the straw figure on the wall a good
hundred yards away, and then to the archer standing beside
Hanfor.
"Liende?"
"We stand ready, Regent."
She gestured to Hanfor. "When I drop my arm…"
"Yes, Lady Anna."
She could sense Jecks standing perhaps a yard behind her,

waiting to see what the results of her demonstration might be.
Beside him stood Jimbob, shifting his weight from one foot to
the other.
"Go ahead." Anna looked to Liende.
The sound of strings, woodwinds, and the falk horn rose over
the fields, joined by Anna's voice.
"Arrowhead once in the air, 
turn and strike the target there-"
Anna dropped her hand, and the bowstring sang.
"-Strike the target on the wall, 
strike and make the target fall…"
With the last of her words, she watched the wall, having lost
sight of the arrow that she'd directed be aimed slightly away
from the target to ensure that the spell would indeed change
the arrow's course.
Abruptly, the straw figure toppled off the wall, transfixed with
the heavy shaft.
Anna smiled inadvertently. The spell worked; she could direct
arrowheads, and the shafts followed. More important, Anna
had neither headache nor double vision. So… she could use
spells directed only at inanimate objects, even if they affected
animate objects.
You're rationalizing like a lawyer… She didn't want to think too
much about that, though she knew she would, sooner or later.

She always did. 
Jimbob closed his mouth as Anna turned.
"I'm just working out what was used on me," she said, suddenly
conscious that the wound on her chest still ached slightly,
probably from tension.
"You have that reckoned," said Jecks with a slight laugh.
"Now, for the second test." Anna looked at Jecks.
"The forging one?"
"I'd like to know exactly what we can count on-or can't." She
turned toward where Fhurgen held Farinelli's reins. The gelding 
whuffed as she neared, as if to tell her that he'd be just as happy
to get out of the sun. His tail flicked at a fly that buzzed past
Anna.
"Do you think one test is enough?" Jecks inclined his head
toward the wall where an armsman reclaimed the target.
"For that, yes." She nodded as she climbed onto Farinelli,
waiting for Jimbob and Jecks to mount.
The three rode slowly back to Synfal, trailed by Fhurgen and
Rickel, and a squad of armsmen.
Bielttro, the thin-faced ostler, was waiting outside the stable
when they reined up inside the keep. "How was he, lady?"
"He was fine. I should have ridden farther, but that will come."
"He seems disappointed when you do not ride."

"He's been disappointed a lot lately." Anna laughed gently.
"You may take care of our mounts, Jimbob," Jecks said quietly
to the red-haired boy.
"Yes, ser."
Anna dismounted and led the gelding to his stall. There she
handed the lutar to Jecks, who set it aside. The muscles across
her upper chest and shoulder definitely twinged as she reached
for the saddle.
"My lady… you are not that recovered." Jecks stepped past her
and lifted the saddle, moving gracefully and quickly to rack it.
Farinelli turned his head, but did not protest.
Anna did give her mount a quick brushing before leaving the
stable and heading for the armory and the adjoining practice
yard. Jecks carried the lutar, and Anna didn't protest.
Hanfor was waiting in the shade of the eaves before the armory
door, an unsheathed blade in hand.
Anna took it, and almost dropped it, so much heavier was it
than it looked. "Is this a good blade?" She looked to Hanfor.
"It is a good blade for the average armsman."
Anna felt the weapon for a time, studied it, and finally returned
it. Then she reclaimed the lutar and began to tune it.
"It would be good if we could obtain blades," said Hanfor. "Yet
I know of no sorcerer who has created blades."

"There are many things she has created not seen before in
Liedwahr." Jecks smiled ironically.
Hanfor laughed. 
"I'm ready. Can you lean the blade against the wall there?"
The arms commander carefully propped the blade against a
niche in the bricks and stepped back.
Anna strummed the lutar, since she hadn't been able to create a
spell that went with the songs that the players already knew.
"With iron, carbon, and heat be met, 
metal heat and steel be set, 
forge this steel into a blade, 
as good as the finest ever made…"
Even before she finished the spell, a gray haze appeared beside
the first blade, a haze that solidified into a second blade, one
appearing nearly identical to the one Anna had modeled it
from, except that the hilt was metal, rather than leather
wrapped over a tang.
Hanfor lifted the new blade, hefted it. He frowned. "It doesn't
feel quite right. I cannot say why that might be." The arms
commander turned to Jecks. "Perhaps we could spar-just the
blades against each other."
"That might be best." Jecks lifted the original blade, leaving his
own in his scabbard at his waist.
Anna watched. While she couldn't tell the moves, she could
listen, and Jecks' big blade rang almost in its own true key,

while the one she had spellforged sounded somehow flat.
Abruptly, the new blade shattered, and chunks of metal rained
across the practice yard, and Hanfor staggered back, a line of
red across his cheek.
Jecks lowered his blade, brow furrowed, and stepped forward.
"Hanfor!" Anna ran toward him.
"It's just a scratch." The gray-bearded arms commander held
up the hilt with a smile. "I fear, Lady Anna, that your other
spells are more effective."
"It looks that way."
Theoretically, there was no reason why her spells couldn't forge
a blade. Maybe she didn't know enough about sword
construction or smithing to visualize the blade correctly. Or
metallurgy… or any one of a thousand things.
But why could she build bridges? Because stone was more
forgiving? Or because she'd seen enough bridges? Or because
of her design classes?
Again… background knowledge seemed to play an important
role in the effectiveness of visualization… and spells. And,
again, she really didn't know enough, not by a long shot.
41
JECKS stepped into the room, followed by Hanfor. "Lady
Anna, Herstat has arrived. He will be here in a few moments."
Jecks bowed, his eyes twinkling, as though to ask if she felt

ready to continue her internal revolution in Defalk, the
revolution that would be fueled by her efforts to grant young
Jimbob greater wealth and power than his predecessors.
Great… you're undertaking internal revolution while you've got
to put down an obvious revolt and threats of invasion. And you
still don't really know what you're doing-except it's already
taking a lot of sorcery, and you've barely started. It seemed so
strange. She was trying to give a ruler more power when she
came from a place where dictators and absolute rulers were
considered evil. Except feudal chaos is worse than a strong ruler.
She offered a pleasant smile. "Would you have Jimbob join us?"
"I would be most pleased." Jecks bowed slightly and left.
Anna wondered, if she used Synfal as a headquarters for much
longer, whether she should consider refurbishing the old throne
room. She shook her head.
Jimbob, Jecks, and Herstat arrived almost all together.
Herstat, an older, grayer, and stooped male version of his
daughter Dythya, bowed. "Lady Anna."
"Herstat, it's good to see you again." The regent offered a smile.
"I apologize for hijacking you from Lord Jecks and upsetting
your life."
"Both Lord Jecks and my daughter your counselor have
persuaded me that such minor upsets are to be far preferred
over the alternatives." Herstat offered a rueful smile.

"That may be," Anna admitted. "I'll be honest," she continued.
"I have two jobs for you here. One is long-term. One is much
shorter. The long-term job is to ensure that Synfal is well-run
and that Lord Jimbob understands every aspect of how it is
run. I will ensure he spends time here with you. At times, you
may have to come to Falcor. If you feel you have trouble with
him, then I expect you to let me know. If you cannot reach me,
let Lord Jecks know."
"Might I ask a question, Lady Anna?" asked Herstat.
"Please do."
"Much of this could be accomplished at Elheld." Herstat waited.
"You mean…" Anna shook her head. "I'm sorry. I'm afraid I
didn't explain this well. Lord Jecks is the lord of Elheld; Jimbob
will someday hold Elheld, but right now, he is the legal Lord of
Synfal. The people have to get used to him, and he has to
understand what is involved. You manage people well, and that
is something that he must learn…"
"You think too highly of me," Herstat protested.
"I know what people say, and what I feel." Anna looked at
Jimbob and then at Herstat. "There are a couple of rules I will
insist on. First, as I told you earlier, Jimbob, until you are of
age, you will never contradict Herstat or question his actions or
judgments in any public place. You can certainly ask
questions-that's how you learn-but only in private chambers,
never where you will be overheard." Her eyes went to the
youth. "Is that clear?" 

"Yes, lady." Jimbob nodded, the nod conveying that he
understood also that Anna wanted all parties to know the rules.
"Second, if you strongly disagree with an action Herstat has
taken, you will talk first with your grandsire. If he feels it is
necessary, he will come to me." Anna turned to Herstat. "You
may and should suggest actions to Lord Jimbob. If he fails to
learn skills or acts in a way that would hurt the holding, you, or
himself, you are to let Lord Jecks know immediately. If you feel
that Lord Jecks is unable to deal with the situation, you will
come to me. Is that clear?"
Herstat nodded. "Yes, lady."
Anna frowned. She really didn't want to tell Herstat how to
manage anything. He'd clearly done well enough. "The real
point of this arrangement is for you, Herstat, to help Jimbob
learn all the aspects of being a lord and landholder." She turned
to the redhead. "And to keep you from making too many
mistakes."
"Yes, Lady Anna."
"Finally, I don't expect you two to come to Lord Jecks or me
often." Anna offered a wry smile.
Herstat nodded. "I am at your wishes, lady."
"Yes, Lady Anna," said Jimbob earnestly.
"There's one last thing," Anna said. "No… no more sermons. It's
the acting saalmeister-Halde." Her eyes went to Herstat. "He
knows how the holding runs as well as anyone could. I've

directed him to give you every assistance, and when we're done
here, I'll formally introduce you. His problem is that he thinks
everyone is like he is. That is, he understands and does what is
necessary. I'm sure he gets impatient when people don't
understand, or don't want to do their jobs, and I suspect his first
thought is to punish. I've asked him to watch you, and learn,
and I'm going to ask you to offer quiet suggestions. I'd like to
use him elsewhere, but he needs to learn more about people."
Herstat half smiled. "You do not offer easy tasks, lady."
"No. None of our tasks are easy." She grinned at Jimbob. "Last
set of old people's sayings. Some people will try to flatter you,
to tell you how important you are." She paused, trying to come
up with the right words. "How important am I?"
"You… ? You are very important."
Anna waited.
"The most important person in Defalk, lady?"
She shrugged. "I don't know about that." She opened the green
shirt enough to show the still-purpled bruise and scar. "People
have tried to kill me, and they almost succeeded several times.
Do you know why they didn't, young Jimbob?" 
"You're too strong."
She shook her head. "I would have died three times, at least, if
people hadn't made a lot of effort to save me. I'm not perfect." Is
that an understatement! "But I was able to treat enough people
well enough that they cared. No one… no one," she repeated,

"is strong enough to survive without the help of others. You
have to learn how to make others want to help you. It's not
something you can order them to do. And even if you could,"
she finished, "how could they help you if you're too wounded or
tired or far away to give them orders?" She didn't know how
much, if any of it, Jimbob would retain, but she'd had to try.
After another short silence, she said, "Time to introduce Herstat
to Halde." And then to work out the last details of the violence
ahead.
She smiled, instead of taking the long deep sigh she felt like
taking. "I hope your trip wasn't too tiring, Herstat."
"No, Lady Anna. We missed the rains, or most of them."
"You were lucky," said Jimbob. "We got a whole sky full of
rain… for days."
Anna and Jecks locked eyes, and Jecks nodded almost
imperceptibly.
So far… so good. Until we have to meet Sargol, and Gylaron…
and Dencer.
One problem perhaps solved, and three more to go. Just about
the way her entire life had gone.
42
AFTER looking back at the solid bridge over the Synor, Anna
gave Farinelli a hearty thump on the neck. "We did a good job
there, fellow."

The gelding whuffed, as much of a mutter as anything else. "I
know. Bridges aren't your thing." She just hoped she'd be as
successful in dealing with the rebellious southern lords as she
had been in rebuilding bridges.
On the flat and dusty road eastward, empty once they were
more than a dek from the bridge, Anna shifted her weight in
the saddle. She hadn't been riding recently, and she was going
to be stiff again. She couldn't keep up with being in practice for
much of anything, it seemed. That aspect of her life hadn't
changed. It had been like that when she'd been teaching, and it
was worse in Liedwahr.
The road was wide enough for three riders, and Hanfor rode on
her left, silent, thoughts hidden behind blank eyes. 
"A solid piece of work, Lady Anna," agreed Jecks from the
chestnut he rode beside her.
"I wish I could do more. Too many of the roads and bridges…"
She shook her head. She could only do what she could do, and
that wasn't near enough.
"You will have time," Jecks promised.
Anna nodded, not convinced. She should have been able to
make blades, but the second and third trials had produced no
better results than the first. Maybe she just didn't have the right
feel for blades.
Her eyes flicked to the road ahead, the same road she'd ridden
weeks earlier, right into an ensorcelled crossbow bolt. This time,
she was better prepared, but so probably was Sargol-and

Gylaron and Dencer.
"Good hearty day," observed Jecks, half turning in the saddle
and then turning back, as though he'd belatedly realized that
Jimbob was not with them. "Not all that hot yet."
Anna blotted her forehead. She could hardly wait for weather
Jecks would call hot. Even with the Evult's drought clearly
broken, full summer was on its way, and it promised to be
hot-again. Even for Jecks.
Was there some connection between hot weather and war?
Good dry roads? Lack of illness and hunger?
A puff of dust appeared on the road ahead. As they rode on
eastward, Anna could make out the figures of a horse and cart.
"A peasant heading to market in Cheor, no doubt," suggested
Hanfor.
"There is no one behind him," Jecks said.
The column neared the distance until Anna could make out the
dusty figure of a man seated on the cart seat.
Abruptly, with a fearful glance toward the armed riders that
Anna led, the driver turned his single horse cart down a side
lane that was little more than a rutted path between fields filled
with green shoots. Anna didn't know the plants, but thought
they might be beans of some sort.
Dust puffed from under the waist-high wheels and from the
hoofs of the bony gray horse as the cart bounced southward
down the uneven lane and away from the Anna's force.

"Sargol has spread the word," said Hanfor dourly. "We are here
to destroy and pillage." His eyes followed the dust raised by the
farmer and his cart.
"Best we disappoint their expectations," growled Jecks. "Save
for Sargol himself."
"No pillaging," Anna said. "Destruction will be bad enough."
Hanfor nodded.
They rode eastward, not speaking, to the sound of hoofs on the
dusty clay.
43
ENCORA, RANUAK
THE Matriarch descends the wide polished limestone steps to
the floor of the Grain Exchange. Men and women standing
around the raised platform in the center watch the tally poles,
as the prices are changed periodically. Several glance toward
the round-faced and gray-haired woman in pale blue on the
stairs, their eyes alternating between the tally changes and the
Matriarch.
A tall thin woman in a sea-blue tunic and trousers steps to the
front of the platform, and a gong reverberates through the
high-ceilinged space, the tone echoing off the stone walls and
columns.
"Trading is temporarily suspended," she announces, "for this
visit of the Matriarch." She extends a hand in a vague gesture

toward the older woman. "We would not wish any to be
distracted or to lose coins by another's distraction."
"You are most kind, Abslim," answers the Matriarch as she
nears the head of the Exchange.
"What brings you to our humble Exchange?"
"Me? The harmonies, I suppose. I had heard rumors that the
Exchange was considering a surcharge on handling grain and
transactions that involved Defalk. I thought I would come to see
for myself."
A series of murmurs whisper across the polished white floor.
"The surcharge was begun yesterday. There is much unrest in
Defalk."
The Matriarch nods as she proceeds through and around the
traders and toward the trading platform at the south end of the
hall. "Are you imposing a surcharge on Ebra? Or Dumar? Or
Neserea?"
There is a moment of stillness.
"Not at the moment."
"Ebra has a civil war brewing and no central government.
Neserea has a struggle between an outside regent and an
underage lord. Dumar has accepted the presence of a
Sturinnese fleet. Do not those merit consideration?"
"We will consider such."

"Ah… Abslim… why does the Exchange deal so harshly with
Defalk?"
Abslim squares her shoulders. Finally, she speaks. "Is it not true
that the sorceress continues the old ways in Defalk? She has
announced that the new heir to Synfal will be young Lord
Jimbob. She has not allowed any of the consorts to dead lords
to become full noble holders in their own rights, but only
administrators for male heirs." The tall and thin woman in
sea-blue tunic and trousers smiles coldly across the floor of the
Exchange. "This lady Anna may be a woman, but she has done
little or nothing for women." 
"That may be, although I would suspect you have not stated all
that has occurred. Still," muses the Matriarch theatrically, as
she steps from the trading floor to the platform, "what has the
sorceress to do with the cost of transactions involving Defalk?"
"It raises their costs," answers Abslim. "Because you are the
Matriarch, we have acceded to your request to allow normal
credit to the lords of southern Defalk. Now we find that they
are in revolt against the very regent who has guaranteed that
such loans would be repaid."
"She never guaranteed more than repayment of past debts,"
answers the round-faced Matriarch quietly, yet her voice
carries, and the whispers die. "She has repaid half of a debt she
did not incur. How does that make her responsible for
guaranteeing the debts of those who rise against her?"
"She is the Regent of Defalk."

"There is no authority in Ebra, but you have no surcharge
there," points out the Matriarch. "You have oft said that the
price itself knows the problems of trade. Why have you
changed that?"
There is no answer.
"Abslim, what do you desire?"
"I desire that the Matriarch use her power and the harmonies to
improve the lot of women throughout Defalk, not to impose her
wishes through the Exchange."
"You are imposing your wishes through the Exchange.
Banning further loans to Defalk reflected your wishes. Or those
of the SouthWomen." The Matriarch smiles.
"The marketplace is always right," says Abslim.
The Matriarch shakes her head. "The prices set by the market
are right, in the end, but that does not mean you or the traders
are right." A gentle smile follows. "You know that, and so do
the harmonies." She turns. "I have said what I will say."
The whispers on trading floor remain low until the round-faced
Matriarch has climbed the stairs and vanished.
Abslim's face remains as cold as the limestone columns, long
after trading resumes.
44
The dusty road wound around yet another orchard-covered
hill, with a narrow strip of bean fields separating road and

orchard. The fields appeared to have been recently tended, but
nothing moved in the still morning air, warm already, with the
sun barely above the trees and low hills.
The road was empty as well. It had been all the way from
Cheor, expect for an occasional dog, one or two farm carts that
vanished upon seeing the riders, and a handful of older women
in the fields, most of whom slipped out of sight behind trees or
hedgerows once the riders appeared.
Anna sipped the last drops from her second water bottle, then
replaced it in the holder. She readjusted the uncomfortable
breastplate, hoping she wouldn't need it, but knowing that she
should get used to wearing it. Under the light armor that rested
too heavily on her, the scar from the crossbow bolt still itched,
and the itching was worse because the plate made her sweat
more. The slash on her arm itched as well.
"Glories of warfare, Liedwahr style," she murmured, half
wondering, far from the first time, how a singer who'd hated
fantasy had ended up in a world with two small moons, music
magic, and medieval warfare. "God, or the harmonies, have a
nasty sense of humor."
"Pardon, Lady Anna?" asked Jecks.
"Nothing, Lord Jecks. I was just muttering to myself." As you
find you're doing more and more.
Jecks nodded, but did not pursue the conversation. Riding
beside Jecks, Hanfor studied his map, and occasionally spoke to
the riders who shuttled messages to and from the scouts.

The sorceress slowed Farinelli as they neared a brick marker-a
road-stone that read, "Osuyl-2 d." She peered eastward, but
could see nothing except those scouts who rode almost a dek
ahead and the fields which slanted gradually upward and
ended in a rise about a dek away. Osuyl had to be beyond the
low hill.
When the column halted, so did some of the scouts, while a
single rider eased over the rise and out of sight along the road
toward Osuyl.
"How far to Suhl?" asked Jecks.
"Four deks beyond Osuyl, from what we figured, and more to
the south," said Hanfor.
"Time for the mirror," Anna said. The intelligence would be
valuable, and she wanted time to eat and recover after using it.
She reined up and waited until she was sure Hanfor had
signaled Alvar and gotten the arms-men to halt in reasonable
order.
Then she dismounted and extracted the mirror from its padded
leather case atop her saddlebags. Next came the lutar. 
A good thing you don't travel heavy, she reflected as she tuned
the instrument.
Finally, she glanced at Jecks, then Hanfor. "Ready?"
They both nodded, Jecks first.
Her fingers touched the strings, and she began the spellsong.

"Those in Suhl so strong, 
those who'd do me wrong…"
The image in the mirror on the roadside grass was clear. On the
mound she had discovered weeks earlier was a huge crossbow,
unattended and attached to a log frame set into the ground.
Below the vacant summit in the meadow between the keep and
the mound were more than a score of tents. Several strings of
mounts were lined up, as though on some form of tieline, to the
north of the tents.
Anna frowned. Weren't they keeping tabs on her? Sargol's
forces seemed almost relaxed. What did that mean? She
glanced at Hanfor and Jecks. Jecks smiled faintly, but did not
speak.
"They have something else planned, I would say, Lady Anna,"
Hanfor suggested.
Anna released the spell, then set down the lutar and took a long
swallow of water from one of the remaining bottles.
"They do not have many armsmen on guard," mused Hanfor.
"I do not like that."
Neither did Anna, even if it happened to be early in the day.
Setting aside the water bottle, she tried the second spell,
ignoring the line of hot and dusty armsmen who lined the road,
waiting on equally hot and dusty mounts under a sun getting
hotter each moment.
"Danger from Suhl, danger near, 
show me that danger bright and clear…"

The next image in the glass was that of fields and a road similar
to the one that stretched before them to Osuyl. Orchards
crowned the low hills to either side of the road. Anna squinted,
trying to discover… something.
"There," murmured Jecks. "The soil is different."
Anna followed his finger, as did Hanfor.
"Pits… stakes."
"Blinds there, I'd wager. Archers." Jecks shook his head. "Signs
of mounts there."
"Is it just my imagination," Anna asked, "or are there traps all
along the direct route to Suhl?"
"That is what your glass shows," Hanfor pointed out. "They will
have scouts on all the main roads."
"Main roads?" Anna had already noted the lack of the wider
roads throughout Defalk. "Is there another one?" 
"There is but one," conceded Hanfor. "They will have scouts on
the larger lanes as well."
With his patient tone, Anna felt small. "I'm sorry. I'm feeling
bitchy." Who wouldn't riding for days after a lord who's tried to
kill you and who's probably got ambushes everywhere?
A quick frown passed across Jecks' face, and Hanfor showed no
expression at all, both indications that regents weren't supposed
to admit bitchiness in public.
Feeling the heat from the glass, and seeing the grass next to the

frame begin to brown, Anna released the spell, then blotted her
forehead, and searched for the water bottle.
After drinking, Anna decided to try again.
"Show me now and show me clear 
the way to avoid this danger near… 
Like a vision, like a map or plot…"
The mirror remained blank. Anna frowned. Jecks and Hanfor
exchanged glances.
The mirror couldn't advise? It could only display. What about
showing a lane without armsmen? Would it do that?
"Let's try something else." Anna tried to get the words in her
mind. Of course, there's no simple way to do it.
She could sense the impatience of the riders waiting in the hot
sun, yet she had to find a way to keep them out of an ambush.
"Show me now and show me clear 
a lane to Suhl without armsmen near, 
Like a vision, like a map or plot…"
This time the glass showed an image-of a lane leading from a
group of buildings-Osuyl?-down a lane that branched to the
north of the main clay road. The lane swung around one hill
and then swung south uphill through a few small hovels and
then down another lane and through an older and neglected
orchard. Beyond the orchard was an open field just to the
northeast of the mound containing the enchanted crossbow.

"There are some hovels along this route, but there are no signs
of armsmen," noted Jecks. "Not now."
"They will find us soon enough." Hanfor had out the
greasemarker and was sketching the route rapidly on his map.
Anna broke the spell, and the image faded. She walked back to
Farinelli. She was faintly light-headed, and that bothered her.
Three biscuits and several chunks of cheese later, she looked at
Jecks and Hanfor. "If we find that lane, can we get to the field
and get set up before they charge us?" she asked Jecks and
Hanfor.
"We will find it," averred Hanfor. "It is not far ahead." He
turned his mount to the armsman beside him. "Tell the scouts
to look for a lane to the left of the road. It will be shortly past
the hill crest. We will take that if they find no signs of mounted
armsmen."
"A lane to the left past the hill crest. Yes, ser." The armsman
spurred his mount into an easy canter.
Hanfor shook his head. "I hope your glass is true, and none
lurk in the orchards beside the lane."
"So do I," Anna said. "It's been right so far. How much time will
we have?"
"They will not charge at first," said Jecks. "They will want you
to attack. Even from the field below that orchard you will be
too far from that infernal device. If they do charge, it will take a
half glass for them to assemble."

Anna wasn't so sure that Lord Sargol would be that slow, and it
wasn't something she intended to leave to chance. She nodded
to the two and walked back past her personal guards until she
reached Liende and the players.
"Lady Anna."
"We're getting close. I'd guess about a glass. We may not have
much time to prepare." Anna shrugged. "Jecks thinks we will. I
don't know. I'd like to start with the long flame spell."
"The long flame spell-the one against their weapons?" Liende
leaned forward in her saddle, then had to brush a lock of white
hair back off her forehead.
Anna nodded, wondering if Liende were graying so quickly
because of the magic, if all players and sorcerers-except
her-died young in Liedwahr. She certainly hadn't run across
any old sorcerers. She wanted to laugh. Liedwahr was a violent
and primitive place, and she hadn't run across many old people
of any occupation, except for a handful of lords and ladies.
"What will be the second spell?" asked the head player.
"The first arrow song… I think." Anna didn't shrug, though she
wanted to. How would matters go after the first spell? She had
no idea.
"Players!" Liende's voice rose over the murmurs of the
armsmen.
"Green company!" called Hanfor.
"Purple company!"

"Gray company!"
Anna coughed as she walked back to Farinelli and remounted
in the dust that sifted around her as the light wind shifted.
Once in the saddle, she groped for the third water bottle. Four
bottles-they probably wouldn't be enough, and Jecks thought
the weather was pleasant!
After riding a hundred yards, she was out of the worst of the
dust and had managed to clear her throat. Dusty horseback
travel didn't always agree with spellsinging, but at times not
much did. 
With scouts moving over the rise and out of sight, they rode
slowly eastward along the road that sloped gently upward. The
tops of trees with pale green leaves appeared to the south, their
trunks hidden by the crest of the hill that held another bean
field.
"The first lane should be about five hundred yards ahead,"
suggested Hanfor, "on the left just over the rise and beyond the
orchard."
Anna peered from the saddle, absently patting Farinelli.
Hanfor was right. A narrow lane, barely wide enough for two
mounts, ran through the bean fields across from the orchard.
Two of the scouts waited. The others had started down the lane,
distant dark blots between the fields and scattered hedgerows.
"To the left. Down the lane. Take the shoulders. Four abreast!"
ordered the arms commander. As the orders were repeated by
Alvar and the subofficers, he leaned toward Anna. "We don't

want to be too strung out." He shrugged. "Some of the fields
may suffer."
"Better the fields than us," Jecks concurred.
Anna merely nodded, her eyes on the dusty lane, her thoughts
on the spells she would have to use, and the notes that held
them.
For another dek or more, they followed the lane over and
around the low hills, moving more and more southward.
Though she strained, Anna could see nothing except fields, the
few scattered orchards, the lane itself, and dust.
"That looks like the next turning point," Anna said, pointing
down the lane past the end of the fields. Four hovels or small
houses stood at varying distances from where the two lanes
crossed. Around the houses were gardens, and pens made of
rough-trimmed branches. The pens were empty.
A scout waited at the crossroads; the others had taken each of
the roads.
"We should head due south again at that crossroads," said
Hanfor, glancing from his rough map, then nodding at the
messenger riding beside him.
"Tell them to scout the south road, ser?"
Hanfor nodded.
"Yes, ser." The messenger rode ahead of the column toward the
tiny hamlet and the single waiting scout.

"Over the next rise is an orchard," Anna recalled, "and then a
higher field that overlooks that mound."
"Ready arms," ordered Hanfor, and Alvar echoed him. The
muted orders passed back along the column.
"No one around," said Jecks as they neared the crossroads and
the small houses.
Anna could feel and see that.
The thatched roof on the first house on the left sagged so much
that one side held a small pool of rain water. A dusty black dog
scurried down the side lane, to the north, as if the canine knew
the riders were headed south. The rear door to the cottage
swung in the hot breeze. On the woodpile by the door, in the
narrow band of shade cast by the overhanging eaves, crouched
a black and white cat. 
"Boots in the dust," said Hanfor. "Less than a glass old. Work
boots. No mounts."
"They were warned," said Jecks.
Anna didn't mind the people being warned. She did mind the
stories that had caused people to flee their homes in fright, even
terror.
At the small crossroads, if where two lanes intersected were
indeed a crossroads, the column turned south.
Anna stood in the saddle and turned. "Liende… it won't be that
long. Tell the players to get ready. We won't have much time
when we get to where we can see Suhl."

"Yes, Lady Anna," said the head player, nodding her head as
she did before turning to those who rode behind her. "Make
ready. The long flame song will be the first spell."
Once the column passed the houses, Fhurgen eased his mount
up behind and closer to Anna. "Lady Anna?" The
black-bearded armsman's voice rose above the clamor. "Should
we not lead?"
Anna supposed-no, she knew-that at least some of her guards
should precede her. "A few, Fhurgen, but I have to be able to
see."
"Then I will lead, and Rickel will flank you." Fhurgen was
counting on Jecks to cover her right. The guard swung his
mount around and quicktrotted to the fore.
The strawberry-blond and broad-shouldered Rickel eased his
sorrel up beside Anna. Jecks slipped his blade from its
scabbard, examining it as they rode southward.
"Lord Jecks?" asked Anna.
Jecks nodded.
"Is there any reason why some keeps have their own names,
and some have the name of the town?"
The white-haired lord cocked his head for a moment, then
smiled ruefully. "I do not know… save that Elheld was a keep
long after Elhi was a town."
"So… you think that the older holdings have the town name
because they grew together?"

"Mayhap… but Synfal was a keep before Cheor was much
beyond mud hovels." He grinned.
Anna had to grin back. Some things you couldn't explain. Her
grin faded as she glanced back and saw the column of dust.
Surely, someone from Suhl had seen them.
Anna cleared her throat and tried a vocalise. "Holly-lolly,
polly-pop…" Less than a half-dozen notes into the exercise, she
half coughed, half choked on mucus. After clearing her throat,
finding the water bottle, and taking a small swallow, she
started again.
Lord… is it going to be one of those times? 
One of those times it was. Her voice kept cracking, and she
couldn't seem to clear her cords. Anna rode and kept doing
vocalises, half aware that they were passing through bean fields
and fields with sprouts too low for her to identify. Every so
often, she had to moisten her mouth and get rid of the dust.
After a half-glass-or longer-she felt better, well enough to
handle the spells she had planned.
Another orchard appeared ahead, and the lane split the trees.
On the right of the road, the trees sprawled to the west for a
dek or more. On the left were only scattered handfuls of the old
and gnarled apple trees. The ground beneath the orchard's trees
bore the trace of tattered white apple blossoms, and the faintest
scent of the fallen flowers. The leaves were already cloaking the
old and twisted branches.
"Suhl's beyond this," Anna said.

Hanfor nodded. "The scouts have seen it. No one is coming this
way."
"Not yet."
The high field Anna had first seen in the glass spread out below
the rise where she reined up, the main bulk of the orchard to
her right, a few trees and mainly fields to her left. The wide
meadow in the valley held a man-made mound that
commanded the main road that split the valley. That main road
ran perpendicular to the lane that Anna and her forces had
taken.
"No armsmen on the hills to either side, ser," panted another
messenger, drawing up beside Hanfor. "There's a galloping lot
of them coming up on the other side of the valley, where this
lane would lead, if'n we'd taken it farther. They look to be a dek
back, almost like they're a'waitin', ser. They've got a different
banner."
"Another joins Sargol's cause," opined Jecks. "Gylaron, I would
wager. He is shrewd."
"Fighting on someone else's land?"
Jecks nodded, checking his blade again.
Beyond the mound, on the rise across the low valley, hulked
Suhl, a thick-walled and square keep of dull red brick and gray
stone. Below the keep was a welter of tents, and mounts
tethered in long lines.
A horn sounded, and dust began to rise as riders scrambled for

their mounts.
"They didn't expect us to come this way," said Jecks.
Why not? Anna wondered. Or were back roads too dangerous,
because they were narrow and forces could be trapped? She
shook her head. She was too slow. Talking was wasting time.
"Players!"
"Yes, Lady Anna?" called Liende.
"A quick warm-up, and then the long flame song."
"Way for the players! Way for the players!" shouted Fhurgen.
"Green company to the fore!"
The players spilled off their mounts and onto the ground,
arrayed facing the valley and the mound.
Anna dismounted, clearing her throat, and going through a last
vocalise as the players straggled through a warm-up. 
"Together. We must play together, else we die separately."
Why does that sentiment come up so many places? Anna
wondered absently even as she looked to Liende. "Ready?"
"We stand ready." Liende gestured, and the warm-up stopped.
"The flame song. On my mark."
"Go!" Anna tried to ignore the sound of horses, of both her
forces and those of Sargol and of Hanfor's terse orders,
concentrating instead on the notes and the spell she would sing.
"Mark now!" called Liende.

Anna waited for a moment, then began.
"Fill with fire, fill with flame 
Those weapons spelled against my name 
Turn to ash all tools spelled against my face 
and those who seek by force the regency to replace.
"Fill with fire, fill with flame…"
The line of fire exploding across the south, across the valley,
even across the walls of Suhl, seemed almost endless.
Anna just stood, light-headed, dizzy, nauseated, as her words
and the music ended.
Even the mounts, Farinelli included, remained still as though
stunned, but only for a moment.
Fhurgen pressed her water bottle on her. "You must drink,
Lady Anna."
She drank, mechanically, her eyes blurring, not sure she
wanted to look out across the valley, where she could already
hear cries and screams and moans.
"Sargol has yet hundreds of armsmen. His captains are rallying
them," Hanfor noted, easing his mount up beside the sorceress.
"Where are our archers?"
"Our bowmen are ready, as ready as necessary. So is the
trumpet."
Anna frowned. "Will the arrows carry to the tents or the keep?"

"We can take the hill the scoundrel raised. You have cleared the
path to it, if we hasten," Jecks said. "Will that help?"
Anna nodded, then said, "Yes." The height would help carry
her voice and the player's support. "Can we put the bowmen
there, too?"
"We can manage that. Only a handful of their armsmen
remain there." Hanfor turned. "Alvar! The Green
Company-take the mound."
"Ser! Green Company… Green Company…"
Anna turned to Liende. "We'll have to remount, and ride to the
mound."
"Mount and ride. Follow the regent." Liende had already
slipped her horn into its case. "Now. We must remount and
play again."
Another ragged trumpet sounded. From across the valley to the
west came the sound of riders, hoofs, harnesses. 
"Those are not Sargol's," Jecks said. "Leronese lancers."
"From Gylaron?" Anna struggled into the saddle and urged
Farinelli downhill. Rickel eased his mount beside her, and
Fhurgen led the way, following the three companies that swept
down the low hill.
Anna shrugged to herself. She'd thought all along that they'd
have to defeat all three lords. She coughed and spat out more
mucus, hoping her asthma wouldn't act up too badly.
A faint smell of burning flesh drifted with the dust into her

nostrils, and she pushed aside the sensation. Beyond the mound
were dark lumps across the low green grass, hundreds of dark
lumps. Some moved. Most did not.
Anna swallowed, and put the thoughts out of her mind.
Sympathy, concern, those would have to wait. She
concentrated on riding, on staying close to her charging
armsmen, although it seemed less than a handful of mounted
figures even remained of those that had been riding toward her
1 forces. That handful turned back toward the tents.
Reaching the mound took little time, and Anna reined up,
finding she was panting slightly. Holding her breath? That
wasn't good. She forced herself to breathe easily and deeply,
but not too deeply.
"Dismount!" ordered Liende as the players rode up behind
Anna. "Your pleasure, Lady Anna?"
Anna frowned. What spell? What did she need? Then she
looked west, at the oncoming lancers.
"The arrow spell." That shouldn't take that much effort, and she
needed to husband her strength, shaky as she was after the first
spell.
"Arrow spell. Warm-up."
Again, horns and strings tumbled out of cases, and Fhurgen's
men grabbed reins and gathered players' mounts.
Anna eased out of the saddle and toward the players, who
stood in the middle of the mound. To the south of the mound

where she stood were a handful of foot levies, forming up
beside the tents below the keep of Suhl, and a scattering of
Suhlan mounted armsmen. To the west, drawing up in ragged
order, were the lines of Leronese lancers. They had also taken a
less direct route to the battlefield, or that might have been the
shortest way from Lerona. Joining them were another group of
lancers, nearly two score under a crimson banner.
Anna shook her head. Again, someone else was paying for the
games of the damned chauvinistic lords-but Sargol was
nowhere in sight, not surprisingly.
"Which forces, lady?" asked Hanfor.
"The Leronese, I guess." She looked at the arms commander.
"What do you think?"
"The Leronese are the threat. And the red lancers. They must be
from Dumar. You have felled most of Sargol's lancers in the
valley. His levies gathered by the keep could not reach here
soon. He may have others in the keep, but they are not a
threat."
Not yet. "When I signal-I'll drop my hand-can you have our
archers loose their arrows toward the Leronese?"
"That. That we can do." Hanfor turned in the saddle. "Bowmen!
To the west, to the lancers. Nock your arrows."
Anna cleared her throat, then gestured to Liende. "Once
through- the first arrow song."
As the music rose, in tune, she began to sing.

"These arrows shot into the air, 
the head of each must strike one armsmen 
there with force and speed to kill them all, 
all those who stand against our call!"
Anna dropped her hand, aware that a humming or thrumming
sound vibrated somewhere before her.
"These arrows shot into the air…"
As the music and her words ended, she half smiled, pleased that
she wasn't dizzy or light-headed, then looked at Hanfor,
consciously avoiding a glance toward the lancers.
"If you could do another," he suggested, his eyes flicking
toward the west.
Anna could hear hoofbeats. She glanced toward her chief
player. "Liende? Can you and the players manage the arrow
spell again?"
"We can, Regent." Liende turned. "Players! The arrow spell
again. At my mark."
Anna nodded.
"Mark."
With the second release of arrows, and the end of the spell,
Anna felt a brief light-headedness. She glanced toward Hanfor.
He smiled grimly. "A handful remain, and they have turned
back to the west, on their way back to Gylaron."

That's what we hope, anyway. Anna slouched toward Farinelli,
absently patting him before extracting the water bottle and
drinking deeply.
"Do not forget to eat, lady," suggested Fhurgen.
To eat-a good idea. She fumbled out another stale biscuit and
slowly chewed, moistening her mouth. Then she glanced
southward. The gates of Suhl stood ajar, and men and horses
straggled through them, leaving tents on the flat empty.
Dozens of mounts walked riderless across the flat. Some grazed
amid the dark lumps of death. Anna looked, blankly, and ate.
After a time, she turned and looked at the squat timber
framework that held a burned and broken crossbow,
wondering who had broken it. Hanfor? Fhurgen? Someone
else? Did it matter? She ate another biscuit, sipped more water. 
Jecks eased his mount nearer, stopping next to where Fhurgen
sat mounted, holding Farinelli's reins. He looked down at the
dusty sorceress. "They retreat behind their walls."
The sorceress glanced south.
A lone individual hobbled toward the keep, behind the others,
squeezing inside before the iron-banded timbered gates swung
closed.
For a moment, Anna closed her eyes. Then she turned. Liende
sat on the dirt, limp. Most of the other players slumped in
similar positions. Kaseth lay stretched out, eyes closed, his white
head on a folded blanket, his breathing ragged. Delvor looked
whiter than snow, and seemed to sway as he looked at Anna,

then glanced hurriedly away. Even Liende's eyes were glazed.
Her players were more spent than she was. Then, after a
fashion, she'd trained harder than they had. Still, she hadn't
even considered what all the playing of spellsongs would do to
do them. She just hadn't worked with players for extended
spells under stress, and her inexperience showed through.
Again.
"Fhurgen! They need food, water."
Anna wondered. This was the first time her players looked as
exhausted as she felt. She snorted, almost to herself. They'd
never played so many spells so long and so close-nor ridden
across a valley in between sets.
As her guards went to work, Anna turned back to survey the
keep. After a time, she turned to Jecks. "Can we ask Sargol to
surrender?"
"You cannot pardon him," Jecks said. "He tried to kill you, and
he has raised his banner against you. If you offer him a pardon,
what will you do to Gylaron or Dencer?"
"And we just can't sit here and beseige him, right?" She already
knew the answer to that one. She had no siege engines, no
wealth of supplies, and only a few hundred armsmen that she
couldn't afford to tie up all summer waiting around Sargol's
keep.
"I do not see how."
"What if we offer mercy to his family and retainers?"

"That would not hurt." Jecks' smile was cold. "He will refuse,
because he does not know your strength. Nor will any man of
Defalk surrender to a sorceress."
Not to a mere woman… is that it? "Send someone to offer
mercy to his family and retainers and the armsmen who
remain-but not to Sargol."
Jecks turned his mount toward Alvar and Hanfor. "We can but
try."
Anna watched as the three talked. Alvar gestured and Hanfor
beckoned. Two armsmen, one bearing a battle trumpet, joined
the three, then rode toward the silent walls of Suhl.
The trumpeter sounded a call, wavering across the afternoon.
After a time, it was repeated.
Anna didn't see anyone appear on the wall, but the armsman
with the trumpeter called out a message. Anna caught enough
of the words.
" '… offer mercy to all but Lord Sargol… ' "
Even Anna didn't miss the scattered arrows that were the
response, or the hurried retreat of the de facto herald.
Jecks rode back to Anna.
She looked up. "I saw."
"He does not believe that you can touch him within his walls."
Jecks paused. "You have not torched the fields or orchards. He
would think that weakness."

Weakness? Why would I set fire to- "Oh…"
Jecks sat astride the warhorse, waiting.
Again, Anna had the feeling of being in a totally alien culture.
Without cannon, without siege engines, a lord could remain
within walls for weeks-or seasons. The only damage an invader
could do would be to the crops and the followers outside the
walls. What was common sense to Anna became weakness to a
rebel lord.
Anna nodded slowly. "I need to think." She patted Farinelli
absently.
Jecks turned his mount back toward Hanfor, and Anna studied
the walls of Suhl once more, her thoughts spinning.
She didn't have the manpower or the time to put Suhl under
siege- not with Dencer and Gylaron left to deal with-and Sargol
knew that. She didn't want to use the standard tactic of
burning the fields and murdering all the productive peasants or
serfs. Defalk had suffered enough, and her goal was to
build-not to destroy. Not to destroy the common people, you
mean. You wouldn't mind taking down a few chauvinistic lords.
What else could she do? She hated relying on sorcery so
heavily, but she didn't have thousands of armsmen, nor
cannon, nor siege engines, nor… What she didn't have was far
more than what she had.
A glass later, the gates of Suhl remained closed, iron-banded
and dark, without word or signal. Anna glanced toward Liende
and the players. They looked tired, but all appeared well.

"What will you?" asked Jecks. "Sargol lies behind the walls, and
he has refused your offer."
The sorceress just looked at the older lord. Jecks had been right,
but it didn't make matters any better.
Jecks looked away, and for the moment, Anna didn't care. She
might later, and then again, she might not. For some reason,
she recalled his reaction to the ballroom in Cheor. Dancing, so
innocent, even with the harmonies of Liedwahr, yet Jecks had
found it blasphemous, or dissonant. So had Alvar, though the
younger officer had been more temperate in his words.
Her eyes went to Hanfor. "Can we leave Suhl behind us?"
"After this?" he asked ironically, gesturing down the mound at
the heaps of dead armsmen and mounts, and the handfuls of
still-wandering mounts. 
Anna understood. In for a copper, in for a silver, or some such.
Better to get it over with, better to do it before she thought,
before she felt. With a long and slow deep breath, she began to
walk toward Liende.
"I'm going to try to reach Lord Sargol with an arrow spell.
Would you get the players ready?"
"We will ready ourselves."
Next, she needed Hanfor, but he was already riding toward
her, as if he had guessed something from seeing her talk to
Liende.
"Yes, Regent?"

"I'll need a score of bowmen, ones who can loft arrows over the
keep walls."
"I will gather them." He turned his mount.
She walked toward Farinelli, slowly. As if he sensed her
thoughts, the gelding sidestepped.
"Even you're worried, old fellow."
The regent and sorceress took her time readying herself.
Finally, she finished a last vocalise, then cleared her throat, and
looked at Jecks and Hanfor, then at Liende. "We'll need to get
closer. How close to the walls could I safely go?"
"No farther than the tents," offered Hanfor.
"If that," added Jecks.
"My lady? Must you?" growled Fhurgen.
"Yes. Unhappily." She swung herself into the saddle and urged
Farinelli down the slope and toward the tents, toward the closed
keep.
Rickel rode on her left, Jecks on her right, Fhurgen and two
other guards before her, and the players, and a good two score
armsmen around and behind them.
Anna stopped short of the tents, empty canvas that had once
held men, men who had died or fled or both. She forced her
thoughts to the spell in her mind, the last one for now. The last
one, she reminded herself, as she climbed from the saddle, her

boots hitting the dusty ground heavily. For a moment, she just
held to the saddle before swallowing and stepping away from
Farinelli.
She glanced back at the players, dismounted and tuning, and
she waited. After what seemed an interminable time, Liende
called, "We stand ready, Regent."
"Then start the spellsong."
Anna timed the music and lifted her voice toward the silent
keep.
"These arrows shot into the air, 
the head of each must strike Lord Sargol there-"
Anna dropped her hand, and sensed the release of the arrows.
"-with force and speed to kill him dead, 
for all the treachery he's done and led." 
Slightly light-headed, she watched as perhaps two dozen
arrows flew over the walls of Suhl. Had she heard a slight
clatter?
The walls remained as silent as before.
Anna turned toward Farinelli, and laboriously got out the lutar
and the mirror. After tuning the instrument, she cleared her
throat.
"Show me now and show me near 
Lord Sargol bright and clear…"
The glass was explicit enough. Sargol was clad in gray inside a

stonewalled room, one with iron shutters-iron doubtless because
he thought it proof against sorcery or some such. And it had
been proof against the arrows. Sargol's eyes glittered, but he
was very much alive.
Anna took a deep breath, feeling Jecks beside her, also studying
the glass before she cleared the image. Now what?
Her eyes flashed toward the hulking brick and stone keep of
Suhl, its gates barred, its lord raging. She shook her head and
turned to Jecks.
"Now what do I do?"
"I do not know."
Why? Why … because it's the perversity of the universe. She
turned and walked back to Liende.
The chief player watched as the regent approached.
"Liende, I'll need the flame spell-again."
"Lord Sargol still lives?" The chief player looked down.
"Unfortunately."
Anna waited as the players reorganized. Neither Jecks nor
Hanfor said a word, though they exchanged glances-and kept
exchanging them.
Finally, in the late afternoon silence, with the brick and stone
keep brazed in golden flat light of a sun that hung over the low
hills to the west, Anna gestured to Liende and the players, then

let her voice rise.
"Those who will not be loyal to the regency, 
let them die, let them lie, struck by fire, struck by flame…"
This time, the chords of Harmony did shiver the sky, and the
ground trembled. Then came a wailing that should have been a
counterpointed chord, except that nothing matched, not
intervals, not key or scale or anything-the closest sound Anna
had ever heard to pure dissonance, again a sound that no one
else seemed to hear.
Her teeth and jaw ached, and her eyes watered, first from the
sounds, and then from the lines of fire that arrowed from the
impossibly azure blue of the sky, endless line of fire after
endless line of fire. 
Anna shuddered as she could sense a few of the fire arrows
slash into her own armsmen. Bad spell. … How do you know all
your own forces are loyal in their hearts?
Sweat burst out on her forehead, a sweat of fear. Was she that
loyal, even to herself?
Even before the last chord, darkness had begun to gather
around her, swelling, vibrating, alternating with light. Anna
fought to hold on to consciousness, fought, and the darkness
receded, ever so slightly, hanging at the corners of her eyes.
Someone held a water bottle, and she drank before realizing
that Jecks stood beside her and held it. Then she ate, heavy
brown bread, dry like sawdust in her mouth.

After that she sat down in the dust, unmindful of the sneezes
that racked her, the fires in her eyes, and the knives that twisted
in her stomach. Her eyes open in the late afternoon, she saw
nothing. Her ears clear, she heard nothing. Too damned close to
Darksong… far too close. Maybe it had been part Darksong?
It couldn't have been-no double vision. But that raised more
troubling thoughts. She could destroy people-if the spell were
worded correctly-but not change them? Walls could stop
arrows, but not fire?
In time, Hanfor returned to where she still sat in the dust.
"Lady… Suhl lies open to you." The arms commander bowed
deeply. "None of those who survive gainsay your regency, nor
that of Lord Jimbob. Even the two detachments of Dumaran
lancers fell to the last man."
Anna shivered at his tone, at the blankness of face and
expression, at the ill-concealed fear. "Thank… you." After a
moment, she added, "I didn't want it to be this way. I offered
terms… I did." The only ones I could…
Hanfor nodded, but she could sense his feelings that the choice
had been hers, and it had been. Hers alone. She couldn't blame
Dieshr, the music department chair at Ames, or Avery, or
Sandy, or the kids, or the economic pressures. She'd chosen the
spells and used them.
She tottered to her feet and looked at Suhl, looked at the open
gates, sensed the horror she had created. The bodies-sprawling
from the walls, seemingly lying everywhere-were the worst,
with red-and-purple burns and blackened skin, with clothing

scorched and seared.
The stench of burned meat was everywhere, carried by the light
and hot breeze.
Anna forced the bitter bile back down her throat, with every
breath. She slowly turned to a pale Jecks, who stood beside his
mount.
"Well… Lord Jecks," Anna croaked. "Was it worth it? To save
the delicate sensibilities of the northern lords?"
Jecks' face, white as that of a marble statue, paled even more,
whiter than his hair.
With invisible starbursts flashing before her eyes, Anna could
barely see, let alone stand. She let herself slump back to the
ground and sat there. 
"Lady Anna… here is a blanket." Rickel's voice was soft.
Mechanically, Anna shifted herself onto the blanket, then
closed her eyes. The starbursts still cascaded across her
now-dark field of vision, and she opened her eyes.
Fhurgen handed her a chunk of bread. She took a small bite.
Then she twisted and retched across the dust, adding yet
another stench to those of fire and death.
Fuck Defalkan conventions! I'm not doing this again… . Despite
the violence of her thought, Anna wondered. In Liedwahr, with
its emphasis on force, could she totally avoid the use of greater
force? And how?

How… in the name of God or the harmonies… or whatever?
45
ANNA stood on the worn stones of the battlement of the front
corner tower of Suhl, looking blankly over the valley. The
surface of the mound Sargol had raised was bare, with no sign
of the infernal crossbow. The tents had been struck, brushed
clean, and stored in one of the keep's storerooms.
Three deep holes gaped in the ground-mass graves. Four
wagons were scattered across the grass, each heaped with
bodies. Under the watchful eyes of subofficers, armsmen
stripped each corpse of weapons and valuables before lifting it
onto the wagons.
Caaaw. … A large crow flapped its wings in settling onto the
other corner tower. Nearly a dozen of the scavengers circled
over the meadow, under the wispy thin clouds scattered across
the morning sky.
Absently, Anna's hand strayed to the wound on her arm. It was
still red and itched, if less than before. Behind her, by the steps
up from the lower wall, stood Rickel, his broad-shouldered form
casting an even broader shadow. Another guard was at the
base of the stairs.
Boots scuffed on the tower steps, and Anna turned as Jecks
emerged into the hazy sunlight.
"Lady Anna, how do you feel?"
"Close to human, until I look out there."

"You did what had to be done." Jecks crossed the stones of the
tower, then stopped next to the stone wall, perhaps two yards to
her right. "Sargol would not have surrendered. He tried to kill
you twice." He paused. "And he would rather have stopped his
ears against your spells of obedience."
"I suppose so." She frowned. Obedience or loyalty spells were
clearly Darksong, and her body and the harmonies were telling
her their use was most definitely limited-if she wanted to
survive. Yet… was the alternative slaughtering thousands? Did
that make her any better than Sargol? Wanting to survive? 
She looked down at the bricks of the rampart walk underfoot.
"You did what needed to be done. You showed mercy at
Synfal, and that was first. You have shown what will happen to
those who resist."
"What's left of Suhl? Besides mass graves filled with loyal
armsmen?" asked Anna abruptly. "A handful of shattered
souls? Serfs and women too frightened to think. Three idiots,
and a dozen infants, a handful of children. Three of them were
Sargol's." She laughed, bitterly. "At least, he had heirs. At least,
I don't have to worry about finding someone else to make a
lord of the Thirty-three. At least, they'll be southern lords
without delicate sensibilities."
Jecks' face went stony again, and Anna didn't care, or almost
didn't care. Her eyes focused on the wagons and the armsmen
dumping bodies into the pits in the meadow. The light wind
carried the faint odor of death.
"You asked me how those lords would feel, lady. I told you."

His voice was hard.
"You did, and you were probably right," Anna said quietly. "I
don't have to like a situation where I must choose between
letting Defalk disintegrate, slaughtering thousands, or dying
trying to use Darksong."
Jecks did not answer, but stood by the battlement, turned so he
faced neither toward her nor away from her.
"My lord," she prompted quietly, but firmly.
"What would you have me say?" The words sounded dragged
from his lips. "That I did not know how terrible your sorcery
would be? From me, who has seen battles for all his life? I did
not know?"
Anna remained silent, and the methodical clank of spades and
the dull sounds of teams moving wagons drifted across the
tower. The wagons carried far too many bodies.
"You saw the Sand Pass."
"Those were dark ones, not Defalkans."
Anna felt less sympathetic to Jecks. "They were people, Lord
Jecks. Just as those poor armsmen I slaughtered the day before
yesterday were people. They loved; they hoped; and they died."
"Lady Anna. Think of your flame spells. Did you not direct
them at those who rebelled. Only those who rebelled?" Jecks
asked softly.
"Yes," she admitted.

"Yet but a handful survived. What would you have? An entire
hold seething in rage? This is not Synfal, where Arkad did not
incite revolt, where no one raged against you. Arkad did not
like the regency, but in his own way, he honored Defalk."
Anna forced herself not to answer, to consider his words first.
After a time, she spoke, slowly. "Are you saying that so many
died here because they violently opposed the Regency and
Jimbob?" 
"That is what I believe."
The regent and sorceress leaned on the warm worn stone,
resting her head on her arms. Lord, Lord…
"Their ties are to these lands, to their lord, not to Defalk. They
still think of themselves as Suhlmorrans."
"You said the Suhlmorrans had not ruled here for centuries…
for hundreds of years."
Jecks shrugged, almost sadly. "Still, they call themselves
Suhlmorrans."
"How can we ever…"
"You already have."
"No. Enough lived that they'll hate Jimbob and the Regency
more."
"Not if you direct the heirs."
"Where will I get another administrator?" Anna asked. "Who

will hold the keep? We can't garrison it, not with Gylaron and
Dencer left to deal with."
"You need not leave more than a handful of armsmen-the
wounded among them. No one will dare attack here. There
would be no advantage, either. You will declare that his infant
son will be the heir, will you not?"
"Have I any choice, realistically?"
"No," Jecks admitted.
"Have someone draft up the statement, but don't make it too
specific, only that his heirs will hold the land. Don't name
names. I'll sign it, and have a messenger take it to Synfal and
let Herstat have it copied. He can send them to all of the
thirty-three who haven't risen-and to Hadrenn." She hoped
whatever reached her didn't need too many changes, but she
was still too tired to think as clearly as she'd like. The harmonies
help her if she ever had to handle large battles on two days
running.
After another silence, punctuated with the clank of spades from
the graves, Jecks asked quietly, "What will you with the golds
in the storeroom?"
"The same as always." Anna laughed harshly. "The Regency
gets some. I get a little. You get a little, and most of it stays here
for Sargol's administrator and heirs."
"What of your armsmen?"
"You think they should get a bonus?"

Jecks frowned at the word.
"Something extra?" Anna corrected. "A silver each? Two? What
would be customary?"
"Two silvers would be most generous, and appreciated."
Anna tried to calculate. Roughly two hundred lancers, and the
players should get more. That worked out to… what? Forty
golds? She wanted to shake her head. If that were expected
with every battle, she'd be paying several hundred golds,
maybe a thousand before the whole mess was resolved.
For some reason, the thought that she'd paid two golds for five
yards of velvet crossed her mind-and an armsman who risked
his life got a pair of silvers. Yet a bonus of a single gold-several
times during the campaign ahead, and there would be a
campaign, that was clear-that bonus would bankrupt Defalk. 
Cloth was always overly expensive in pre-technology societies.
She frowned. Another excuse, no matter how true? 
Jecks waited silently
"That sounds reasonable, but let's talk to Hanfor. He has to lead
the men." She paused. "Any ideas on who could run this place?"
"It would not take great experience," Jecks offered. "Not at first.
What about the sister and ward of Lady Gatrune?"
Anna tried to remember the young woman's name. Anna had
met her at Lady Gatrune's holding in Pamr, when Lord
Hryding's armsmen had been escorting Anna to Falcor to offer
her services to Behlem after the Lord of Neserea had conquered
Defalk. "Herene?" Tall and blonde, like Gatrune, but thinner

than her older sister. Anna nodded to herself. "Herene."
"A woman here would be good," Jecks said. "With a solid
armsman and officer at her hand before long."
"So that the other lords would understand it wasn't a power
grab?" Anna also understood another element of Jecks' logic. A
male caretaker or administrator meant takeover-such as with
Jimbob and Herstat at Synfal-while a woman meant continuity
of the male heirs. She took a deep breath. You can't change
everything all at once.
"They would be less threatened."
"I can see that." Anna wanted to threaten them all, but she only
said, "In this case, that makes sense. If something like this
occurs again… we'll have to see."
"That will be your decision, as always." Jecks bowed slightly,
his voice formal.
"Let's find Hanfor." Anna turned from the battlement, blotting
her damp forehead, and started down the steps, followed by
Rickel. Two other guards swung behind her at the base of the
tower. The sorceress had begun to feel that, no matter where
she went, she was leading a parade.
Hanfor stood on a mounting block in the courtyard, directing
officers and armsmen. When he saw the two, he stepped down,
shaking his head. "Sargol was not organized."
Anna had suspected that from the beginning of the fight two
days earlier. "We won't keep you, Hanfor, but Lord Jecks and I

have been thinking. Would an extra payment of two silvers an
armsmen be an appropriate reward for their efforts?"
Hanfor's face crinkled into a smile. "So long as you tell them
now, and let them know that they will receive it when we
return to Falcor. Otherwise, too many will find local spirits."
"Should I announce it, or should you?"
"Normally, I would announce that." The arms commander
grinned. "But if you would prefer…" 
"I'd prefer the normal," Anna said. "Two silvers when they
return to Falcor."
"To be received when they are not on duty," Hanfor added.
Jecks smiled.
"Of course," Anna agreed. "You set the terms."
"You see, Lord Jecks, why so many of us prefer her reign?"
"So do many of the lords. Would that all understood." Jecks'
voice was dry, barely rising above the clop of hoofs, and the
clamor of voices of the armsmen crossing the courtyard, and
the wagons returning through the gates.
"They will," Hanfor affirmed. He glanced over his shoulder.
"We'll talk later," Anna said, "about what we do next. After
dinner?"
"I will be there." Hanfor bowed, and then turned to where Alvar
stood, waiting.

"The wagons?" asked the swarthy officer. "Can we use two of
them to gather provisions?"
Anna stepped back, letting Rickel, Jecks and her guards follow.
"I need to talk to Liende, Lord Jecks. If you would excuse me?"
"As you wish, lady." The white-haired lord inclined his head.
"Thank you." Anna forced a smile. "At dinner?"
"At dinner, my lady." Jecks offered a pleasant smile in return.
It took three inquiries to find the wing where the players were
quartered, and Anna had tried two doors before she rapped a
third time on the ancient oak.
"Yes?" Liende opened the door, sleepy-eyed, hair rumpled.
"Oh… Lady Anna. Oh… I was so tired."
"Don't worry about it." The sorceress stepped into the small
room, shutting the door, and leaving Rickel and the guards in
the brick-walled corridor. "I feel that way still."
Liende glanced around the room, her eyes touching on the
single chair and the pallet bed. Anna pulled out the chair and
sat. The player perched on the edge of the bed.
"Your pleasure, lady."
"I've been thinking, Liende, and I wanted to talk to you. I don't
want to repeat what happened here at Suhl," Anna said.
"Perhaps Sargol and his armsmen deserved it for their
treachery earlier…"

"It was treacherous to attack you unprovoked."
"I don't understand why." Anna shrugged. "I wasn't even
heading toward Suhl."
"He was fearing that you were."
The sorceress nodded.
"And he claimed the lineage of Suhlmorra."
"He wanted to re-create the kingdom of Suhlmorra?" asked
Anna.
"So it is said." Liende offered a tight smile.
The regent shook her head. The last thing Defalk needed was
fragmentation into more small countries. "Anyway… I hadn't
wanted to use such terrible spells…" 
"Even with Lord Brill…" Liende looked down.
"No. Lord Brill was too gentle." Anna laughed, then cut off the
laugh before it turned hysterical. The thought of her as a
ruthless and bloody butcher was insane. It was also true. "Too
gentle."
"Yes," agreed Liende. "But Defalk needs you."
Defalk needs a woman butcher? What does that say about Defalk?
Or you? "I will try to do what we need with less violence."
"That may not be possible, Lady Anna." Liende offered a
sardonic smile.
"I know. We'll try, though. I'll be giving you two more songs,

short ones, that I hope will help."
"No one can play before the morrow. Kaseth… he may not
play for another day, yet. His fingers shake."
"We won't leave Suhl until all of you are ready to play."
"Thank you, lady."
Anna wanted to scream. Thank her for what? For butchery or
common sense or both? She just stood. "You're welcome. Take
care, and let me know if any of you need anything."
"We are well quartered and fed." Liende rose, slowly, as though
she were stiff.
Anna nodded again, then slipped out into the corridor.
46
Anna's boots clumped heavily on the worn stone floor tiles of
the dim corridor. Her nose itched, and she rubbed it. Like
everything else in Suhl, the corridor held the faint odor of mold
and must. Even five years of drought hadn't been enough to
destroy that-or the recent rains had revived the spores quickly.
She rubbed her nose again, trying not to sneeze.
"The family quarters and the nursery are just ahead, lady," said
Fhurgen. "We've removed…"
"They need an honorable burial," she said tiredly. "And stone
markers or whatever's customary." Her head still throbbed; her
legs ached; and sharp pains stabbed through the balls of her
feet with each step. "Honorable?" asked Hanfor. "After his

treachery?"
"He and his consort paid for it, didn't they? There's no point in
disgracing the dead." Anna stopped and looked at the
hollow-eyed Jecks. "Is there?"
"An honorable burial in the lords' plot would serve many
purposes."
And mollify the sensibilities of my squeamish northern lords.
"Fine. Let's set that up." There was so much to set up with only
a few handfuls of retainers remaining. Yet Anna couldn't afford
to have Suhl go down in ruins, not when her goal was to
rebuild Defalk, not destroy it. Great start you're making.
"The nursery." Hanfor gestured to the open door.
Anna stepped into the long narrow room, with its narrow
embrasured windows and weathered inside shutters. Only
Jecks accompanied her. She glanced at the three children-the
dark-haired girl and the two brown-haired boys-then at the
short and stocky woman who stood behind them protectively.
"I'm not about to hurt them," the sorceress said, even as she
could sense the nursemaid's doubt. Still, the woman had
survived, and that meant she wasn't disloyal. Or that her first
loyalties were to the children. "They weren't the ones who tried
to kill me."
"Lady, Lord Sargol was a good man." The nursemaid's voice
quavered.
Anna respected the opinion, and the courage it took to voice it.

"He was good to his people, I'm sure. He wasn't good for Defalk
or those who lived around him. And totally good lords don't
refuse to pay their liedgeld and attempt to kill regents who
aren't even threatening them. Nor would he have died if he
hadn't been planning treachery. You weren't, and you're alive."
The maid's eyes widened slightly, as though she had not
thought about that.
"Tell me the children's names."
"Keithen is the older boy. He's five. Resthor is his brother. He's
two, almost three, at eight-week of summer. Dinfan, she be the
daughter. She's eight, I think."
Anna turned to the girl. "Dinfan, do you know who I am?"
"Da, he said you were a harpy of discord."
That's one for honesty. "Some people have said that. It's not
true. I'm the Regent of Defalk."
"He said you were bad." The girl's voice was unsteady, but she
held her chin firmly, almost defying Anna, much as her own
Irenia had. Irenia, the accident, the funeral-they all seemed so
far away, so distant.
Anna swallowed, trying to keep her composure before she
spoke. "I have done bad things. So has your father. So do most
people. So, child, will you. That doesn't make us bad people."
Anna waited, still measuring the girl.
''Will you kill us, too?"

"No. You, if you learn enough, will hold Suhl. If you don't, one
of your brothers will."
"Women aren't lords." Again, that defiant echo of Irenia. 
Anna forced a smile. "Lady Gatrune holds Pamr. Lady
Anientta holds Flossbend. I am Regent of Defalk."
For the first time, Dinfan's eyes dropped.
"You are your father's daughter. You must learn all you can.
Perhaps, when you are older, you will come to Falcor to learn.
Then you will know more when you are old enough to hold
Suhl."
There was no answer. Behind her, the nursemaid's eyes
widened. "Do ye play with the child, lady?"
"No. I don't play games. Lord Sargol didn't understand that.
Some of the other southern lords still don't. Suhl is Dinfan's so
long as she is responsible and loyal to Lord Jimbob and the
Regency. I hope you will make that clear." Anna paused. "I will
ensure she, and her brothers, have a tutor until they are old
enough to come to Falcor. You will ensure they are loved. You
will not tell them tales. You may tell them that their father
rebelled and tried to kill me, and for that I slew him." Her eyes
fixed on the nurse. "Do you understand?"
The nurse shivered. "Your will is law, Regent."
"Take care of them well. Their people will need them." Anna
nodded.
The nurse bowed.

"Good-bye, Dinfan."
"Good-bye."
Anna gave a last smile and stepped back into the corridor, back
to her entourage.
"I don't have the faintest idea where to get a good tutor, but we
need to find one." Anna looked at Jecks.
"You will not foster them at Falcor?"
"They're too young right now." And I'm not even there, and
Lord knows when I will be. "In a year or two for the girl, or three
if she's young for her age."
"I will have Herstat and Dythya inquire after tutors."
"Good."
She walked slowly back to the small hall she had appropriated
for her receiving and work space. Somehow, no matter where
she went, there were messages and paperwork and people to
see… and scrolls that seemed to follow her across the
countryside.
The hall, like most in Defalk, had but high windows in the rear.
Hanfor stood waiting, just inside the door, bowing
momentarily.
Anna inclined her head.
The lit candles in the four wall sconces added minimal
illumination to what little of the gray day's light seeped

through the windows. The table was square, old, battered, and
could seat six people. Four armless chairs were drawn around
it. Anna slumped into one, glad to get off her feet. "Please sit
down."
She poured a goblet of wine better than what she got at either
Loiseau or Falcor, or even at Synfal, then took a long sip. Jecks
followed her example.
Hanfor sat and pursed his lips.
Dinfan seemed bright enough. She might be another possible
match for Jimbob. She shook her head-thinking like the rest of
the thirty-three lords of Defalk, or Machiavelli. What else could
she do?
"She's only four years younger than Jimbob," she ventured.
"I thought you had young Secca in mind."
Anna blushed. "I did. I do… but I guess… I'd like there to be
some choices. I don't want to have consorts who can't stand
each other."
"Alasia liked you," Jecks mused. "Don't know as I understand it
all."
"We don't have to decide that now," Anna said quickly. "There
could be others." She turned to Hanfor. "You look concerned."
"You were most effective, Regent Anna." Hanfor paused. "We
lost but ten men, and another ten are injured."
"That's still a score," Anna said. "Is that what you're trying to

say? That we can't afford even little losses like that for many
battles?"
Hanfor shrugged. "I do not like that, but it has taken all winter
to find five score additional armsmen."
"If you rout Lords Gylaron and Dencer, blades will flock to
your banner," Jecks said.
"People always support you after the dirty work's done." Anna
took another sip of the wine. It felt good to be off her aching
feet and legs. She hadn't walked that much, but they'd always
hurt when she'd gotten tired, and she was still tired, damned
tired. Or, should she say, dissonantly tired? "Now what? How
are we going to get enough people here to keep this place
going?"
"The tenants will farm as always," Jecks said.
"It must take a staff of fifty to keep this pile of brick and stone
operating, even on a minimal basis, and that doesn't count
armsmen. We've maybe got a score of retainers left."
"There are many at Synfal," mused Jecks. "Not that all were
well-used."
Anna considered that. They certainly hadn't cleaned the main
hall. Then, maybe Arkad had gotten to be like Howard
Hughes, a recluse who let things close to him fall apart. "We'll
have to send a message to Herstat to arrange for some of them
to come here, the younger ones mostly, with some whose
children are grown. We'll have to see what skills are missing,
first." Another inventory, and she and Jecks would probably

have to do that. She sighed. "Have the scouts found out
anything about Gylaron's lancers?"
"There are no signs. Those who survived rode south."
"In a day or so, when I'm feeling better, I'll try the glass."
"That might be best," offered Jecks.
"I have scouts on the roads and the hilltops," Hanfor added.
"They have seen no one."
"Let's hope they don't." Anna took another swallow of wine.
Lord, she missed really good wine, and hot baths where she
didn't have to spell the water herself. And… She shook her
head. Don't get into that. 
Thrap.
The three heads turned to the door.
"You have some messengers here, of a sort," announced
Fhurgen, with a grin.
Anna frowned. "Messengers?"
"You should see them, Lady Anna." Fhurgen kept grinning.
"All right. Send them in."
The short black-haired armsman stepped into the chamber,
followed by a taller brown-haired figure. Both wore somewhat
faded greens.
"Fridric… Markan?" Anna paused. "What brings you here?"

"We bring a message from Lady Anientta." Markan extended a
sealed scroll. "And a score of armsmen who seek your service."
"My service?" Anna rose from her chair to accept the scroll,
then glanced at Jecks, who smiled openly, then at Hanfor.
Markan shook his head, then pushed back a lock of brown
hair. "Things are not as they were at Flossbend. Stepan has left
to join Gestatr in Synek."
"Does Gestatr serve Lord Hadrenn?" Anna reseated herself.
"How did you know, lady?" asked the brown-haired armsman.
"I didn't, but some things are beginning to make sense."
Jecks' eyebrows lifted.
"Are you sure you all wish to serve the Regency?" Anna asked.
"We would not be here, otherwise."
Anna nodded, then broke the sealed scroll and began to read.
"Regent Anna, Lady and Sorceress, and Protector of Defalk…"
Anna wanted to groan. Still the flowery openings that Anientta
seemed so fond of and that meant to Anna that more trouble
lay ahead.
We were pleased to have your most gracious confirmation of
our status as protector and administrator for Jeron… We will do
our utmost to fulfill your trust in us… In this regard, you
should be pleased to know that my sire, Lord Tybel, has
graciously provided some considerable assistance… Onfel,

second officer of his guard, and one of his clerks…
Secca has been most courteous in sending an occasional scroll
and is pleased to be in Falcor, and for this we are all most
thankful for your generosity…
… as always, both Jeron and I stand ready to do your bidding
in any endeavor in which we may be of assistance…
The wax seal remained that of Lord Hryding, and the signature
read, "Anientta, administrator of Flossbend, for the heir, Jeron."
Anna nodded and turned to Markan. "I accept your service. I
take it that Onfel was not to your liking?"
Markan smiled so faintly the expression was not a smile. "Say,
Lady Anna, that we were not exactly to his liking."
"A picked guard of Lord Tybel?"
"Who could say? We felt that our… services might be better
used elsewhere."
Anna smiled. "We can use your services. Markan, this is Arms
Commander Hanfor. I should have introduced you sooner, but
I'm tired, and I'm not thinking very well."
Both Markan and Fridric bowed.
"Honored, ser. We have heard much of note of you."
"Honored," murmured Fridric.
Hanfor shook his head. "Good men we can use."

Anna looked at Fhurgen, still standing in the doorway. "Why
don't you have someone get them settled?" She glanced to
Markan. "Then Hanfor will talk with you and we'll see exactly
how you can be best used."
"Thank you, Lady Anna." Markan smiled more widely.
After a moment, so did Fridric.
When the door had shut behind them, Jecks laughed. "You
have not put down all the rebellious lords, and already they
flock to you. A score- will not that help, Hanfor?"
"That will help."
Jecks frowned. "Who is Gestatr?"
"Gestatr was Lord Hryding's chief armsman. Fridric told me
more than a season ago that he'd gone back to his home in
Synek."
"And Hadrenn holds Synek?" Jecks finished. "You think that is
why you received that scroll from young Hadrenn?"
"Exactly."
"You had a glint in your eye," observed Jecks, "when you
looked upon the older of those two."
Jealousy? wondered Anna. "I do. Markan is responsible and
trustworthy. I was thinking about leaving him and Fridric here
to run things."
"You know this?"

"Markan was my escort from Lord Hryding's to Falcor after
the Sand Pass battle. He was the lead armsman at Flossbend
after Gestatr left."
Jecks nodded. "That is a horse of another color. One can place a
lead armsman from one hold in another, and none will object,
young as he may be."
"Young… he may be effective longer," Anna pointed out, "and
he understands guarding a lord's household."
"There is that," agreed Jecks. "And he will favor you and
Jimbob."
"Exactly." Anna rose and went to the door. "Fhurgen? Will you
summon Markan and Fridric back? Or have someone do it,
please?"
The black-bearded guard smiled. "You have a task for them?"
Anna nodded, her lips in a wry smile.
The head of her personal guard laughed softly. "I will get them."
"While they're summoning those two," Anna told Jecks, "I'll
draft a scroll to Herene, and I suppose to Lady Gatrune, too,
explaining why I need Herene." 
Jecks nodded, and Anna wondered what else she'd forgotten.
47
THE woman in the mirror wore faded green trousers and tunic,
and had a smudge on her left cheek. The blonde hair was cut
short, shorter than a bob. The fine features were those of an

older woman, but the lightly tanned and flawless skin, the trim
and muscular figure, and the clear eyes belonged to an
eighteen-year-old-except for the darkness behind them. Three
days not on the road and regular nightly sleep had erased the
worst of the dark circles.
Anna grimaced. So did her reflection in the near-full-length
wall mirror. The wooden mirror frame's wood was
age-darkened so much that it resembled oiled ebony, and the
shallow carved vines were nearly invisible.
The sorceress readjusted the lutar, ran her fingers across the
strings, and then twisted one of the tuning pegs ever so slightly.
She cleared her throat and began the spell.
Behind her, Jecks and Hanfor stood, uneasily watching the
cloudy silver surface of the antique mirror as the notes echoed
slightly in the cavernous bedroom Anna was using for her
scrying.
"Mirror, mirror, in your frame, 
Show me Gylaron in his fame,
Where'er he may ride or be, 
Show him now to me."
The mirror displayed Gylaron-swarthy, solid, but not quite
stocky, with a trimmed and pointed black beard. He stood in a
surprisingly small wood-paneled bedchamber talking to a
heavyset black-haired woman with a heart-shaped face and
dark eyes.
"She does not appear pleased," offered Hanfor.

"No." Anna studied the images, first of Gylaron, who shrugged
and signed dramatically as she watched, and then of the
woman, apparently his consort, from the dark red velvet she
wore. Tears rolled down the consort's cheeks, but her hands
remained folded in her lap.
Anna released the spell and took a deep breath.
"He looked worried," said Jecks.
"A man about to attempt a desperate venture," suggested
Hanfor. Anna swallowed, then checked the lutar's tuning, even
as she mentally rearranged the spell she'd used earlier to scry
danger.
"Show from the south, danger to fear, 
Gylaron's threats to me bright and clear…"
The words were cramped to that melody, but she hoped it
wouldn't matter too much.
The mirror remained blank, then swirled into a featureless
silver, and finally showed an image not of Lerona, but of a
mountain hold.
"That be Stromwer," Jecks said.
Anna frowned. Had her spell failed? Or did Lerona truly pose
no dangers? With a sigh, she set aside the lutar and went to the
spell folder on the table. With the grease marker, she drafted
another version of the spell.
Once she had it in mind, she lifted the lutar and offered it.

"Show me bright and show me clear, 
threats from Gylaron for us to fear…"
The silver swirling repeated, this time remaining featureless.
A snap filled the silence, and Hanfor looked down disgustedly
at the broken marker in his hand.
Anna shook her head.
"Maybe there's something going on with Dencer." She
distrusted Dencer more than she had Gylaron, or Sargol, even
if she couldn't have explained precisely why.
Jecks shrugged.
"We still haven't seen Gylaron's keep," she said disgustedly.
Sometimes, even scrying was dissonantly imprecise. Sometimes?
What about most of the time? You're exaggerating. Still, she'd
overkilled bandits, gotten images she hadn't really wanted,
killed singing dark monks instead of armsmen, and nearly
killed herself a half-dozen times.
She'd just have to use a direct mirror spell. She strummed the
lutar and readjusted the peg for the top string. Then she cleared
her throat. She really needed something to drink.
Hanfor held up a hand. "A moment, Lady Anna?"
"When you're ready." Anna couldn't help grinning as the Arms
Commander used his belt knife to sharpen the grease marker
he used for sketching. Setting down the lutar, she took a sip of
the wine from the pitcher on the table, although she really

wanted water.
Then she walked to the window and pulled the shutters wide.
The fresh air, warm as it was, helped. The fresh earth over the
mass graves reminded her of wounds… or scars. Would it
always be like that?
Hanfor coughed. "Lady Anna."
"Oh." She turned and crossed the stone floor to reclaim the
lutar.
"Show me now, bright and fair, 
Gylaron's keep as it stands there…" 
Gylaron's liedburg rose out of the town of Lerona itself, on a
small hillock to the north of the center of the town. The walls
were low, no more than five to six yards high, and the gates
were wide open.
"No defenses," murmured Jecks.
Hanfor shook his head. "Some form of treachery?"
Anna released the spell and set aside the lutar. "I don't think so.
The mirror showed us Sargol's treachery. I just didn't
understand what it meant. Three different spells, and we get
nothing. That means that Gylaron isn't trying anything."
"Or there is a greater wizard?" asked Jecks.
Anna took a deep breath and went back to the table and spell
folder. After a time, she scrawled out another variation of the
mirror spell.

Again, she faced the mirror and sang.
"Spells and wizards show me bright 
those who aid Gylaron's fight."
What filled the antique mirror was a silvery mist, seemingly
mixing with a faint steam from the mirror frame. Hurriedly,
Anna released the spell. Then she took a hefty swallow of the
red wine, followed by another. She sank onto the hard chair,
glancing around for something to eat. There was only the
pitcher of wine and three pewter goblets.
"Satisfied?" she asked, still holding the goblet, debating
whether she should have more wine so early in the day.
Jecks looked down at the sharpness of her voice.
Anna felt both ashamed of her pettiness and angry. Don't they
understand this is work? Why would they? No one on earth
understood that an hour and a half recital was work. No one
understood the energy it took to teach lessons hour after hour.
Why would things be different on Erde?
If she destroyed something… that was work. She forced her
jaw to unclench and sipped some wine-very slowly, very
deliberately.
"Would you like something to eat?" Jecks asked, walking
toward the door.
"Yes, please."
Jecks slipped out of the room.

Anna sat quietly, drawn into herself, knowing her blood sugar
was nonexistent, knowing that she'd regret anything she said,
waiting.
Hanfor sat on one of the chest against the stone wall, sketching
something, a rough map, perhaps.
Shortly, the door opened again.
"Mayhap, this will help, lady." Jecks set the basket with the
still-warm loaf of dark bread on the table before her.
"Thank you." She forced a smile, then broke off the end and
slowly began to eat.
No one said a word until Anna had eaten for a time. One
shutter creaked and swung partly across the window with a
brief gust of warm air.
"Gylaron has not paid liedgeld… yet he makes no plans,"
mused Jecks.
"That be not quite so," suggested Hanfor. "The glass shows that
any plans he makes present no danger. We must still approach
Lerona with care."
Anna nodded, chewing on another chunk of the moist and
dark bread, before speaking. "We need to see what Dencer
plans."
"Especially after your glass has shown Stromwer," agreed
Hanfor.
After she had finished most of the loaf, Anna stood and lifted

the lutar.
"Lord Dencer, show me then and now, 
what he does 'gainst me and how, 
show the scenes both far and near 
and show us what one should fear."
Four scenes appeared, two side by side on the top of the mirror,
the other two below. In the top right-hand vision, Dencer stood
in his private study, his angular frame looking down upon a
younger officer in the crimson uniform of a lancer of Dumar. In
the top left side was an image of a group of men digging a
large pit. Sharpened stakes were stacked at the side of the
excavation.
The third image held no people, just a view of a small circular
fort containing a large iron caldron. Below one side of the
caldron was a circular stone basin from which ran a polished
stone trough. The trough ended in a circular opening in the
wall of the small fortress overlooking a narrow gorge.
The last scene, the one on the bottom right of the ancient glass,
showed men working to fill nets with rocks. The thick hemp
nets were braced with huge round timbers-rough-smoothed
treetrunks-and extended over a rocky escarpment overlooking
a road. Several sets of the netted rocks were visible. Hanfor
sketched and jotted furiously. Jecks' eyes flicked from image to
image. Anna just studied the last three images in turn, until the
mirror frame began to smoke and steam. Then she released the
image, set the lutar on the chest by the wall beside the mirror,
and took a deep breath, finally walking to the window and
stepping up to the open air, pushing back a shutter that had

swung halfway closed in the light breeze.
The morning air was less fresh, and warmer. After several
breaths, she stepped back toward the other two. "Dencer
understands sorcery and its limits."
"All of those defenses are the kind that have an effect from afar,
like Sargol's giant crossbow," added Hanfor.
"Isn't there a way to get around those?" 
"From what I remember," mused Jecks, "the town is in a
mountain valley, and the keep guards the roads to the valley.
The main roads east and west enter the town right under the
keep's walls."
"It all makes sense," Anna said. "He could swear allegiance to
either Dumar or Ranuak."
"Not Ranuak," said the white-haired lord. "They wouldn't have
him. Ehara would. That was a Dumaran lancer Dencer was
talking to."
"So Ehara tries to gain Dencer's allegiance, and Sturinn
supports Dumar." She shook her head and sat at the table,
picking up the last of the bread. Had she eaten an entire loaf?
She snorted, thinking that she probably should have eaten
more.
"The Sea-Priests would add all Liedwahr to Sturinn's rule," said
Jecks.
Hanfor nodded.

Not if I can help it. "The big pot?" Anna asked after swallowing
a mouthful of the bread.
"To boil oil, and the stone pipes spray it out over the road that
leads to the keep," said Jecks. "Stromwer is at the foot of the
Sudbergs."
"We'll have to find a way around those defenses," Anna offered,
"but that will wait until we deal with Gylaron."
"Will other sorcerers help him?" asked Hanfor.
In for a copper, in for a gold. Anna stood and retuned the lutar.
"Again?" asked Jecks.
"I'd like to see what other sorcerers are working on." Anna took
a deep breath and strummed the strings, then tightened the
bottom tuning peg, and restrummed.
"Of those with power of the song 
seek those who'd do me wrong 
and show them in this silver cast 
and make that vision well last."
She studied the images in the glass. They were the same as the
last time she'd used the spell-the blond seer from Nordwei, the
hawk-faced Sea-Priest, and the young black-bearded man.
The Sea-Priest-if he were the same one-sat across a table from
Ehara, his eyes bright even though the silver of the glass. The
hatred that burned on the faces of both the Sea-Priest and the
unknown young man still disturbed her. Were the Sea-Priests

that fanatically against women in power?
The intense young man-he wore nondescript brown clothing,
not the colors of a sorcerer and not the livery of any of the
neighbors or enemies of Defalk. He stood in what seemed to be
some type of storeroom. Yet her sorcery indicated that he had
power and was an enemy. But who was he?
"Do you recognize the younger man?" She released the spell
and replaced the lutar in its case. 
"No."
"He wears a tradesman's browns," said Jecks.
She'd have to keep tabs on the unknown young man, but she
was tired, and her spells indicated that he wasn't associated
with any immediate danger. Still… she'd have to remember.
Nonimmediate dangers left untended usually became
immediate at the worst possible time.
"The Sea-Priest schemes with Ehara."
"Everyone schemes," Anna snorted.
Jecks cleared his throat, and Anna turned.
"Perhaps it will do no good, but would you not consider
sending scrolls to Gylaron and Dencer suggesting that their
defiance of the Regency is unwelcome and requesting their
allegiance?"
"And their liedgeld?" Anna asked ironically. "It can't hurt, and I
suppose it would set better with the other lords if at least I
asked."

"That it would."
"You don't think they'll agree?"
"I would think not," said Jecks. "Yet, they had not heard of
what befell Suhl." He shrugged. "There is a chance."
"Would you draft what you think we should say?"
"That… that I can do."
"Thank you. I should have thought of it." Anna turned to
Hanfor. "How soon will your scouts have their reports on the
roads?"
"By nightfall."
"Can we march on Gylaron by two days after tomorrow?"
"We could march the day after tomorrow, but two days would
be better."
"Let's plan on it. Unless we get a total downpour." She paused.
"Or Gylaron decides to return to the fold."
That got another blank expression from Jecks.
"Rejoin the Regency." Anna stood. "I'm going to check a few
things around the keep."
Both men rose.
When she left the chamber, Fhurgen and Rickel stepped from
their post at the door. Both marched behind her down the dim
corridor.

She eased open the nursery door and stepped inside alone, as
quietly as she could. Dinfan sat at a table with her back to the
door, and the nurse sat on a stool looking at the girl.
"… your ma, she was from Fussen. That be where your cousins
struggle to see who will be lord." The nurse looked up, her eyes
widening.
Anna shook her head, and motioned for the woman to continue.
"Ah… she be… the elder…"
Dinfan turned, holding a chunk of bread. Her wide eyes fixed
on Anna, those eyes so alike, and so unlike Irenia's. "Did you
know my mother?"
"No, Lady Dinfan. I did not." 
The nurse stood and bowed. "Regent."
"She called me lady, Bregha. She called me lady."
"You are the lady of Suhl," Anna said gravely.
"Indeed you be," added Bregha.
"Ma, she was lady of Suhl."
"She was, but she did not hold Suhl. If you study and learn,
you will." Anna smiled faintly, turning to the nurse. "Does she
know her letters?"
"Some."
"We will find someone to help with that. The Lady Herene will
be her guardian, and she can help her with her letters. It may

be several weeks."
The nurse bowed.
"Take care, Dinfan." Anna smiled.
Dinfan offered a faint smile in return.
As she left, Anna shook her head, ignoring Fhurgen's frown as
he fell in behind her. Would every child always remind her of
her own, blocked as she was from even using sorcery to see
their images?
"Do you know where Liende might be, Fhurgen?"
"In her quarters on the second level, lady. Beyond the back
stairs."
Anna could hear the woodwind player's practice from well
down the corridor. She rapped on the door, and the notes
stopped.
The chief player opened the door, horn in hand.
"Lady Anna." Liende looked rested, more rested than Anna felt.
"Liende, you look more rested."
"Several days' sleep has helped." A wry grimace crossed the
older woman's face.
"That's good. Unfortunately, I have some work for you. I'd like
you to keep the players working on those songs. I may have
one more for you in a day or so."

"Kaseth cannot play yet."
"I understand. He collapsed. But you and the others can start,
can't you?"
Liende nodded. "Kaseth, he has more experience, and he can
learn more quickly."
"There will be a gold bonus for each of the players for this past
battle. Two for you. That's when we get back to Falcor." While
they had found somewhere over fifteen hundred golds in
Sargol's storeroom, the amount left after deducting the past due
liedgeld would be less than a thousand, and most of that had to
be left in Markan's care to run the holding. Another reason why
Sargol hadn't paid? Then why hadn't he asked for relief? Male
pride? Damn male pride! Anna swallowed, trying to get her
thoughts back in line, and added, "We aren't carrying lots of
golds with us."
"Your word is more than good, lady." Liende smiled. "All the
players know that, and it will be better to have their golds safe."
"Good." Anna hoped they all felt that way, and still would after
their ever-extended journey was over-if it ever ended. "We'll be
leaving for Lerona three days from now. I don't know what
we'll need. We may not have to fight… and we may."
"We know you will do what is necessary, and no more."
"Thank you." Anna smiled. "I'm glad you're here. I know it's
hard on you to be away from Kinor and Alseta, but I appreciate
it."

"I can return to them." Liende smiled sadly. "You have lost
yours, and… I wish it were otherwise."
"So do I." Anna swallowed. "Thank you." After a moment, she
turned and started toward the stables. She still had Farinelli to
groom.
Anna had hoped not to have to use Liende in battle. That
hadn't worked. She'd hoped not to have to kill off so many
Defalkan armsmen. That hadn't worked. She'd hoped not to
have to continually rely on sorcery… but pitched battles took
armsmen and equipment she lacked… and so the list went.
48
THAT'S her…" hissed a young voice from the darkness beyond
the stall where Anna saddled Farinelli. "The regent."
"Looks too pretty to be a regent."
"That's 'cause she uses sorcery. Bet without it, she'd be ugly."
Anna smiled, then called back toward the two unseen stable
boys. "I look the way I am, boys."
Scurrying feet and the rustle of straw were the only answer.
Anna led Farinelli out of the stables, hoping that Markan could
find a good stablemaster. She'd ended up mucking Farinelli's
stall at Suhl because the big gelding hadn't let anyone else near,
not that there had been many souls left in the keep after her
magic.
Fhurgen waited outside, already mounted, his dark eyes

flicking from side to side. Rickel stood guard on his mount a
dozen yards across the courtyard, his eyes more toward the
open gate.
Anna checked her four water bottles, the lutar case, and the
leather pack that contained her spell glass, then swung easily
into the saddle.
Farinelli whuffed once, and she patted his neck, glancing
toward the stables as Jecks led out his mount. The white-haired
lord was still muscular, if slightly stocky, and still handsome.
If only… If only what?
"Lady Anna?"
The sorceress turned toward the armsman approaching on foot.
"Markan."
"Lady Anna… you know we would ride with you," Markan
offered, his eyes momentarily traveling past Anna to the
players and the arms-men mounted up along the length of the
courtyard. Behind him, Fridric nodded. 
"I know. But many can ride with me. I'm asking more of you,
Markan. Much more. I'm entrusting you with the heir of Suhl,
and with the lady Herene, once she arrives. You must keep
them safe, and you must ensure that all here respect and love
the Regency and the reign of Lord Jimbob to come. That's not
easy." Building things is much harder than destroying them.
That was becoming all too clear.
"I will do my best."

"I know. You need to find a lot of people… including a good
stablemaster." Anna shook her head.
"I will take that on, lady," volunteered Fridric. "Until we find
one. My father ran the stable in Aroch."
"Thank you." Anna smiled.
The smaller armsman flushed.
Hanfor rode back from the lower section of the courtyard.
"Lady, all are ready."
"I'll be right there." She nodded to the arms commander, then
turned to Markan. "I've told you what needs to be done. You
have those lists. Don't hesitate to send a scroll to Herstat at
Synfal or Dythya in Falcor if you need something."
"Yes, Lady Anna."
"Good." She turned Farinelli toward the gate, and Jecks eased
his mount beside hers.
"He will find out how hard are those tasks you have laid for
him," Jecks prophesied as they rode down the causeway in the
hazy morning light to join Hanfor at the head of the column.
"We all find that out."
"A good armsman we could use, and the half-score you left
with him and the wounded," murmured Rickel from behind
Anna.
"We could," Anna admitted, leaning forward in the saddle and

giving Farinelli a solid pat on the neck. "Taking Suhl, we lost a
score, one way or another. Would you like to lose that many
again? Or hundreds, without sorcery, if Suhl rebels again?"
Fhurgen, to the left of Anna, guffawed. "Winning battles, my
friend Rickel, that is just the start. That's why we're armsmen.
Be glad you are."
"The battles you don't have to fight, Rickel," Jecks added, "those
are the ones that could save your life."
Anna could sense the young blond armsman's embarrassment,
and she turned her head to him. "Rickel… it takes time. Even I
thought about just winning battles, just getting through them."
She laughed ruefully. "Sometimes I still do."
For how long?
She had no answer to that question. So she smiled as she rode
to join Hanfor, Jecks beside her, and her guards flanking and
trailing them. Hanfor raised a hand in salute, and she returned
the gesture, trying not to sneeze as the dust tickled her nose. 
Across the valley, past the raw earth of the mass graves that
held most of those who had served Sargol, lay the road to
Lerona.
49
STROMWER, DEFALK
THE bitch avoided Sargol's traps-all of them. And her
archers-they I turned his armsmen into targets." Dencer shakes

his head, and the brown-and-gray hair flops onto his too-high
forehead.
"One attacks a sorceress most safely from afar." The officer in
crimson, standing before the wide table, bows his head slightly.
"As you have prepared to do, Lord Dencer."
"Oh, spare me the compliments, Captain Gortin." The lanky
lord bobs his head. "Your master sent two companies of lancers
to aid Lord Sargol, and she destroyed them with a few words of
song and then turned his keep into a flaming abattoir."
"Yes, she did that." Gortin's words are neutral.
"Well… Captain Gortin? What will you do? She is riding south
to Gylaron's keep." Dencer pushes back the chair and stands,
like a predatory heron, jaw forward, beady eyes on the lancer.
"Let Gylaron face her. She lost some-score men at Suhl. She
will lose more at Lerona." Gortin smiles easily. "Then we will
see."
"Will you send for more lancers?" Dencer lurches around the
writing table and steps to the bookcase, where he extracts a
small leather volume.
"They could not reach Stromwer before the sorceress," says
Gortin.
"So they could not. And what am I to do? Throw myself on her
mercy? Die so that my ungrateful consort shall hold my
patrimony?" Dencer smiles bitterly. "Where is Dumar's
friendship now?"

"I am here, Lord Dencer. So are my lancers. We stand with
you."
"Stand with me… Ah, that sounds so reassuring." The tall lord
lifts the leatherbound volume. "Here. Tactics against sorcery.
From Pelletara. 'Do not allow a sorcerer close to your men. If
possible, fight any battles in rain or snow, preferably in a heavy
thunderstorm.' " Dencer looks at Gortin. "Perhaps your master
can bring us a thunderstorm."
"Thunderstorms are possible here in the Sudbergs." Gortin
shrugs. "I question whether the sorceress would choose to
attack in one. Or whether we could find one at the right glass to
cover any movement we might make." 
"For a representative of a mighty power, you offer little
comfort."
"I am here to fight, Lord Dencer."
"Fight you will." Dencer closes the book with a snap. "You may
go."
"Thank you, Lord Dencer." Gortin nods and turns.
50
SCOUTS report a wagon ahead, sir," the messenger puffed to
Hanfor, turning his mount to ride beside the arms commander.
"A wagon?" The veteran's eyebrows lifted.
"Just a wagon. Three people in it. Two horses. Nice matched
grays, sir. It be a fancy wagon, with brass trim."

Anna and Jecks listened. Anna blotted her forehead with a gray
cloth that was reddish brown with road dust turned to mud by
continual sweat under the hot late-spring sun. A line of puffy
clouds dotted the southern horizon, but seemed no closer than
they had at daybreak.
"And, ser, there be some armsmen, three, four deks south of the
wagon. They are not riding anywhere."
Hanfor turned to Anna. "Your wish, lady?"
"Let me see what I can see."
As Hanfor called out orders, and the column slowed to a halt,
and dust boiled around her, Anna dismounted, handing
Farinelli's reins to Rickel. She unstrapped the mirror pack and
then the lutar. She walked away from the column, forward
along the road shoulder until she was out of the dust. The
mirror went on the scraggly grass, uncovered, and she took the
lutar from its battered brown case and began to tune it.
Rickel and Fhurgen followed, mounted, with Farinelli. The
gelding whuffed and sidestepped as the two guards reined up.
Jecks and Hanfor arrived, walking their mounts and standing
back from Anna and the mirror.
It took three vocalises to get her cords clear. By then Farinelli
had settled down, and a dull muted buzz-the murmurs of
waiting armsmen- filled the midday heat.
Anna cleared her throat a last time, then sang.

"Show from the south, danger to fear, 
All the threats to me bright and clear…"
The glass showed Dencer's keep, nothing more.
She tried again, using Gylaron's name, and the mirror
remained silver.
"The harmonies say Gylaron offers no danger?" hazarded
Jecks. "Even with armsmen?" 
"That would be my guess," Anna answered. "There's nothing
close here. Nothing from Gylaron, either." She replaced the
lutar in its case, then wrapped the mirror and strapped both in
place on Farinelli. Then she remounted.
"Let us approach carefully, with arms ready," suggested
Hanfor. "Your guards before you."
Anna nodded, and Fhurgen and Rickel rode to the fore. She
coughed at the dust, and wiped more of the muddy film from
her forehead. Then she had a long swallow from her second
water bottle, almost empty.
They rode another dek.
Ahead, in the middle of the road, in a flat section deks from
woods or hills, with just bean plants nearby, there stood a
wagon. A solid man in maroon velvet, with a leather belt
bearing an empty scabbard, sat on the wagon seat, open hands
resting on his knees, palms up. His swarthy face was slightly
sunburned. With him were a boy and a girl, neither older than
ten, Anna judged.

On the wagon bed were two chests. Each was open, and from
each glimmered gold coins.
On a low hill to the south were dark spots, mounts and
armsmen, as the scout had said, a good three deks away. Anna
tried to see more detail, but could only catch an occasional glint
of sun on metal.
"All that gold, and no guards?" murmured Rickel from behind
Anna.
"Who needs guards? There's us here, and the Leronese at the
hilltop. You want to try to make off with any of it?" asked
Fhurgen.
Beside Anna, Jecks grinned.
The sorceress again looked past the wagon. The hill in the
distance, and the armsmen on it, seemed the same. Gylaron's
armsmen, they had to be.
Rickel and Fhurgen moved directly before her, their blades
drawn. All stopped a good thirty yards from the wagon.
"Lady Anna?" called the man on the wagon seat.
"Yes," answered Anna cautiously.
"I am Gylaron. These are my two oldest. In the chests is all the
coin that I have. All the golds of Lerona."
Anna shivered inside, fearing what might come, and not
knowing exactly why.

"I have received your scroll, but know you that I had made the
decision to come to you before it arrived." Gylaron coughed
and continued. "Do what you will with me. Do what you will to
my heirs. Hand over my lands to another. All I ask is that you
not visit the fires of dissonance upon my people." Gylaron's
eyes were bleak, but his voice was firm. "Do not do to Lerona
what you did to the keep of Sargol."
"Why should I trust you?" Anna asked, even as she fumbled to
extract the lutar from its case. "You have all your armsmen on
the hill there."
"They are there to keep anyone from stealing the golds, no
more."
Anna believed him, believed the bleakness and desperation in
his voice. 
"Will you swear allegiance to the Regency and to Lord Jimbob?"
"I will swear aught to save my people and my consort." 
Anna fumbled with the tuning pegs, then managed to clear her
throat.
Her voice cracked with phlegm on the first note. She broke off,
coughed it clear, and began again.
"Gylaron wrong, Gylaron strong, 
loyal be from this song. 
Gylaron now, Gylaron old, 
faithful be till dead and cold.
"Your heirs of lord, daughter and son, 

Holders of lands, this be done. 
Treachery prevent to all Defalkan lands 
with your cunning and your hands."
All three figures on the wagon seemed shrouded in silver for a
brief flash. All shivered.
Anna shuddered herself as a knife slashed through her skull,
leaving a dull and throbbing ache-and double images. Shit!
One little loyalty spell and you can't see or think very well. You
can destroy a whole keep and you can't ask for loyalty?
"Lady Anna?" Jecks' voice was low, concerned.
"I'll be all right." She forced herself erect in the saddle, then
nodded to Fhurgen. The guard let Farinelli carry her closer to
the wagon. Both guards flanked her, their blades out, as she
rode toward Gylaron. Jecks rode on the right of Fhurgen, and
his blade was also bare.
"Lord Gylaron."
"Lady Anna, I swear allegiance, by the harmonies, and upon
the heads-"
"No!" snapped Anna. "Not upon your children. Upon anything
else, but not upon them." She found herself, shaking,
wondering about her reaction, wondering how she'd known
what his words would have been. Her headache throbbed more
momentarily, and she blinked, but the double image remained.
Gylaron's eyes widened. So did those of the children.

"I… swear allegiance, by the harmonies, by my sire's honor
and spirit, to you, the regent, the Regency of Defalk, and to
Lord Jimbob, heir of the realm." Gylaron swallowed.
"Thank you." Anna took a slow breath, forced her voice to be
firm. "I'm… sorry, Lord Gylaron. I can't explain, but your
children must declare their allegiance, and I don't want your
loyalty on their heads." She turned her gaze to the boy, who
seemed older. "You are?"
"I'm Gylan. I'm nine."
"Will you swear to be loyal to the Regency, Lord Jimbob, and
the Realm of Defalk?"
"Yes, Lady Anna. I swear… allegiance." Gylan's voice stumbled
over the last word. "You won't kill us?" 
"I have no intention of killing anyone who is loyal. There's been
too much killing." Her eyes went to the child's father. "I will not
hesitate to kill those who are disloyal." Then she looked at the
girl, whose black hair was so dark that it nearly shimmered
blue-black in the sun. "What's your name?"
"I'm Reylana. I'll be eight at the season-turn."
"Will you swear allegiance? That you will be loyal to me and to
Lord Jimbob?"
"Da says I'm to do as you say."
Anna swallowed. "Promise me that you will be good and that
you will be loyal."
"I always try to be good. I'll be loyal." Reylana paused. "Can we

go home? I'm hot."
"I think that might be a good idea. In a moment," Anna said,
stifling a smile, before turning her eyes back to Gylaron and
the chests. "You will send this year's liedgeld and last year's to
Falcor to Counselor Dythya. Save the rest for your needs and
your people."
Gylaron went to his knees, if casting a wary look at all the
armsmen.
"No, my lord. That is not all," Anna forced her voice to be hard.
"You will assemble all your armsmen, all those on the hill to the
south, and all those in your keep. You assemble them without
arms, and they also will swear loyalty to me and to Lord
Jimbob. If one lifts his hand, all will suffer, and you will die. If
they swear, then I will leave Lerona in peace, except for your
obligations for levies and liedgeld, and those other duties of a
lord of the Thirty-three." She hoped she'd included everything,
and her eyes flicked to Jecks.
The white-haired lord nodded almost imperceptibly.
"You would leave us in peace, after what… after Suhl… ?"
Gylaron's tone was openly disbelieving.
"Lord Gylaron," Anna snapped. "If you learn nothing else,
learn that I keep my word, for better or worse. Sargol tried to
kill me when I was on my way to Synope, not even on the road
to Suhl. He refused to pay his liedgeld, and he laid traps along
every road to his keep. What would you have done?"
Gylaron lowered his eyes.

Anna had another thought. "I may ask for the use of a fewscore
of your armsmen… in service of the Regency. I will pay them."
Despite the double vision, she could see Hanfor nod.
"Anything you wish, lady and regent."
Anna nodded.
51
YOU'LL let him go ahead of us?" Jecks had asked. 
"The children will stay with us," Anna had answered. "With the
loyalty spell and them, I'm sure Gylaron will arrange matters
just as I requested." She hadn't been totally sure, but nothing
was absolute. She'd learned that a long time before.
They had reached the keep without incident, and Hanfor and
Alvar had ensured a clear and safe route to the wall overlooking
the keep's courtyard. Anna knew she didn't look all that
prepossessing, not in faded green shirt and riding trousers and
a battered brown hat. She had donned the spare purple tunic
with gold trim.
Gylaron bowed as Anna's group, surrounded by Fhurgen and
the other guards, their blades out, crossed the open space
toward the inner battlement. Behind came Liende and the
players, their instruments still in cases. Yuarl studied the old
walls in wonder. Palian shook her head slowly. The young
violinist Delvor just shuffled along. Duralt, the cocky-appearing
falk-hornist, strutted behind Liende. Below, packed in the
courtyard, stood the armsmen and servants and staff and

everyone else, it seemed.
"I told them that you had a message for us, and that we had
reached an agreement that would not require a battle, and that
I had agreed to swear allegiance to the Regency." Gylaron's
swarthy mouth crinkled. "I did not reveal any more details.
That was not difficult, since you provided none." He inclined his
head to the woman beside him, the one with the heart-shaped
face Anna had seen in the glass. "Lady Anna, might I present
my consort Reylan?"
"You are as beautiful as your image," Anna said. "I'm glad to
meet you."
"Why did you spare us?" asked Reylan. Her olive skin, flawless
complexion, red lips, and black hair made her a beauty. "What
trickery do you plan?"
Flanking Anna, Fhurgen shifted his weight, easing toward the
woman.
"I plan none, except to ensure the loyalty of Lerona. A regent
deserves that."
"Why? What business is this of yours?"
Anna wanted to shake her head. Instead she took a deep
breath. "Why is it so hard to understand? Defalk is threatened
on all sides-"
"Defalk has always been threatened on all sides."
"The Sea-Priests of Sturinn have cast their lot with Dumar,"
Jecks interjected, "and Konsstin will be moving his lancers into

Neserea."
"They are all gathered, lady," announced Hanfor. "Best you not
wait."
"We'll talk more later." Anna gestured to Lord Gylaron. "Join
me." Anna's steps were deliberate, trying to compensate for the
double vision that remained from the loyalty spell, as she
stepped toward the wall overlooking the courtyard. 
Gylaron paused, then stepped with Anna to the edge of the
inner battlement. Beside her stood Fhurgen and Rickel, each
bearing a mid-sized shield, gathered from somewhere, each
scanning the crowd in the courtyard below.
Gylaron's appearance, more than Anna's, quieted the murmurs.
Anna began to speak, trying to concentrate, to ignore the
continuing double vision. "You have a wise and thoughtful
lord. He has pledged support to the Regency, and to Lord
Jimbob. Lord Sargol and his armsmen rebelled. They are all
dead. Lord Arkad rebelled, but his people did not. Lord Arkad
is dead, and his people live." Anna turned to Gylaron. "The
Regency supports and confirms you, Lord Gylaron."
With the last words, Anna stepped back, leaving Gylaron
standing alone. A sighing crossed the courtyard, and Anna
could hear a few scattered voices.
"The regent has been fair-and more generous than any could
expect. Honor her." Gylaron turned and gestured to Anna.
Fhurgen released an audible sigh.

Anna stepped forward.
If the cries of "Honor the regent!" and "Long live the regent!"
were not overwhelming, they were at least suitable, and Anna
stepped back before they died away. So did Gylaron.
Rickel sheathed the blade he had held ready behind Gylaron.
"I am relieved you did not have to use that." The swarthy lord
took a long breath, then looked at Anna. "It is better this way."
"I'd hoped so," Anna answered. "It's better than a battle, isn't it?"
Rickel nodded solemnly.
"That it is."
"What else have you concealed?" asked Reylan.
"Not nearly as much as you think," Anna responded politely. "I
don't work that way."
Gylaron glared at Reylan and extended an arm. "Might we
offer you the hospitality of Lerona?"
Anna glanced toward Hanfor.
"And you, also, Arms Commander."
"There is much to do, yet," demurred Hanfor. "I would that I
could join you, but you will do well indeed with Lady Anna
and Lord Jecks. I am but a poor armsman."
"Scarcely." Anna grinned. "He has made it possible for Defalk
to survive, yet he would take no credit."

"Nor will I," answered Hanfor. "Not until all Defalk is strong
and united. Then, I will praise you for changing the world, and
I will take my leave for a quiet hill retreat." A wry smile
followed. "By then, I will be old enough to enjoy it."
"If you finish your duties, Arms Commander, please join us."
"Thank you." Hanfor nodded, then turned.
"My players will need refreshment," Anna said. 
"Your arms commander had said such," Gylaron answered.
"They' will eat in the hall next to us, if that is agreeable."
"That's fine." Anna nodded and stepped back to Liende. "If you
follow us, they've set up a meal for all of you in the hall next to
us." Her voice lowered slightly. "The atmosphere might be
more cordial there."
"You risk much," Liende said.
"I hope not." Anna shrugged. "I'm doing the best I can."
The regent followed Gylaron and his consort to the stairs, her
own guards seemingly everywhere. Jecks, hand on the hilt of
his blade, walked beside her. The small dining hall was down a
single flight of brick stairs and fifty yards along a vaulted
corridor, lit by intermittently spaced candles set in wall sconces
and protected by smudged glass mantels.
The players, led by a page or fosterling of some sort in faded
maroon, followed, Kaseth almost beside Liende.
Rickel stationed himself and two others at the door to the small
dining hall. Fhurgen followed Anna inside. The rectangular

table was set for five, one place at the head, and two on each
side. The linens were maroon, and the goblets crystal.
Gylaron gestured toward the head of the table. "Regent Anna."
"Thank you. We appreciate the effort and the hospitality."
"Would I be too blunt if I said that we appreciate your
forbearance and our lives?" Gylaron's tone was light, but the
dark eyes were somber.
"Honest, I'd say," Anna said as she sat. Fhurgen slipped behind
her and stood before the arras at the wall to her back.
"Our lady the regent is very direct," Jecks added. "Sometimes,
distressingly so. She is not from Liedwahr, and views matters
with a different eye, almost always for the best." He laughed.
"It has not always seemed that way at first."
"Ah… yes…"murmured Gylaron, with a sideways glance at
Reylan.
After a moment of silence that seemed endless, Anna glanced at
the pitcher before her. "Is that wine?"
"It is. It is our best, but poor compared to those from the hills of
Sudwei and Stromwer." Gylaron smiled apologetically.
"I suspect it is far better than what comes from my lands."
"I thought…" Gylaron's eyebrows rose. Then he closed his
mouth.
Anna shook her head. "With the death of Lord Brill, I inherited

the lands of Mencha, dry and to the east near the Sand Pass. I
am also, I have discovered, the Lady of Loiseau, and like you,
Lord Gylaron, I find I must pay liedgeld to the Regency." She
smiled wryly. "The domains of Falcor and Cheor belong to
Lord Jimbob. I was referring to the vinegar from Mencha, not
anything from anywhere else." Anna smiled inside. At least,
she'd gotten that part right.
"Lord Brill had no heirs?" asked Reylan.
"No. And no consort." Anna poured some of the wine and
passed the pitcher to Reylan.
"And you?" The dark-haired woman poured wine for herself
and for Jecks.
"My children remain on earth-the mist world." Anna had to
struggle not to squint against the continuing double vision,
although the headache had subsided to a dull and muted
throbbing.
Gylaron and Reylan exchanged glances.
"Haven't you heard?" Anna asked. "I thought everyone knew. I
have children nearly as old as you, Lady Reylan…" She
quickly ran through the story of how she had come to Erde and
ended up as regent. "So… I have no heirs, and Loiseau will
probably go to the next good sorcerer who supports Defalk."
She laughed softly. "It almost seems fated that way."
"The harmonies," mused Gylaron.
"So it has seemed," added Jecks.

A serving girl brought in a large maroon platter, setting it
before Anna. Another brought two baskets of still-steaming
bread. Anna glanced at the meat and the sauce. Poison?
Everyone was eating the same thing. All she had to do was wait
for the others. Besides, the glass hadn't shown treachery, and it
had been far more accurate than anything else. Is this what it
will always be like? Wondering? Becoming more and more
paranoid? She forced a smile and took a healthy serving of the
meat and the white sauce, then passed the platter to Reylan.
The dark bread looked and smelled good, and she broke off a
chunk.
Everyone looked at her. Hoping she wasn't too paranoid, she
took a bite of the bread, then a sniff, and a sip of the wine-easily
the best she had tasted in Liedwahr. "This is the best I've tasted
in Defalk."
Gylaron smiled at the enthusiasm in her voice. Even Reylan
did, momentarily.
"Nuural will be pleased."
"Not as pleased as I am," Anna answered, taking another sip.
For a time, the four ate, quietly. Anna was amazed, again, at
how hungry she was, and how much she ate. You should be
getting used to this. But would she ever?
"You seem reasonable," ventured Reylan. "Why… why…
Sargol?"
Anna frowned. "Sargol sent his armsmen to ambush me when I
was traveling to Synope. I wasn't even going to Suhl. He didn't

pay his liedgeld, and he brought in two companies of Dumaran
lancers-or they came for some reason."
"Lady Anna suffered two severe wounds from crossbow
quarrels," Jecks said quietly. "The scars are there still, I would
imagine." He inclined his head to her.
Anna pushed back the sleeve of the green linen shirt. A jagged
red scar ran along her forearm. "The other is… less…
accessible." Anna flushed.
"The bolt was enchanted and went through her breastplate,"
Jecks explained.
"When someone goes out of his way to attack you, and doesn't
pay liedgeld, and brings in foreign armsmen…" The sorceress
shrugged. "Then he locked himself in his keep and wouldn't
even talk. I offered terms." Not exactly the best terms, she
reminded herself. 
Once again, Gylaron and Reylan exchanged glances.
"Talk to her armsmen, any of them," Jecks said mildly,
breaking off a chunk of bread.
. "Ah… I could not," Gylaron demurred. His eyes went to
Fhurgen, then to the doorway where the blond and
broad-shouldered Rickel stood. Then the Lord of Lerona looked
at his wine again.
"Perhaps later," Jecks suggested. "At your leisure."
"You would change Defalk," Gylaron continued, abruptly as if
to change the subject. "Or so Sargol said. Yet you affirm Lord

Jimbob."
"Defalk will change, even if I died today," Anna pointed out.
"The only question is whether the people of Defalk benefit or
suffer with change."
"You did not mention the lords."
"No. I didn't. Those lords who understand that times must
change and help with that will benefit. The others…"
"Will suffer?"
Anna nodded, then added, "Because Defalk must change to
survive."
Gylaron nodded thoughtfully.
"Might I ask what will become of Lord Sargol's lands?" asked
Reylan, a tremor in her voice.
"I have confirmed that his oldest child is the heir. The former
chief armsman of Flossbend is running the lands for her for
now until she is older. The lady Herene-she is the sister of Lord
Nelmor and Lady Gatrune of Pamr-she is coming to serve as
guardian for the children." I hope.
"His daughter is the oldest?"
"Yes. She's the oldest."
Reylan smiled. "Some lords will not approve."
"I'm sure they won't, but Defalk can't afford to waste its
women." Anna took another sip of wine.

"You stood before my people. Were you not afraid someone
would attack?" asked Gylaron.
"I worried about it," Anna admitted, squinting and trying to
decide which image before her was the real one of Gylaron. 
Damned double vision…
"I would not have stood as a stranger before such," offered
Reylan.
"She has stood before the Dark Monks, before assassins, before
the Prophet of Music, before Sargol's archers… before many,"
said Jecks.
Gylaron shook his head. "You look young, but your words are
not. Nor your actions. Sargol was right to fear you." He smiled
sadly. "What would you have with me?"
"I told you. Do your duty to the regency and meet your
obligations as a lord of the Thirty-three." Is that so hard to
understand?
"I fear I do not understand." Gylaron pulled at his chin.
"Surely… no lord of reason would dispute such a call… and yet
many-or some…" Anna felt like exploding. Here we go again …
"There must be some mistake, Lady Anna . . . you must have done
something wrong… Why, no reasonable man would ever rebel if
you had been logical and reasonable. …"
She slowly unclenched her jaw. "Lord Gylaron, there has never
been anything hard about what I asked. I haven't asked
anything special of you or other lords. I haven't asked anything

that other lords haven't demanded before I ever came to
Defalk."
Gylaron looked down, with that blank male look of
incomprehension, combined with fear-fear that she was an
unreasonable and illogical woman who would explode on the
spot.
And she felt like exploding, which would do no good
whatsoever. She swallowed another sip of wine, then stood. "I
am sorry. For some reason, I feel rather… unsettled. I beg your
leave." She forced a bright smile, one she scarcely felt. "If you
will excuse me… Perhaps Lord Jecks can answer your
questions better than I can right now." Fhurgen followed her
out.
"You were kind," the guard said once they were in the corridor. 
"I can't afford to lose my temper at every pigheaded lord in
Defalk," Anna said bleakly, taking careful steps to ensure her
balance against the inaccuracies of double sight and the
distraction of her pounding headache. "There aren't enough
people who know anything as it is." 
For a moment, she stood in the dim corridor. Now what? A
page bowed. "Lady Anna, regent and sorceress? Would you
like to go to the guest quarters?"
"Yes, thank you." Why not? Maybe Jecks can smooth things over.
Sitting on a straight-backed chair before the writing table in the
guest chamber and leaning forward, Anna massaged her
forehead. Her eyes were closed, shutting out the strange double

images-hot and cold. The harmonious and disharmonious sides of
life? She should have eaten more, and held her temper better.
But she was so tired of men who either didn't understand or
pretended not to understand. Or, when confronted,
immediately suggested that the misunderstanding had to have
been her fault. Was she oversensitive? Probably.
She looked up at the knock on the door to the guest chamber.
"Lady Anna," announced Fhurgen, "Lord Gylaron to see you."
Anna stood warily, trying not to blink as the dark-skinned lord
stepped into the room. Fhurgen followed, his blade unsheathed. 
"I offer my apologies, Lady Anna." Gylaron bowed, deeply. "I
fear there have been many false tales traveling Defalk."
"I don't doubt that." Anna paused. Jecks had clearly smoothed
things over. What could she say? "Sometimes… truth is harder
to swallow than false tales, and my strangeness… the fact that I
don't know Defalk as well as you do… that can lead to
misunderstandings."
"Lord Jecks explained. I did not know how many arrows you
have taken for Defalk and those you lead." The swarthy lord
shook his head. "You are not as you look."
"Lord Gylaron, I am much older. I didn't look for what
happened to me." She paused, gauging his expression. "I have
no heirs here on Erde. I never will." :
"He told me that as well. That clears another fog." His face
wrinkled. "Yet… why would you not add my domains to Lord
Jimbob's?"

"Lord Jimbob will need more than Falcor to raise the coins a
leader of Defalk must have. He shouldn't ever have more than
that, but especaily not as young as he is. Too much power
corrupts."
"You would judge that?"
"Is there anyone else who can?" Anna asked bluntly. "I can't
pass anything on. I have no ties to anyone. I could be wrong,
but I saw how Lord Barjim couldn't raise the coins or armsmen
necessary to save Defalk. I also saw how Lord Behlem
squandered golds. I think a ruler should be somewhere
between." She smiled. "What do you think?"
"I think… Lady Anna, that I am fortunate to retain my head
and my lands. I will not trouble you more."
"Lord Gylaron…" Anna tilted her head slightly, wondering if
that would be too flirtatious even as she did. "I will always be
here to answer honest questions. I will do my best to preserve
Defalk. I make mistakes. Even sorceresses do. If you have a
question, if you have a concern, I will answer. I may not always
agree, but I will answer."
"Lord Jecks told me how you spent golds to gain seed corn for
the south. I would that I had known."
That, and Gylaron's opening words, were all the apology as she
would! ever get, but they were enough. "When you have
pressing needs, let me know."
"I thank you, lady. And Reylan would thank you as well, were
she here." Gylaron smiled. "We would see you at the evening

meal."
"I will be there," Anna promised.
After Gylaron had left, Anna walked to the window. She didn't
wait long before Jecks arrived.
"How did you manage that?" Anna asked warily.
"I did what Rickel suggested. I had him put on armsman's
greens Rickel took him around. He talked to armsmen. Anyone
and anywhere he wanted. Then he came back and we talked
some more." Jecks smiled and his eyes twinkled.
"So he doesn't believe I'm the bitch from dissonance any
longer?" Anna walked toward Jecks, seeing the lines around the
eyes, the fatigue.
"He has… a healthy… respect for you," Jecks answered.
"Like Birfels? He respects me, but can't stand what I'm doing."
"Gylaron is distressed that his world will be changed. I did
persuade him, as did his consort, that his situation is far better
than it would have been under anyone else, including Lord
Ehara or the Liedfuhr of Mansuur. Or the Evult."
"I'm so flattered." Anna snorted.
"Lady Anna… nothing had changed in Defalk for generations.
Then came the drought, and the Evult. Everyone expected that,
once the rains returned, so would the good days of the past."
"They weren't that good," muttered Anna.

"That matters not. For the lords, they think those days were
good."
"So they're upset now?"
"Not all. Some see beyond their noses and fields." Jecks smiled.
"Those like Clethner who live with their backs to Nordwei, or
Nelmor, who sees the sun set over Neserea."
"I don't know. I'm not a very good politician. The older I get,
the harder it gets to smile and pretend to be a good little girl. To
pretend that it's all my fault that they don't understand. To
pretend that I didn't make it perfectly clear when I spelled it out
in words a five-year-old should understand." Anna walked
back to the window and looked down at the courtyard, where
several score of her armsmen stood or sat under the shade of
overhanging battlements. "I never was that good."
"Give them time. Like Gylaron, they will see that all you bode
for Defalk is good."
"Do I? Really? I wonder." She turned again. "You're tired, and
what I did didn't help. Can you get some rest before supper, or
dinner, or whatever?"
"Supper, here in the south," Jecks said.
"Will you get some rest?" she asked again.
"I will have some food sent to you,". Jecks said. "You did not
eat."
"I couldn't." She met his eyes. "Please take care of yourself and
get some rest."

"As my lady commands."
"I don't command you," Anna said with a smile. "I doubt
anyone's ever commanded you."
"Not until now, lady." Jecks bowed.
"You're impossible."
"Just ancient."
"You're not that, either. Now go get some rest, and let a poor
sorceress think about how she can avoid swallowing her boots
again."
Jecks bowed once more, and Anna shook her head, ruefully, as
Jecks departed, graceful, muscular, and far more
understanding than most of Ws peers. Most? How about all of
them?
53
MANSUUS, MANSUUR
RAIN rattles against the shutters of the large study, and a
warm mist seeps in from the darkness outside and around the
louvers. Konsstin paces back and forth in front of the wide desk
table piled with scrolls, lit with a five-branched candelabra.
Thrap. The knock on the door is diffident, almost timid.
"Yes?"
The door opens, and Bassil peers in. "You sent for me, sire?"

Konsstin gestures broadly, his arm passing so close to the
candelabra that the flames flicker, twisting the vague shadows
that fall on the paneled walls and the bookcases.
The door closes, and Bassil enters, straightens his maroon tunic,
and pushes his dark hair back.
"So I woke you?"
"No, sire. I was reading over the dispatches…"
"What reports from Defalk?" asks Konsstin cheerily.
"Your seers are overworked." Bassil bows, briefly. "The
sorceress has subdued all but Stromwer."
"I suppose she turned them all into abattoirs, or ash heaps."
Konsstin forces a laugh.
"One abattoir, sire. That was Suhl. She did save the heirs and
established some arrangement for them to keep the holding."
"Clever. They can exert no power for years, and by then it
won't matter. Darkness, the woman's devious. Worse than
Cyndyth or Kandeth."
"Worse, sire, perhaps. She is not devious. All the seers and all
the dispatches report she is most direct. To date, she has always
kept her word." Bassil licks his lips in the dimness.
"Direct? That is even more devious. She keeps her word, but
when will she break it? She does what she says, no matter how
difficult. That makes it even easier, for who will oppose her,
knowing she is a powerful sorceress and will not be turned?

Dissonance, Bassil! If that's not devious, I don't know the
meaning of the word."
"Do you wish me to ready those scrolls I prepared for you
weeks ago?"
"Not yet. Not yet. Stromwer is a fortified mountain hold. Let us
see how she does against the devious Dencer, with all his aid
from Ehara."
"You hope she wins there?"
"I must hope that, dissonance take them all." Konsstin waves an
arm generally westward, beyond the closed shutters and
night-darkened balcony. "I have no love of the Sea-Priests. I'd
hope they all go down-or up-in discord." 
"Do you believe this sorceress will defeat them all?"
"She will take Dencer. None but a fool would gainsay that.
Whether she will turn his hold into an ashpit or find some way
to preserve it is the sole doubt." His fingers touch the silvering
brown beard. "She is clever. Too clever by far, and should she
gain another hold-"
"Gain another hold?" blurts Bassil. "She has gained none.
Synfal went to the heir…" He shuts his mouth as Konsstin turns.
"Bassil. At times you think. Tonight, you are tired. You must be
tired. Do you not understand? Lady Gatrune holds her
consort's lands; so does Lady Anientta. Administrators or
saalmeisters of the sorceress's choosing hold Synfal and Suhl.
She has bound Gylaron in some sorcerous fashion, and she will

do some-such similar to Dencer. Lord Jecks will do as she
wishes, as will Geansor and Birfels, for she holds their heirs, and
those heirs of several other holdings as well. The lords Clethner
and Vyarl are beholden to Jecks, and Lord Tybel will not cross
the sorceress so long as his daughter Anientta administers the
lands of Synope. Then, the sorceress holds Loiseau in her own
name. Dissonance! Do you not see? How many holds is that?"
Bassil's brow lifts as he calculates. "Just thirteen or fourteen. Out
of thirty-three."
"Bassil," Konsstin says gently. "Bassil… Lord Barjim could
count on five holds, at best. Lord Donjim controlled ten. This…
usurper… she has a greater rein on Defalk than any ruler in
generations. And she is a sorceress."
Bassil swallows. "I am tired."
"Not too tired, I hope, to understand what I have told you?"
"No, sire. I had not thought of it in quite that fashion."
"Best we always think of power in that fashion." The Liedfuhr
gestures toward the door. "Get some sleep. We will talk
tomorrow."
Bassil bows.
Outside, the warm rain splats against the shutters. Inside, the
candles flicker as the Liedfuhr paces.
54
Aware of the sweat beading on her forehead, Anna ignored it

and studied the image in the glass again. At her shoulder,
Hanfor continued to sketch. Jecks stood to Anna's left, also
surveying the view in the hazy silvered glass.
Dencer's keep-a square assembly of gray stones-stood on a rise
at the middle of a narrow valley that resembled a T. Behind
and to the south of the keep was a small town. Mountains
terminating their lower slopes in high cliffs flanked the keep on
the east and west, cliffs less than a dek from the keep's side
walls. 
Dencer or some previous Lord of Stromwer had cut away the
slope both in front and in back of the keep, replacing it with
two polished stone walls that glistened like shining water even
through the glass. On top of those stone-tiled earthworks were
walls, easily four yards high, so that the total smooth face was
easily fifty yards in height from the cut base of the hill on both
north and south to the top of the wall that stretched from cliff to
keep and then from the far side of the keep to the other cliff.
A single stone road ran the length of the valley-from the north
southward and up an inclined ramp through the hill cut to a
fortified gate at the crest of the modified hill and then around
the walls of the keep itself on the east side and then through
another gate, and down the second stone tiled berm and to the
town. The space on the rise on either side of the keep had been
kept cleared and in pasture, and the buildings of the town did
not begin until almost a half-dek to the south of the keep, well
south of the southern stone berm.
On the southernmost end of the valley was the east-west road,
running along a stream that seemed to flow downhill from the

west. Anna frowned. She would have thought the keep would
have been at the south end of the valley to protect the town.
"The road to the west winds up into the Sudbergs and travels to
Dumar," noted Jecks.
"And I suppose the one of the west goes to Ranuak?" Anna
rubbed her eyes, glad that the double-imaging from her last
foray into Darksong had finally disappeared.
"To the port of Sylwa."
Farther to the north the valley constricted into a gorge, the
same narrow defile that Anna's earlier scrying had revealed as
the site of Dencer's other precautions-netted rocks and boiling
oil.
The mirror frame began to smoke, and Anna released the
image with one of the release couplets she'd developed.
"Let this scene of scrying, mirror filled with light, 
vanish like the darkness when the sun is bright…"
Her eyes flicked away from the burned square on the wall
beside the mirror that represented the firing of the first mirror
in the chamber when she hadn't released the spell quickly
enough.
After a moment she walked to the narrow window of the guest
chamber and let the warm wind blow around her, cooling the
perspiration that long scrying efforts seemed to bring.
"The keep has three layers of defense," observed Hanfor. "None
of the others in Defalk have such."

"Once it was needed," said Jecks. "The Suhlmorrans wanted
Stromwer. So did the ancient Matriarchs, and so did Lord
Ehara's ancestors." 
"And none of them got it, I assume?" asked Anna.
"No. Uhlan the elder lost an entire army trying to annex it to
Suhlmorra."
"Why?" She turned from the window, her eyes on the rosewood
antique high bed that had given her a headache to spell for
vermin.
"Now, with the fast ships, it makes less difference. Still,
Stromwer stands on the shortest land routes between Dumaria
and Sylwa and Encora, and between all of southern Defalk and
Dumar."
"What about Sudwei?" Anna pursued. "I thought Geansor held
the access to the South Pass."
"He does, and that is an easier route from the east and middle
of Defalk, but the easiest way to transport goods to Dumar was
to use the Falche down to north of Abenfel, and then take the
roads through Stromwer."
Anna tried to summon up her mental map of Liedwahr,
concentrating. Finally, she nodded. Her eyes went to Hanfor.
"Any ideas of how we can get close to the keep?"
"The road is the only entrance to the keep," Hanfor said tiredly.
"Unless one travels through Ranuak or Dumar."
"We cannot approach within deks of the walls," added Jecks.

"Not unless we wish to be bathed in oil and buried under
boulders."
Both men looked at Anna, as if she were supposed to find a
solution.
I'm not the military type. I'm a singer, for heaven's sake. Anna
stepped past the low chest at the end of the bed, where the lutar
rested, and looked down at the table, at the map Hanfor had
sketched from session after session with the glass.
"I don't want to turn Stromwer into another flaming mass." 
Why not? You did that to Vult, and Suhl wasn't much better.
"That's why," she muttered to herself. As she saw the puzzled
expressions on the faces of Jecks and Hanfor, she added
hurriedly. "Talking to myself…"
Her throat was dry, and she refilled the goblet with
orderspelled water, taking a long swallow. "Would you like
some?"
"No, thank you."
Jecks shook his head.
Anna glanced at the map on the table and then away. Two
days of scrying, and sketching, and talking, and they still
couldn't figure out how to get close enough to the keep to use
sorcery to affect those within. She could bring the walls and
town down, but she couldn't find a way to take Stromwer
without massive force. The way the valley and keep were set
up, any force massive enough to destroy Dencer's outer
defenses would flatten town and keep. At least, any force she

knew how to use.
"We haven't heard any response to our request that he put
down his arms, have we?"
"I doubt that we will," Hanfor answered. "The scroll was
delivered. We know that."
The lack of response from Dencer brought the question back to
force. Is there any other way in Defalk? She cast in her mind for
another approach, then frowned. 
"I don't understand how Barjim managed to get Wendella as a
hostage." Anna turned to Jecks. "He certainly couldn't have
taken her by force."
"Alasia captured her on her way from her brother's."
Her brother? Anna tightened her lips. Remembering all the
names was still hard for her. Mietchel! That was it; he was the
Lord of Morra. The sorceress grinned. "Did she put on finery to
do it?"
Jecks' brows knit in momentary puzzlement. Then he laughed.
"I wager she did, though she talked little of it. She said it
needed to be done. Barjim was not wholly pleased."
Anna bet he hadn't been.
The moment of humor didn't solve the problem.
In her mind, she almost saw two images, but not Darksong
images- that of the near-impregnable Stromwer, surrounded on
three sides by step cliffs and canyons and the heavily fortified

entrance and that of the ripped and sundered hills of
Appalachia in her childhood, the results of strip and deep
mining.
Why the two images? Was her subconscious trying to tell her
something?
Mining? What did that have to do with it? Ditches, holes,
tunnels… "Tunnels! That's it."
Now all he had to do was find somewhere that a short tunnel
would reach a cliff or flat spot overlooking Stromwer. Or where
she could create one. All… ? Are you sure you want to do this?
She inhaled slowly, then let her breath out, as she realized both
Jecks and Hanfor stood waiting for her to explain.
55
ANNA coughed, then spat clear the mucus and inhaled dust.
Far-inelli whuffed, with the slightest hint of a head toss, as he
carried her along the back trail that headed west away from the
main road. Eventually the trail would circle back along the
heights of the low mountains on the west side of Dencer's keep.
Eventually. Farinelli whuffed again.
"I know. It's hot and dusty. There's a stream somewhere
ahead." She felt guilty as she took a drink from her water bottle.
"How far?" asked Jecks. 
"According to the glass, two or three deks, if I remember right."
"Horses could use the water, lady," Fhurgen said from behind

her.
"I know," she repeated. "But I can't bring the water closer."
Despite the rains she had brought to Defalk, there hadn't been
any moisture in nearly a week. Several hundred horses were
enough to churn up dust, especially with slow riding up steep
and narrow roads. The light wind out of the north was just
strong enough to carry the dust of the main body up and
around Anna and those in the van.
The first two days out of Lerona hadn't been bad. An almost
straight road south, flat, and they'd made good time through
the bean fields and meadows. Then they'd reached the low hills
that signified the beginning of Dencer's holding.
Of course, she'd received no reply to her scroll-one way or the
other. He can't even conceive of dealing with a woman regent…
or those lancers from Dumar aren't letting him… or… ? She
didn't know. All that was certain was that she had a rebel lord
on her hands who, for whatever reason, seemed inclined to
respond only to force. So what else is new?
She also had a score of Gylaron's armsmen. She hadn't thought
she would need any, but Jecks had pointed out that taking
some armsmen would ease matters with Gylaron. Ms pride,
mainly. And she could always call for a fewscore more if she
needed them.
Anna brushed more dust off her sleeves. The main road had
gotten narrower, and even dustier. The trees had gotten shorter,
with more low evergreens and less broadleafs, and

consequently less shade.
"… wish she'd find a better way…"
"… we took three keeps now… lost maybe a score… wager
'gainst that if you want… eat dust all summer…"
"… can't breathe…"
Red dust, and more sandy red dust, swirled up from the main
body. Anna pushed back the battered brown felt hat and
blotted her sweating forehead. The gray square of cloth was
once again a muddy red.
Beside her, Jecks rode silently, his silver hair marked with
blotches of red where sweat and dust had combined.
"A penny… a copper," she corrected, "for your thoughts." She
shifted her weight in a saddle that had gotten progressively
harder and less comfortable.
"You would have us travel a long way to avoid killing Dencer.
Yet you dislike the man." Jecks' words were slow, thoughtful.
"I don't have any problem with killing Dencer, necessarily," she
answered. "I don't want to turn another keep into something
like Suhl." Anna shrugged. "We can't get close enough to
Stromwer to use sorcery- the kind that won't kill
everyone-unless we do this."
Jecks nodded, the kind of nod that told Anna he wasn't quite
sure he believed her.
Did she believe herself-or was she overreacting to the disaster at

Suhl? How much force is necessary in a place like Defalk? Is Jecks
right? Would I be better off doing it the simpler way? Can I at
least cast one more loyalty spell… to spare Defalk. 
The sorceress took a deep breath. Or is this to ease your
conscience? She winced at the thought.
As Farinelli carried Anna to the top of a low ridge, momentarily
out of the dust, she could see the winding strip of green in the
narrow valley ahead, green that showed the promised stream.
On the other side of the stream, the trail would back eastward,
toward Stromwer.
Toward another set of gambles with spells, another effort to
resolve violent feelings with as few deaths as possible. And for
what? So you can ensure a marginally-grateful twelve-year-old
will inherit what his father wasn't strong enough to keep? So
that you can't move without guards following every motion? So
that everything you do is questioned?
Anna pushed away the thoughts and leaned forward to give
Farinelli a solid thump on the neck. "We're getting there, fellow.
It won't be long."
56
ANNA packed away the glass and strapped the leather bundle
to the saddlebags once again. Then she remounted Farinelli,
swaying slightly as she swung into the saddle.
"You must eat." Jecks eased his mount beside hers and
extended a chunk of bread.

"Thank you." Anna nodded, took a bite of the bread, and
chewed. "Another dek, I'd guess." She pointed. "About halfway
up that next section. By the clump of pines there."
"Junipers," Jecks corrected.
"Junipers, whatever." She chewed another mouthful. Why
didn't he understand that she hated being corrected over little
things. What difference did it make whether it was a pine or a
juniper? She'd just pointed out a clump of trees as a reference
point.
Were men everywhere like that? Avery had been worse, she
had to admit, correcting everything. Then, he'd been king of the
comprimarios, able to get any secondary role anywhere, but
never the big roles.
Anna laughed to herself. She had the biggest role ever-sorceress
and regent-and, fortunately and unfortunately, it was for real.
She unstop-pered the water bottle, her third for the day, and
took another long swallow.
The dust puffed from under the horses' hoofs. The wind raised it
around them and coated them all with fine red powder. Anna
took another swallow of water and finished the bread. Without
speaking, Jecks extended another chunk. 
"Thank you." Anna took it. She was being bitchy, in a way, but
he wasn't the one who had to stand out there and wonder if the
spell would be right, if fire would turn and kill them all or
whatever. Or if she would fail. Sorcerers did fail. She'd seen
Brill die from failing, and she'd overmastered the Evult. Who

was to say that another sorcerer wouldn't show up with greater
power?
Like the Sea-Priest or the young man in brown with hate in his
eyes. She'd tried to find out more from the glass, but all she
could see was that he lived in a small town and worked in some
sort of store, a chandlery, it looked like in the silver-mist visions.
Without thinking, Anna discovered she had eaten all the bread.
"You were hungry," Jecks observed, as if that explained
everything.
"Thank you. I was." Anna let him think that she had only been
hungry. She wasn't in the mood for explaining, and now wasn't
the time. Instead, she studied the steep hillside to her left as
Farinelli carried her closer to the pines-the junipers, she
reminded herself-on the downhill side of the trail. Beyond the
dry gorge to her right, the hills climbed into even higher peaks,
with barren but not snow-covered summits, mountains almost
like plateaus tilted slightly sideways.
Opposite the junipers, Anna reined up, then dismounted and
handed Farinelli's'reins to Rickel. She took out the glass, and
unwrapped it again. Then she took out the lutar and retuned it,
not that it needed much work in traveling less than a dek.
Words drifted uphill as she touched a tuning peg.
"… hope we're wherever we're going…"
"Don't hope too much. You might have to fight, then."
"… avoids fights when she can…"

"… lucky we are, there… not like Barjim or Donjim…"
Then, reflected Anna, clearing her throat for a vocalise, Barjim
and Donjim hadn't been able to call on sorcery. Would her
voice last? She pushed that thought back as well. Not the time
for that…
Finally, her fingers touched the strings.
"Show me now and show me clear, 
Where I stand to make a tunnel near…"
In the glass, Anna stood perhaps a yard uphill of where the
glass lay on the dust of the trail. The image in the mirror was
crystal-clear, and the spell took nearly no energy at all, a
confirmation of her closeness.
After quickly clearing the image from the mirror, the sorceress
glanced at Hanfor and Jecks. "This is the place." She almost
laughed, thinking of someone else's words in another canyon a
world away and years past. Careful… don't get punchy. You
haven't even started. Worry? Fear?
She turned and looked for Liende. "Chief player?"
"We are coming, Regent."
As the players gathered and began to tune, Hanfor called
orders in the background. 
"Alvar, take the purple company up to the crest. Jirsit, the
greens back to the last hilltop there. Scouts…"
"The building spell?" asked Liende.

"The second one," Anna confirmed.
"After that? Do you know?"
"The loyalty spell… if it goes well. If not," Anna winced, "the
flame spell."
"Let us pray to harmony it goes well," Liende murmured.
It won't… Anna pushed that thought back as well and cleared
her throat, bending to retrieve the mirror. First, she packed
away the lutar. Then came the traveling mirror. The sorceress
noted that the frame was so black it was almost polished like
hard coal. How long would this one last? Like singing, sorcery
was hard on everyone and everything involved.
Jecks had dismounted and stepped closer to Anna, leading his
horse. "So far… there's no sign of Dencer's folk."
"That's fine with me." Anna glanced at the wall of red-and-gray
rock layers. Red and gray? That seemed odd to her, but it had
been twenty years since freshman geology.
She looked up. Above and before her, the rocks climbed several
yards more. To either side they towered even farther. The
mountains had been Stromwer's protection for years.
"I like it not, not seeing your enemy." Jecks chuckled. "Like as
not, we'll see them soon as your tunnel appears west of the
keep."
"It won't be over the keep. It's still almost a dek from the
overlook I'm trying to create to the keep walls. That's as close as

we can get."
"Is that close enough."
"It will have to be." Anna offered a cold smile. "If it's not… well,
I can always resort to turning everything into molten rock." She
bit off the next words, the ones like… and what would that do
for the sensibilities of your northern lords? "I hope I don't have to
do that."
"Nor I."
Anna stepped away and started a vocalise… softly. She didn't
want to strain her cords. She had no idea how many spells she
might need on the other side of the tunnel-assuming she could
create a tunnel, assuming it didn't collapse, assuming… The
sorceress forced her mind onto the vocalise, onto the exercise
itself, shutting out everything.
A second vocalise followed the first.
"Lady Anna?" Liende's voice broke through the sudden
comparative quiet, where the only sounds were those of horses
and the murmurs of the one company Hanfor had pulled back
from where Anna and Jecks and the players stood. Even
Fhurgen and Rickel had moved their mounts back, and Anna's
and Jecks' as well. "Lady Anna, we are ready when you are."
The sorceress and regent nodded.
"The second building song!" Liende gestured.
Anna took a deep breath. Are you crazy? Trying to use sorcery
to drill a tunnel through a mountain? But it's not a mountain,

just a short chunk of rock, and that's not as bad as calling up lava
from underground… She cut off the mental dialogue and
hummed, trying to get her pitch. Then she began the spell. 
"… remove all boulders, clay and stones. 
Fix the braces in their proper zones… 
Drill the tunnel straight and true 
and square form this hill to my pattern there…
"Smooth the rock and make it hard…"
The problem with spells wasn't just the words in rhyme but
making sure that the word matched the note values as well,
and sometimes-too many times, it seemed-she was shading
notes or note values or words, or all three. Just so long as it's
musical…
The ground shivered. The unseen chime, or chimes, or chords
that no one seemed to sense but Anna, rang across the skies, for
a moment, turning the entire heaven bright blue, before the
scattered and puffy clouds reappeared.
Dust, and a gout of hot air geysered from the rock in front of
Anna, and she backed up, squinting, then closing her eyes.
There was the patter of rain, except it was tiny fragments of
rock.
As the haze settled, Anna opened her eyes back to a squint,
peering through the semicircle that arrowed into the
improbable gray-and-red rock. At the other end was a
semicircle of light, light that seemed to cascade and flare
around her.

She staggered and sat down.
Jecks knelt beside her, offering bread and hard yellow cheese.
"You need to eat."
"Have to hurry…" she muttered.
"You cannot move until you eat."
"Drink?" she asked.
He also had her water bottle, and she took a long swallow, then
a mouthful of bread, then one of cheese, and then more water.
The pulsating glare receded.
"Not too bad." Anna looked at the tunnel. "I still worry."
"Keep eating," said Jecks. "If your spell is as you planned, what
can Dencer do? If it isn't, you'll have to be strong."
She drank more of the water, and then finished the bread,
before she looked back. Behind her the players sat on the rocks
and the trail itself and followed her example.
When she had finished, Anna slowly stood and stretched.
Liende walked slowly toward the sorceress. "How many more
spells?"
"I hope one-the loyalty spell. Otherwise, the long flame spell.
I'm going to see." Anna started toward the tunnel.
Jecks took two quick steps to join her. Both Fhurgen and Rickel
hurriedly dismounted, handing off their equine charges to
other guards, and scurried after Anna, shields on their arms. 

Anna took one step after another, the way getting dimmer as
she walked. The floor felt warm, almost uncomfortably so, but
a breeze blew from the eastern end. Anna kept walking, but the
semicircle of light at the other end grew but slowly.
Her nose began to itch, and she sneezed, abruptly, three times
in a row. Sweat dripped down the back of her shirt.
"Hot as dissonance here," murmured someone-Rickel or one of
the guards who trailed them.
At last, she peered out of the tunnel onto the ledge-and the
sunlight. Her eyes watered. At the end was a low wall,
waist-high. Did I put that in? She almost wanted to laugh. She
hadn't remembered visualizing a safety wall, but her fear of
heights had definitely kicked in.
With a swallow, Anna stepped in the sunlight.
"A moment, lady," said Fhurgen.
Fhurgen and Rickel, bearing the shields they used to protect
her, stepped out onto the ledge.
Anna followed them, with Jecks beside her, out to the wall. She
forced herself to look down at the valley beyond. The tunnel
and ledge were more than a hundred yards above the valley
floor. With another swallow, she surveyed Stromwer.
Less than a hundred yards to the east, and a hundred yards
below, lines of archers were forming up, still ragged, but the
bows were obvious-both for the larger group in tan and the
smaller group in crimson. So were the four crossbowmen to

their left. Behind them, were over two-score mounted figures,
most in cr imson-the Dumarans. Behind the archers was an
angular figure waving a blade and shouting commands.
"Best you hurry," Jecks suggested. "Their shafts could reach the
ledge."
"They can lift arrows that far?"
As if to answer her question, an arrow arched over the wall and
clattered on the stone.
Rickel and Fhurgen lifted the shields, and Anna turned and
called down the tunnel. "Players!"
"Players!" Jecks' heavier voice boomed against the stones.
Anna dropped to her knees, letting the wall shield her, and took
another look at the armsmen below. Two blocks of archers-one
in tan, one in crimson-were loosing shafts rapidly. Was the tall
figure on horseback beside the archers in tan Dencer himself?
The Lord of Stromwer had to have had some warning, some
scrying ability, to have gotten his men formed up so quickly.
Anna could see Dencer had sheathed his blade and was
drawing a bow from horseback. She ducked behind the shield.
Another arrow clattered against the smoothed rock that
reinforced the tunnel mouth, then dropped onto the stone of the
ledge.
"Players!" Jecks boomed again, his fingers tightening on the hilt
of a blade all too useless from where he viewed the valley. 
A figure paused at the tunnel mouth.

"Stay there!" Anna didn't need to lose another chief player.
"Line up everyone right there inside the tunnel. They've got
dozens of archers. I'll need the flame song for them."
Liende paled.
"Just for the archers and the horsemen," Anna emphasized.
"Then we'll have time for the loyalty spell."
She tried not to wince… but she didn't trust Dencer, even under
a loyalty spell, and Dencer didn't deserve mercy. You're the
avenging angel now? She pushed away the thought, and
cleared her throat, going through the simple "polly-lolly-pop"
vocalise on her knees. It didn't feel right. She had to cough and
clear out her throat. "I need to stand up."
Fhurgen and Rickel locked shields.
"When I tell you, you'll have to step to the side," Anna said.
"Yes, lady." Fhurgen grinned grimly. "But not until then."
Another arrow clattered, this time against the safety wall.
Behind her, a ragged warm-up tune followed as she struggled
to clear her cords.
Three more arrows bounced from various angles onto the ledge.
A heavier clank announced a crossbow bolt that skidded almost
to Anna's feet.
"Now!" snapped Anna. The arrows would only get more
accurate.

"The flame song. On my mark. Mark!"
The tune was ragged, but not too bad, Anna hoped as she
launched into the spell.
"Turn to fire, turn to flame 
Those below who reject my name 
Turn to ash all tools spelled against my face 
and those who seek by force the Regency to replace…"
Another volley of arrows arched over the wall, one sticking into
the shield Fhurgen held, several others clattering against the
stone of the cliff above and around the arch of the tunnel
entrance.
"Turn to fire, turn to flame…"
Fiery spikes of flame seared out of the sky, more like lances of
flame than arrows, and the harmonic chord that only Anna
seemed to hear strummed deeply, once, twice.
Anna winced as the screams rose from below, as another volley
of arrows clattered on the stone, and as more lances of fire
slashed from sky to valley.
57
STROMWER, DEFALK
The angular Dencer peers down at the clouded image in the
glass-an image that shows a woman standing on a road and
singing at a rock face. Behind her are the even more shadowy
figures of players.

"Where is she?" demands the Lord of Stromwer. "I know she
works sorcery. She always works sorcery. But where works she
this sorcery?"
"We will try, ser." The sweaty-faced man in tan linens gestures
to the three players and begins to sing.
"Now show in the shining light of song 
Where the sorceress may be found…"
The singer coughs and the images shiver back into silver mists.
"Show me! Now!" snaps Dencer.
The seer coughs again, then repeats the refrain, the violinos
matching his thin voice.
This time the cloudy image shows horsemen along a narrow
trail.
"Not much better. Thank the harmonies I know my lands."
Dencer glances at the seer. "Cannot you do better than that?"
"Ser… she is powerful."
"What use are you all? Worthless! Why have I only the weak
and worthless?" The lank-haired lord knocks aside the seer with
his gauntleted left arm and strides from the room. "Gortin!
Zerban! Form up the archers! Now!"
Dencer still yells commands as he rides from the stables and
closes with the waiting Dumaran captain. "Are your men
ready?" The Lord of Stromwer gestures toward the gate to the
south. "Zerban! We ride!"

"I have followed your orders, Lord Dencer, but I see no
sorceress."
"Had we waited until we saw her, too late would it have been.
Are all you Dumarans so stupid?" Dencer urges his mount
toward the gate. "Archers! Ride to the west! After me!" The
gates groan open, and the armsmen in tan leathers flank
Dencer as he rides out through the gates and along the berm
road to the west.
Gortin gestures to his own lancers and smaller number of
mounted archers, then follows the gawky-looking Lord of
Stromwer through the gates and across the flat grass of the
high berm toward the cliffs to the west of the keep.
"Why here?" asks the Dumaran officer when he finally draws
his mount alongside that of Dencer, more than halfway to the
base of the cliff. 
"The bitch uses sorcery, and if she succeeds, she will make her
way through that low point in the cliffs." Dencer draws his
blade and gestures. "There. See you not the rock steaming?"
Gortin half ducks as the weapon swirls by him, then looks to
the cliffs ahead and overhead. As Dencer has said, steam or
mist-something boils off the rock nearly a hundred yards up
from the base of the cliff.
"She will level that mountain, if it takes that, to get to us. She is
already calling on dissonance to support her attack." The tall
lord reins up and half turns his mount. He stands in the saddle
easily, despite his awkward appearance, and gestures with the

long blade. "Form up the archers! Here! Now! Right before me!"
Gortin gestures, and the Dumaran archers begin to form to the
south of the tan-clad forces of Stromwer. Dencer watches as the
archers tumble off of mounts and form on the long grass before
him.
Above them and to the west, a dull rumbling fills the midday
air, and gray clouds of dust spurt from the cliff's side.
"A tunnel… The bitch has created a tunnel… Proves she's not
all-powerful." Dencer gestures with the long blade
again-toward the gray-and-red layers of the cliff that lies less
than a hundred yards from where his archers prepare.
The gray mist swirls away in the light breeze, revealing a
rock-walled balcony jutting out of the cliff. Gortin's jaw drops
momentarily, but he closes his mouth quickly and glances
toward Dencer.
"Your lord-did he not realize the danger this sorceress poses?"
Dencer's voice oozes with irony. "The great Lord Ehara… he
did not realize?"
"I… think not, Lord Dencer."
Two shields appear above the wall on the cliff, and then a figure
in greens-apparently blonde-peers over one of the shields.
"The bitch! She's there already," mutters Dencer. His voice rises
as he sheathes the blade. "Zerban! Archers! Blanket that place
with shafts! Now! Every shaft you have!"
To his left, Gortin echoes similar commands, and the half-score

of crimson-clad Dumarans begin to loft shafts over the short
expanse of wall. Some arrows bounce off the rock.
"More shafts!" insists Dencer, stringing his own great bow, and
then loosing one shaft, then another.
The sounds of horns, then of strings, waft out over the
valley-followed by a strong voice, a clear voice, a voice that
makes that of Dencer's seer seem as nothing.
The Lord of Stromwer glares, nocks another shaft, and releases
it. "Bitch! Bitch! Get you if I can…" His voice is low and ragged.
The puffy white clouds to the south and west darken into gray,
and the ground seems to rumble.
Dencer looses another shaft. 
A lance of fire appears from somewhere in the sky and sizzles
into the archers before Dencer.
"Ooooh…" The muted moan of the dying man mixes with the
odor of burning flesh.
"Aeeeiii... aeeiii…"
Fire lances begin to fall as fast as raindrops in a thunderstorm,
and the screams of the dying rise with the flames that engulf
them.
Dencer nocks yet another shaft and lofts it toward the stone
wall above him. "Bitch! No sorceress… No woman… Bitch!"
He struggles to reach one more shaft as the fires enfold him,
tries to lift it to the burning bow, while he clamps his lips shut.

Then he raises one fist… slowly… before his charred figure is
thrown from the back of the mount that rears to escape the
flame, rears… and collapses under the rain of fire that appears
to be everywhere there are armsmen.
58
AS Anna finished the spell, she took a deep breath, then began
to cough. Rickel and Fhurgen raised the shields around her.
"Oh…" Behind her was a muted cry, and a sound of someone
falling.
She turned, still coughing, as the arrows continued to rain
down on the rock-walled platform, even as the few clouds
began to darken, the ground seemingly to rumble. Fiery spikes
flared from the skies, bright enough to dazzle her eyes, and
with the spikes came cries… and screams from below. Screams
that Anna ignored as she saw the body.
On the ledge sprawled one of the more newly recruited players.
A crossbow bolt had gone straight through his neck. Even as
she scurried toward the figure, with blood that had welled up
everywhere, Anna could tell it was too late, probably a slashed
carotid artery. 1'he odds against something like that were
tremendous, but somehow, warfare didn't always take odds
into account.
Shit… damn…
Anna looked over at Liende, trying to recall the young violist's
name. Hasset-he'd been one of the cheerful ones. Blond,
curly-haired, laughing, and he was dead. Like that. How

many? How many more?
As she questioned, both the fire lances and the screams died
away, and only the odor of burning grass and burned flesh
drifted upward from the valley. Only? Anna swallowed, trying
not to cough again, afraid she'd end up retching if she did.
After a moment, she turned her eyes to Liende. "I'm sorry. I
tried." 
"I know." Liende sighed. "It is war."
War-was that what she was good at?
Several of the players swallowed as they looked down.
"We're not done." Anna caught their eyes. "You need to get
ready for the next spell… or what we've done won't mean
anything." Her eyes went to Liende. "Out by the wall. It's safe
there now."
"Places," coughed Liende. "By the wall."
Anna walked slowly back to the overlook. Both Fhurgen and
Rickel had lowered their shields. Jecks stood by them.
Below, streaks of black seared the earth. Small patchy fires
burned in several places. Man-sized heaps of charcoal dotted
the green meadow. Three horses galloped free. The others had
been less fortunate, sharing the fate of their riders.
Poor damned horses… but you can't keep coming up with spells
for everything… Except that the problem was that spells had to
be relatively short, and that meant that people-and

horses-suffered. Then, that was true of blades, arrows, and
nuclear weapons.
Anna cleared her throat.
The remaining nine players straggled out onto the walled ledge.
Kaseth, almost tottering, still clutched his violino. Delvor
marched out almost defiantly, followed by Yuarl and Duralt,
still half strutting.
Typical brass player… Anna forced her mind back to the keep
below. "The new spell… the loyalty spell. On my mark." With
the players behind it, rather than just her lutar, she hoped that
the effect wouldn't be as draining on her and more effective on
Stromwer.
"Mark!" Liende gestured and began to play herself.
Anna went into the song, without words, without preamble.
"Folk of Stromwer, weak or strong, 
loyal be from this song. 
Be you young or be you old, 
faithful be till dead and cold.
"Your heirs of all, daughters and sons, 
workers of lands, while time runs 
Treachery prevent to all Defalkan lands 
with your cunning and your hands."
The slash of pain was so intense, the pounding through her
skull like so many jackhammers, the flares in her eyes so hot,
that she could feel her knees fold like an instantly-struck set.

And the darkness was not cold or distant, but hot, prickling.
She could feel herself twitching, moaning, and unable to move,
before the hot blackness swept over her and swallowed her.
59
ENCORA, RANUAK
The dark-haired woman strides past the guard outside the door
and into the sunlit study. Her eyes fix the gray-haired
Matriarch, ignoring the older man in the straight-backed chair
across from the writing desk.
"Veria, I had asked not to be interrupted. I presume you have
information of great import." The Matriarch's words are level.
"Matriarch, you said that this sorceress used only Clearsong.
You said that she was with the harmonies." Veria's cold eyes fix
on the cherubic face of her mother. "All Liedwahr felt the
dissonance of this… abomination."
"I have no doubts that the sorceress meant well, daughter." The
Matriarch's face clouds.
" 'Meant well.' You will find an excuse for everything that she
does. Did not the Prophet of Music mean well? Did not the
Evult mean well?"
"You take on too much, daughter," says Ulgar quietly, rising
from the chair.
Veria's eyes flash. "You would see nothing but perfection in
every word-"

"What happened to the sorceress?" asks the older woman. "If
you will…"
"She lies prostrate. The seers say she may not live. Nor should
she, with that force of Darksong!"
"And if she does? Do you think she will attempt it again?" The
Matriarch turns in the padded desk chair.
"If she can. The woman has no ideals. She is not a woman for
us."
"Oh? Was she raised as you to understand Darksong and
Clearsong? Did she have someone tutor her in the finer
points…"
"Matriarch…"
"I think you should leave, Veria." Ulgar steps forward, and his
eyes are hard. "We do not know what happened, not well
enough to judge, and you wish to judge."
"I have every right to judge Darksong-and I will." Veria bows.
"Good day, Matriarch."
As the door closes, the Matriarch glances to her consort. "You
should have let her speak."
"No. She is only looking for ways to hurt you." Ulgar's eyes go
to the door.
"I cannot explain it, Ulgar." The Matriarch sighs softly. "I know
that whatever the sorceress did was to avoid more bloodshed.
She does not like to shed blood. She is still young at heart, and

she would use her skills to change souls to save bodies. As we
know-and as Veria will not see- you cannot use the harmonies
in such a fashion." 
"You think she used Darksong to avoid bloodshed?"
"That is my surmise. The glasses that pass will tell." The
Matriarch shakes her head. "Harmony rests on what is, not on
good or evil. What is, the whole basis of Clearsong, does not
allow easy decisions. It was ever so for sorcerers and sorceresses,
and that is why those few who survive become great. Only the
great survive. It is a hard, hard lesson for the young to learn, or
for those who have come from elsewhere."
Ulgar glances toward the window and the street below, where a
dark-haired woman hurries toward the harbor. "It is hard for
all of us."
60
HOT… Anna was hot all over. Except she was freezing.
"Cold… hot…" Her eyes felt as though they had been replaced
with a mixture of hot coals and ice, and she had no idea
whether it was morning or midday or deep night.
She shivered violently.
Out of the darkness words rumbled, and more words.
"Drink," someone said, and she drank, and kept drinking until
she felt wetness running down her cheeks.
"Enough, lady… enough…"

The words trailed off, and she found herself back in the
darkness where she burned and froze, sweated and shivered.
Some time later, her eyes opened slowly… as if she had terribly
violent allergies or they were swollen so much that they could
barely open.
Two figures leaned over her-one a warm, kindly, white-haired
figure, the other a cool, sneering, gaunt and bitter man, also
with white hair. Yet both were the same, and both were Jecks.
Each held a mug, and she felt one mug held wine, the other
poison.
"You must drink more. The wine holds honey."
Which mug? Or were they one and the same? She tried to close
one eye, but still two images of Jecks remained.
Finally, she grasped for the mug and swallowed the contents in
a series of convulsive gulps.
Jecks-the two Jecks-took the mug. One smiled sadly, and the
other smiled evilly. "You must rest."
Rest? Or rest forever? Oh… Elizabetta… will I… 
"Rest… you must rest…"
The words sounded kindly, and then like a promise of death.
Anna tried to move, but her arms, her body seemed encased in
ice, but ice that burned with every attempt to move.
Is this what it's like to be mad? Mad, mad, mad…

Her tears burned and froze her cheeks as they flowed, before
her eyes closed on fire and ice, ice and fire.
61
Anna lay propped up on the cot in her tent-the tent she hated to
use because it meant her armsmen were sleeping on the ground.
Under the light of the single hanging lamp, Jecks sat on the
stool across from her, deep circles ringing his eyes, his white
hair ragged and disarranged. He held a platter of hard cheese
and bread, from which she ate… slowly.
"The players? Besides Hasset, I mean."
"He was the violino player who took the arrow?" Jecks paused.
"All fell as you did, but they were eating yesterday, some the
night before. Except the older man."
"Kaseth? How is he?"
Jecks glanced at the earthen floor of the tent.
"He died?"
"Yes, my lady."
Anna took a deep breath. She knew that sorcery took a toll on
the players, usually a far lesser toll than on her, but somehow,
she hadn't expected…
"He was old, your chief player said."
Old, and Anna had brought him to Stromwer to die. Her

record with players left a great deal to be desired. "Are the
others all right?"
"Far better than you." He extended the platter. "You must eat
more."
"Tell me what else has happened." Anna reached for another
chunk of cheese.
"… We have had to forage some," the lord continued, "but we
have taken only what we need, and only from Dencer's
personal lands. At least, so far as we could tell."
Anna couldn't argue with that. She slowly ate another small
chunk of hard cheese, closing her eyes for a moment to shut out
the twin images of Jecks. At least, one image was no longer
appearing as an evil twin, though the right one still felt much
"cooler" than the left.
"Lady?"
"I'm still awake. Sometimes… the two images."
"You see double still? There were no bruises on your skull."
"It's Darksong." She opened her eyes. "If I do Darksong
anymore, I see two images." She reached for the mug and
swallowed. "I thought I knew what it was-Darksong, I
mean-but it's not that simple."
"None of sorcery is simple." Jecks took the mug back from her
and extended the platter, probably the only one in her entire
camp. "Nor is it easy."

"Brill told me that the difference between Clearsong and
Darksong was that one dealt with nonliving things and the
other with living things." Anna frowned. "But I didn't get any
reaction at first for some things that were probably Darksong."
Jecks was the one to frown. "You were using Darksong before?"
"I didn't think about some of it. I made a gown."
Jecks' face relaxed, and he nodded. "A gown."
"But cotton and wool are from living things, and that means
the spell was Darksong." Anna stopped and forced herself to eat
another morsel of cheese.
"Surely, such a small spell… ?"
"I couldn't do it now-I'm sure of it. It's like an allergy." At the
look of incomprehension on Jecks' face, she added. "It's like a
poison where a little bit doesn't hurt, but if you keep adding a
little bit here and a little bit there…"
He nodded slowly. "Then, the spell over Dencer's keep?"
"I knew it was Darksong," Anna admitted. "I thought I could
avoid killing all of Dencer's armsmen. I didn't want any more
killing. I wanted to end this campaign without killing people. I
didn't think the backlash would be so bad."
"You near died. I had to force wine into you."
Anna looked at his face. Were those scratches? "I fought you?"
"You have fought me and all the forces of harmony and

dissonance."
"I'm sorry. I really am." Anna swallowed. Her throat was sore,
somewhat swollen, and she didn't want to consider the state of
her cords. "You had to nurse me, didn't you?"
"There was no one else."
Liende and the female players had been floored as she had
been. So who else had there been? "Thank you."
Jecks smiled. "After the beginning, it was not so difficult. I did
wrap you in blankets for a time."
"Did it even work? The spell?"
"That we do not know. No armsmen have left the keep,
according to Hanfor's scouts. Your first spell killed Dencer."
Jecks offered another smile, more crooked. "The keep is yours-if
we can reach it."
"Oh… the armsmen in the gorge."
"They may fight." Jecks' twin images shrugged. "They may
not."
Anna finished the last of the wine in the mug and let it rest on
her stomach. "I'm feeling better. We could leave tomorrow…" 
"The day after. Tomorrow… you walk around the camp. You
assure all you are recovered. That, too, you must do." Jecks
stood. "I need sleep. So do you."
"Thank you…" Anna said quietly.

"You are my lady." Jecks nodded and slipped out of the tent
and into the late twilight.
For a long time, Anna lay there, eyes seeing faint double
images, double shadows from the lamp, her head aching,
thinking.
Thinking… about Kaseth, and Jecks, and even Dencer… and
Darksong, and Clearsong.
I can't use a loyalty spell, but I can kill an entire keep?
It wasn't fair.
Is life ever fair?
She closed her eyes, but the questions didn't vanish.
Anna patted Farinelli, then shifted her weight in the saddle and,
with her left hand, reached up and readjusted her damp shirt
off her sweaty back. Lord, she wanted a bath-as much to get
rid of the itching from the fine red dust as anything. The
damping effect of light rain of the night before had barely
lasted until midmorning, and it had taken them that long to
retrace their way back from the camp Jecks and Hanfor had
established to the main road to Stromwer. By then, the sun,
clear skies, heat, and hoofs had combined to raise the red dust
once more.
She still wore the breastplate, and sweat collected under that,
mixing with dust. The chest scar from the crossbow, though
healed, itched even more than her arm. They'd ended up
waiting another day more than she had hoped for, but that had

brought the end to her double vision-most of the time.
Sometimes, her vision would still split, almost as if to warn her
that she skirted on the edge.
Great! You can use your spells to kill-if they're worded right-but
you can't use them to persuade. Her lips tightened, and she
forced herself to relax. "You can't change what is," she
mumbled to herself. "You can't…"
A thought crossed her mind-and she wanted to laugh bitterly.
Whatever god or deity had set up Erde had wanted to protect
men's and women's souls from being manipulated, but hadn't
seemed to care about their physical well-being. Just like the
priests of the Inquisition, who had tortured people to preserve
their souls. 
She pushed that useless thought aside and studied the land. The
fields beside the road were already knee-high with bean plants
and cotton, Anna thought. Cotton, harvesting that would be a
chore. Too bad she didn't know how a cotton gin was built, but
she was a singer, not an engineer.
Ahead of the column, the dust of a pair of mounts filled the
road that led south to Stromwer.
"Halt!" Hanfor's command echoed down the column as the two
scouts reined up.
Rather, one scout reined up two mounts, and Anna saw the
figure of the other scout, dead, slumped across his mount's
neck. "Ser… they still got archers up there."
After Anna reined Farinelli in, she glanced from Jecks to the

road before them. Ahead, perhaps five hundred yards ahead on
the right, was the point where the northern part of the valley
narrowed into the defile that led to Stromwer. The first set of
the nets Anna had found in her scrying glass bulged from the
escarpment, the lowest part of the boulder-filled hemp nearly
fifty yards above the road.
With the halt of the column, three archers stood above the nets
and lofted arrows toward the advancing column. Clearly,
Anna's loyalty commands hadn't reached the armsmen on the
heights, and neither had orders from Stromwer. Or orders to
resist had.
Anna sighed and, dismounting, unstrapped the lutar. Then she
walked forward in front of Hanfor and the others, almost as
though they were not there. Mechanically, she tuned the
instrument, then followed with a vocalise, then another. She
cleared her throat, and did a last warm-up before her fingers
went back to the lutar.
"Archers high, archers strong, 
turn to flame with this song."
Her thoughts focused on just those she saw. Still, when her eyes
cleared, she saw at least four flaming figures fall into the defile.
She lowered the lutar and turned, walking back to Farinelli, her
steps careful as she had to tread her way through renewed
double images.
"You think like a warrior, lady," Jecks said quietly as Anna
slowly replaced the lutar in its case.

"Me?"
"What spell did you choose?"
"Oh…" She understood. She had chosen the simplest spell to
kill the archers-one that didn't cost armsmen, archers, or even
arrows. Simple and direct-and bloody. What does that make me?
"You are a warrior regent." He answered her unspoken
question. His head inclined toward where Hanfor surveyed the
road and the gorge. "Your arms commander knows that. So do
your armsmen. That is why they follow you." 
Anna fastened the lutar in place before taking the reins from
Fhurgen. Then, she shook her head. They still needed to deal
with the boulders and the nets. What were you thinking, woman
?
She gestured toward Liende. "We'll ride closer. That will make
it easier."
Then she remounted. As they started toward the gorge, Hanfor
called out orders to the armsmen, and Rickel and Fhurgen
moved up to flank Anna and Jecks.
This time, Anna reined up somewhere between one hundred
and two hundred yards from the high-walled opening to the
gorge.
Jecks studied the rocks above intently. "I see nothing."
"Nor I," added Hanfor.
"Players!" called Liende.

Anna took several swallows from her water bottle while the
players ran through their warm-up, then dismounted and
walked down the road until she stood several yards before the
group.
"We stand ready, Lady Anna."
Anna cleared her throat, then nodded.
"The short flame song. On my mark. Mark!" Liende's voice
echoed hoarsely through the canyon.
There was no hurry, not for the moment, and Anna tried to
make the words easy, without strain.
"Nets break and fray, 
boulders to dust away…"
With a roar, the nets fragmented, and a cascade of reddish dust
plummeted down the cliff, welling up in a cloud that drifted
southward into the narrow confines of the defile.
"One down," she murmured, turning back to the big gelding,
where she took out the portable scrying glass and set it on the
shoulder of the road. She unpacked the lutar again, checked
the tuning.
Jecks dismounted and eased close to her, to a spot where he
could see the mirror. Hanfor eased his mount closer.
Anna waited for them to stop, then sang the spell seeking
dangers.
"Show from the south, danger to fear, 

All the threats to me bright and clear…"
The mirror silvered, then split into images. Anna blinked. There
were four-no, five-sets of nets with archers above them, and the
circular oil-caldron fort.
"Six more times?" She shook her head.
"Thev won't have anv reinforcements," Jecks said.
"I don't have any, either," she answered. Lord, six more sets of
spells! With that, she packed up the mirror, and then the lutar,
and walked past Farinelli to find Liende.
The chief player stood by her mount, packing her horn case.
"I may need some help," Anna said slowly. "There are six more
sets of nets, and I'll probably have to use the mirror to find
some of them."
"We are yours to command."
"I know," Anna said tiredly. "This isn't what anyone signed up
for. But there aren't that many players…"
"And there is but one sorceress to save Defalk," Liende finished.
"You ask more of yourself than of us. What spells will you
need?"
"The flame spell. For the archers and men that guard these rock
nets. I don't like it, but if they haven't surrendered with all the
time that has passed, they won't." And I can't do it with the
lutar. She shouldn't have tried the first spell.

Liende shook her head. "No sorcerer I know could sing it once
and have it succeed without players."
"Thank you."
"We thank you."
Anna smiled faintly and turned, walking slowly back to
Farinelli. Six more times? She squinted as she remounted.
"Why could she not cast a spell against all evils?" asked Delvor
as he packed away his violino.
Anna wished she could just sing a blanket spell that would
protect them against everything, but she'd found nothing was
that easy. After a moment, she answered. "First, because spells
only work against a specific evil, and I have to be able to
visualize-see in my mind-who or what that is. Second, the spell
has to name the evil and provide a means to stop it. Third, it
can't be too big a spell, or it would kill both you and me."
"Even so, without the first spells, we would have been buried in
arrows and boulders," answered Jecks. "All the armsmen from
the keep could have gone up there and shot down."
He didn't mention that they'd still lost the one scout before
Anna had called fire on the handful of guards who had been
out of range of the loyalty spell of- Had it been a week before?
Anna glanced back along the column, to the wagon that
carried the body, but it was lost in the dust.
"How many more?" She hadn't realized she'd spoken aloud
until Jecks answered.

"None, if we are lucky. One cannot count on luck in warfare."
He smiled grimly. "You still wear the breastplate?"
"Yes. It itches." She blotted her forehead, then her neck. Her
back itched as well, right between her shoulders where it was
impossible to reach. She squirmed slightly.
"Better that than another arrow. Twice have you escaped
death…"
"I know. The third time might not be as fortunate."
Hanfor coughed. "Lady Anna?" 
"Yes, Hanfor?"
"We must proceed with care…"
"The next danger won't be until the next set of rocks. We'll have
to go slowly. The mirror doesn't show detail that well."
"Then your guards-" Hanfor broke off.
"They'll ride before me," Anna conceded.
"With shields?"
"With shields."
At times, she felt like a pampered poodle-guards, shields,
warning glasses. She understood, but it didn't make her feel
better.
"Long day," she murmured.
"Not so long as last week," Jecks answered.

Somehow, that didn't console her much, not when she recalled
the; lines of fire and the dead archers… and the dead Hassett
and KasethJ She fumbled for the water bottle and had another
drink as she rode slowly into the gorge that led to Stromwer.
63
ESARIA, NESAREA
Rabyn and a small blonde woman sit at the small white marble
table in the corner of the Pavilion of the Prophet. Between them
is a tray of candied nuts, honeyed dried figs, and glazed apple
slices and basket of lemon bread. Rabyn fills both goblets from
the pitcher of dark wine. "This is from Ferantha. It is quite
good." A boyish grin fills his face. "Nubara doesn't think I
know the best wines come from the valley."
"They always talk about the wines of the south Mittfels." A
delicate clinging tinkles through the pavilion as a gentle puff of
a breeze off the Bitter Sea fluffs the young woman's fine blonde
hair.
"Ferantha is where they make the wines they don't sell. The
ones they! keep for us and for the great houses," Rabyn
continues. "Did you know that, Krienn?"
The young woman glances toward the harbor, where a ray of
sun flashes through the mixed cumulus clouds to strike and
whiten the sail or a Norweian trader. Her dark brown eyes flick
back to Rabyn, and she smiles quickly. "No, I didn't know
that." 

He lifts his goblet, as if to drink, but then sets it on the table,
and instead, takes one of the honeyed figs. "I am young, but I
listen, and I know much more than Nubara would ever guess.
Or you." He follows his words with a wide-eyed smile.
"You are the Prophet," she answers with a smile, also nibbling
on one of the figs. The fingers of her left hand lightly clasp the
base of the goblet of wine she has not touched. "I imagine there
is much you know."
"I learned most of it from my mother. She was… exceptional,
you know. She made sure I knew everything." Rabyn smiles.
"Everything." His fingers brush the candied nuts and then
delicately extract one of the glazed apple slices.
"It is said she was remarkable." Krienn takes an apple slice and
chews it quickly-after Rabyn has swallowed his.
The young prophet lifts his goblet and sips before speaking.
"She was. She didn't explain. She showed me."
The blonde woman waits until Rabyn has taken several sips of
the wine before taking the smallest sip of her own.
"And… someday, I will have revenge on that sorceress." The
youth picks up one of the candied nuts, holds it up to the
late-afternoon light. "I have already persuaded Nubara to send
a company of the Mansuuran lancers to Elioch, and to raise
another company of Neserean lancers, armsmen under my
cousin Bertl."
"Is he a good leader?" Krienn asks.

"Bertl? He's not as good as Relour. That's why I wanted Relour
in Elioch. I threatened to behave badly, in public. And I whined
a little, and asked why sending one company of lancers to give
the sorceress something to think about was so bad." Rabyn
smiles brightly, then pauses. "She is blonde, you know? The
sorceress, I mean."
"Ah… she is?" Krienn reaches almost absently for a nut, eats it
quickly, then takes another sip of wine.
"She is." The dark-haired prophet nods, sets the nut he had not
eaten on his green-and-cream napkin, and takes another small
sip of wine, so small he barely wets his lips. "She is a demon
from the mist worlds." He smiles warmly. "But your eyes are
brown, not blue. You are from Nesalia, and that is far from the
mist worlds." He lifts the goblet and sips again. "You are small
and pretty, not tall and angular."
"Thank you, Prophet of Music." Krienn tilts her head slightly.
She takes another nut, distracted, and chews quietly. The tip of
her tongue barely touches her upper lip, then vanishes.
"I would like you to see my collection of Ranuan silks," he offers.
"You do know a great deal more than your years," Krienn
answers. "Ranuan silks? On your bed?"
"They are beautiful. They offer great pleasure," he says
smoothly.
"I am sure that they do." Krienn's eyes go to the archway, then
to the closed door that leads to the main part of the palace, a
door barred from inside. "You would know more than I."

"Trust me." Again comes the boyish smile.
As they rise, Rabyn steps back and gestures toward the
archway. His eyes flicker to the candied nuts, the nuts which he
has not sampled, and he smiles, coldly. 
He steps up beside her, smiling, his hand on her bare shoulder,
as they step through the archway.
64
THE road through the gorge was no more than ten deks in
length, and yet, with six stops and a dozen spells, the sun had
touched the western walls of the valley, turning the dark clouds
purplish, before Anna and her armsmen rode through the open
gates of Stromwer, after Alvar and a score of armsmen had
inspected the keep-at Hanfor's insistence.
"Stromwer lies open and loyal to you," Alvar had announced.
Anna hoped a bath, a good hot bath, also lay open-except she
had unfinished business. Business she hoped she could
complete, half-dazed and double-visioned as she was, although
she had used no Darksong on the emplacements in the gorge. 
Just the good solid brute force of Clearsong… bloody Clearsong.
She was punchy and found herself holding back hysterical
laughter at the idea that Clearsong magic could be so much
more bloody than Darksong.
The dark clouds offered a faint drizzle by the time Anna reined
up outside the keep's stable, in a courtyard ringed with her
armsmen.

"All are loyal," Hanfor announced.
Score one for my last effort at Darksong. "I'm going to groom
Farinelli." She glanced at Alvar. "Have the saalmeister or
seneschal or whoever ready to meet me in the hall."
"I can do that." Alvar smiled.
Jecks and Hanfor both frowned.
"Lady Wendella… if she's still alive." Anna dismounted and led
Farinelli into the stables behind Rickel, who carried his blade
bared. She forced her steps to be deliberate.
"We are your servants!" called a thin-faced man in gray
leathers from his knees on the straw.
"I accept your allegiance," Anna said. "I also remember that
you pledged the same to Lord Dencer."
"Lady…"
"Serve Defalk, and no one will suffer," Anna said more softly.
Their eyes wide, two stable boys looked at the big gelding as
Anna led Farinelli past. By the time Anna had groomed
Farinelli and ensured he had grain and some water-not too
much-a full-fledged downpour greeted her at the stable door
where Fhurgen and Jecks waited.
"The saalmeister is in the corridor there," Fhurgen announced,
pointing through the rain to the arched doorway that stood
fifteen yards away, across the rain-slicked cobblestones and the
scattered puddles. "Alvar is with him."

Anna glanced across the rain-pelted courtyard, then at Rickel
and Fhurgen. "Better dust than mud on the road, I guess."
"Far better, lady."
Anna walked through the rain, fearing she might fall if she ran,
ignoring the roll of thunder and a single flash of lightning.
Four figures waited in the corridor-Hanfor, Alvar, Jecks, and
the saalmeister. Anna wiped the water from her hair and face,
knowing she scarcely looked like a regent, but more like a
damp and shaggy dog, a thin-faced, dark-eyed, and haggard
shaggy dog. She didn't even want to think about how she
smelled.
Unlike the stablemaster, the saalmeister was heavyset. Dark
circles ringed his eyes, a sign, Anna felt, that he had suffered
from the conflicts of the loyalty spell.
"Darflan, this is the Lady Anna," Alvar announced.
Darflan went to his knees. "We serve you and the Regency."
"You can stand," Anna said, trying to keep the exasperation
from her voice. "Where is the lady Wendella?"
"The… lady… Wendella?"
"I'm sure you've heard of the lady."
"Ah… where Lord Dencer left her. We did not know. It was
said…"
"Enough. Take us there, and bring the keys."

Jecks glanced at Hanfor. Alvar shrugged.
"Two loyalty spells are enough for anyone," Anna said. "Oh,
where is the heir, her son?"
"In his nursery, lady."
"Get his nurse and bring him here."
That got another exchange of glances between Jecks and
Hanfor.
"She is his mother." Anna didn't feel like explaining.
"Now… lady?"
"Now." Anna's voice chilled. She was damp, sweaty, tired, and
wasn't much interested in explanations.
Darflan nodded and waddled quickly down the corridor.
"Alvar," Hanfor said. "If you would make arrangements with
the cooks for feeding our armsmen? I had not gotten to that."
"Yes, ser." Alvar turned and headed back down the steps.
"I'm sorry," Anna said.
"That is my job, not yours," the veteran said quietly.
The nurse, in faded brown, a squirming child in her arms,
bustled toward Anna and her entourage, with Darflan at her
side.
Anna glared. The nurse's bustling confidence transformed into
a bow. "Regent… lady… you wished to see young Condell?" 

"I did." Anna looked at the child, already sporting a dark
thatch of curly hair. "Please follow us."
The nurse glanced to the saalmeister. The saalmeister nodded.
Don't look to him, Anna wanted to snap. "Let's go."
"Yes, Regent."
The saalmeister led them down the main corridor to the end,
then up two flights of steps and back along a narrow corridor.
His blade out, 1 Rickel flanked Darflan while Fhurgen trailed.
Jecks kept a hand on the hilt of his own blade. The nurse
followed most of them, just ahead of Fhurgen.
Darflan paused at another narrow staircase.
"Go on," Anna said.
The steps up to the tower were narrow, even narrower than
those in the north tower of Falcor where Anna had stayed.
Darflan stopped at the second landing.
"Unlock it," Anna ordered.
When the iron-barred door was open, Anna took the key ring
from Darflan and stepped inside.
A hollow-eyed Wendella looked up from the pallet. The sunken
eyes were ringed in lines. "Have you come to gloat?" 
"No. I've come to set you free." Anna motioned to the wet
nurse, who I stepped forward. "Your son, and heir to
Stromwer."

"For how long, sorceress?"
Anna looked at the pale and emaciated figure. "We need to get
you healthy."
"Do not try to tempt me."
"I'm not tempting anyone," Anna said quietly. "Dencer is dead.
I hold the keep. Your son is heir. He will inherit his father's
lands when he is old enough."
"Why do you play with me?" Wendella's eyes remained on the
cold stones of the floor.
"I am not Dencer," Anna snapped. "You should know me well
enough to know I don't play games. You don't have to like me.
You don't have to like your situation. You're bound to be loyal
to Defalk and the Regency, and you're smart and tough. I'd
rather have you running Stromwer than some lord's pampered
second son."
Wendella's eyes widened slightly. "For how long? Until you
hold all Liedwahr?"
"That's not my intention." Anna smiled. "But if it were, I'd need
you even more." She nodded to the wet nurse. "Let her hold
him." The nurse eased the child into Wendella's arms. Anna
tried to ignore the tears that oozed from the brown-haired
mother's eyes. At least she can hold him, see him. Stop feeling
sorry for yourself. No one whipped and tortured you-not
physically, anyway.
"Your rooms are ready for you," Anna said. She stepped back.

"They are, aren't they, saalmeister?"
"They will be, Regent."
"Immediately."
Darflan bowed.
Anna turned to the nurse. "Lady Wendella's wish is your
command. In anything."
"Yes, Regent."
Anna turned back to Darflan. "Leave the door open and escort
Lady Wendella to her quarters when she is ready. Offer any
assistance she wishes. In anything, and make sure she gets a
good meal immediately. And hot water for a bath when she
wishes."
Wendella looked at Anna, shaking her head. "I cannot pretend
I like you, sorceress. You cannot buy my loyalty."
"I have your loyalty," Anna said. "I respect you, but I don't like
you, and I never will. But you will run Stromwer far better than
Dencer. If you don't, I'll find someone who will until your son
can."
"I will run Stromwer, and I will run it well." Wendella lowered
her eyes. "I will not, I cannot, speak ill of you. But I will not
speak of you, save as I must."
"That's fine. Now… get some food and whatever you need."
Anna nodded and stepped back out onto the landing, and
started down the steps, her boots echoing in the stone stairwell.

At the bottom, in the main corridor, Jecks glanced at Anna.
"You wonder why? She's been tortured, and she's still sane. She
has to be loyal, and backing the Regency is the only way her
son can hold his lands, because I'm the only one who will back
her. She's smart enough to see that."
The white-haired lord shook his head.
Was she crazy? She didn't think so. Wendella had been a bitch,
but there was a difference now. She'd never be more than civil
to Anna, but that wasn't the point. Preserving Defalk was.
"Jecks? Have I taken Stromwer from its heir? Have I imposed
an outside lord?"
The hazel eyes met hers. "You, lady, are more deadly than
either Ehara or Konsstin. You will not let personal hatred move
you from what you know is best. Even the harmonies could not
preserve them now."
Anna was the one to shake her head. "Me? The woman's who's
nearly gotten herself killed a half-dozen times? The woman
who has to return a child to his mother before anything?"
"She will come to respect you," Hanfor said slowly. "If she has
not already. So will her armsmen."
"Those that survive," Anna said.
"That is most of them," Hanfor answered. "And they appreciate
that you limited your spells to those who attacked you." He
laughed. "The common armsman is more glad for his life. It is
all he has."

Anna shivered. "I think I need some dry clothes and some food.
It's been a long day." How many more to come? "And a hot
bath."
"Now you hold all Defalk," Jecks said. "You can rest." Anna
wanted to laugh. With Ehara and the Sea-Priests plotting
something? With Mansuuran forces in Neserea? With a civil
war in Ebra, and one side being backed probably by both
Sturinn and Dumar? 
She took a breath. Jecks was right. She could rest-briefly. And a
bath would feel good.
65
DUMARIA, DUMAR
LORD Ehara lifts the crystal decanter, lets the light from the
window illuminate the amber liquid, then sets the decanter on
the writing desk. He walks to the shorter bookcase and extracts
a volume. The Art of War. He replaces the leather-bound book.
"They never call it 'the profession of war' or 'the faith of war' or
some such. It's always an art."
The rangy man in the white of a Sea-Marshal nods from the
wooden chair across from the writing desk. "War is conflict, like
the conflict of harmony and dissonance. In conflict, nothing is
certain. So warfare is an art. It is not like smithing a blade or
plowing a furrow."
"Sturinn has been good at war."
"We deal always with the uncertain. The sea is our home, and it

is never sure."
Ehara extracts another book, scans it, and replaces it on the
shelf. "Why are you here? Why a fleet of forty ships? Why not
just replace me? I could not stand against Sturinn."
"You are perceptive," jerRestin says. "We prefer perceptive allies
and friends."
"You talk of friendship, Sea-Marshal jerRestin," says Ehara
easily. "I have taken your tokens of friendship and your advice.
Now, I have lost hundreds of golds, five companies of lancers,
and the confidence of many of my officers. Southern Defalk lies
in the bloody hands of that butchering sorceress." Ehara lifts a
goblet of wine from the desk in a mock toast, then replaces it,
untouched.
"You have taken our advice and our coins when it suits you,"
answers the rangy man with the tanned face. "And a few gems."
"That may be," Ehara laughs. "Rulers have that habit. What
suggest you now?"
"Wait for her to come to you."
"Now you suggest this?" 
"Had you not meddled in Defalk, she would have no reason to
enter Dumar."
"Oh." Ehara lifts the goblet again in another toast. "A toast to
mighty Sturinn. You have encouraged me to enrage my
neighbor, knowing my efforts would fail-"
"You began those efforts before we came to offer friendship."

"I stand corrected, mighty Sea-Marshal." Ehara takes a deep
swallow of the amber wine. "You encouraged me to increase
my efforts. That will encourage the sorceress of the north to
invade poor Dumar. Because mighty Sturinn is my friend,
Sturinn can then bring all her troops and ships to my aid,
crushing the cruel and sorcerous invader. Then Sturinn will
bring us trade, and more ships, and new customs. And before
long, Dumar will join the Ostisles under the Maitre of Sturinn.
Do I have that right?"
"Almost," admits jerRestin. "Except that Lord Ehara will be
viceroy for Dumar and Defalk, high above all in Liedwahr."
"That is so you Sea-Priests can claim you have come but to help
your friend and ally."
"Would you rather stand against the sorceress and the Liedfuhr
of Mansuur alone? Who now knows of the Lord of Bultok or
the Marque of Cealur? All those lords have vanished into the
maw of Mansuur."
"A sad choice I face."
"A better choice than without Sturinn," points out jerRestin.
Ehara laughs and lifts his goblet. "Here's to waiting. May it not
prove too costly."
The Sea-Marshal frowns momentarily.
THEMA

UND 
VARIANTE
* * * * * * * 
66
THE main guest chamber at Stromwer had two narrow stone
windows, opposite each other in one corner, with a hot breeze,
a bed, and a small bathchamber built into one corner of the
narrow and deep room. Rickel had located a small writing desk
and had the servants move it into the room, along with three
chairs.
Anna supposed she could have used the late Dencer's study, but
she didn't feel comfortable with that. That sort of thing seemed
too presumptive, even if she had effectively conquered
Stromwer. She massaged her forehead. The double vision had
vanished after two days of rest, but she still had a slight
headache.
With the thrap on the door, she turned her head. "Come in."
"My lady." Jecks wore a clean blue tunic, and had washed up.
He looked more handsome than ever as he stepped into the
guest chamber. Behind him stood a messenger bearing leather
bags of some sort.
Anna had to make an effort not to smile insanely. She was glad
to see Jecks… and his smile and twinkling eyes. She needed
something positive in her life. "Lord Jecks."

"My lady. You have some… dispatches… from Falcor."
"Dispatches?" Anna offered a smile, hoping her smile wasn't too
inviting, too forward. Idiot! You worry about being too distant,
and you worry about being too forward. "I suppose it had to
happen." She kept smiling, not exactly sure why. Hormones?
Do I have any left?
"Put them there." Jecks gestured to the braided
brown-and-white rug beside the wide bed.
"Yes, sire, Lady Anna."
As the messenger departed, the regent looked at the three bags
of scrolls Jecks had escorted in.
The white-haired lord smiled broadly and lifted the largest bag.
"Those are from Dythya." He stacked the scrolls on the foot of
the bed behind the small writing desk.
Anna groaned.
Jecks held another bag and began to extract a second set of
scrolls. "These are from Menares." A third and smaller bag
followed. "These are from Himar."
"Wonderful."
"You are the regent, and some things about the business of
Defalk must be handled by the regent."
"Scrolls are better than battles," she conceded.
"They offer less hazard to health."

Anna wasn't sure that administration, especially by
horse-carried messages, wasn't hazardous to health and sanity.
She took a deep breath and started with the scrolls from
Dythya, opening and scanning them and putting them in piles
on the bed-those where there seemed to be something she
needed to do; those that were information she probably needed
to go over; and those complaining about Menares. When she
was done, over a glass later, the first pile held a half-dozen
scrolls; the second a dozen; and the third, five. 
She took a swallow of wine, dark purple and not nearly so good
as that of Lerona, and picked up one of the to-do scrolls. "This
one says that she and Himar have located a farm smith who's
done knives and stuff. They think he could do blades… maybe."
Jecks nodded. "How much?"
"A gold a season, plus a silver a finished blade. We purchase all
the materials and the equipment." Anna shrugged. "We might
as well try. Give him a season trial?"
"We have no other smiths," Jecks pointed out. "If you supply
the hammers and anvils and wrought iron, blades will cost you
half what you would purchase them for."
"We were talking a gold a blade…"
"Your own smith might cost the Liedstat as little as three or
four silvers a blade."
Nodding, Anna pulled out some of the crude paper she'd taken
from Dencer's study, and began to write on the small table,
carefully, so carefully because the combination of quill and

local ink meant everything took forever to dry. Then she laid
the sheet on the bed to dry and picked up the second scroll.
"Lord Nelmor has sent his son Tiersen to Falcor for fostering."
Anna snorted. "She's enclosed Nelmor's scroll as well. Of
course, it's because his sister Ytrude is so pleased. Right! It's
because another company of Neserean lancers has been
quartered in Elioch. Listen to this.
" '… once you have dealt with the problems in the south, we
look forward to your return to Falcor. We remain your
obedient servant in all matters… ' "
Anna snorted. "All that matters is the danger closest to his
lands. Maybe I should ensure there are dangers on all borders."
"Some rulers have done so. For a few years, it has worked. Then
people disregarded the danger and the ruler, and so did those
who threatened," offered Jecks dryly.
"Well…" Anna licked her lips. "I'll send Nelmor a scroll that
says how I'm glad to hear that Tiersen has gone to Falcor. I'll
reassure him that all holdings in Defalk are dear to me,
especially his, given the deep and early friendship offered by
his family." Anna paused and glanced at Jecks.
"You are a wicked woman. He will burn at that hint that you
hold his sister so highly."
"Good. She was there, when all the male lords-except you-were
still twiddling their thumbs. I'm still committing to saving his
neck." Anna reached for another sheet of paper. 
The third scroll was about taxes or tariffs. The merchants of

Falcor had requested that the lord's tariff be reduced to one
copper on twenty, instead of the one on ten. Anna handed the
scroll to Jecks, and looked at the next one.
"Lady Anna?"
She looked up from reading the next scroll-about the need to
find golds to repair the street sewers in Falcor that had been
clogged by the Evult's flood. "Yes?"
"Have you reduced the liedgeld for the lords?"
"No. I've let some pay late."
"Then should you allow the merchants to pay less?" Jecks had a
point. The liedgeld came from the peasants and holding
workers, in effect. Why should one group get relief? Or, if she
gave the merchants relief, how soon before every lord was at
her door?
She sighed. "Can we suggest that we will review the tariff, but
that, given the needs of Defalk, it must stand. Say that we will
be looking into fairness for all those who pay tariffs in all
forms?" 
Jecks grinned. "You are indeed wicked."
Anna was just afraid she'd brought American politics to Defalk.
She reached for another sheet of paper.
After drafting her political reply she went back to the sewer
business, directing Dythya to spend another hundred golds to
repair the sewers- and to enforce the rules requiring them to be
flushed periodically. It might help reduce disease, but she

wasn't sure by how much. Then came the next scroll.
"We have another message from our friend Hadrenn. Like
everyone else he has a problem." Anna read selected passages
to Jecks.
"As last I wrote, we of Ebra must change with changing times,
and we were most pleased with your recognition of Synek as a
domain of Falcor, and with the aid you provided most
graciously. I was most honored by your later elevation of the
domain of Synek to the Thirty-three of Defalk…
"… Bertmynn has received coins from the Liedfuhr of
Mansuur, and blades for his armsmen as well. Now Gestatr has
discovered that a ship from the Maitre of Sturinn has arrived in
Elawha, claimed unjustly by Bertmynn when it should be a
separate domain. From the vessel have come lances, blades,
and golds…
"… we of Synek, while not yet hard-pressed, must fear the
worst…
"In short," Anna concluded, " 'we're loyal; we're in trouble; and
please send coins.' "
Jecks laughed. 
"All I do is spend money." Anna glanced at the two piles of
scrolls she still hadn't even sorted. "More coins than we really
have."
"What will you take from Stromwer's treasury?"
"Some. What Wendella can afford, by my reckoning. More

than enough to pay for this mess, if it's there."
"More than you reckon," Jecks suggested. "When all is totaled,
you will have missed things."
He was probably right about that, too.
"How long before you think to return to Falcor?" asked the
older man cautiously.
"I'm not sure we're finished here," Anna said slowly. "I don't
want to stay in Stromwer, but Ehara's not exactly
disappearing."
"You hold Defalk," Jecks said. "He cannot bring that many
troops against you. He lost close to a hundred lancers who
supported Sargol and Dencer."
"He has a few more to lose than we do. I don't like the
Sea-Priests, either." Anna pursed her lips, thinking about
women in dangling chains. "Ehara and his friends the
Sea-Priests are still a threat. A big one." Anna gestured toward
the wall mirror, and the ashes against the wall under it. Will
everyone remember you as the sorceress-regent who destroyed
every mirror in every chamber she slept in?
"You have perhaps twelvescore armsmen," Jecks pointed out.
"The season is early summer, and still we have no proven
weapons smiths, and few enough blades for the additional
armsmen we need and do not have. You have more golds, but
not enough."
Anna thought of the veiled plea for coins from Hadrenn, her

newest vassal or lord or whatever, pressed by Bertmynn, who
was getting coins from both Konsstin and Sturinn, from what
she could tell. That was designed to make life difficult for her
and Defalk, nothing more. "We should send a few hundred
golds to Hadrenn."
Jecks nodded. "That is cheaper than armsmen, but you will
have fewer golds."
"I always end up with fewer golds." Anna rubbed her forehead,
then took another swallow of wine. "Would you like some
wine?" She filled the other goblet before Jecks could answer.
Ehara of Dumar bothered her. The Sea-Priests, if she could
believe Hadrenn's scroll, were pouring coins and arms into
Ebra, and they were doing the same in Dumar, and Dumar,
unlike Ebra, was neither prostrate nor divided. But what could
she do about Ehara?
"How do you think Ehara would react if we sent a scroll to him,
requesting his pledge, on his honor, not to interfere with
Defalk?"
Jecks laughed. "Why… he would send a scroll pledging the
very same, almost on the glass, and nothing would change."
Anna felt stupid. She wasn't thinking as clearly as she should,
perhaps because of the residual headache-or because ruling
wasn't yet a habit with her. "What if we asked for five hundred
golds in recompense for the damage he caused, and his pledge
never to send coins or armsmen into Defalk?" 
"You might get his pledge, but never his golds."

"Then, we'll draft a scroll which basically demands his pledge
and the golds, and which states, given his past behavior, that a
pledge without golds is without meaning or honor."
"He will not take such well."
"No… he may not, but I don't see much point in ignoring him.
We've seen his lancers everywhere, and he ought to pay. If he
won't, he ought to be put on notice."
"You would fight Dumar?"
"We've already been fighting Dumar. Ehara had no real cause
to support the rebels, unless he was already planning a war, or
to make trouble for us. Either way, it has to stop."
"Then, you should send such a scroll."
Anna could tell Jecks was less than pleased, but she knew that
she had to do something to deal with the Lord of Dumar.
By the time she had given Jecks the second draft of the scroll to
read, from outside, a golden red poured through the narrow
windows.
"Lord, I didn't realize it was that late." Anna glanced at the piles
of scrolls in dismay.
"There is always tomorrow."
"And tomorrow, creeping on its petty pace, until the last
syllable of recorded time," Anna misquoted.
Jecks paused in lifting his goblet, then drank. Thrap!

"Yes?" answered Jecks.
Rickel peered inside the room. "The lady Wendella, to see Lady
Anna and Lord Jecks."
Almost makes you sound like a couple. Anna coughed, trying to
push away that thought. "Have her come in."
Wearing a natural cotton gown that left her looking too
washed-out, Wendella carried Condell into Anna's chamber.
"Lady and regent." She bowed, her face composed. 
"Lady Wendella."
"I have come to offer my apologies and to beg of you pardon."
Wendella's eyes remained downcast.
"You do not have to answer me, but could I ask why?" Anna
inquired. "I do not like you, Lady Anna. It may be that never I
will. You have been fair, for what your duties require. You have
not been petty nor spiteful." Wendella coughed. "I have found
that your first act, on entering Stromwer, was to restore my son
and my station. You have not taken my rooms, nor the study,
and the treasury has not been touched."
"I will require some of that," Anna said. "Enough to pay for my
armsmen. I will leave what you need to run Stromwer and for
the liedgeld. I wish I could do otherwise… but the past has left
Falcor with little."
"It is said that you, as Lady of Mencha, have paid liedgeld. Is
that true?" The words were direct. 
"Yes."

Wendella nodded. "I do not like you. I freely grant you my
respect and my thanks for my son and my station. And I will
write Lord Mietchel telling him so."
"That would be good for us all," Anna said. "I will be equally
frank. I respect you for what you have endured. I respect your
strength, and I am sorry for your suffering. I suspect we will
never be close friends." And that's an understatement. "I will
help, as I can, to ensure that Stromwer is strong and respected."
Wendella bowed. "I… can… say no more." Her eyes went to
the sleeping Condell.
"You don't have to," Anna said gently. "I am glad you came. I
hope you will rest and recover, and take care of Stromwer and
your son." She stood, as did Jecks.
The two waited until the door closed behind Wendella.
"I said that she would respect you."
Anna still wondered how much was compelled by her spells.
Still, it was better than slaughtering an entire keep. You've done
that, too. She reached for the wine and took another swallow.
Then came the last scroll in Dythya's to-do pile.
She groaned. "The rivermen are asking that we forgo the tariffs
on cargos down the Falche, since this is the first year in the last
four that the river has been high enough for their boats. They
need every copper to survive."
"So do you," answered Jecks. "So does Defalk."

Anna hated taxes, and she hated being the local equivalent of
both government and the IRS. But how could she keep the
country together without revenues to pay armsmen and smiths
and everything else?
After a sigh, she took another sip of wine, then reached for
more paper.
Thrap!
"A young fellow to see you." This time it was Fhurgen who
peered inside the chamber with a wide grin.
"A young fellow?"
"From Abenfel."
"Birke?"
The dark-bearded guard just offered a wider grin.
"Have him come in." Birke? The red-haired son of Lord Birfels
who'd been her first page when she had come to Falcor? Who'd
effectively been a hostage both of Barjim and then of Behlem?
Wearing a green tunic piped in gray, the red-haired youth
stepped into the chamber and bowed deeply. "Lady Anna, at
your service." A cheerful smile followed the words.
"Birke! It's good to see you." Anna paused. "Why are you here?"
"We had heard that you were not too far away, and my sire has
asked that I offer an invitation of our hospitality to you and
your forces." Birke smiled. "We rode from Abenfel in less than

four days." 
"Your offer of hospitality is much appreciated," said Anna. "I
honestly hadn't thought about what we'll be doing after we
settle Stromwer."
"We would be pleased to offer a place of rest on your return to
Falcor. The river road is not longer than the way through Suhl."
"It is good to see you. And your offer is tempting." She smiled.
"I will think about it." She glanced at the piles of scrolls. "We'll
talk at supper." She gestured. "I have a few duties as regent."
"You have always been the regent, and Defalk is fortunate
indeed." Birke spoiled the formal words with another wide grin.
"You…" She shook her head. "At dinner."
"With pleasure." He bowed again.
Anna refilled her goblet after Birke had left. Was she drinking
too much? She'd scarcely had anything to drink until the
damned scrolls had arrived. That showed how much she liked
administration.
"He's grown," Anna said. "I still wish he'd stayed in Falcor."
"He may have stayed there long enough that it matters not,"
suggested Jecks. "You have a way of changing people quickly,
my lady."
"Me?"
"You, my lady."

Anna shook her head, then glanced at the scrolls. "Changing
people or not, we still have too many scrolls to go through."
"At your service, my lady."
Anna mock-glared at Jecks.
67
Anna glanced back at the walls of Stromwer, reddish in the
dawn light, rising out of dark red-and-gray cliffs. She stifled a
yawn. For someone who wasn't a morning person, the regent
business was a tough gig. And getting tougher, no matter what
Jecks thinks. Absently, she patted Farinelli, who almost pranced
northward down the road.
"Riding in the morning is so much better," burbled Birke from
Anna's left. "It's cooler, and the air is cleaner. There's less dust,
and it's quieter…"
Unless you're riding next to a cheerful morning person, Anna
thought, yawning again. All the damned scrolls and paperwork
had taken forever. She glanced at Jecks, almost as bright-eyed
as Birke, and wanted to shake her head. On mornings such as
these, she definitely missed coffee, but there didn't seem to be
any coffee in Liedwahr and no substitute closer than hot cider.
Hot cider was no help, even when it was available, which it
wasn't in early summer in Stromwer. 
She coughed gently. Something, some pollen, was irritating
both nose and throat.
"… A morning hunt in the higher hills, that is good, too," Birke

continued.
"Unless you're the deer," Anna finally said dryly.
Birke flushed.
"Don't mind me, Birke."
"You do not like hunting?"
"Let's say that I know it's necessary." Anna forced a polite
smile. "Just as some battles are necessary."
Birke frowned.
"I'm sorry," Anna said quietly. "Could we talk about something
besides hunts and battles? I'm a little tired of killing." You
should be, with all you've done.
After a moment, Birke spoke again. "Did you know that you
can see the Falche from the southwest guard tower at Abenfel?
It hasn't had that much water in years. If it keeps rising, even
the oldest farm trenches to the north will be able to carry water
to the fields."
"You're that close to the river?" Anna asked.
"Only a little more than a dek and a half. The keep has its own
springs, and that means it didn't have to be close enough to be
flooded."
"You must be higher, then?"
"A good two hundred yards. The upper part of the Chasm
begins by the keep."

"The Chasm?" Anna hadn't heard about the Chasm, except in a
brief mention during one of Menares' geography lectures to the
fosterlings and as a label on a map.
"That's the deep canyon that carries the Falche into Dumar and
the cataracts. My sire, he's talked about the cataracts. I've never
seen them. But the walls of the canyon, some places, they're
hundreds of yards tall, and there's one place-it's a ride of several
glasses-where you can almost throw a stone… well, shoot an
arrow anyway, from the cliffs on one side to the other. Another
place, there's this beach… the sand is so soft…"
Birke flushed.
"I can imagine what you might have been doing there," Hanfor
said with a gentle laugh.
"You thought of it, you veteran lecher," Anna countered, to
relieve Birke's growing embarrassment.
"So I did." Hanfor laughed good-naturedly. "It's been a long
spring."
Several of the guards behind Anna laughed as well.
She shifted her weight, conscious that she was beginning to
sweat again under the breastplate. She had to get used to the
damned armor, she supposed, but would she? Really?
"One of the big pines fell into the river…" Birke continued. 
"You're not planning on going back to Falcor yet," Jecks said in
a low voice, easing his mount closer to Farinelli.
"Not yet. We couldn't stay in Stromwer, and it won't hurt to

visit Birfels."
"No, it will not." Jecks smiled. "You worry about Ehara? Do
you regret sending the scroll?"
"The scroll? No. I worry about the Sea-Priests. They're using
Dumar as a wedge. They won't attack Mansuur or Nordwei.
From what you've said, the harbor at Elawha in Ebra isn't very
good. So that leaves Ranuak or Dumar, and if I were a
Sea-Priest, I'd certainly try Dumar first."
"They have sought out Ehara," conceded Jecks.
"I don't like going back to Falcor and leaving them to create
more trouble," Anna said quietly.
"Even with you, Lady Anna, we could not attack Dumar,"
offered Hanfor.
"I understand that," Anna said tiredly. "What are we supposed
to do? Wait until Ehara and his newfound allies attack us?"
"Have we any choice?"
Anna looked at the dusty red road where it entered the gorge,
at the long shadows of morning. "I don't know. I keep hoping."
As always, as ever, but things don't change that way. She took a
deep breath. And you'd better think of something… some way to
force the Sea-Priests out of Dumar…
68
Anna lay quietly in the dark, on a cot under the thin silk tent
that she rated. Both tent and cot were improvements on her

first campaign, if she could call the battle of the Sand Pass and
the subsequent flight from the Dark Monks of Ebra a
campaign.
The silk overhead fluttered ever so slightly, and Anna opened
her eyes, then closed them. Outside, leather creaked as one of
her guards shifted his position.
Her arm still twinged at times, the one that had taken the
crossbow bolt first, and it twinged now. She turned onto her
side, carefully, so that she didn't tip the lightweight cot.
The silk of the tent sidewall fluttered.
She couldn't attack Dumar. Yet Dumar would attack Defalk.
Or the Sea-Priests would. Or Bertmynn would use the aid of
Sturinn to defeat Hadrenn, and then she'd face the Sea-Priests
and their allies on two fronts, with the Liedfuhr on a third. 
But she hadn't the resources for an attack, even with sorcery.
How could she convince Ehara to throw out the Sea-Priests?
What kind of show of force would it take?
You . . . thinking like a hawk… or a warmonger…
Finally, she sat up and pulled on her boots before she stepped
out into the darkness.
"Lady?" whispered the guard, Kerhor, from his voice.
"I just needed some air, Kerhor."
"Yes, lady." Kerhor straightened and followed her the dozen
steps she took to a low rise.

On the eastern horizon was the tiny red disc that was
Darksong, while high over ahead was the bright white disc of
Clearsong. Two moons, music magic… sometimes she felt it
had to be a dream-until she got shot by an arrow or floored by
the backlash of her own magic.
Anna missed the big bright moon of earth. She missed a lot,
still. Elizabetta, not that much older than Birke, her little
redhead who wasn't little, but all too far away, beyond even the
scope of Anna's glasses and reflecting pools.
Was her daughter in love under a bright moon? How long
would she really miss Anna? Did Anna want her to grieve too
long? Would she even grieve, knowing Anna was alive,
somewhere? Should she?
The sorceress and regent shook her head slowly, taking a last
look at the red moon on the horizon, then the white disc near its
zenith, before slipping back into her tent, hoping she could
sleep. Praying that she could.
69
There it is," announced Birke, gesturing ahead as the van rode
to the crest of the low hill. Anna half stood in the stirrups to get
a better view of Birke's home. Like Synfal and Stromwer,
Abenfel clearly dated from a more warlike period. The tall gray
walls were without embrasures, and the gate towers were twice
the size of those at Falcor. Despite the height of the walls, they
seemed'almost squat from their thickness, and each of the four
walls stretched nearly a dek.

"It be a big place," murmured Rickel to Lejun-the two guards
riding immediately behind Anna and Jecks.
"More than half the rooms are empty. They have been for
years, I guess," Birke said. "We always had great fun at
steal-away-and-find. I once found a funny set of drums, all
attached in a frame, and all different sizes." 
"What happened to them?"
"My sire burned them." Birke shrugged. "He said they were
ancient magic that no decent folk should use. I think there was
a ballroom once on the third level. I saw it in the old drawings,
but that was a long time ago, and now that space is where the
library is."
Jecks nodded at that.
Anna managed not to frown. Brill hadn't been happy when
she'd mentioned the use of multiple drums, but he'd never
really explained, despite all her questions. And then he'd died
before Anna could follow up. Jecks had clearly been unhappy
with the ballroom at Synfal and had already told Herstat to do
something about it-without telling Anna. Herstat had asked
Anna-quietly. Anna had told him to go ahead. If it upset Jecks
that much, it would certainly have upset others. What she still
didn't understand was why they all went crazy about dancing.
As if it were so immoral. Anna sighed quietly. She wouldn't
change that. And drums? What kind of sorcery went with
drums? The books she'd gotten from Brill had alluded to their
use, but she'd never had the time to pour through them all, not
with the struggle of reading a language that was a cross

between Old English and German.
As Farinelli carried her steadily along the dusty gray clay road,
she studied the approach to the keep instead. Abenfel stood on
a low hill, the gates to the north. Directly to the east and the
south were higher grassy hills. To the west, the ground sloped
gently for more than a dek to a line of trees, which marked,
from what Anna could see, a bluff, possibly overlooking the
Falche. Because of the haze, she could not make out the far side
of the river, but she gained the impression that even the upper
part of the Great Chasm was considerable. Was it like the
Grand Canyon, or narrower and deeper like the Black Canyon
of the Gunnison?
Her eyes went back to Abenfel.
A permanent bridge, of later construction from the darker
stone, spanned a dry moat almost a hundred yards wide and
ten deep and led to the open gates, roughly three yards high,
and bound with dark iron.
One of the riders with Birke unfurled a green-and-gray
pennant.
Hanfor nodded and murmured something to one of the scouts,
who unfurled the Regency banner. Without speaking, both
standard bearers rode to the front of the column.
High thin clouds were turning orange and pink as the sun
dropped behind the lower peaks to the west, leaving only the
tips of the higher mountains to the south in light, and but
briefly.

No one spoke as the column rode across the bridge and
causeway.
Anna had barely reined up in the courtyard of Abenfel before
Lord Birfels crossed the worn but still well-set gray paving
stones. Birfels' red hair was more than half white, and his ruddy
complexion was blotched from too many years in the sun.
"Regent Anna."
"Lord Birfels." Anna swung out of the saddle.
"You dress and ride like a lancer, as slim as many, if more
deadly." The faded brown eyes held a hint of a smile, and Anna
could see the similarity between Birfels and his offspring-both
Birke and his older sister Lysara, who had replaced Birke as a
fosterling at Falcor. 
Anna shrugged. "I've had to learn to ride, but a blade is beyond
my skill."
"Not a dagger, I understand."
Anna tried not to flush. She'd never live down the time she'd
gutted a Neserean lancer who'd tried to ambush her in Falcor's
stable. "I was fortunate."
Birfels waited as a slender and white-haired woman neared.
Despite the silvery-white hair, her face and figure conveyed
that she was a good decade younger than the lord.
"Lady Anna, this is Fylena, my consort."
"Lady Anna," Fylena smiled warmly. "Birke has told us so
much about you."

"I am pleased to be here, Lady Fylena. I do hope Birke hasn't
revealed too many of my weaknesses."
"From his tales, we were not aware that you had any." Birfels
offered another hearty laugh.
The southern lord was certainly more voluble than he had been
in the past, and Anna had to wonder why. She patted Farinelli
absently. The gelding whuffed. "I have more than my share. I
try not to reveal them too blatantly."
"You have been most successful," said Fylena gently.
"I would be honored to place all of Abenfel at your disposal,"
offered Birfels. "I have even repaired and filled the reflecting
pool once used by the lady Peuletar."
"Your hospitality is most generous," Anna responded.
"And most self-serving," added Birfels, self-deprecatingly. "You
are the first ruler of Defalk in generations to put down the
Suhlmorran lords, something long overdue."
"You must excuse my ignorance," Anna said. "As you know, I
have had to learn the history of Defalk. I presume you do not
come from that line."
"Hardly. That we can discuss at supper." Birfels turned to Jecks,
who had dismounted with so little fuss that Anna had almost
forgotten he was there. "Jecks, you are always welcome."
"You would be welcome at Elheld, Birfels, if your bones could
stand the chill."

From behind and to the side of Fylena, Birke grinned.
"It is chill enough here for me, come winter and the snows. The
cold I would not mind, only that wind out of the north, and you
may keep it there."
"Lord Birfels, I must confess I am relatively new to this
business." Anna gestured to Hanfor, who had remained
mounted. "This is the Regency's arms commander, Hanfor. We
have somewhere over twelvescore lancers and others with us." 
"Arms Commander, you are most welcome. Syliern will be here
momentarily, and he can offer you a choice of quarters for all
your men." Birfels offered an ironic grin. "Abenfel was once the
southern keep of Defalk during the insurgencies. We have some
considerable space."
"And for our mounts?"
"There are close to five hundred stalls in the rear stable. I believe
we might have a hundred mounts."
Hanfor bowed his head slightly. "We will take care, then."
"Knowing this lady," Birfels said with a nod toward Anna, "I
would wager that you would scarce do aught other."
Jecks grinned briefly. "Your fame is spreading, Regent Anna."
Anna replied with a smile, feeling that any verbal answer
would come out wrong, tired as she was. Then, she wanted to
shake her ahead. She'd almost forgotten the players again. She
made another gesture, this one to beckon Liende forward.
"Lord Birfels, Liende, my chief of players."

"I see we share some of the same heritage, chief player,"
bantered the lord, touching his grayed red hair. "Are you from
the south?"
"Only from Arien, lord," answered Liende.
"South enough for me. Be welcome. We have quarters for
players, too. And replacement strings, as I recall."
"Thank you." Liende bowed her head.
Birfels turned to the regent. "Could I show you your quarters,
Lady Anna?"
"In a moment, if you would, Lord Birfels. I will need to groom
and settle Farinelli, and it might be best to get that done."
A frown crossed Birfels' face.
"My sire," interjected Birke quickly. "You might recall this is
the raider beast that only the lady can curry. He maimed one
groom at Falcor."
"Ah… I had forgotten. There are so many tales about you,
lady." Birfels shook his head.
"It could wait," Anna said. "But I'll have to groom him
sometime."
"Best now, and all will be settled. We will be here when you
finish."
After ensuring Farinelli was brushed and fed, and watered,
Anna, carrying only her lutar, with Jecks beside her, followed

Birfels across the wide courtyard toward the center building of
the keep-almost one hundred yards, she figured, by the time
they entered the arching front entryway.
The entry foyer was nearly three stories high, with twin
quarter-circular marble staircases, rising over an arch that
fronted a long corridor.
"That leads to the dining halls and the library," Birfels
explained as he pointed to the arch. "The guest chambers are
up on the second level."
"It's very impressive," Anna said.
"One of my ancestors had hoped to be Lord of Defalk. The
Suhlmorrans ensured otherwise." Birfels gave a crooked grin.
"I'd wager all this stone is chill in the winter," added Jecks. 
"Not so cold as one might think."
As she followed Birfels up the polished marble steps, old
enough that the centers of the stone risers were slightly
hollowed, Anna wondered how many other lords of Defalk had
similar thwarted ambitions in their background.
The second-level corridor was equally opulent, with pale green
marble floor tiles cut in diamond shapes, and matching green
marble sheets set as wainscoting. Fhurgen's and Lejun's boots
echoed on the stone as the guards followed with Anna's
saddlebags and traveling mirror.
Above the marble wainscoting, the walls were painted pale
green, and hung intermittently with life-sized portraits-all men,

Anna noted. "Your ancestors?"
"The lords of Abenfel." Birfels smiled briefly. "One presumes so,
but life is never so certain as we believe. Neither are bloodlines,
for all the fighting over such."
"Nothing's as sure as we'd like," Anna agreed.
Jecks merely nodded.
Beside each portrait were sconces with polished mantels and
green candles. None were yet lit, although the fading twilight
left the hall dim and gloomy.
Birfels stopped and threw open the carved double doors. "These
are the sorceress's guest chambers. We haven't had a sorceress
stay in them since my father was a lad." He shook his head.
"Hard to believe."
Anna stepped inside. On the polished redstone floor was a deep
green braided rug. Apparently, braided rugs were the thing in
southern Defalk. The guest chambers were truly a suite, with a
bedchamber, a second chamber on one side that contained the
reflecting pool and a table with chairs, and a bathchamber on
the other side of the bedchamber.
Fhurgen and Lejun set Anna's bags on the low chest at the foot
of the high bed with the carved headboard that depicted a
woman in a flowing gown and an arm raised to a star over a
garden of some sort. Anna set the lutar beside her bags.
"The headboard-that's a depiction of the first Lady Peuletar.
There were several, all cousins, descendants of sisters, of course."

"Of course," Anna agreed, knowing that by custom and
perhaps by Erde itself, sorceresses had no offspring.
Birfels picked up a striker and lit the candle on the small
writing table. "Lady Anna, Fylena and I took the liberty of
having warm water placed in the bath. Supper will be in a
glass, if that would be satisfactory…"
"That would be fine," Anna said. "Thank you for everything."
"It is more than our pleasure." Birfels bowed and turned to the
white-haired lord. "Your chamber is on the other side, Lord
Jecks."
"I can stand this sort of place," Anna said to herself after the
door closed and she was alone.
The writing desk even had a stack of paper and a recently filled
inkwell. Anna shook her head, wondering exactly what Birfels
wanted-or was it merely to offer amends now that it had
become obvious that she was indeed a powerful sorceress. She
fingered the golden-green brocade coverlet on the high bed-fine
needlework, but somewhat frayed around the edges. 
Anna walked back to the sorceress's room, clearly a working
arrangement with a polished, if old, conference table on one
side and the reflecting pool almost against the inner wall. A
heavy black drape was drawn back from the narrow window.
She glanced at the pool, its waters silvery even without sorcery.
Sometime, when she was rested, she'd have to use a pool to see
if she could view Elizabetta-when more time had passed.

Then she went to the bathchamber, where a soft white dressing
robe and a large green towel were draped across a wooden and
bronze stand. The sorceress dipped a finger into the
bathwater-tepid, almost cold. With a sigh she went back to the
bedchamber and reclaimed and tuned the lutar, then returned
to the bathchamber.
"Water, water, in the bath below, 
both hot and soothing flow…"
Once Anna had the water nearly steaming, she replaced the
lutar, undressed, and slipped into the tub, trying to let sore
muscles loosen, trying not to think at all.
Later, probably too much later, she dressed slowly, easing into
the single gown she had carried, glad for the time to relax
without anyone around. A timid knock interrupted her
woolgathering.
"Ah… yes?"
"Lady Anna?"
"Yes?" Anna repeated, padding across the cool floor barefooted.
Lejun announced, "A young lady with a message."
"Ill take it."
A dark-haired girl-vaguely familiar, although Anna knew she
had never seen her before-peered in. "Lady Anna, my sire
would welcome you to supper."
Anna motioned the girl into the chamber and plopped herself

onto one of the chairs. "You seem familiar."
"I am Clayre, Lady Anna. We have not met, but I wanted to see
you. So I asked if I could announce supper."
"Are you Lysara's sister?" Anna could see the facial
resemblance between the two, although Lysara had red hair.
"Yes. She is two years the elder."
At the regretful tone, Anna shook her head. "Look at it the
other way. You're always going to be younger. For most of
your life, it's going to be more fun to be younger than your
sister."
The hazel green eyes twinkled momentarily. "I had not thought
of that."
Anna reached for the green slipper shoes, glad she didn't have
to wear boots. 
"Lysara said you were beautiful."
"She's kind. I don't feel beautiful." I just feel tired. Her feet were
somewhat swollen, and the shoes barely fit, even as soft as the
leather was.
"You look tired. Was it a long ride?"
"Five days in the saddle is long anytime. I think I've spent half a
season riding since the beginning of spring." Anna stood. "I'm
ready."
As she stepped out of her quarters, this time, Lejun slipped
from his post to follow them. The black-haired Kerhor

remained guarding her door.
"We're going to eat in the family hall," Clayre announced. "It's
much nicer than the main hall."
The long marble corridor remained dim, with but one candle in
every third or fourth wall sconce being lit. A single large taper
in a bronze stand lit the foyer.
Rickel waited outside the ancient redstone archway to the
family dining hall, nodding as Anna approached. "Good
evening, Regent."
"Good evening, Rickel. I hope you've gotten something to eat."
"I ate earlier, Lady Anna."
A group of people, including Jecks and Hanfor, already waited
inside. Everyone paused, and the conversation died as Anna
and Clayre entered. Birfels bowed and stepped forward. "Lady
Anna, you truly grace us."
"I'm pleased to be here, and happy not to be riding." Anna
smiled. "I appreciate your kind hospitality and the chance to
see Abenfel. It's truly a grand keep."
Birfels gestured to the head of the table. "If you would?"
"Thank you." Anna stepped toward the table, while the others
arranged themselves behind places.
Birfels nodded toward his consort. "You and Fylena have met,
and , you know Birke." He inclined his head toward the end of
the table. "That is Wasle, and then Clayre." A younger

redheaded youth sat farther down the table, but above Clayre.
Anna tried not to bristle at the position of the dark-haired
young woman below her younger brother. "Clayre came to tell
me about supper. I have not met Wasle." She paused, then
asked Hanfor, "Arms Commander Hanfor, how are you
finding things?"
The gray-haired and green-eyed veteran nodded. "We
appreciate the hospitality, the men especially. You have good
barracks here, Lord Birfels."
"Old, but good. They date back over three hundred years to the
last Suhlmorran uprising, when Lord-"
"My lord," suggested Fylena mildly, "we could sit and eat and
then talk. In greater comfort."
Birfels laughed. "That we should."
Anna took the chair at the head of the long table, as indicated,
with Jecks at her right and Birfels at her left. Fylena sat beside
Jecks, and Hanfor beside Birfels. 
Three serving girls appeared. One bore a silver-rimmed
porcelain platter bearing slices of meat smothered in a
creamlike sauce and garnished with sprigs of narrow green
leaves. Another carried two baskets of bread, and the third, a
dish of something white and steaming.
The main dish came straight to Anna, who served herself, but
waited for the others, taking some bread, and then some of the
spiced and steamed apples.

"Will you be heading straight back to Falcor?" asked Fylena,
after taking a small portion of the meat and sauce.
"I don't know yet." Anna smiled politely. "I thought I might
wait a few days, if your lordship doesn't mind." Her head
inclined toward Birfels. "I'd like to see what Lord Ehara's
reaction is."
"Lord Ehara?" Birfel's eyebrows knitted up.
"Oh…" Anna shook her head. "You live with these things, and
sometimes you don't realize that others haven't any idea what
you're talking about. Lord Ehara sent something like four
companies of Dumaran lancers to support Lord Sargol and
Lord Dencer."
"What did you do to them, Lady Anna?" Birke asked brashly.
"They will not threaten Defalk again," Jecks said firmly, his
eyes fixing on the redhead.
"Yes, sire." Birke's tone was abashed.
At the end of the table, Anna could see Clayre toying with her
shoulder-length dark and wavy brown hair, twirling it around
a finger as the girl-woman waited for the large platter of meat
and sauce to make its way down to her.
"That is for the best," Birfels said. "Yet… lancers of Dumar in
Defalk. How did that come to be?"
"Lord Dencer sought aid from Dumar, or was receptive to it,"
Anna said. "Sargol followed his example."

"Mayhap the other way," added Jecks. "Since both are dead,
and the lancers-"
"All of them?"
"All of them," Jecks confirmed.
Wasle and Clayre exchanged glances.
Anna took a small mouthful of meat and sauce, finding it
comparatively mild for Defalkan dishes. The knife and spoon at
her place were heavy sterling, ornately designed with a
nut-and-leaf pattern. The weight and the minute scratches
testified to the cutlery's considerable age and quality.
"This is beautiful silver," she said. "A family heirloom?"
His mouth full, Birfels nodded, finally swallowing and
answering. 'From before my great-great-grandsire."
"How fares Lysara?" asked Fylena.
"You may have heard from her since I saw her," Anna said.
"We left Falcor at the… turn of spring. She seemed to enjoy her
studies."
"She said as much when she came home in the fall." Birfels
broke off another hunk of bread. 
"Once Lysara is betrothed… perhaps you would consider
Clayre as a fosterling?" asked Fylena.
Betrothed? Anna took a small mouthful of bread and chewed,
rather than risk speaking immediately. Falcor wasn't a
finishing and mating school! "Ah… Lysara hadn't mentioned

becoming a consort."
"She is getting to be that age," answered Fylena.
"Do you have anyone in mind?" Anna lifted the goblet and
sipped the pale red vintage. "This is good wine."
"Thank you," acknowledged Birfels.
"I have exchanged scrolls with Lady Resengna." Seeing Anna's
unspoken question, Fylena added, "She is the consort of Lord
Dannel of Mossbach. Their youngest-Hoede, is he not in
Falcor?"
Anna managed to swallow the wine without choking. Hoede, of
the thick skull and overbearing manner? "He is one of the
fosterlings. He has not expressed any interest in Lysara."
"Ah… one cannot expect much of young people at that age.
They will see it is for the best."
"I can see that it would be an excellent match for Hoede," Anna
said politely.
"Well… she must find someone from the Thirty-three, Lady
Anna," answered Fylena sweetly. "Perhaps you might find a
better match for her. She does respect you so."
Sucker! You fell right into that one… Anna smiled. "I had not
thought about it, but I certainly will."
Fylena nodded. "Lysara would be most pleased, and so would
we."

"Birke was telling me that you left Dencer's consort to rule his
lands for his heir, and that you have a force safeguarding
Sargol's young sons as well." The redheaded lord raised his
goblet and sipped the wine, then reached for the platter of meat.
"His daughter and his young sons." Anna glanced down. Had
she eaten everything?
"Lady Wendella had proved difficult at Falcor, had she not?"
asked Birfels.
"She will not prove difficult in that way again," Anna said.
Wasle and Clayre exchanged quick looks again.
"You have managed to settle Defalk in less than a year." Birfels
flashed! a smile. "No new ruler has managed that in centuries,
much less a regent." He laughed. "You know what they used to
say about Defalk? Don't worry too much about the lord. If he's
to be worried about, he won't last."
"Then perhaps it's better to have a lady," parried Anna.
From beside Hanfor, Birke grinned. Farther down the table,
Clayr nudged Wasle and whispered something.
"You have already proven that on the field, my lady," Jecks
said mildly. "And in just about every other place. Alasia said
you might." He took the smaller basket of bread and extracted
the largish heel, turning his head and giving Anna the quickest
of winks. 
"Ah… yes. I see we need some more bread," said Fylena
quickly. "Diella!"

A serving girl appeared and scurried off with the empty basket.
"How came you to serve the regent?" asked Birfels, looking at
Hanfor.
The veteran smiled pleasantly. "I was serving as one of the
Prophet's overcaptains…"
Anna took another helping of the sauce and meat and another
ladle of the spiced steamed apples, letting Hanfor weave his
tale. The less she said the better… definitely the better.
70
DUMARIA, DUMAR
I would have you read this." Ehara's bass voice emphasizes the
last word as he hands the scroll to the Sea-Marshal in white. He
continues to sit upright in the chair behind the writing desk,
ignoring the small pieces of green wax that litter the polished
wood.
"She is angry," jerRestin says. "So much the better."
"She is angry? I cannot believe that she would demand a
thousand golds and my pledge." Ehara's eyes fix on the
Sturinnese officer. "Never have I been so insulted."
"She wishes you to be insulted, to be angry." JerRestin laughs.
"And she has succeeded."
"A thousand golds?"
"Lord Ehara, why do you not request two thousand from her?

Tell her that the unrest created by her inability to govern has
cost you dearly. Suggest that she is in a poor position to
demand anything of Dumar."
"I would not give her the satisfaction…"
"What does it cost you to ask of her what is your due-both in
terms of golds and of honor?"
"I should lower myself…" Ehara shakes his head.
"She is a woman and an outsider. She cannot be expected to
understand such. The Maitre understands that different
standards must be ap-plied to women-lower standards."
JerRestin extends the scroll. "You do what you must do."
"You make it sound as though I must respond to her… her
presumptions." Ehara stands and takes back the scroll, looking
down at the Sturinnese. 
"She is like a willful child. She may be powerful, but she knows
nothing of how the world works. If someone does not educate
her…"
"I should educate her?"
"You would not wish the Maitre to speak for Dumar, would
you? Or the Liedfuhr of Mansuur?"
Ehara shakes his head. "You twist words as well as the slippery
women of the south."
JerRestin's eyes glitter, but he remains silent.

"Since I must, I will respond, but for my pains, she must pay
three thousand golds." The Lord of Dumar sets the scroll on the
writing desk.
71
ANNA looked out the window from the bedchamber through
the gray early-morning mist-wondering why she had
awakened so early. She'd never been a true early bird, no
matter how many early-morning classes she'd had to teach
over the years.
To the west, she could see the trees on the bluff that overlooked
the effective beginning of the great Chasm, although, from
what she'd seen, the river had cut out a valley that extended
another ten deks back to the northeast from Abenfel. She'd
meant to take a ride to see the Chasm, but somehow, various
things kept intruding, including the continual arrival of scrolls
from Falcor and Synor. Herstat, Dythya, and Menares were
well-organized… but their organization and unwillingness to
act unless they had clear directions from her was taking more
time than ever she would have believed.
That wasn't why she'd awakened early.
Was it Ehara? There had been no answer from the Lord of
Dumar, but Anna already half suspected that she'd either get
no response-or one that was impossible. While she worried
about what she could-or should-do, whatever had wakened her
didn't feel like that.
She turned and studied the bedchamber again. The door bolt

was, firmly shut. While she could hear noises through the
window, they seemed like normal keep noises.
What else could it be? Were even more sorcerers looking for
her? How would she know?
That… that she could determine.
She took out the lutar and walked into the chamber with the
reflecting 1 pool, and softly ran through one vocalise, then
another, coughing and, crackling, and slowly clearing her
throat. Lord, she hated trying to sing in the morning. But she
probably wouldn't get that much time later. 
Finally, she stood before the pool, as the gray light outside
began to turn faint gold.
"Of those with power of the song 
seek those who'd do me wrong 
and show them in this silver cast 
and make that vision well last."
Anna took more time to study the three images in the glass-the
blonde woman seer from Nordwei, the hawk-faced Sea-Priest,
and the young black-bearded man.
In the light of dawn, the Sea-Priest stood under a spreading
green tree, before a wide, parklike expanse of lawn. Beside him
stood another man in the white of Sturinn. The other man
gestured vaguely in a direction Anna couldn't discern from the
scene. The younger man-not the sorcerer-looked hurriedly
toward a building in the background. The Sea-Priest smiled
indulgently.

The black-bearded young sorcerer stood in a darkened room
where only his face and that of another young man were fully
clear. The other man seemed to be standing before what Anna
thought was a drum set-a drum set in Liedwahr? But no details
appeared.
Anna released the spell and stepped over to the table, seating
herself and taking out paper and greasemarker. Before long,
she tried again.
"Silver water 'tween the stone, 
show me, and me alone, 
that sorcerer in black and brown 
and in what land he may be found…"
The glass showed something from the air. Ann squinted at the
image. Three rivers converging into one? The Fal, the Chean,
and the Synor all turned into the Falche-another sorcerer in
Defalk?
After a moment, she released the spell and worried her lower
lip. Then she returned to the table. It took longer the third time.
"Silver water 'tween the stone, 
show me, and me alone, 
that sorcerer in black and brown 
and in what town he may be found…"
The pool obediently showed another aerial image that could
have been one of a dozen towns-or more. Two main roads,
buildings in the center, becoming farther apart away from the
center of the silver-shrouded image, out with nothing that Anna

could recognize as a distinguishing feature.
"Shit…" she murmured, releasing the image once more, setting
the lutar aside, and reseating herself with paper and
greasemarker. She tried seeking the sorcerer for a fourth time. 
"Silver water 'tween the stone, 
show me, and me alone, 
that sorcerer in black and brown, 
and the river near where he is found…"
That brought a close-up of a river, but Anna couldn't really tell
the scale, nor could she see anything that would tell her
whether the river she saw was the Chean, the Fal, or the Synor.
Half the problem was that she wasn't that good with spells
when she didn't know a name, and the other half was that she
wasn't that familiar with Defalk or Liedwahr.
One thing had become very clear. Names-the right names-were
very important in certain aspects of sorcery. The problem was
that she didn't have the right names-at least that was the
problem in locating the obscure sorcerer.
Finally, she went back to the desk and began to draft a scroll to
Menares, to tell him that there was a good possibility that
another sorcerer had appeared in Defalk and requesting that he
discover what he could quietly. The old schemer was good at
intrigue. Perhaps he could come up with some clue that would
help her spellcasting.
As she finished the first scroll, she nodded to herself. Best also to
send a scroll to Dythya and one to Herstat. They were solid,
and would certainly let her know if anything came up.

72
ANNA eased into the chair at the head of the table, then smiled
at Jecks. 
"You look rested." The Lord of Elheld smiled. The dark circles
and haggard cheeks that he had brought to Abenfel had also
vanished. 
"So do you." Even as she said that, it occurred to her that the
days at Abenfel had provided her with more of rest than
perhaps any time since she had been spirited to Liedwahr by
Daffyd's spell. And that way even with the scrolls from
Menares and Dythya that had found their wa to Abenfel.
"You needed the days…" Jecks' voice dropped off.
"I am so glad you decided to remain longer," interjected Fylena.
"Birke has been so pleased. All of us have been." The
silver-haired consort of Birfels offered a broad smile.
"You have been most hospitable." Anna glanced toward the
foot of the table, where the young red-haired Wasle sat above
his older sister Clayre. The dark-haired Clayre was playing
with her hair again, absently, as she listened to those around
her. Was she bored? Waiting for something to happen in her
life? To go to Falcor?
Anna wondered when she'd get back to Falcor. Should she just
leave? And then have to turn around when Ehara acted?
"… have been able to open some of the higher ditches for the

first time in nearly ten years…" The words drifted from where
Birke talked with Hanfor.
Anna wondered. Everyone was so happy that the rivers were
rising, happy that the rain fell, but did they really understand
the cost? Or care? Water was vital, especially to countries like
Defalk, where everything depended on the rivers or the rains…
yet somehow people expected the rains to fall and the rivers to
flow.
"Yet… you look somewhat… absent…" suggested Birfels.
"I'm sorry," Anna answered, her fingers curling around the
goblet that Jecks had filled. "I was… distracted." She smiled.
"Your hospitality has been wonderful, and I have enjoyed
Abenfel greatly."
"Yet you are regent, and must think of other matters. I
understand."
Anna wondered. Did anyone else see what she did? Or was the
prevailing modus operandi to wait and react? But wasn't that
exactly what she was doing-waiting for Ehara's reaction? But
then what? What could she do?
73
ENCORA, RANUAK
I AM so glad you finally deigned to join us for dinner, dear,"
says the Matriarch as Veria enters the smaller dining room. 
"You could make her welcome," suggests Ulgar. 

"Why?" asks Veria. "That would be hypocritical, and we both
know that. Really, Father." She slips into the seat across from
him.
Alya shakes her head infinitesimally, but lifts the long carved
wooden bread platter and hands it to her sister.
"Thank you, Alya. You do bake wonderful bread."
"One of the few things you approve of, Veria," responds Alya.
"Since we are committed to honesty this evening, and not
manners or tact." 
"Honesty has much to recommend it," answers Veria easily.
"Especially when dealing with a sorceress prone to Darksong."
"So long as it is not selective honesty, which is often worse than
falsehood," says the Matriarch, her gray eyes fixing on her
dark-haired daughter.
Ulgar swallows silently, and gives a quick shake of his head as
Alya starts to open her mouth.
"It was very foolish of the SouthWomen to buy that cargo of
blades- even through two trading fronts," observes the
Matriarch. "It was even more foolish to send them to the
freewomen of Elawha."
"When the Maitre of Sturinn is openly supporting that toad
Bertmynn?" asks Veria. "What are we supposed to do? Cheer
when the women of Elawha are forced into the chains of
Sturinn?"
"Your mother has always opposed Sturinn," interjects Ulgar

quickly. "You might remember that."
"She has opposed Sturinn with words," adds Veria, ripping off
a second chunk of the flaky-crusted bread with a quick and
violent twist. "The Matriarchs have buckled under when it
appeared Sturinn might be mightily displeased. Or have we
already forgotten the massacre of the Sisters of the South?
When our own Matriarch murdered our compatriots to
appease the Sturinnese?"
"Two women who chose to consort with a Sturinnese merchant,
against the advice of their families and the Matriarch, were
whipped and died. Your storied Sisters of the South killed the
entire crew of a merchant ship that had nothing to do with the
crime, except that they refused to surrender the merchant to a
mob." The Matriarch sniffed. "That is hardly the stuff of noble
legend."
"Your predecessor once removed executed those women who
survived."
"As she should have. As would I-even were one of them my
own daughter, dear Veria." The Matriarch's words are even,
polite, and like ice.
"I see." Veria sets down the bread on her plate. "So… Matriarch
and Mother, what would you have had us do with the blades?"
"Let the sorceress have bought them, or given them to the
Ebran Hadrenn." The Matriarch smiles pleasantly, although
her eyes remain cool "We have talked about the sorceress, and
there you know my reasoning."

"I know you would support a sorceress who uses Darksong to
keep men in power." 
"We do not agree on that," the Matriarch answers calmly, "but
if you had sent them to Hadrenn, he would have the men to use
them against Bertmynn."
"You do not think the freewomen will not fight?"
"They will fight, and they will die. The Sturinnese will lose
armsmen and take vengeance on the city. Bertmynn will
rightly blame the SouthWomen, and wrongly blame Ranuak,
and we will both suffer. Hadrenn will lose more armsmen than
he would need to lose. Eventually, the sorceress will be forced to
act, and even more Ebrans, many of them women, will die."
"You know everything and do nothing."
"I persuaded the Exchange to grant credit to the lords of
Defalk. Most supported the sorceress, and the three rebels fell
quickly. She will feel compelled to act against Sturinn, and that
will strengthen us." The Matriarch smiles coldly. "And women
will not die, or few indeed, unlike the city's worth your rashness
will kill."
Alya winces, then smooths her face.
"You have an answer for everything." Veria rises. "I should not
have come."
"No, daughter, I am relieved you did come."
"You don't sound relieved." Veria steps back from the table.

"I am relieved," continues the Matriarch inexorably, "because, if
you continue this foolishness, you will do so knowing I will not
hesitate to treat you as any other."
"Matriarch and Mother, that I knew already. Good evening."
The three at the table wait until the door closes. Even after that,
not a voice is heard.
74
ANNA pulled on her single simple green gown. Her stomach
growled, reminding her that after an afternoon of riding along
the Great Chasm, a canyon that certainly deserved its name,
she was more than ready to eat. The Falche almost reminded
her of the Colorado, winding through steep cliffs, except that
the rocks were more like the granite of the Black Canyon. And
all that water flowed into Dumar. There ought to be
something…
Thrap!
"Yes?"
"A message for you, lady."
Anna frowned-more scrolls from Falcor? Her eyes went to the
scrolls on the writing desk as she walked barefooted to the door
of the bedchamber. "Rickel?"
"Yes, Lady Anna?"
"A message?"

"A message from Dumar, Lady Anna."
Anna opened the door.
Rickel stood there, flanked by Blaz and Lejun. "The messenger
arrived here less than a tenth of a glass ago. Alvar took the
message and sent it with me. The messenger insisted that
someone write a scroll that the message had been delivered to
the regent. Lord Jecks is writing such now." Rickel extended a
scroll wrapped in gold-and-red ribbon. 
"Please have someone find Hanfor and Lord Jecks-once he's
finished with writing that scroll for the messenger. I'll need to
see them both." Anna took the scroll.
"Yes, Lady Anna." The blond guard bowed.
Anna closed the door and walked into the "work chamber,"
sitting down at the conference table used so many years earlier
by other sorceresses. She broke the ornate red-wax seal and
unrolled the missive. At the bottom was another crimson seal
over crimson-and-gold ribbons.
While she waited for Jecks and Hanfor, she began to read the
scroll, slowly.
To the Regent of Defalk,
With felicitations and wishes for a fruitful and peaceful year in
our neighbor to the north…
Anna skipped through the dozen lines of meaningless flattery
and well-wishing.
… Insomuch as you have neither accorded Dumar nor the Lord

of Dumar the honor due both… Insomuch as you have failed to
satisfy the lords of your own land and to keep the peace…
Insomuch as many of these lords appealed to Dumar for aid in
restoring time-honored ways and customs and order to their
lands… Dumar will stand ready to assist you, to offer counsel
and advice, and to ensure that Defalk's borders remain in
accord with the ancient traditions… but in view of the great
and grievous harms done to Dumar, and to the honor of
Dumar… such assistance cannot occur unless the Regency of
Defalk were to indemnify Dumar for such harms… Three
thousand golds would be little enough, a bare pittance given
the affront Dumar has suffered, however inadvertent such
affronts may have been… for surely, as the Regent of Defalk
may take liedgeld and honor from the lords of the Thirty-three,
so also must the Regency bear the costs of the actions of its
lords upon others, as well as the costs incurred by the acts of the
regent…
Anna set down the scroll… waiting. Her eyes went to the
window. She had her confirmation, but what could she do
next? Someone rapped on the door in the adjoining chamber.
"Come in," she called loudly.
After a moment, Jecks appeared, Hanfor somewhat behind his
shoulder. "Lady Anna." 
"Sit down." She handed the scroll to Jecks. "You were right.
He's not about to admit wrong, and he certainly isn't about to
pay for the damage he's created."
"Most lords would not."
Especially not to a female regent. "Go ahead and read it. You,

too, Hanfor."
Anna waited, still wondering how she could deal with Ehara.
She couldn't keep shuttling between the south of Defalk and
Falcor. She didn't have enough of an army-yet-to leave at
Stromwer or Abenfel. And she couldn't wage a conventional
war-not conventional for Liedwahr, anyway-against Ehara.
She didn't even have a way to wage guerrilla warfare against
Dumar, and that was if she even knew how-which she didn't.
"He is most offended." Jecks passed the scroll to Hanfor.
"Let me understand this," Anna said quietly, trying to keep
from boiling over. "He sent golds and companies of lancers into
Defalk to support an uprising, and he's upset that I called him
on it? He's cost Defalk thousands of golds, and he's upset that I
suggested he repay some of it? He's behaved dishonorably by
trying to subvert the legitimate heir of Defalk, and he thinks
I've dishonored him by having the nerve to say so?"
Jecks cleared his throat and looked at the polished wood of the
table.
Anna waited.
"He does not believe that anything he has done is dishonorable."
"A lord like Ehara," added Hanfor, "believes that all he does is
honorable, and that all anyone else does is not."
Anna couldn't see that much difference between Ehara and half
the lords of Thirty-three in Defalk. "So how do we convince
him? Or make sure that he stops meddling?"

"I know of no way, save defeating him in battle." Jecks
frowned. "You have not enough armsmen, even were you to
call up levies, to carry the fight to him. This he knows."
"Some other show of force?" Anna wasn't sure what that might
be, except the idea of affecting the river came back to her.
"Ehara may respond to no other force." The muscular lord
shrugged fluidly.
"Do you wish to use sorcery?" asked Hanfor.
"The only kind of sorcery that I can think of that would be
effective is the kind that kills people," Anna said. Are you sure?
Jecks shrugged.
"In other words, I have to find a way to slaughter most of the
able-bodied armsmen in Dumar, or risk having this
tradition-bound idiot continually stirring up trouble in southern
Defalk."
"I know of no other way. Even had you the golds he demands,
to pay them would only encourage him to demand more."
Anna repressed a glare at Jecks. She'd already figured that out.
She stood. "I need a few moments to think before dinner." And
to cool off… if you can. 
"As you wish, my lady. I would that it were otherwise," said
Jecks, rising and bowing.
Hanfor just bowed. "Lady Anna."

She waited until the door closed.
Why? Why did it come down to how many people she could
kill?
There had to be another way… there just had to be-some way
to show Ehara that she was powerful and was withholding that
power. Some way that didn't involve mass slaughter.
She started to look for her green slipper shoes, her thoughts
skittering every which way, but always coming back to the
issue of force.
As she slipped on the second shoe and straightened, her eyes
went toward the Great Chasm. She frowned. The Chasm was
big; it had rock walls that looked sturdy, and it could hold a lot
of water, maybe even as much as Lake Mead or Lake Powell,
and they'd taken years to fill.
How would Dumar do without water?
She smiled. It's only an idea… but…
With a brisk nod to herself, she headed toward the door and
dinner.
75
ANNA glanced toward the window and the bright morning
light- much brighter than she felt as she glanced over Lord
Ehara's scroll again. Hanfor glanced at Jecks, and the older lord
glanced back. Both watched Anna. 
"Before I do anything, I'd like to see how Lord Birfels reacts.

That's why I summoned you. He should be here any moment."
"Yes, Regent." Hanfor nodded.
"He knew a messenger arrived yesterday," Jecks pointed out.
"He may be unhappy he was not told sooner."
"He'll be the first to know, besides you two. That will have to
do."
Both men fell silent, either deciding to see what happened or
because I of the chill in Anna's voice.
"Lord Birfels," announced Rickel.
"Have him join us."
"You had asked to see me, Lady Anna?" Birfels bowed as he
entered the sorceress's work chamber, first to Anna, and then to
Jecks and Hanfor. Hanfor and Jecks stood as he entered.
"Please sit down." Anna remained seated at the table, waiting
until the ruddy-faced lord slipped into the chair opposite her.
"Thank you."
"You are a lord of the Thirty-three, Lord Birfels." Anna smiled.
"How do you feel about Lord Ehara of Dumar?"
"Lord Ehara?" Birfels frowned. "You have told how he sent
lancers into Defalk. Before that… none scarce heard of him."
"Would you say that most lords of the Thirty-three would feel
that way?" Anna's tone was almost idle.

"We have heard little of Dumar nor had to worry little in
previous years." Birfels shrugged.
"Lord Ehara is beginning to give you good reason to worry."
Anna extended the scroll with the crimson-and-gold ribbons
across the table. "If you would read this."
Birfels began to read. By the time his eyes were halfway down
the sheet, his normally mobile face was set in stone. Finally, he
lowered the scroll. "He is most offended."
"Yes, he is." Anna forced a smile. "I'm a little confused. As I
pointed out earlier to Lord Jecks, Lord Ehara has sent golds to
support rebel lords in Defalk. He has sent lancers directly
against the Regency, and against Defalk. I suggested to him
that such was neither honorable nor proper and requested that
he redeem his honor in gold. This was his response."
"It does appear… unusual." Birfels paused. "Many have seen
the Dumaran lancers? The ones in Defalk?"
"Those in Dencer's keep and Gylaron's." Hanfor's mouth
twisted into a crooked smile. "Those who were close to them at
Suhl… perished with them."
Anna forced herself to remain calm, even as she could sense
Birfels trying to rationalize how any lord of Dumar could be
dishonorable.
"Ah… yes." Birfels glanced at the scroll again. "You did not
mention this last night."
"I wanted to think about it." So the most honorable Lord Birfels

was watching the messenger, too. "Outside of Lord Jecks… and
myself"- Anna couldn't resist the reference to her own status as
one of the Thirty-three of Defalk-"you are the first of the
Thirty-three to see it."
"He may have been offended that you suggested his honor was
not enough to back any pledge of… friendship." Birfels glanced
to Jecks, as if looking for support.
"He may have been," Anna said mildly. "His actions have not
been exactly friendly. He does not mention the Sturinnese
officers who have apparently pledged great friendship to him
and to Dumar."
"Sturinn is far across the ocean to the west." Birfels smiled.
"Dumar has ports and trade. Defalk does not."
"That's true." Anna nodded slowly, trying to keep from visibly
seething. "Yet a Dumar under Sturinn would not be good for
Defalk."
"Sturinn ruling Dumar. That is like worrying about sour cider
before the apples have fruited, much less fallen from the trees."
Birfels smiled.
"Perhaps." Anna nodded, turning to Hanfor. "Do you know
how the Prophet of Music felt about Sturinn?"
Hanfor touched his gray beard, pursed his lips for a moment.
"He spoke of the need to put Liedwahr under one ruler before
Sturinn turned its ships eastward." 
"Aye, and he wanted to be that ruler," said Birfels. "Much good
his efforts gained him."

Anna cleared her throat. She'd heard enough. "You can see,
Lord Birfels. This places Defalk in a difficult position. Lord
Ehara is denying any responsibility for the damages he has
already caused. He's actually asking for blackmail-tribute,"
Anna added at the look of incomprehension on Birfels' face,
"before he will assure Defalk he will not cause further trouble."
"That is true," conceded the red-haired lord of Abenfel. "Yet you
cannot match his forces, not armsman to armsman, or
anywhere close." He frowned. "You are not proposing a levy of
sorts on the Thirty-three, or an increase in liedgeld?"
"I hadn't thought of that." Anna kept her tone sweet. "I'm
looking into applying some form of sorcery to Lord
Ehara-something that would remind him that armsmen are not
the only form of force."
"Would that…" Birfels broke off, almost embarrassed-looking.
"Be honorable?" Anna finished. "I'd say sorcery is as honorable
as slaughter, and more honorable than lying." She smiled
sweetly. "Wouldn't you, Lord Birfels?"
"Lord Ehara would doubtless not see it that way." Birfels
laughed abruptly. "I wish you well in whatever you plan. I can
spare you perhaps two score armsmen, should you need them,
and guesting here for so long as needful."
"Thank you. I may well need them. If I do, I will pay them.
That would be the least I could do." Anna rose. "Thank you for
being so forthcoming, Lord Birfels."
"I am glad I have supported you, Lady Anna." Birfels shook his

head as he rose from the conference table. "And I will continue
to do so." He bowed. "If I may be of any other service…"
"You have been most kind, and most hospitable." Anna smiled
again.
Once the door closed, Jecks turned to Anna. "You are
dangerous, Lady Anna."
"Thank you." Not bad for almost losing it.
"You have a sorcerous plan in mind. Birfels feels you do."
"I have an idea. I'd like to see what's going on in Dumar first,
but I definitely have an idea." Like shutting off their water. . .
just like the Evult shut off Defalk's? "Isn't Dumar very
dependent on the water in the Falche? All the cities are on the
river, aren't they?"
"No sorcery could hold that river…" Jecks shook his head. " . .
not even yours."
"Not sorcery itself, but a product of sorcery." Maybe. She stood
and headed to pick up the lutar. "We might as well see what
we're really up against." And whether your thoughts about
somehow damming the river make any sense-or would do
anything at all.
After tuning the lutar, and spending more time scrawling out
adaptations of mirror spells, Anna reclaimed the lutar, glanced
in the reflecting pool, then began the spell. 
"Show in Dumar, high and true, 
What the Sea-Priests do. 

Show me now, and show me all, 
where their ships and forces fall…"
The sorceress lowered the lutar. The silver-shaded waters
misted, then glowed before two images filled the pool. More
than twenty three-masted ships lay in the harbor -Narial- while
the split image showed another score anchored in a wide river
below a bluff- Dumaria?
Hanfor and Jecks, each flanking Anna, studied the waters.
"Twoscore ships," mused Hanfor. "I'd wager two hundred
lancers or armsmen a hull."
Four thousand trained troops, Anna thought. That's what the
Sea-Priests can spare. We've got all of four hundred armsmen,
plus levies, and that's everything.
Hanfor jotted down some notes for a moment, Jecks surveyed
the images, nodding every so often.
Steam began to curl off the water, and Anna could feel the
beginning of a headache when she chanted the release spell.
While the image would fade sooner or later, the spell cut it
off-and the drain on her.
"Those ships would say that the Sea-Priests wish to add Dumar
and, in time, all of Liedwahr, to their domains." Jecks fingered
his smooth chin.
Anna wondered how he managed to be so clean-shaven when
hot water and safety razors weren't available. He never seemed
to cut himself, either.

"Now that they have consolidated their hold on the Ostisles…"
murmured Hanfor.
Anna nodded, thinking. The ships were the key. What could
she do? "What would happen if they lost their ships?"
"They would not wish to send others, not soon," offered Hanfor.
"Armsmen, lancers, they have often lost such. Ships are prized."
Anna nodded and stepped away from the pool and to the table
where she had laid out her skimpy references. As they watched,
Anna took out the leather folder and began to page through
Brill's notes and papers- the ones she'd retrieved from Loiseau.
Some of them made little sense, but she knew that fussy old
Brill had to have written something on how he'd created the
artificial lake and water gates at the Sand Pass.
She didn't have thousands of soldiers. She didn't have handfuls
of sorcerers. She didn't have hundreds of storerooms of grains
and strongbox rooms filled with gold. What golds she had
already belonged to others, or might as well.
Then, abruptly, she closed the folder. Seeking out water spells
could wait-but only until she had time to work one out in quiet. 
"You are silent, Lady Anna," ventured Jecks.
"I'm considering more disastrous sorcery to deal with Lord
Ehara and the Sea-Priests. I'm going to have to think some,
though."
"You should take advantage of Lord Birfels' hospitality while
you can," suggested Jecks. "Do not bury yourself here in your
rooms."

"I won't." Not too much, anyway. "I could use a ride." She
smiled. "I'd like to see the Falche, and Lord Birfels certainly
might feel happier if I were out of the keep for a bit." She stood.
"I'll be down at the stables in a bit. Would you like to join me?"
Hanfor bowed. "I appreciate your kindness."
"But professional armsmen ride too much, and there are duties
pressing?" She smiled gently.
"You understand, I see, lady."
Anna laughed gently. "Go do whatever. I'm not upset."
Jecks frowned. "I think I will go with you, lady." He grinned
suddenly. "You do little without a purpose."
"I'm taking advantage of Lord Birfels' hospitality," the sorceress
pointed out.
"I shall also." The white-haired lord bowed.
When she had closed the door behind the two, Anna walked
back to the reflecting pool and picked up the lutar from the
chest against the wall, then stepped up to the shimmering
water.
"Show me now so clear to see 
where the Falche's cliffs most narrow be, 
that site so near…"
The pool showed an image of a narrow gorge with high gray
cliffs. The Falche seemed far below, a narrow ribbon of silver.
Anna shook her head. What else could she rely on? And what

other options did she have?
"Let this scene of scrying, 
mirror filled with light, 
vanish like the darkness 
when the sun is bright…"
She replaced the lutar in its case, closed the leather folder, and
walked back to the bedchamber.
"Now… for a ride. Let's see what that gorge really looks like…
if it's like I remember…"
She frowned. Could she dam the river? Well… Brill and
everyone else had said spells either worked or they didn't. She
hoped she could find the right location… and the right spell. A
dam was a lot bigger than a bridge. But not as big as turning a
valley into a volcano…
Somehow that didn't comfort her a lot. She paused.
What could happen? The Falche could just grow behind the
dam she wasn't sure she could create and fill up all the low
canyons feeding into the Chasm behind the dam, maybe flood
a few of the lowest fields in a year or two. Some day, it would
flow over the spillway, and return to being the water source for
Dumar. In the meantime, the Sturinnese might take over
Dumar, and she and Jecks would have to decide whether a war
in Dumar was worth it. 
On the other hand, after a few weeks of dryness, Ehara might
reconsider.

She shook her head. If Ehara were like all the other lords she'd
run across… Yet… what else could she do? If she invaded
Dumar and blasted everyone with sorcery, without trying other
alternatives, then her own lords, and lords or rulers elsewhere,
would all be laying for her. They would anyway, but she had to
make it harder on them… and give the innocents in Dumar a
chance, long shot though it might be.
In the end, she reminded herself, she still might have to rely on
force and emotion to devastate Dumar and prevent a worse
mess later, or be reasonable and wait for an invasion or worse
in a year or two, when Ehara was in the midst of a worse civil
war and Konsstin was bringing sorcerers and armies into
Neserea.
Wonderful options… but she knew she had to try the dam. A
long shot… yes… but she had to live with herself as well as
with the lords of the Thirty-three.
76
FARINELLI'S hoofs raised puffs of dust from the gray dirt of
the trail. Anna glanced to her right, downhill through a gap in
the mixed broadleaf trees and evergreens. The gap had been
created, it appeared, when a section of the granite-like rock had
peeled away and carried the trees at the edge with it. Beyond
the gap was the gorge or the Great Chasm, and she could make
out the steep gray cliffs of the far side for a moment. They
seemed as solid as she recalled.
Ahead rode Birke and Rickel, while Birfels rode beside Anna to
her right, with Jecks and Fhurgen behind. A full squad of

armsmen trailed, back twenty yards or so, there at Hanfor's
insistence.
The lutar was strapped over near-empty saddlebags, also at
Hanfor's suggestion. Anna couldn't really fault her arms
commander's caution, not after the ambush by Sargol and the
earlier attempt by the Dark Monks.
"Here!" Birke reined up his chestnut on a raised hillock that
slanted downward to the west, one where the trees and brush
had been cut back to afford a view. The clearing had not been
recent, since there were waist-high saplings and bushy
evergreens.
Farinelli whuffed as Anna reined the gelding in beside
Birke-well short of the overlook's drop-off. 
"This is the place where the Chasm is the narrowest," Birke
announced. "To the south, the cliffs are higher, but the Chasm
is much wider, always over a dek, sometimes as much as five."
"At least several," murmured Birfels.
Anna smiled. Mario had been like Birke, always overstating in
his enthusiasm. She pushed away the thoughts of her son,
knowing she couldn't afford to dwell on them. Hoping as
always that Mario was well, she turned in the saddle to take in
the view.
The scene resembled the one that the reflecting pool had
revealed, if from a lower vantage point. The river was
constrained by gray cliffs which rose at least two hundred
yards from the floor of the gorge. Unlike the comparatively

narrow stream that flowed past Falcor, between the rains and
the drainage from the Synor and tributary streams, the Falche
was on its way to becoming a mighty river. Below the cliffs, the
river was fifty yards wide, but still filled less than half the
riverbed.
Anna half nodded to herself. It would take years to fill a dam
even halfway up those cliffs, considering how many deks to the
north the valley stretched.
"That is the most water we have seen in many years," offered
Birfels. "Once when I was young Birke's age, the water filled
the gorge from side to side, so deep there was not even a ripple."
Anna could sense Birke's doubt, but the young man kept a
pleasant smile on his face.
"In time," suggested Jecks, "that will again happen. The rains
have returned."
"And not a season too early," answered Birfels.
Birke nodded, but his eyes rested speculatively on Anna.
Anna glanced northward, upstream. They had ridden for more
than two glasses, a good six to eight deks, almost due south
from Abenfel, and the river had flowed through cliffs the entire
distance, though the cliffs west of Abenfel had been lower,
perhaps only fifty yards high.
The gorge had enough space so that, if she dammed the Falche,
there would be a deep lake, not inundated farmland. That was
important. Of course, once the water reached the top of the

dam, or the spillway, the river would flow again, but that
would be several years away, and at least part of the
Sea-Priests' fleet would be grounded in the meantime, and
Ehara and the Sea-Priests might just get the message to leave
Defalk alone-without Anna having to slaughter innocents.
Her eyes went back to the cliffs. They looked solid. Her sorcery
had indicated that there was no better site. Still… would such a
spell work? Could it work?
She couldn't know that until or unless she tried. She nodded to
herself once more.
77
DUMARIA, DUMAR
SHE has withdrawn her forces from Stromwer to Abenfel. That
is where the messenger found her," Ehara announces, setting
aside the scroll and leaning back in the chair behind his writing
desk. "So much for your plans to have her attack."
"She must be the one to attack," says the Sea-Marshal.
"You say that," answers Ehara. "Yet those who have attacked
her have perished. So have those who have waited for her
attack. So, if you would be so kind, can you tell me how to
ensure that she attacks where we would prefer and without
turning our forces into cinders?"
"Can you send messages into Defalk?" jerRestin asks. "Scrolls,
rumors…"

"What will rumors and speculations do?" Ehara sits up, and his
sudden motion causes the flames from the five-branched
candelabra on his writing table to flicker.
"Incite her to anger. Anger precludes true thought and
planning."
"For her? She is from the mist worlds. She has ice in her veins."
Ehara offers a sardonic short laugh.
"Even ice boils if heated long and fiercely enough."
"What rumors do you wish planted?"
"That you have decided to adopt the Sturinnese custom of
decorative chains for consorts." JerRestin pauses. "Or that you
have pledged full allegiance to the Maitre. Or that Sturinn has
pledged to send as many ships and armsmen as necessary to
bring the sorceress down…"
"I prefer the latter," says Ehara. "My own folk would drown me
in the Falche if I pledged to any lord outside Dumar, and the
chains business… well, I see why you find it expedient, and
why it would incite her… Perhaps we could add something
that said I had rejected that… for now… unless the Matriarchy
becomes too restive." The Lord of Dumar laughs. "The bitches
to the east won't act on rumors; they never have, and they
never will. It could help provoke the sorceress…" His fingers
touch the full black beard. "Now, my friend Sea-Priest, would
you kindly explain-before I extend my neck further-just how
you expect to defeat the sorceress."
"By devious enchantment." Sea-Marshal jerRestin smiles. "She

is not the sole sorcerer in Liedwahr. She is perchance the most
powerful, but she is new to Erde. We lure her into a situation
where she does not expect and cannot defend herself against
sorcery. Without her, Defalk is powerless. Now."
"Correct me, if I am mistaken, but was that not what Lord
Sargol attempted?" 
"Bah! He set his trap so that a female child could see it. The
sorceress cannot defend what she does not see."
"And how can she not see it? She scrys everything, you have
said."
"Simply put-if there is no enchantment until the moment before
the trap is sprung." The Sea-Marshal smiles more widely. "She
cannot detect a trap that does not exist-until it does, and then it
will be too late."
78
OUTSIDE the unshuttered window, a bird twittered, one that
Anna had not heard before in Erde, something like a finch. A
puff of warm air brushed over her as she sat at the conference
table in the room once used by another sorceress.
Anna pushed away the pile of spell-noted papers and put her
head in her hands. She just couldn't use Brill's spells. The tunes
were essentially monophonic, and even if she varied the melody
she sang, there just wouldn't be enough harmony and varied
textures to support the heavy sorcery she had in mind. She
didn't have the theory background to compose a polyphonic
spell, not one where the separate melodies meshed strongly

enough.
She shook her head. Her eyes burned from trying to force her
way through the awkward phrases and spellings Brill had
used-awkward to her, but probably normal for Erde, she
reminded herself.
The finch twittered again.
Is it right to do this? Is it right not to? Do you want to risk the
chance that the Sea-Priests will put the women of an entire
country in chains… and then all of Liedwahr?… But they might
not… And who will stop them?
The arguments and counterarguments battled back and forth
across her mind until she wanted to scream.
Shaking her head again, she pulled out the crude orchestration
she'd done for Daffyd based on "The Battle Hymn of the
Republic." If she had to fight another pitched battle, the players
could use it. In the meantime, could she write another set of
words? One designed to build a dam?
With a long sigh, she reached for the marker and a fresh sheet
of the rough brown paper. After a time, she wrote. Then she
rewrote. Then she rewrote that. Finally, she murmured the first
lines aloud.
"My words must start the damming of the river here below,
With a building of the strongest stones from where the waters
flow… Let the base be solid as the granite with no single flaw…"
Anna scratched out the next words, and glanced to the window,

rubbing her forehead. She was no poet, no composer, and
words didn't come that easily. What rhymed with "flaw" that
would fit the note values?
After a time of staring at the paper and then at the window, she
reached for the goblet of orderspelled water.
Could she use the modified chorus? After slowly, carefully
dipping the quill in the inkwell, she wrote out the lines.
"Glory, glory, halleluia; glory, glory, halleluia; 
Glory, glory, halleluia, these stones will last and last!"
The middle lines were too rough, and she needed a second
verse. Still using strophic spells. "What else can you do? You're
not a composer."
One finch twittered, then another, as if in argument-like the
damned lords of the Thirty-three.
Anna stood. Time to find Liende, now that she knew it could be
done… somehow. She still probably needed to refine her sketch
of the dam as well, to ensure supports went well into the cliff
walls and well below the sand and mud of the canyon floor.
As she walked toward the door to the corridor, carrying the
music, she glanced at the smaller writing desk in the
bedchamber where another pile of scrolls lay. Earlier she'd read
through close to a dozen. She heard from Lady Gatrune of
Pamr that her sister Herene was on her way to Suhl to take on
the guardianship and tutoring of Dinfan and her brothers, and
that was one piece of good news. The rivermen had petitioned
again, and that wasn't. Lord Tybel had requested that, since

Hryding had died and since Anientta was Tybel's daughter and
since Arien and Synope adjoined, that the two domains be
temporarily joined under his oversight. Tybel had also
requested that Anna keep that request in confidence, which
meant that he probably hadn't. So she had another problem on
her hands, another lord who either couldn't stand a woman
running the lands, or worse in this case, a woman in Anientta
who couldn't run the lands.
She took a deep breath before opening the door.
"Lady Anna," offered Lejun.
"Lady Anna." Jecks stood in the hallway, where he had been
talking to Rickel, the broad-shouldered blond guard, and one of
the two on duty outside Anna's door.
"I'm going to find Liende."
"The players' quarters are up a level and at the end of the long
narrow hall." Jecks gestured toward the staircase at the front of
the keep.
"How are their quarters?" Anna asked, feeling guilty that she
didn't know personally.
"They are good. I looked."
"Thank you. Sometimes… I just feel like I can't keep track of
everything." 
"Barjim and Alasia felt that way, and there were two of them,"
Jecks said reasonably.
"I could get the chief player," offered Lejun.

"Thank you." Anna hadn't really felt like running after Liende,
but she also hadn't wanted to ask someone directly. She found
she had to ask too much as it was, and she'd never liked asking
or ordering people around. And now you're in a position where
you have to… How God or the harmonies have a sense of humor…
"I'll remain," said Jecks with a smile, "so that she has two
guards."
Anna doubted she needed even one guard at Abenfel, but she
hadn't thought she'd needed any riding the grounds at Loiseau,
and that had almost killed her when the Dark Monks had
spitted her with a war arrow.
"What have you been doing?"
"Thinking. That is hard for an old warhorse like me." Jecks
laughed. "It is much easier to run one's lands or fight battles.
Even to discipline a grandchild."
"Old?" Anna shook her head. "You're not that much older than
I am.
Jecks studied her, blatantly, for a moment before touching the
silver-gray hair behind his temple theatrically and grinning. "It
would not appear so."
"You are an impossible and lecherous warhorse, not an old one."
"I defer to your judgment, lady, regent, and sorceress." Jecks
bowed. "My bones, in their wisdom, would beg to differ."
At the sound of steps, both Anna and Jecks turned as Lejun

returned with Liende.
"Thank you, Lejun. I appreciate it." Anna faced the red-haired
player. "I hope you don't mind."
"Lady Anna, we are your players." Liende smiled.
"Liende, Lord Jecks…" Anna gestured toward the door to her
chambers.
Once the three were seated around the conference table
adjoining the reflecting pool, Anna handed Liende the sheets
that bore her notated versions of the "Battle Hymn." Old
Professor Thomson would have cringed, but the crude
orchestration had worked for Daffyd, and Liende had more
experience than Daffyd had had.
"I'd like you all to work on this."
Liende glanced across the notation.
Anna repressed a sigh. "Let me hum it for you. Then I'll do it
like a vocalise." Sometimes it was a pain, not ever being able to
match words and music except when casting an actual spell.
All in all, Anna went through the melody almost four times,
and the cobbled-together bass twice before Liende nodded.
"I have it." The player pursed her lips. "This is more difficult."
"It will have to be. Is it possible to get this together in the next
three or four days? I'll come to the rehearsals-just let me know
when." Anna smiled.

"Everyone is here, Lady Anna." Liende glanced at the notes
again. "We could begin in a glass."
"I'll be there." Anna paused. "There must be a space
somewhere."
"There is a large storeroom that Hanfor obtained for us, up on
the fourth level. We have been working on the other spells."
Anna rose. "Thank you."
"In a glass, lady."
After she had escorted Liende out, Anna returned to the
conference table. Jecks displayed a bemused half-smile.
"You look amused."
"This spell will take mighty sorcery…" Jecks ventured.
"Oh?" Anna didn't feel like admitting much. Besides, after
humming and vocalising the "Battle Hymn" six times, she had
a headache, and there wasn't any equivalent of aspirin or
ibuprofen, unless she wanted to chew willow bark, and that
cure was probably worse than her headache.
"You have given your chief player music that will have all of
them looking darkly and grumbling, once you are not around.
There are stacks of paper all about you, and you have
requested more. You have ink on your fingers, and your eyes
are worried."
"I'm not a composer. I'm not even an arranger. No one around
here has dealt with harmony in a couple of centuries, and the

whole concept of homophony seems beyond everyone."
Jecks' eyes glazed over, and he shook his head. "I would think
that I might understand. Then you speak, and the words mean
nothing."
"I'm sorry." There you go, apologizing again. You are the
regent… but a year doesn't change a lifetime of apologizing. "I
need spell music that is more complex than anything Brill
developed. I was not trained in writing that kind of music.
That's composing. I did all right in theory, but composing's
way beyond that."
Jecks smiled almost grimly. "For what do you need such music,
music so… so… intricate… or mighty… that mere words
cannot explain?"
"Lord Jecks," Anna said slowly, "there are more than forty ships
from Sturinn in Dumar. Half the time I use the glass to see
Ehara, there's that Sea-Priest sorcerer with him."
"He is a sorcerer?"
"That's what the glass says." Anna didn't mention the other
sorcerers, the blonde Norweian woman and the young man in
brown. Her spell efforts hadn't shown much about him, except
he was in a small town of some sort, in Defalk, which bothered
her. Her efforts to refine a spell to find out exactly who and
where he was hadn't come to much, and neither had her
inquiries to Menares and Dythya, not that she knew yet.
"A sorcerer from Sturinn serving Ehara. Hmmmm… Even
dense as I be, that is not good."

"I have to do something," Anna added. "That's the way it feels."
Your big problem is figuring out how to make that something
happen. "I'm going to try to block the Falche, and then suggest
to Lord Ehara that his reaction wasn't wise or in the best
interests of Dumar." 
"Your spells will do this?"
"I think so."
"I do not know. Lord Ehara is proud. He will not suffer, but his
people will, and they will blame you."
"That could be," Anna admitted. "But I'd rather try it than try
to march into Dumar and fry every armsman sent against us
until they're either slaughtered or I am."
"You do not have to fight Dumar," said Jecks slowly.
"No. I have to fight Sturinn. The only choice I have is when."
Anna moistened her lips. "If I dry up the river, that would
ground their ships, some of them, anyway, and it wouldn't kill
lots of people."
"The Sea-Priests would not like that. No, they would not."
"I could suggest to Ehara that the Sea-Priests should leave
Dumar and Liedwahr."
"A show of force." Jecks shrugged. "With some… it might
work. Ehara, I do not know."
"I think it's better than waiting for the Sturinnese to turn
Dumar into their puppet."

"If the Sea-Priests overthrew Ehara now," agreed Jecks, "even
the Liedfuhr might join you in an attack."
"If something like that happened," Anna mused, "then would
the Thirty-three be so upset if I used sorcery?"
"They would not be displeased if you used sorcery before
that-so long as it did not affect them."
Anna laughed. "How could any sorcery not affect them, one
way or another?" She reached for the pitcher and filled two
goblets. "I have to think about how to do this more." Do you ever
!
"Thinking will not halt the need to act," Jecks said dryly.
"I know that, too." She offered a crooked smile. "Have some
wine. It's pretty good."
He lifted the goblet. So did she.
79
ANNA waited until the group struggled through the "Battle
Hymn" spell again. "No… it's too slow. The tempo has to be…"
She _sang the melody like a vocalise. "Da DAH da…" Delvor
shook his head slowly, limp brown hair flopping.
"Three separate melody lines at once, and one not exactly a
melody line… playing such a spellsong is hard," offered Liende. 
Anna repressed a sigh, not bothering to explain that the
accompaniment was not three separate lines. That would have
been polyphony, and what she'd written was scarcely that.

"Hard makes better spells, unhappily," she finally said.
"You have proven that, lady," admitted Liende. "We will work
harder."
"Thank you." The sorceress nodded. "I'll check back first thing
in the morning."
She ignored the whispered "Tomorrow morning?" as she
stepped out of the converted storeroom and onto the landing
where Lejun and Rickel waited. Then, she walked slowly back
from the storeroom and down the narrow steps, half conscious
of Rickel's boots on the steps above her.
Would her damming of the Falche really motivate Ehara to
push out the Sturinnese? Or just force them to conquer Dumar?
Or something else? What can you do? You just can't march into
another country and turn their armies into ashes. And you can't
wait until they've got enough ships and men and sorcerers to take
over all of Defalk.
"Did Napoleon and Hitler think that way?" she murmured. But
so many more people got killed when rulers and governments
did nothing- like six million Jews and millions of others, a
million or so Armenians, five million Cambodians, who knew
how many Kurds, Bosnians, Africans…
Face it. No matter what you do, it will be wrong.
Shaking her head still, she entered the chambers Birfels had set
aside for her and went straight to the writing desk beside the
reflecting pool. Before she sharpened the quill, she poured a
small goblet of wine and took one sip.

She sat and began to draft the scroll. Lord, she hated writing
things. It took foreverl After a good two glasses, and as the sun
began to lower over western Sudbergs, she finally had
something. She read over the phrases slowly.
… I encountered two companies of Dumaran lancers in putting
down the rebellion at Suhl. Another two companies opposed
our efforts at Stromwer. One would hope that you, as a lord of
a land, would recognize the authority of a ruler or regent to
address rebellion without outside interference… yet you have
responded to my inquiries with defiance and arrogance… and
a demand for tribute…
In addition, it has come to our attention that over twoscore
Sturinnese war vessels are anchored in Dumar.
These events lead to the almost inescapable conclusion that
Dumar is attempting to meddle in Defalk. At worse, one could
conclude that Dumar and Sturinn plan a war of conquest in
Liedwahr.
Such a war would be to the detriment of all, particularly of
Dumar. To reinforce this point, without resorting to force of
arms, I have stopped the flow of the Falche River. This gesture
on the part of the Regency is offered in good faith short of war,
and in response to your use of lancers in Defalk and the
presence of a large foreign fleet in Dumar, the fleet of a land
that has been unfriendly in the past to all Liedwahr. 
We would urge you to reaffirm bonds of friendship with Defalk
and to take the necessary steps to ensure that the only ships
from Sturinn anchored in Dumaran waters are those few

necessary for mutual trade… We also await the payment of
those golds required for the rebuilding of Defalk necessitated
by your actions…
The next part wouldn't do. She scratched out the line, and
laboriously rewrote it, forcing herself to take care with quill and
inkwell.
In time, she stood and went to the door, peering out. Fhurgen,
Rickel, and Lejun were all there.
"Yes, Lady Anna?"
"Ah… could someone find Lord Jecks for me?"
Fhurgen looked at Rickel. Rickel looked at Lejun. Lejun
shrugged and grinned.
"He was sparring with Lord Birfels earlier, but he may be in the
library now," offered Fhurgen.
"I shall go," said Lejun.
"Thank you," Anna said quietly.
She went back to the smaller writing desk in the bedchamber
and began to read the latest scrolls. Menares, Dythya, Himar,
and Herstat somehow managed to get messengers to the right
place.
The first message was another from Lady Gatrune, thanking
Anna for trusting Herene with a position of responsibility. The
second was from Anientta, disavowing her father's request to
combine the administration and control of Arien and Flossbend.

Anna frowned. She'd already denied Tybel's request, but those
messages to both Anientta and Tybel probably had crossed
with Anientta's to Anna. Sooner or later, she needed to visit
Synope-or send Jecks or someone-to resolve that mess.
She picked up the third scroll and broke the seal.
Thrap!
"Lord Jecks, Lady Anna."
"Come on in."
They walked back to the conference table where Anna handed
her rough-drafted message to the white-haired lord. "Would
you read this?"
"I would be pleased. You have a fine hand, and a way with
words."
"Thank you." Anna forced herself to accept the compliment,
even while rejecting the idea.
After he finished, Jecks glanced up. "You are determined to use
such sorcery?"
"Unless someone comes up with a better idea. Doing nothing
will only make things worse." Anna took the last sip of wine in
the goblet and lifted the pitcher. It was empty, and she set it
down. "Right now, we have young Hadrenn holding off
Bertmynn and the Sturinnese and maybe the Liedfuhr in Ebra.
According to Menares, and who knows how he found out, both
the Liedfuhr and the Sturinnese are funding Bertmynn. Things
still aren't sorted out in Neserea, and we've at least got credit

with the Ranuan Exchange for our people. Dumar's the only
problem. What happens a year from now when there are twice
as many Sturinnese ships and armsmen in Dumar, when the
Liedfuhr uses that as an excuse to take over-just for the
duration-Neserea-" 
" 'For the duration'?" asked Jecks.
"Sorry. That's a sarcastic expression where I come from. It
means he'll say his action is temporary because of the
emergency conditions, but he never will leave. Neserea will
become part of Mansuur, and then we'll have problems on two
borders, with Bertmynn using coins from everyone to finish off
Hadrenn in Ebra…"
"Matters might not turn so ill."
Anna raised her eyebrows and fixed Jecks with cold blue eyes.
Jecks' lips curled into a sardonic smile. "That is why I am glad
you are regent, Lady Anna. You expect the worst of serpents
and plan for it. Planning for the worst, season after season, is
not to my liking."
"I take it you don't have a better idea?"
"I have those which are more pleasant." He laughed harshly,
once. "Yet against what you say, my ideas are like mist. No, I
fear you are right. I do not have to like your reason, but I must
respect it."
Jecks, an optimist? Anna nodded. He'd have to have been, to
have survived. And what does that say about you? She pushed
that question away.

"I'll have this ready to go." She gestured to the message. "It
needs to leave by messenger the moment the dam is
completed."
"Why tell me such?"
"Because I'm liable to be exhausted or asleep or not thinking
well, and you won't be." She forced a grin.
"As you say, Lady Anna."
"Am I wrong?" she demanded, her eyes meeting his warm
hazel ones.
"I think not." He paused. "You are not as other women. You
will not tell yourself that matters are other than they are. Defalk
is fortunate in that, but I would not say that of you, lady."
"Damned-cursed-to be a realist?"
He shrugged sadly.
"The message will be here, tied in green ribbon." Anna glanced
at the empty goblet, then at the clouds through the narrow
window, growing more golden by the moment. She could have
used more wine. Before long, being regent would turn her into
a full-blown alcoholic.
"There's a banquet tonight," Jecks offered.
Anna groaned. "I'm supposed to be entertained, and
entertaining?"
"I believe that is what Lady Fylena said." 

"Then you don't get to leave before I do." Anna offered a smile.
"Your wish in that is my command."
"You are still most careful, Lord Jecks."
"With sorceresses, and regents, that is wise." He kept a blank
expression, but the hazel eyes twinkled, and Anna wished for a
moment that she were neither regent nor sorceress.
80
WEI, NORDWEI
ASHTAAR turns in her chair to view the harbor through the
open window. In the late twilight, the sound of insects hums
upward from the trees below the Council building. To the
north, points of yellowed orange flicker into being as the larger
lamps on the harbor piers are lit. The darkness undotted by
lamps denotes the river Nord and Vereisen Bay beyond.
At the knock on the door, the spymistress turns, returning her
thoughts to the room illuminated softly by the wall-hung brass
luminaries. Behind the spotless crystal mantels, the lamp flames
scarcely flicker, but they are bright enough that her dark hair
glistens in their light. "Yes?"
"You requested my presence, honored Ashtaar?" Gretslen bows
as she steps inside and closes the dark-stained wooden door
behind her. The lamplight turns her blonde hair into a faint
cloud in the dim room.
"I did." The darker woman gestures to the chair before her

desk. "You have reported that the sorceress now holds all of
Defalk?"
Gretslen brushes a lock of short blonde hair off her forehead.
"She has subdued all the rebels without destroying their keeps
or all heirs, except in the case of Synfal. That she turned over to
the heir to Defalk itself, Lord Jimbob."
"She did not raze Stromwer?"
"No."
Ashtaar purses her lips, and her fingers slip around the black
agate oval, blacker even than her hair. "She has the loyalty of
all Defalk, and yet she neither presses into Dumar nor returns
to Falcor."
"She guests with Lord Birfels of Abenfel. She and her forces are
his invited guests," Gretslen confirms.
"And the Sea-Priests remain in Dumar? Can you determine
why?" 
"No, honored Ashtaar, save that their Sea-Marshal spends
much time with Lord Ehara, who does not seem overly
pleased."
"Would you be pleased?" Ashtaar laughs. "He has the Liedfuhr
to the west, the sorceress to the north, and the Sturinnese fleet
in his harbor. He has been providing aid to the rebel lords of
Defalk, and the sorceress knows that. Would you be in his seat?"
Gretslen shakes her head.
"The worst is yet to come," predicts the spymistress. "Ehara is

trapped between the Sturinnese, who will do anything to gain a
foothold in Liedwahr and to destroy a powerful female ruler,
and the sorceress. She will destroy them-and much of
Liedwahr-if she must in order to keep the gilded chains of
Sturinn from enslaving the women of Dumar and Defalk."
Ashtaar offers a cruel smile. "She does not know that, but she
will."
"And what of us?" asks Gretslen.
"We are worse, dear seer. We told her about the chains, and we
will let her use her full powers, come what may." Ashtaar's
fingers tighten around the black agate before she forces them to
relax.
81
ANNA glanced to her right at the mist rising out of the gorge
and above the trees and brush that blocked her direct view of
the canyon and the river. Her eyes went to the damp clay of the
trail that led to the narrows where she would try to create her
dam. In the leather folder behind her saddle were her drawings,
based on everything she could remember, and the elaborate
three-stanza spell. Elaborate strophic, homophonic spell…
She hoped she wouldn't need it, and that she could concentrate
on the drawing and the concept of the dam, but the words and
melody notations were there if necessary. She felt tired, and she
hadn't even done any spell-casting. Then, most of the fatigue
was probably from mental conflict. She didn't like what she
was planning, but she had to do something, besides waiting,
and anything else she or Jecks or anyone else had thought up

was worse-except doing nothing. And within a short time, that
would result in even more dire consequences.
The lutar that accompanied her everywhere away from
whatever keep she inhabited was also fastened behind the
saddle. Jecks rode silently to her right, drawn into himself, and
probably fighting the same internal conflicts. Anna snorted. He
was probably wondering how they'd ended up saddled with a
temperamental sorceress who didn't want a return to the good
old days. Women thinking? Openly questioning men? Or
running holdings? What had Erde come to? 
As she pursed her lips, moistening them, she leaned forward
and patted Farinelli, getting the faintest of whuffs from the
gelding. Ahead of her rode Rickel and Fhurgen, and behind
Anna, Hanfor and Lord Birfels. After the veteran and the lord
rode Lejun and then the regent's players, followed by the
Purple Company.
The players were silent, even Delvor, the struggling violinist,
and Duralt, the cocky falk-horn player who was too often full
of himself. Anna missed Daffyd. For all of his puppy-dog hurt
looks, for all that his misconstrued spell had dragged Anna to
Defalk, he'd been a good player and leader and had stood up
for what he believed in-and for Anna-and he'd died at Vult
doing it.
"Lady Anna… ?" Birke's voice almost broke-the problems of
adolescent growth-as he edged his mount nearer to hers.
She turned her head, eastward, left, and let the rising sun warm
her full face. "Yes, Birke."

"What… what will happen… after…"
"After the sorcery?" That is a damned good question. "There will
be a dam, and a large lake behind it. When the water reaches
the spillway- that's a lower place in the dam-it will flow over the
dam, and then the river will continue."
"But… why… do such sorcery?"
"To let the Dumarans and the Sturinnese know I could halt the
river forever. To persuade the Sturinnese to leave Liedwahr." 
You hope…
"They might not," Birke said. "My sire says they are like ants in
a granary. You have to remove everything and kill them all
before they will leave." He paused. "Would you do that?"
"Birke," Anna said slowly, "one day you will inherit your sire's
lands. You'll be responsible for all of the holding. You know
what the Sturinnese have done. They've conquered the Ostisles
and now they have a fleet in Dumar. Would you like to see
Lysara and Clayre in gilded chains? Or your own consort when
you have one? What would you do?"
"They have often taken many years… and you are powerful.
They cannot defeat you."
Anna wanted to shake her head. She'd seen it in academia on
earth, and in Erde among the lords… and everyone else. If the
problem wasn't immediate, ignore it and hope it will go away.
"Birke… your faith in my ability is touching, but how long will
I live? I'm older than your father, possibly older than Jecks. And
I can be killed. It's almost happened twice." More like half a

dozen times if you count the backlash of sorcery-"Then what?"
The youth's forehead furrowed. After a time, he answered.
"Lady Anna, when you talk, nothing is quite the same. But it is
hard. I remember when you bespelled Virkan. At first, I
thought you were fearsome, and-then Skent said something
strange. He talks more like you, you know.
He said that you had only spelled Virkan to do what a good
person would not need a spell for." Birke glanced at the
winding trail ahead, then looked back at the sorceress. "He said
that you seldom spelled except to make things better for
everyone." The redhead laughed nervously. "And he looked at
me, and he told me that what was better for lords wasn't
always better for everyone else. I would have struck him
except… he's bigger, and he seemed so calm." 
Anna glanced over her shoulder. Birfels was talking quietly to
Hanfor. "Birke… Skent was right. What is good for one lord is
not good for all lords, and what is good for all lords may not be
good for all people. You remember Secca?"
"The little redheaded fosterling. Lysara wrote me about her,
but…"
"You had already returned to Abenfel. She has two brothers,
one older and one younger. She is brighter than either. She is
fairer and more determined than either. Would it be better for
her to hold the lands or her brothers?"
Birke looked at the mane of the roan he rode. "The sons… They
have always been heirs…"

"Exactly. It's hard, isn't it? If you admit that Secca might be a
better landholder, then wouldn't you have to admit that Clayre
or Lysara might have that skill, too?" Anna laughed. "I'm not
changing the succession laws, except in cases where the sons
are incompetent or there aren't any sons." She paused. "Isn't it
better that Cataryzna hold her father's lands than some
outsider?"
Birke nodded. "That… that is better."
"Well… that's the sort of thing I am changing. Nothing more." 
Not for a long time, anyway. That's enough to turn some of the
older lords purple as it is.
Birke screwed up his face. "But you did not… I mean…
Dumar… and the Sea-Priests…"
"I didn't, did I?" The sorceress wiped her forehead. Despite the
early-morning coolness in the hills, she was starting to perspire.
Nerves? "I'm hoping that if I cut off the river to Dumar for a
time, that will persuade Ehara to get the Sea-Priests to leave."
"But…"
"If they don't?" Anna shrugged. "We'll have to see. At least this
way, I'm not using sorcery to kill scores or hundreds or
thousands of people." If it works… She repressed a shiver. "Isn't
that the narrows there?"
Birke stood in the stirrups. "Yes. There goes a buck! If I had my
bow out, we'd have venison."
Anna watched as the big white-tailed red deer-was there such

an animal?-bounded from the cleared area into the trees that
climbed the hills to the east of the trail. She was glad Birke
hadn't had his bow out and strung. She turned in the saddle.
"Liende, I'd like the players to set up on that grassy spot on the
ridge there, right below those bushes."
"Players!" Liende ordered.
Anna eased her water bottle from its holder and took a long
slow swallow before replacing it. By then, Farinelli had carried
her to the partly cleared ridge that overlooked the narrower
section of the gorge. 
Most of the mist had cleared from above the river, save for a
few wispy strands drifting out of the shadows she couldn't see
below her on the eastern side.
"Purple company!" called Hanfor. "Squads one and two back
along the trail, up to the crest by that pine. Squads three and
four, ride down to where those two bushes sit by that fallen
trunk."
As the armsmen followed the arms commander's orders and
dust swirled across the high meadow, Anna dismounted,
handing Farinelli's reins to Lejun and then unpacking the
folder with the spell and the drawings of the dam. Folder in
hand, she stretched, then lifted her shoulders, walking in circles
to get the stiffness out of her legs. Her steps took her down to
the overlook, and she studied the gorge once more.
The Falche seemed wider than even the few days earlier, the
silver ribbon twisting in the shade hundreds of yards below. As

she watched the play of light and mist and shadow, she cleared
her throat, then began her vocalises.
"Holly-lolly-polly-pop… Damn!" She coughed, trying to clear
out her throat, then began again. It was going to take a long
time to get clear. It did-four separate vocalises and a lot of
mucus.
Only the faintest of mist streamers were left by the time she
turned from her warm-up and view of the Falche. Jecks was
waiting for her by Farinelli, water bottle in hand, after she
walked back up the gentle slope through the knee-high brush.
"You're worried, aren't you?" she asked.
"I should not be." He shrugged. "I worry every time you
attempt the impossible." A small laugh followed. "You have
made the impossible possible, time and again, but still I worry."
"This time even more?"
He nodded.
"You may be right. This is a very ambitious spell."
"Sometimes, my lady, you try too hard to avoid shedding
blood."
"You all wanted me as regent. That's who I am." Anna laughed
brit-tlely and shook her head. "No… you didn't want me. You
wanted someone to preserve Defalk, and you got me. That's
different, isn't it?"
"In these times, Defalk could not have a better ruler."

"You're so careful, Jecks, but I understand. Thank you." She
took the water bottle and drank, then handed it back.
The players stood on the cleared part of the ridge, stretching,
coughing, clearing throats. The sounds of strings and the
clarinet-like woodwind and the deeper falk-horn intertwined as
the group finished its warm-up tunes.
"Your players stand ready, Lady Anna," Liende said.
"Thank you, Liende. I'm almost ready." Anna walked to where
Hanfor waited, still mounted. "I don't know what will happen,
but it could; spook the mounts."
"I have told the men that. They understand." 
"Good." She paused. "Thank you."
Hanfor touched his brow in an informal salute. "May the
harmonies be with you, Lady Anna."
Anna glanced from Hanfor to Jecks, getting a brief smile from
the white-haired lord. She took a last swallow and coughed
gently to make sure her throat was clear. Finally, she nodded to
Liende.
"The battle tune. On my mark… Mark!" The head player
gestured, and lifted her clarinet-like horn, turning to join in the
melody she had started.
Anna tried to stay focused and relaxed, letting her body and
cords carry the music, her mind on trying to hold the image of
the dam, her eyes on the drawings, attempting to project them
in place in the narrow gorge below.

"My words must start the damming of the river here below…"
Even from the first words, the sky seemed to silver, and to
freeze-a silver-blue hemisphere frozen in time. From the
players' separate parts- each note rang like a tiny bell, even the
sweet singing of the strings, and the deeper bass of the falk
horn.
Anna forced her thoughts back to the image of the dam and to
the song---
"With a building of the strongest stones from where the waters
flow…"
The melody from the players welled up around her, and the
sorceress half smiled. Never had they sounded so good, so solid.
"… setting every block into the place that it must hold…"
The phrasing flowed, just as she had planned.
Just before the last chorus, Anna could sense an enormous
pressure behind even the silver-blue sky, and she could feel her
knees trembling. Even with all the help of the players, Anna
had this feeling she wasn't going to make it. Lights seemed to
flash around her, and the ground groaned and rumbled.
She hung on, concentrating on the last words and the notes.
"Glory, glory, halleluia; glory, glory, halleluia; 
Glory, glory, halleluia, these stones will last and last!"
She slumped, panting. Never… so… hard… Such a short song.
…

THRUMMMMMH!
The entire heavens pulsated with a series of chords, the chords
seemingly unheard by any but Anna, and silver clouds that
were mist and yet not mist, filled the gorge. Underneath the
ground trembled, and shook. 
Farinelli half whuffed, half screamed, then half reared,
dragging Lejun and his mount uphill and away from the river.
"… dissonance!"
For a moment, utter silence, a blanket of silence that muffled
absolutely all attempt at sound, descended.
THRUMMMMM
With the second chord, sound resumed, and the silver mists
over the river rose and boiled away. The haze lifted, showing a
picture-perfect arching dam of glistening gray stone. The
spillway was even there.
Anna could sense tears welling up in her eyes. She tried to take
a deep breath-and couldn't. Damned asthma. . . .
The world turned red, and then black and swirled around her.
82
DUMARIA, DUMAR
THE two lords, one of Dumar, one of Sturinn, sit on opposite
sides of the low table which bears a large carafe of wine, a bowl
of honeyed nuts, and one of dried fruit. Ehara lowers the scroll

and looks at Sea-Marshal jerRestin. "And how far upstream is
the Falche dry?"
"Not a drop of water flows over the first cataract or the second.
Your sorceress has stopped the entire Falche. Even I would not
have thought I it possible."
"She's hardly my sorceress, Sea-Marshal," Ehara says with a
ragged laugh. "It was done, Sea-Priest. Don't tell me how you
would not have believed it possible. Half your fleet sits
grounded in the mud below Dumaria. The waters of the
Envaryl lap around their hulls. What of the other half?"
"They remain at Narial. The bay is tidal." JerRestin reaches for
a: handful of honeyed nuts. He eats them deliberately.
Ehara lifts the scroll he has been reading. "The sorceress has
sent this.! She has suggested that it might be better for me and
my people if theij Sturinnese fleet returned to Sturinn." He
extends the scroll to jerRestin.
The Sea-Marshal reads slowly. "Behind the polite worlds, she is
ordering you to dismiss us… and to pay her thousands of
golds."
"It does not sound like such a bad idea, at least until the river is
returned to us."
"You do not wish to pay all those golds. Nor do we wish that,
either. The sorceress cannot hold back such a mighty river
forever. It will not hurt to wait." The Sea-Marshal smiles. "In
any case, the ships at Dumaria cannot sail anywhere."

"What if I requested you to leave?" asks Ehara.
"I would take your request, and then I would send it to the
Maitre. It is on his orders that I am here."
"I see."
"I think you do, Lord Ehara. Shall we have some of that wine
while we wait for the sorceress to act? It may be some time. You
know she is prostrate. The scroll might not even be her work.
She reached beyond herself, and she may not recover. Often
those who do such great works do not recover." JerRestin
smiles. "Some wine?" he repeats.
"Ah… of course."
83
ANNA opened burning and blurred eyes, slowly, painfully.
Jecks looked solemnly at her, propped up as she was by lumpy
pillows in the high-backed bed. She met his glance for a
moment, then closed her eyes against the pounding headache
and the miniature starbursts that flashed before her.
When she opened them again, the white-haired lord sat in the
chair by her bed.
"My lady… Lady Anna… you cannot continue like this." Jecks
extended a goblet. "It is wine, honeyed. You must drink."
Anna drank. Then she closed her eyes for a moment.
"You must eat and drink more before you sleep."

Obediently, she forced her eyes back open and took another sip
of the wine, far too sweet for her preference. She tried to get her
eyes to focus on the white-haired lord, but one moment he
seemed clear, and the next a silvered fuzzy image.
"Another," he urged inexorably.
She took a small sip. A thought struggled somewhere, and
finally she asked, "The… message?"
"As you ordered, I did send it, under the blue flag of messages
and harmony. Lord Ehara doubtless did not feel such harmony
when he received your words." 
"Received?" Anna rasped.
"You have lain like one enchanted or dead for nearly a week.
The message has surely been delivered, but there has been no
time for a reply. We have forced water into you, but you are
thin unto death." He extended a small fragment of bread. "You
must eat."
Anna slowly chewed the bread, hard as it was with a dry
mouth, then let Jecks hold the goblet again as she drank. "The
dam… ?"
"You have wrought a mighty sorcery," he admitted, offering
another small fragment of bread. "The river has filled the gorge
for three deks and slowed its flow for another five… And it has
yet to creep halfway, nay not even a fourth part of the way, up
those stones your sorcery laid."
"Is any… water going… past… ?"

"Beyond the dam are only sands and drying rocks. And more
sand and dry rock. Before long, Lord Birfels worries that the
waters will flood the fields near Emor."
Emor? Anna hadn't even heard of Emor.
"That is a small hamlet fifteen deks upstream of Abenfel." Jecks
pressed another square of dark bread upon her.
"Be… awhile," mumbled Anna as she struggled with the bread.
"Years. It's a deep gorge."
"Not as deep as before. The waters have covered the sands and
the shores, and it is a lake of blue." He offered more bread.
Chewing the bread took effort, and her jaws moved as though
they were made of lead. She swallowed and took another sip of
wine.
Her eyes felt heavy, far too heavy, and she could no longer
keep them open.
84
PAMR, DEFALK
I cant believe what Deurn said you had back here," says the
thin and ,-wispy-bearded youth. "I just had to see."
"You'll see, Elcean," promises the young chandler. "It is rather
remarkable." He closes the door to the small room, and the slow
and rhythmic drumming enfolds them-thurummm …
thurumtn… thurumnttrti… thurumtn…

"Oh…"
On the pedestal is an almost life-sized statue of a voluptuous
brunette, with an impossibly slender waist and dark hair that
falls against creamy skin like a gossamer cloak, just barely
covering her breasts. The hair shimmers and shifts ever so
slightly in the still air, yet the naked woman- or statue-does not
move.
"Oh… Farsenn… can I touch her?"
"That might not be a good idea," says the chandler. "At least,
not until you listen to me. She won't go anywhere."
"I can look…"
Farsenn slips into song, bass voice intertwining with the
rhythm of the drum.
"Men of Pamr, heed no woman's song, 
for Farsenn will make you proud and strong…"
When the spell ends, Farsenn blinks, then squints before he
resumes smiling. "You see? We men need to stand together
these days, don't we?"
" 'Course… like you say." Elcean continues to stare at the
brunette. "Sure is pretty."
The drumbeat dies, and Farsenn smiles conspiratorially. "Just
don't tell any of the women… You know what I mean?"
Elcean flushes.

"It was good of you to come to see me." Farsenn makes a vague
gesture toward the door. Elcean follows the gesture, and the
chandler follows him.
Once the door closes, the drummer rises and glances at the
rough clay figure that stands on the crude wooden pedestal, a
figure no more than a yard and a half tall. Then he wipes his
steaming forehead, then massages it. He also blinks as though
he has difficulty seeing clearly.
85
ANNA looked at the empty tray on the writing table before
her. Had she eaten all that? Every time she pushed her sorcery,
she paid, and paid more, it seemed. That was another reason
why she wanted to see if she could get Ehara to push the
Sturinnese out.
"It won't happen…" she murmured to herself. All that would
happen was that the Falche would fill up over the next few
years, the Dumaran people would suffer, and she'd take the
blame. The Sturinnese would stay put, and she and Jecks would
have to decide whether a war in Dumar was worth it. And she
would either have to rely on brute-force sorcery to devastate
Dumar and prevent a worse mess later, or she could be
reasonable, according to conventional lordly wisdom, and wait
for a Sturinnese-backed invasion or worse in a year or two. By
then, Ebra would be in the middle of a civil war, or the war
would be over and she'd have another growing enemy to the
east while Konsstin would be bringing sorcerers and armies into
Neserea to the west. 

Yet… how could she live with herself if she didn't try something
else? Even if it happened to be a long shot?
She snorted. Of course she could forget Dumar for a time. But
then she would have to use force in Ebra to secure Defalk's
eastern borders, and that would probably encourage the
Sturinnese to attack southern Defalk from Dumar when she
was weeks away in Ebra and could do nothing.
Outside was gray. That she could tell, but it wasn't raining, just
hot and gray. Even in the thin shift that wasn't hers, she felt
hot, and sweaty, and smelly. She wanted a bath, not a sponge
bath, and not a bath in the lukewarm water Defalkans called
hot. She wanted a hot and steaming bath, and she wasn't going
to get it anytime soon. Not when even boiling water cooled on
the long trip up from the kitchens and the mere thought of
sorcery sent a screaming pain across her temples.
Still, she was better. She wasn't quite so gaunt, and she could
eat, and take short walks, and Jecks didn't look at her as
though she were about to die. Yet it seemed her recovery was
taking longer than after other similar large spells.
Outside the window the finches twittered, and Anna smiled at
the calls that were half song, half argument.
Her eyes flicked to the mirror on the wall-a mirror she could
use just as a mirror, thanks to the reflecting pool. She wasn't
sure she wanted to see her reflection, not yet, anyway.
Thrap!
"Yes?" she said warily.

Jecks peered in. "Lady Anna?"
"Come on in." After he entered, she gestured to the chair across
the I writing desk from her.
"You look better," Jecks offered as he seated himself.
"Not as though I'd die on the spot?" Anna reseated herself.
"You are surely in better health," he said with a smile.
"Because I'm back to my old snippy self?" She even felt like
smiling in return.
"All were worried."
"You were upset because you don't see what this sorcery will
accomplish besides flooding fields?"
"And killing Defalk's sole hope of prevailing against the
Liedfuhr." He smiled. "I mean you, my lady."
"You don't worry about Sturinn?"
"We have no ports and need little of what is traded across the
Western Sea."
"Forty ships in Dumar doesn't bother you?"
"The Liedfuhr has fifty thousand lancers, it is said." Jecks
shrugged. "Forty ships carried a tenth of that number."
Anna forced a smile. Jecks was being logical, and she couldn't
fight logic with logic. Her intuition told her he was wrong, that
Sturinn posed a far greater danger than Mansuur. But how

could she convince him? She took a slow breath.
"You fear Sturinn more than Mansuur." His words were even,
not quite a question.
"Yes. I can't explain why or how, but Sturinn is a greater
danger." Anna took a sip of the wine, a drier red that was far
better than the honeyed stuff she'd swallowed when first
recovering. Her legs felt stiff, and she pushed back the
straight-backed chair and stood.
Why did she feel like an arthritic old woman? In the mirror, she
looked like a worn-out twenty-year-old, but that wasn't the
way she felt at the moment.
She needed to get stronger. That she felt, but it had been almost
two weeks since the dam had been completed, and she was still
slow and tired. Each day she tried to walk farther, get more
exercise, but she continued to feel drained.
Her feet took her to the window, and to the gray clouds piling
in from the east.
"Sturinn may be a greater danger," ventured Jecks, "but
Mansuur is closer."
Anna nodded. She couldn't argue with that, either. "We'll have
to do something about Dumar or Ebra."
"None will gainsay your right to back one side in the conflict
there," Jecks pointed out.
More damned politics. "I suppose not. We don't piss off either

the Sea-Priests or Konsstin, not openly." She shook her head. Or
worry the beloved lords of the Thirty-three… Lord!
"You could go by way of Synope," Jecks offered placatingly.
"I could." Why did she feel so damned tired? She yawned. "I
still think Dumar is the bigger problem."
"You still are tired."
"Yes," she admitted, reluctantly. Her eyes felt heavy. Just how
long wouid it take for her to feel normal again?
He stood. "I must go."
Anna walked toward the high bed. Her eyes were closed within
moments of the clunk of the door.
86
ESARIA, NESAREA
THE heavy, gilt-framed mirror in the hallway to the
bedchamber swings away from the wall. A single low candle
lights the corridor behind the barred door. On the other side of
the door are two Man-suuran lancers.
After several moments, a cloaked figure slips from the opening
made by the swiveled mirror and toward the archway leading
to the bedchamber. In the bed a man lies, sleeping on his side,
his closed eyes facing the archway. He does not move as the
intruder enters the room.
The figure in deep brown, far less visible at night than black,

steps up to the table by the bed, deftly takes the stoppered wine
pitcher from the tray and replaces it with another.
As silently as he has come, the intruder eases his way back
behind the mirror. The mirror swings back into place, and
without even a click, seats itself so that it again appears built
into the wall.
As he steps down the stairs to the narrow passage set partly
below floor level, Rabyn murmurs, "You will notice nothing,
taste nothing, good Nubara. Not for a long, long time."
He passes several other niches in the wall, each behind a mirror.
He also must duck upon occasion when the passageway's
ceiling lowers to accommodate windows in those rooms it
borders. He turns two more corners and comes to the place
where he entered.
There, at the top of the three narrow steps, he presses a lever,
and another mirror swings out from the wall. Once he is inside
his own rooms, he closes the mirror and carefully checks the
boss on the left side, wiping it carefully with the fabric of the
brown cloak.
With a smile, he walks to his dressing room, stopping in front
of the three-yard-wide polished-wood wardrobe, and drawing
wide the double; doors. After he opens the hidden compartment
at the back of the ward-1 robe and replaces the enveloping
brown cloak, his eyes go to the miniature! portrait on the long
dressing table.
The dark-haired woman seems to smile at him, and he smiles

back. "Yes, you taught me well. As that lizard Nubara will
discover."
87
THE sound of heavy raindrops on the walls of Abenfel echoed
into the dim study in the late afternoon. "How long is this rain
going to last?" Anna asked, her eyes going to the closed
shutters of the study. She felt almost trapped inside the
dark-paneled room. The faint odor of wax and burned
candlewicks made her nose twitch, even as she stifled another
yawn. Would she ever stop feeling tired?
Birfels shrugged, a faint smile breaking across his ruddy face.
"Lady, I cannot say. When the winds come out of the east in
the spring and early summer, it may rain for a week or more.
The Sudbergs hold the clouds and the rain melts the snow on
the high peaks…"
Anna got the picture, or thought she did.
In the chair in the corner, Birke smiled, but remained silent, as
though he feared any statement would call attention to him
and result in his dismissal from the de facto meeting of his
elders.
Anna wanted to grin, but didn't.
"Ehara, will he cross the Sudbergs in the rain, do you think?"
asked Birfels. "Will the Sturinnese not prompt him to attack
now that part of their fleet is beached in the empty Falche?"
"There's some water there," Anna said. "We looked in the

reflecting pool this afternoon." Absently, she rubbed her
forehead, although the headache from scrying had disappeared
quickly, and she'd been fine when she'd groomed Farinelli. She
still wondered what was upsetting Farinelli. Ever since her
creation of the dam, the big gelding had been edgy. Did he
sense her continuing exhaustion, a tiredness that had persisted
for all too long? The gelding hadn't been that way at such times
before, though. She pursed her lips momentarily. There wasn't
much she could do.
"From the Envaryl," Jecks said. "Enough to wade in."
"Ehara and the Sea-Priests will not attack Defalk now," said
Hanfor. "They will wait until trouble draws Lady Anna
elsewhere." The veteran lifted his shoulders and spread his
heads, offering an apologetic smile. "Only when she is
committed in Ebra or against raiders from the High Grasslands
of Neserea, only then will they attack."
"You cannot remain in Abenfel forever," Birfels said.
"No," Anna admitted. "If I attack Dumar, then Ehara can ask
for more aid from Sturinn. I wouldn't be surprised if he asked
for aid from Mansuur. He's got enough gall. If I don't attack
now, or sometime soon, then he'll attack when we can't stop
him, like Hanfor said."
"You do not depict a happy setting." The Lord of Abenfel
frowned. "You must neglect the rest of Defalk to stop attacks on
the south, or you must abandon us…"
"Not yet," Anna corrected. "Dumar will not attack, even with

the Sea-Priests' help, for at least a year. They will bring more
and more armsmen, until Dumar is more like a part of
Sturinn." 
"Unless matters change," added Hanfor.
And they always do, Anna thought, we just don't know how.
She stifled a yawn. She was better, but still tired, although she
had ridden Farinelli several times in the past week before the
downpour had started the day before.
"What will you do, then?" Birfels asked.
"If I had more armsmen, I'd attack Dumar," Anna said bluntly.
"If I don't. We'll wait another week, if you don't mind, to see
what develops."
"And then?"
"We'll see."
Birfels stroked his chin. "Ebra?"
"I can't afford to have Konsstin or the Sea-Priests on three
borders, So… we need to help out Lord Hadrenn. He's pledged
to Defalk." That'll doesn't mean I'm going there… not soon.
"Ah…" Birfels nodded. "You would secure the east, then."
"At some time," Hanfor said.
"Hopefully," Anna corrected. And that's a faint hope, indeed,
but allij, I've got.

She wished that her dam had persuaded Ehara or the
Sturinnese to leave, but apparently that hadn't been a
great-enough show of force. She repressed a snort. Not enough
blood and gore and destruction.
"We will see," said Jecks.
"Indeed," added Birfels politely, lifting the wine pitcher. "Would
you care for the good red?"
"Yes," said Anna, hoping the politics of Regency weren't driving
her to alcoholism, even as she lifted the goblet.
ENDE
* * * * * * * 
88
THE stallion reared back, silhouetted by the frequent bolts of
lightning against the night stormclouds, yanking the rope. The
heavy and rough hemp burned Anna's palms raw, sliding
somehow around her hands, ripping, slicing the skin, even
though she had wound the rope tightly so that she could keep
her grip.
The black beast screamed and turned, heading westward.
Despite the fire across her hands and the knives stabbing into
her head, Anna dug in her heels and stiffened her body.
Still, she felt herself being dragged toward the river, toward the
white water that surged only yards from the wild stallion that
dragged her toward it, toward the whitecaps that roared more

loudly than surf. She couldn't let go of the rope. She couldn't…
THRRUMMM!
Anna woke with a jolt, jarred almost bolt upright in the high
bed, as if her entire body had been shocked by the force of the
lightning strike that had seemed to shake the entire keep of
Abenfel.
She blinked, dazed, glancing around the dark room. Nothing
moved in her bedchamber. Had it been just a dream? Or some
kind of earthquake? Outside, the rain kept splatting against the
stones of the keep. What had happened? It couldn't have been
just a nightmare, could it?
In slow motion, or so it seemed, she swung out of the bed, and
padded to the shutters, easing them open. Outside, the rain fell
in sheets, so thickly that she could see nothing but rain.
She watched for a time, but there were no other flashes or bolts
of lightning, only a rumble of thunder that seemed distant, and
receding. Then, although she listened for a long time, the only
sounds were those of the rain splatting on stone and puddle, on
roof and battlement, in big and endless drops. Even in Iowa it
hadn't rained so hard for so long.
Finally, she closed the shutters, and yawned, tired as she had
been for what seemed weeks on weeks.
She slipped back to her bed, listening for a time as the rain
continued to pour down in a soothing waterfall, as it had for the
past four days. After what seemed a glass or longer, she drifted
back into an uneasy sleep.

Despite nightmares of rivers and stallions, when she woke, she
felt refreshed, more alive, more awake than in days. She
padded to the window and opened one shutter. Although the
rain had stopped, the gray clouds, while thinning, blocked any
direct sunlight. She nodded and headed for the bath chamber.
Barely had she gotten out of the hot bath and dressed than
there was a furious rapping on the door. Anna pulled on her
second boot and stood.
"Yes?" 
"Lady Anna?"
She recognized Birke's voice and opened the door.
"The dam… the sorcery…" Birke burst out. "It has… You must
see."
Even as she swallowed, Anna felt herself nodding. Somehow,
she'd been pouring energy into the damned dam. That had
been why she'd been so tired! The storm-or the harmonies-had
broken that tie, and the dam.
"You… look pleased?"
"No. I know what happened." Anna coughed, clearing her
throat. "We can't do much now. I'll need to eat."
"There is… bread and cheese and things in the small hall," the
redhead said. "The others were gathering for breakfast."
"I'll be down in a moment." Anna closed the door, then
searched for her belt wallet and threaded the green leather belt
through it and the knife scabbard, the same battered but stiff

leather one that Albero had given her in Loiseau soon after
she'd landed in Erde. Less than two years earlier, and yet so
long ago in so many ways.
She picked up the lutar and the leather case with the traveling
scrying mirror before she stepped out into the hall.
"I could carry the mirror, Lady Anna," offered Rickel.
Anna surrendered the mirror easily. Her guards knew she
seldom gave up the lutar.
Hanfor, Jecks, Birke, and Birfels were standing and waiting in
the front of the small hall. In the rear were Fylena, Wasle, and
Clayre. The dark-haired girl flashed a quick smile.
"You shouldn't have waited for me," Anna said. "Let's just eat."
She sat on one end of the bench, ignoring the empty seat at the
head of the table, and reached for the bread.
Birfels finally took his own seat, the one that he'd relinquished
to Anna at every dinner, or supper, Anna corrected herself.
After several mouthfuls, Anna paused and glanced at Birke.
"How did you know about the dam?"
"At first, I didn't, but Riksar-he's the wagonmaster, and he has
a cot to the west-he told me that the water in the gorge had
dropped by more than half." Birke shrugged. "So I rode down
to see. There is still a lake, but water is pouring over what
remains of the stones."
Her mouth full of bread and cheese, Anna nodded.

"It falls over… and it roars and the spray is like mist."
The sorceress frowned. It didn't sound as though the dam had
actually smashed apart, but she'd have to see.
Rather than talk, Anna ate until she finally felt full. She should
have been, after inhaling an entire loaf of steaming dark bread,
a large wedge of cheese, and several handfuls of dried apples.
She stood.
So did everyone else.
"If you're not done, please finish eating," the sorceress said. "I
need to groom Farinelli first." With a nod at the group, she
picked up the lutar and slipped out and into the corridor. 
Rickel and Lejun followed her to the stable, Rickel still bearing
the mirror.
Farinelli tossed his head as Anna stepped into the stall, yet he
seemed more at ease than he had in previous days, not
sidestepping or flicking his tail at nonexistent flies.
Although she didn't hurry with her grooming, she found herself
astride Farinelli in the courtyard, while others scrambled to
catch up-except for Jecks and Hanfor, who were also ready.
"I fear what we will see," said Jecks quietly.
"I don't worry about what we'll see here," Anna said. "There
can't be that much damage in the gorge."
"Downstream, below the Great Chasm, there will be ruin if
your dam failed." Hanfor turned in the saddle as Alvar rode up.

"We are ready, Arms Commander."
Anna glanced toward the stable, where Birke led out his mount,
followed by Birfels. "In a moment, once they're mounted."
Alvar nodded.
Farinelli whuffed once, and Anna leaned forward and patted
him on the neck, getting another, lower whuff in return.
Because the trail was muddy, with pools of water in the low
spots, the group rode at a slow walk. Still, Anna had mud
splattered across the legs of her trousers.
The slow ride took closer to three glasses than the two it had in
drier weather, and the sun-trying to break through thinning
gray clouds- was nearly overhead by the time they nearer the
partly cleared vista of the gorge that overlooked the dam-or
what was left of it.
"You see?" called Birke as he stood in the stirrups and gestured
downhill.
From where she'd reined up, Anna couldn't see much of
anything. She couldn't miss the roar of falling water, or the
spray that drifted above the gorge and trees.
She dismounted, handed Farinelli's reins to Fhurgen, and
walked with Hanfor and Jecks down to where she could view
the damage. Birfels and Birke joined the three as Anna studied
the river and the gorge.
From what she could see, the entire structure had… sunk, and

tilted forward at a thirty-degree angle.
Some few rivulets spurted out from the chasm walls, as if in
those places where the chasm or rocks had weakened, but the
dam itself was still intact-just repositioned so that the lake
behind it was lower, a third of what it had been. The Falche
poured over the repositioned dam, a cascade of water.
"You have created a new cataract, the third great cataract,"
Birfels said.
Anna had to wonder what had happened in Dumar when that
wall of water had swept down the Falche. Whatever had
happened, it wouldn't have been good. 
She took a deep breath. She had a lot of scrying, and thinking,
to do.
89
ENCORA, RANUAK
Veria knocks on the pale oak wooden door a second time. The
door to the Matriarch's private quarters opens. "You wasted no
time, sister," says Alya. "Mother said you would be here." She
draws the door full open and steps aside. "Father has brewed
the fine green-gray tea."
"Thank you, sister." Veria's voice is stiff.
"Thank the Matriarch." Alya's smile remains formal, her eyes
cold, as the two walk through the circular foyer and into the tea
room.

"Veria. Please join us," invites the gray-haired Matriarch with a
pleasant smile upon her round face.
"You expected me." Veria slips into one of the two vacant chairs.
"Of course. What has happened will affect the SouthWomen
greatly." The Matriarch sips her tea. "Greatly. Your presence
will allow them to understand what has happened."
"The sorceress tried to build a great dam with sorcery," Veria
begins, "and it failed-"
"It took a mighty regenflut, and the dam did not fail; the
ground around the dam failed." The Matriarch corrects her
dark-haired daughter with a smile. "Even now the dam holds
together, and it will do so for longer than any of us will endure."
"Moth-Matriarch, does that not show her weaknesses still?"
Veria's fingers tighten around the pale blue cup.
"Veria, if you will permit your aging father," Ulgar says with a
smile as he steps up to the table with a green-and-golden
ceramic pot in his hand, "I will refill your cup."
"Thank you." Veria's fingers loosen their grip on the fluted cup
thati matches the pot, and she inclines her head. "Thank you,
Father."
"The sorceress has weaknesses, as you say, Veria," answers the
Matriarch. "As do we all. The weakness was not in her sorcery,
but in her failure to understand that the rock to which she
anchored her sorcery was not so strong as either she or her
spell. And the spell was pure Clearsong." 

"Clearsong or no, it was a failure," points out Veria.
"Sister… that failure destroyed the entire fleet of the
Sea-Priests," says Alya. "Not a ship of those in Narial remains."
"Even her failures are successes," says Veria. "This cannot
continue. The harmonies will not permit it."
"The harmonies permit what they will," suggests the Matriarch.
"I feel that this failure was not the success you suggest. She will
pay for it; she has paid for everything, and the harmonies do
not permit us to escape. With the forces she has wielded, even
less will they permit her to evade fate."
"Yet you support her?" asks Veria.
Alya looks at Veria, but the dark-haired woman refuses to meet
Alya's eyes.
"I support the harmonies." The Matriarch smiles. "So does she,
as she understands them. So should the SouthWomen."
"You said this would affect the SouthWomen," Veria suggests.
"It will. Lord Ehara and the Sturinnese cannot accept such a
devastation. All their resources will go to Dumar. They will not
treat with the freewomen of Elawha, and they will kill them
immediately and as quickly as possible."
"You had said that such would occur because Sturinn was
backing Bertmynn. Now you say that it will happen because
the Sea-Priests are not backing Bertmynn." Veria snorts-loudly.
"They will no longer suggest. They will send more coins and

fewer armsmen, and the price of those coins will be higher, and
paid with the blood of the freewomen and any who oppose
Bertmynn and the plans of the Sea-Priests."
"You merely seek another way to forecast failure for those
women who wish to be free."
"The women of Ebra will be free, in spite of your plots and
blades, Veria. They will be free because of the prices that the
sorceress will pay, and you will suffer."
"Are you threatening me?" Veria sets down the green fluted cup.
"No, my daughter." The Matriarch shakes her head sadly. "I
know what the harmonies demand. They demand much, and
they demand more of those who supply blades for others to
fight their battles than of those who lift them for their own
ends."
Ulgar slurps his tea noisily. As the others look at him, he adds,
"That is why the sorceress will prevail. She does what she must,
and then asks others."
The Matriarch nods, but her eyes are sad, and fixed upon Veria.
90
THE sorceress glanced at the reflecting pool, then cleared her
throat, beginning another vocalise. After three, her voice was
firm, cords clear, and she lifted the lutar and sang.
"Show in Dumar, high and true, 

What the raging flow did do… 
Show me now, and show me all, 
of how it struck and what did fall…"
Anna forced herself to lower the lutar gently, even as her eyes
were drawn into the scenes in the reflecting pool, even as she
heard the indrawn breaths of Hanfor and Jecks.
A muddy sea tossed objects on an equally mud-drenched
beach- spars, sections of rope, limp, doll-like figures in muddy
white uniforms. Farther along the beach were the remnants of a
ship, timbers shattered, jagged ends protruding from the
waters like spears.
"The Maitre of Sturinn will not be pleased," said Jecks.
That's an understatement, and then some. Anna did not speak,
letting her eyes take in the scenes that followed each other, so
many that they could not all show in the pool at once.
Another scene displayed brown waters swirling around piles of
timbers smashed against riverbank, a bank where grasses and
trees had been pressed flat or swept away, where long patches
of red earth had crumbled into the waters. Carcasses of
animals, scattered human bodies, tree limbs, and debris littered
the riverbanks.
Another vista showed rows upon rows of roofless and collapsed
houses below a bluff. Behind the collapsed houses was a heap of
wet earth, from the edge of which protruded walls and timbers.
The wet earth had peeled away from the bluff.
"Dumaria, I think," murmured Jecks. "The lower part is on the

river."
River water piled up behind and flowed through and over and
around a long heap of stone blocks that had once been a bridge.
The pool showed another town, a small one, where nothing
remained but foundation walls and a sea of mud, and figures
toiling through the mud, searching for bodies or belongings or
both.
Anna's eyes burned and her stomach twisted. She'd wanted to
avoid that kind of destruction, and even her attempts at that
had created a disaster, another kind, but a disaster, possibly
even a greater disaster than killing thousands of armsmen. 
Which you will now have to do… anyway.
Another score of scenes followed before she choked out the
release spell. She had to sing it twice, because she couldn't hold
the words the first time. 
"I never… planned… for that," she finally said after lowering
the lutar and setting it on the writing table.
"We know," Jecks answered, "but Lord Ehara and the
Sea-Priests do not."
"Surely, Lord Ehara will request the Sturinnese leave,"
murmured Hanfor.
"Never," said Jecks flatly. "Now… now he cannot give in. His
own people will destroy him unless he attacks us. Within days,
he will march on Defalk."

"He will march after such destruction?"
"You speak as an arms commander. You speak as one who sees
the power a sorceress wields." Jecks shook his head. "The people
and the holders of Dumar will not care. They have suffered
great injury, and, unless Lord Ehara redresses that injury, they
will turn on him. He has no choice."
"He is a fool."
"Perhaps," Jecks admitted, "but he will be a live fool. At worst,
he will live long enough to attack."
Anna winced. "Hanfor, you'd better get the men ready to ride.
We'll try to reach the road below Stromwer before Ehara's
lancers do."
"He will not hurry that quickly," Jecks said with a bitter smile.
"He will have to re-form his armsmen, and find a way across
the Falche. You left no bridges and no fords, I wager, Lady
Anna."
Anna wasn't about to take that bet. She nodded. "I need to
think."
"Of course." Jecks bowed.
So did Hanfor.
After the two had left, Anna lifted the lutar again. The first
spellsong was to seek her enemies of power, and she got the
same images as always-the young man in brown with the
hatred-filled eyes, the blonde seer of Nordwei, and the tall
Sea-Priest. Still… neither Menares nor Dy-thya had discovered

who or where the young sorcerer might be, and her spells had
revealed nothing more.
As for the Sea-Priest, this time he was with Ehara, and the two
were on horseback, apparently leading a column of armsmen.
Anna shook her head and released the spell. She redrafted the
danger spell and sang it. The reflecting pool gave her the image
of the Sea-Priest with Ehara. Another spell, and she was able to
determine that they were somewhere between Narial and
Dumaria-at least they were beside the Falche, and she would
have guessed they were south of Dumaria.
"Good…" If so, that gave her some time. Not a lot, but some.
She walked to the window, and wiped her sweating forehead.
91
Anna turned and glanced back along the road to the north.
Under the hot late-morning sun, the column of armsmen
seemed to stretch a dek behind her, with the wagons and their
mounted escort out of sight behind the low rolling hills. The
threescore armsmen from Birfels and yet another two score
from Gyleron had boosted her force to over four hundred. That
had meant the need for more supplies- and wagons, and spare
mounts.
The sorceress looked ahead at the Sudbergs rising behind the
steeper southern hills ahead. Already, the green bean fields of
Lerona were giving way to meadows and woodlots and an
occasional vineyard, and the soil was turning back into a
redder clay. Peasants and farmers toiled in the fields, not

approaching the armsmen, but not bolting for cover, either.
That was an improvement from the last ride to Stromwer.
She blotted her forehead before she took out the third water
bottle and drank. After four days on the road, they still had
another two before they reached the rugged cliffs of Stromwer.
She had begun to understand why so many of the English
kings had always seemed to be somewhere other than
London-and she didn't like how she was finding it out. There
was always some problem that no one else could handle, and it
took forever to get anywhere by horse, even on comparatively
dry roads.
Slowly, she replaced the water bottle, looking to her right as
Jecks cleared his throat.
"Have you decided on the tariffs for the rivermen?" he asked.
"I can't give them relief without opening the door to everyone
who has problems, and then there won't be any money left to
defend Defalk." She wanted to shake her head. Everybody
wanted something. The rivermen wanted relief. Lord Tybel
wanted to take over his grandchildren's lands, and wanted
Anna's approval for the stunt. The Rider of Heinene wanted
coins to buy arms and more horses to defend the grasslands
against the raiders from the High Grasslands across the border
in Neserea. Hanfor and Himar wanted more coins to hire and
train more armsmen. Hadrenn needed coins to hold off
Bertmynn… and so it went.
"Lady Anna?" Jecks' voice was so deferential that she knew he

was going to ask something even more disturbing.
"Yes." She turned in the saddle.
"You said that the Sea-Priest is a wizard, Lady Anna?"
"The one who's always with Lord Ehara is."
"He could enchant arrows and crossbow bolts, then?"
"I'm sure he could."
"You can sense danger only in the mirror?" Jecks was definitely
being delicate.
"You're afraid he'll come up with some magical surprise when
I'm preoccupied?" 
"Could that not happen?"
Jecks was right, but it was one of the last things Anna wanted
to think about. She was hot and sweaty, and mud had
spattered everything she wore. At least there wasn't any dust
but the riding was slower, and the wagons had lagged behind
the main body more than a glass or two every day. Finding
halfway dry areas to camp had been a problem as well,
especially the first two nights. The third night had been at
Lerona, where Gylaron had been pleased to see them, and even
more pleased, Anna suspected, to see them leave. He had been
gracious enough to send an additional two score of his own
armsmen, to be paid by the Regency, although Anna had not
made it clear she was not officially requesting levies. She would
need those later, if she had to face both Konsstin and Bertmynn
at the same time.

"I suppose it could," she admitted.
Jecks waited for her to draw the inevitable conclusion.
"And you think I should come up with some sorcerous
answer?" Anna finally asked.
"I am not a sorcerer. We have no others here," Jecks answered
with a smile.
"What kind of sorcery did you have in mind, my good Lord
Jecks?" asked Anna with exaggerated politeness.
"Something which would protect you whether you were
immediately aware of it or not."
"I don't think pure enchantment would work. I could perhaps
strengthen this breastplate."
"That would only protect your chest."
Anna nodded. "So now I should carry a shield? How could I use
the lutar?"
Jecks frowned. "That would be difficult."
"Extremely."
He smiled. "Perhaps you should not carry it at all."
"A shield I didn't carry? What use would that be?"
"A small round shield. It could rest like an Ebran shield-forward
of your knee, in a holder with an open top. You could enchant
it so that it would fly up if anything threatened you."

"That would take some spell," Anna said with a laugh.
"You are a mighty sorceress."
"Look where that's gotten me-on a muddy road on the way to a
battle I wanted to avoid."
"As you wish, lady."
Anna wanted to sigh. Jecks might be white-haired, but
sometimes he was worse than a little boy. Then, sometimes all
men were. And women aren't like little girls at times? She
shook her head. "Let me think about it. Maybe… maybe, I can
think up something."
"That is all I ask."
She wanted to sigh again, but she forced a smile. "I hope the
road dries more as we get toward Stromwer." 
"It will be damp until the other side of the crests of the
Sudbergs," predicted Jecks.
Great. Mud and a semi-patronizing yet concerned lord.
Anna patted Farinelli.
92
NORTHEAST OF DUMARIA, DUMAR
THE shadow of a puffy white cloud passes over the road, and
sunlight pours down on the long column once more. In the
middle of the vanguard ride Ehara and jerRestin. The white
uniform of the Sea-Priest appears grayish from the road dust.

"You say we need to reach the Vale of Cuetayl a day before she
does." Ehara glances toward the hills that, more than a dozen
deks ahead, rise out of the flat plains. Behind the hills are the
spired peaks of the Sudbergs, hazy in the distance and heat.
"At least a day. Two days would be better," answers jerRestin,
shifting his weight in the saddle once more. "We need some
time to set up the attack. The terrain there will be suitable."
"Have you been there?" Ehara touches the dark black beard
and frowns. "How do you know?"
"Maps," says jerRestin with a laugh. "Sailors need good maps,
and we are quite good at making them for any sea or land that
interests us."
"And Dumar interests you?"
"All of Liedwahr interests the Maitre," replies jerRestin
offhandedly. "Surely, you know that by now, would-be Viceroy
of Dumar and Defalk."
"I vaguely remember something about that." Ehara forces a
smile. "Especially the viceroy part."
"I thought you might." JerRestin shifts his weight in the saddle
again. "I prefer ships to horses, but one does what is needed." A
hard smile goes toward Ehara.
The Lord of Dumar ignores the smile. "How will you ensure
that the bitch dies?"
"If she has no warning and cannot see what flies toward her,
then she will die," answers jerRestin. "That is why where we set

our attack is important, and why each company must be
separated from the others and under rock overhangs where
possible. The streams should help as well." 
"You think running water will stop her, after what she did to
the Falche?"
"Hamper, not stop," corrects jerRestin amiably.
Behind the two leaders, the armsmen in pale brown, lancers
with crimson sashes, ride stolidly and silently. Behind them are
the two thousand lancers from Sturinn who survived the flood.
Their faces are simultaneously blank and grim.
Even the hum of insects and the calls of the plains sparrows and
dusky finches is low in the midday heat. Another cloud blocks
the sun, and a shadow drifts across the road, then scuds
eastward.
93
A the lead scouts of the column emerged from the last of the
red-stone walls of the canyon, Anna glanced ahead, southward
to the ramparts of Stromwer, and toward the sloped,
glass-smooth wall of stone before the keep that blocked the
southern end of the valley.
The low, rolling hills were mostly green, and Anna could see
scattered figures, and sheep, in places. The low hum of insects,
the heat, and the sweat soaking into the band of her hat
affirmed that summer had indeed arrived in southern Defalk.
Hanfor's scouts had already returned-confirming that Lady
Wendella expected and welcomed them. Not that Wendella

had any choice, Anna reflected. The sorceress's trousers were
encrusted with reddish mud, although the rain had not fallen
quite so heavily farther south-or the sun had been hotter and
dried the road more.
"A good thing that you did not have to assault Stromwer,"
Jecks voiced.
"A very good thing, for everyone," added Hanfor.
"You mean because we'll be stronger to fight Ehara?"
The two did not answer immediately because a scout appeared
on the road ahead, coming over a low rise and riding a slow
canter toward them.
"Now what?" murmured the sorceress to herself. She licked her
dry lips and readjusted the floppy brown hat.
"Another rider, a messenger," the scout said tersely, beginning
to speak even before he swung his mount alongside Hanfor.
"He wears crimson and rides alone." 
Anna wanted to sigh. She didn't have any illusions about the
contents of whatever message Ehara had dispatched.
"It is not a good message," observed Jecks.
"A declaration of war?" suggested Anna. "Or a demand for our
surrender?"
"From what you have laid on Dumar, it could be nothing else,"
said Hanfor.

Anna still wanted to sigh. No matter what she did, it seemed to
lead to some form of fight or skirmish. If she obliterated
someone, that was force. If she didn't, that was weakness, and
weakness meant that she had to use force later. If she used
indirect force, such as damming a river, that was an insult or
created the idea that the ruler involved was weak, and that
meant he had to fight. Even the direct force of a flood-however
unplanned-didn't seem to get the point across-only blood and
slaughter seemed to do that. Idiots! Idiots… everywhere.
The messenger's mount trotted along the damp red clay of the
road toward the head of the column. The bareheaded rider
reined up a good fifty yards south, and extended his
hands-empty-and then lowered them and waited. His
lanceholder held the staff of the pale blue pennant of harmony,
the sign of traveling under truce, though the pennant itself
hung limply in the still summer air.
Fhurgen eased his mount forward of Anna, as did Rickel. Both
raised the protective shields slightly, and both had drawn their
blades. Beside Anna, Jecks also bore an unsheathed blade.
"Halt here," said Hanfor quietly.
The column stopped more than twenty yards north of the
waiting messenger in crimson, who leaned forward slightly in
the saddle, the mounted equivalent of a bow. "I offer this from
Lord Ehara to the lady Anna, Regent of Defalk."
Fhurgen eased his mount forward, letting his blade rest across
his thighs as he reached for the scroll. Even as she wondered
how he could balance the bare steel that well, Anna let Fhurgen

take the scroll.
"The regent will read it," promised the guard.
"I must know that it reaches her hand." The messenger's voice
quavered.
"I'll take it," Anna said quietly.
Fhurgen eased his mount sideways, never taking his eyes off
the messenger, keeping the shield up, until he handed the scroll
to Anna and slipped his fingers back around the hilt of his
blade. "You may tell Lord Ehara his message reached the lady
Anna."
The messenger touched his brow and turned his horse, leaving
at a fast trot, as if to put as much distance between him and the
Defalkan forces as possible.
Anna looked at the rolled scroll, and at the travel-worn crimson
ribbon and the wax seal that resembled a splotch of congealed
blood. Finally, she looked around for a place to put it, before
thrusting it through her belt, unopened.
"You would not read it?" asked Jecks.
"Why? I'd only get madder. What else could I do right now?
We know Ehara's moving every armsman he's got toward
Defalk. He's not asking for peace, not with one messenger and
no escort. Even I can figure that out. That messenger felt he was
expendable. He expected to get killed." Anna shrugged, then
flicked Farinelli's reins. "I want to get to Stromwer, get some
food, and a bath. Then, we'll see what Ehara has in mind." As if

you don't know already…
"I doubt we will learn aught more than we already know,"
suggested Hanfor dryly.
"No," Anna agreed, letting Farinelli move out at a quick walk,
"but he's being a good boy, telling us how bad we are and why
he has to go to war and get all sorts of people killed so that the
lords or holders of Dumar can feel justified." She could feel
Jecks stiffen in his saddle, but she didn't care-almost.
"Not all lords are like that," said Hanfor.
"No-just most of them." Anna thought, and added quickly,
"The good ones keep getting killed, except for Jecks here, and
he can't make a difference by himself."
Hanfor offered a laugh. "That was how Lord Behlem gained his
power. He removed the good lords and elevated those who
wanted all to worship their names."
"It's how a lot of rulers get power." Anna glanced to the left of
the road, beyond a low stone fence where three young men and
a girl stared, almost openmouthed, at her. She forced a smile,
then offered a wave.
The dark-haired girl with the hoe turned to the youth next to
her, but Anna did not hear the words. The sorceress's eyes went
to the road ahead, but her thoughts remained on lords and
people with power who always seemed more interested in
making themselves seem more important and powerful than in
doing much constructive.

After a time, Jecks cleared his throat, rode nearer to Anna, and
asked, "About the Sea-Priest, the sorcerer… have you
thought… ?"
"About a spell to protect me?" asked Anna. "Some."
Jecks waited, and Anna let the silence draw out slightly,
knowing she was being petty, bitchy, or worse. But she was
tired, and everyone kept asking things, little things, big
things-tariffs, arms, smiths, blades, the list seemed endless.
Jecks waited, a patient half-smile on his face.
Anna glanced at the keep, still another two or three deks ahead,
gray-and-red stones rising out of the center of the south end of
the long valley. Finally, she spoke. "I think I could enchant
your very small shield… maybe. I have some ideas, and I will
try to work them out when we stop at Stromwer."
"Thank you, Lady Anna. I would feel much better, would you
try that."
"I'll try," she promised-after a bath, after some decent food. 
Again, they rode in silence, Anna occasionally blotting away
sweat, trying not to think about how she felt and smelled as the
force neared the end of the valley and the walls and ramparts of
the keep.
"Out with the standard!" ordered Hanfor.
One of the scouts broke out the banner with the crossed spears
over the golden crown with the R beneath. The standard-bearer
rode to the front of the van as the hoofs of the mounts struck

the stone slabs of the causeway leading up to the gates of
Stromwer.
The sharp clopping of hoofs on stone echoed around Anna and
back down the valley. Heads popped up from the battlements
of Stromwer, heads that just watched as the regent entered the
gates.
The brown-haired Wendella stood on the front steps of the
main keep building within the walls. "Greetings, sorceress and
regent."
"Greetings, Lady Wendella," Anna reining up Farinelli, but
making no move to dismount. "We're only stopping for the
night."
Jecks reined up beside Anna, while Rickel and Fhurgen stopped
farther back into the courtyard. Hanfor and Alvar continued
toward the wider section of the stone-paved yard before the
stable.
"For the night only?" Wendella looked up with a crooked smile.
"And I had wondered if you returned to take my hold from me."
Anna shook her head, forcing a smile. "Your hold is yours
unless you fail to keep it well. You should know…" The
sorceress didn't bother finishing the sentence, realizing that
Wendella was baiting her, almost as if to say that as Lady of
Stromwer she was loyal, but didn't have to like it.
"Have you heard of what happens in Dumar?" asked the
brown-haired lady, cradling Condell in her left arm.

"We have heard little," Anna said. "I know that Ehara is
marching all of his armsmen toward Stromwer. What have you
heard?"
Wendella offered the same crooked smile. "There are tales that
Lord Ehara is so angry at Defalk that he has turned his back on
all of Liedwahr and ordered the women into chains, as in
Sturinn…"
Jecks glanced at Anna.
"… And that Sturinn has pledged its entire fleet to bring down
the… Sorceress of Defalk…" Wendella swallowed.
"I assume that was 'the bitch-sorceress of Defalk'?" asked Anna.
"Or words like that."
"Yes, Lady Anna."
"We will discuss that." Anna paused, then added, "You should
join us, Lady Wendella. After I stable and groom Farinelli."
Jecks raised his eyebrows.
Wendella glanced from Anna to Jecks to Anna, then nodded.
"As you wish, Lady Anna. I would suggest the private study."
"Thank you. That would be good. I won't be long." Anna
inclined her head and flicked the reins gently. Farinelli followed
her guidance and carried her to the area before the stable where
Hanfor, with the stable-master standing by the arms
commander's mount, directed the armsmen. "Purple
Company-that's the rear section to the right…" Hanfor nodded
to Anna, then continued. "… subofficers check all blades before

supper." 
The sorceress swung out of the saddle. For a moment, her knees
felt like jelly as she stood on the stone. Then she headed into the
stable.
The dark-haired stable boy bowed as Anna led Farinelli
through the open sliding door. "Regent and lady, the front
corner stall… it is ready."
"Thank you." Anna smiled.
Farinelli whuffed once as Anna stepped into the stall, swept and
filled with fresh straw. A bucket of oats also awaited the big
horse.
"Grain, too."
"They all respect their regent here," said Jecks with a laugh
from the adjoining stall.
"If it weren't required by spells, I'd be happier." Anna loosened
the girths, then racked the saddle and hung the saddle blanket
next to the saddle. She groomed the big gelding without
speaking.
When she was finished, she carried the lutar and scroll across
the courtyard and up the steps to the private study,
accompanied by Hanfor and Jecks, and trailed as always by a
pair of guards, this time Lejun and Rickel. One of the younger
guards followed with the leather-cased traveling mirror and her
saddlebags. All three halted and stationed themselves in the
dim stone-walled corridor while Jecks and Anna entered the

study where Wendella waited.
Anna set the lutar on a chest. Jecks surveyed the study, then
nodded at Hanfor who closed the heavy door gently, but firmly.
"You wished my presence, Lady Anna?" asked Wendella, still
holding a sleeping Condell.
"I did. I thought you might like to hear what our neighbor Lord
Ehara has to say to us."
"Your lands are the closest," Jecks added as a reminder.
The Lady of Stromwer inclined her head.
Anna broke the dark red sealing wax and rolled open the scroll.
Her eyes scanned the dark letters and the words quickly, and
she nodded as she read, her lips quirked as she discovered that
Jecks had indeed understood Ehara.
After she finished, she glanced at Wendella, Jecks, and then
Hanfor. "Here's what he says, the most important parts
anyway.
"… Once I might have considered peace, but never can there be
accord with a nation that turns the rivers of Liedwahr against
her people. Never can there be harmony with a ruler who will
not fight in honor and who usurps the very nature of the
earth…
"… I will put every woman in Dumar, every woman in
Liedwahr in adorning chains, before I will treat with you…
"We march on Dumar, and all the way through it." Anna's
voice sounded tired, even to her. 

"Narial is gone, and the lower sections of Dumaria are ruins,"
said Jecks, a quizzical note in his voice. "You must defeat
Ehara, but why would you proceed?"
Anna lifted the scroll and read aloud, "Never can there be
harmony…"
"We still have nowhere near the forces Lord Ehara can muster,"
observed Hanfor, his voice mild.
"I don't intend to fight honorably," snapped Anna. "I intend to
win. I intend to gain the pledge of every armsman in Dumar or
wipe out every one who will not be loyal to Defalk, and I intend
to destroy every Sea-Priest left in Liedwahr." 
Wendella smiled tightly.
Jecks stepped back at the venom in Anna's voice. The faintest of
nods came from Hanfor.
"Are you surprised, Lord Jecks? I won't live forever. You've told
me that. Am I supposed to wait until Dumar is strong again
and so that I can kill twice as many innocents? I tried reason
and scrolls to get a meaningful agreement from Lord Ehara.
That was refused-with scorn. Then I tried sorcery to avoid this
senseless war, and what happened? More people died. Because
they died, Lord Ehara has to kill me or die trying." Anna
paused, finding she was breathing hard. "I'm tired of this sort of
thing. Fine… we're going to stop it all-if I possibly can. Sturinn
can't get reinforcements here fast enough, and by then I'll hold
Dumar- or be dead. One way or another, no one will have to
worry." They think you're crazy.

Only Hanfor nodded, once more, and for that Anna was
grateful. He seemed to understand. Jecks was having trouble in
reconciling what he had seen with too many years of
tradition-that was what Anna felt.
"I'm going to take a bath, and then we'll eat. After that, we'll
discuss exactly how we'll take Dumar." Anna knew she was
sounding imperious, hated herself for it, and hated herself for
not saying anything. But they all want it handled like I happen
to be the tooth fairy, like there's no cost to anything…
"Yes, Regent." Jecks bowed. Hanfor bowed, half-smile upon his
lips.
Wendella bowed. "Supper will be ready as you wish, Lady
Anna. The guest quarters are ready, and there is water in the
tub."
"Thank you." Anna turned and walked toward the study door.
94
THRAP… thrap. The sorceress readjusted her single,
spell-cleaned gown and glanced at the closed door to the guest
chamber. "Yes?"
"Lord Jecks for you," announced Rickel.
"He can come in."
The door eased open.
"Lady Anna." The white-haired and muscular lord bowed, then
smiled. His warm hazel eyes twinkled.

He can be devastating and charming. "Lord Jecks." Until we start
discussing the foibles of the Thirty-three and others of privilege…
or dancing.
From behind his back, Jecks lifted a circular object, not much
more than two full handspans across. "This is a very small
shield." He smiled again.
Anna looked at the small circlet of bronze and iron.
"You said it had to be small, yet heavy enough to stop
anything. And I could not use one with leather."
Anna frowned, then nodded. Still, she tended to forget the
limits of Clearsong and Darksong.
Jecks shrugged. "No shield I know can be light and effective."
"All I can do is try," answered Anna. "It was your idea." She
added quickly, "I wish I'd thought of it earlier." She gestured
toward one of the straight-backed chairs, then sat behind the
small writing desk and opened the folder, searching for a blank
sheet of paper.
After a time, she dipped the quill into the inkwell and began to
write, slowly, almost laboriously, to keep from smudging the
local ink that took forever to dry.
Abruptly, she looked up. "Lord Jecks… I think it would be a
good idea for Alvar and Liende to join us for meals from now
on-even if other lords are guesting us."
Jecks nodded.

"Would you tell them and Lady Wendella while I work on
this?" She smiled. "Please? I'm not trying to make you an
errand boy. I should have thought of it sooner."
"An errand such as this I would be more than happy to
accomplish." Another smile followed the words as he stood,
stepping forward and laying the small shield on the corner of
the writing desk. "If you should need this for your spell…"
"Thank you."
As the door closed, Anna tried to concentrate on the words. For
a moment, nothing came, and the fingers of her left hand
touched the cool metal rim of the circular shield. The shield did
not move as her fingers pressed on the metal. She lifted it,
left-handed, surprised at the weight, and lowered it quickly. 
"Heavy…" No wonder shields weren't exactly in vogue. She'd
hate to have to carry one and a blade. She wondered how
Rickel and Fhurgen managed with the bigger shields they used
to protect her.
With a slow breath, she picked up the pen once more, adding a
few more words to those on the paper.
A finch, or something, chirped outside the window.
Anna set aside the quill and studied the crude spell written on
the brown paper.
"Against enchanted weapons be my shield 
save me from all arms those against me wield…"
Perhaps a variation on the flame spell… She stood and took a

deep breath, then extracted the lutar from its case and began to
tune it. She strummed the flame song, humming the notes as
she did and concentrating on the words.
The sorceress shook her head. Not even close, and the note
values were stretched too far. She tried several other variations.
"If I untie…" She nodded, and jotted down the tune variation
she had in mind, then played it on the lutar once more. That
didn't work, either. She went back to the paper and jotted
down another variation, then lifted the lutar once more, using
nonsense syllables to sing the patterns.
With a relieved smile as she realized that note values and words
matched, she replaced the lutar in its case, and the case on the
chest set against the outside wall. As she straightened, at the
knock on the door, the sorceress looked up. "Yes?"
"Lord Jecks, my lady."
Lately, Jecks had been using the "my lady" phrase. Did he
want her to be his lady? Anna frowned. More important, did
she want to be? "Come on in."
Jecks was still smiling. "Your chief player was pleased. Alvar
was worried. I took the liberty of informing Hanfor before
Alvar."
"Thank you. I should have thought of that." Much as she was
sometimes frustrated by various protocols and customs, Jecks
was good at warning her, or, in this case, in simply avoiding
the problem. "Hanfor didn't object?"

"No. He said Alvar needed the experience if he were to
command larger forces."
Anna laughed. "In short, I should have done it sooner, but
Hanfor's too polite to insist." She crossed the room to the
writing desk where she glanced from the small shield to the
brown paper before her. "I think I have something. We'll have
to see once we're headed into Dumar."
"You won't enchant it now?" asked Jecks.
"Not until we leave Stromwer," Anna said, looking down at the
shield again. "I'm pretty sure a spell like this drains energy
from me." 
Jecks raised his eyebrows.
"That was what happened with the dam. That was part of the
reason I was so tired, and it took so long for me to recover." 
That's what you feel… "That's what I feel, anyway."
"If you feel that, my lady, then that is what must have been."
"Right now," Anna said, "I feel hungry. Shall we go?"
"I could eat," Jecks admitted.
They left the guest chamber, and the guards fell in behind
them. Anna wondered, yet again, if she'd ever get used to
guards escorting her everywhere.
On the main level, the others were already waiting. Liende
wore a dark green gown, slightly wrinkled and probably
borrowed, and Alvar his uniform, brushed. Both bowed as

Anna and Jecks approached the hall. Hanfor, who had been
standing beside Alvar and talking to the captain, also offered
Anna a bow.
"You requested my presence?" asked Liende, stepping up to
Anna and bowing again.
"I should have requested it far sooner. I'm sorry. Some things
I'm just not thinking about."
A puzzled look crossed the chief player's face.
"I need your thoughts, and your advice, but you can't very well
give it if you don't see what I see," Anna explained. "Or if the
only real time you see me is when we're riding."
Liende nodded. "You honor me."
"Not enough," Anna said quietly. "Not soon enough, either."
She raised her voice. "Let's go in and eat."
Wendella stood by the long and dark table that appeared
almost as ancient as the aged wooden paneling that covered the
stone walls. She gestured to the place at the head. "Regent and
sorceress."
"Thank you." Anna gestured to the table. "Please sit."
There were only the six at table-Anna, Wendella, Jecks, Hanfor,
Liende, and Alvar. The swarthy Alvar looked down at his plate,
as if asking how he had ended up with the arms commander
and the local nobility.
"Because you need to be here," Anna said sweetly to the

uncomfortable captain.
"As my lady wishes."
"Enjoy the food," Anna suggested.
"We can all do that," Jecks said dryly, "especially after all the
riding."
"I had Waerya prepare something special," Wendella said. "An
apple-spiced lamb."
The serving girl carried in a large platter. While Anna had
feared seeing a whole lamb splayed across the traylike serving
dish, the dish contained more than a dozen cylinders of rolled
meat covered with a thick brown sauce.
"The lamb is wrapped around the stuffing," Wendella added,
"and the sauce is a family specialty-from the days of
Suhlmorra." A faint smile crossed her lips as she glanced at
Jecks. 
"I don't mind food from Suhlmorra," he rumbled, "just those
who still want to bring back another realm."
"Even my dear brother would be too wise to attempt that,"
Wendella answered. "Mietchel will always be loyal to the Lord
of Falcor, or any Regency that supports that lord."
Since the serving platter was tendered to Anna, she stabbed one
of the lamb rolls and transferred it to her plate, then a second,
and a third. The serving girl's brown eyes flickered from Anna
to the platter and back to Anna.
"Thank you," the sorceress murmured to the girl.

"Your brother would be wise to remain so," Jecks suggested to
Wendella, before stabbing a smothered lamb roll.
"And what if Defalk is ruled by a lady? Say, if Jimbob has only
daughters?" asked Anna.
"That would distress him, were he to live so long," answered
Wendella.
"How does he feel about lady holders in the Thirty-three?"
Anna pursued, almost idly, breaking off a chunk of dark bread.
In a way, being Wendella's guest was almost liberating. The
Lady of Stromwer didn't like Anna, and yet had to be loyal. So
Anna could be more forthright.
"I had thought that there were few. Am I not the only woman
holding lands in Defalk? Besides Lady Gatrune," Wendella
added quickly.
"Lady Anientta holds the lands for her heirs," Jecks answered
for Anna. "And Lady Anna holds Falcor for Jimbob."
"Lady Herene is acting as guardian for Dinfan at Suhl," Anna
added.
"You named the daughter as heir?" Wendella asked.
"She is the oldest," Anna answered after swallowing a mouthful
of the lamb, dry despite the spices and gummy sauce-gravy.
Her own stuffed pork chops or apple crown roast were far
better, but whether she could have done so well over an open
kitchen fire was another question.
"And," murmured Hanfor, "Lady Anna holds Loiseau and

Mencha in her own right."
Wendella laughed softly. "That is almost a fifth of the
Thirty-three, and in but a year. No marvel that my late lord
feared you, Lady Anna. Or that the Sea-Priests would give a
kingdom for your death."
"You know that from what source?" Jecks held a chunk of
bread, suspended in a large hand, as his eyes fixed on Wendella.
"None, save my own feelings." Wendella offered a nervous
laugh. "Yet I'd wager that feeling against all others."
"So would I," added Liende quietly in the momentary silence.
Alvar swallowed loudly enough to punctuate the chief player's
words.
"That will change," Anna said. "The business about women,
that is."
"It changes already," Jecks pointed out.
"True enough," Anna interposed quickly. "But that's enough
about it." Her eyes went to Wendella. "Lady Wendella, could
you tell us, or me, since I know too little about Defalk, where
you grew up and how you came to Stromwer?" 
After a moment, Wendella began. "I am the youngest child,
and the third daughter, of Lord Mietch. The oldest was
Mietchel, and he now holds Morra. My eldest sister-that was
Haerl-she was consorted to Arkad, but she died with child, and
so did the child."

"Was she his second consort?" asked Anna.
"His third." Wendella paused. "When I was young, Morra was
a happy place, with the rose trees always in bloom against the
garden walls. My sire said the walls dated back to the days
when Suhlmorra was great, when Defalk was a poor land but a
sliver of its present demesne…"
Anna leaned back slightly in the chair and listened as Wendella
detailed her background.
"… And then I came to Stromwer to be Dencer's consort when
his first betrothed died of a fever in the year that the Falche
flooded all the lowlands. You know the rest." The dark-haired
lady shrugged.
"Thank you. I wish we could enjoy this longer," Anna said after
a moment of silence. "I need all of you to join me and look at
something."
"All of us?" asked Wendella.
"Why not? It concerns all of you." Anna rose, and the others
followed her out of the hall and down the corridor to the stone
steps. Hanfor ducked away briefly and rejoined the group
carrying brown paper and the flat board upon which he
sketched battle plans and maps.
Anna nodded to herself. Hanfor and Jecks knew what was
coming.
Up in the guest chambers, the five watched, standing in a
half-circle around Anna and the wall mirror, as she took out the

lutar and retuned it.
Outside the half-opened shutter, there was the ter-whit of a bird
that rose momentarily over the hum of insects.
Anna smiled at the lone bird call, cleared her throat, and then
sang the spell.
"Mirror, mirror, show all to see 
where Ehara and his forces be…"
The silvered glass of the wall mirror displayed a line of
mounted arms-men heading toward a rocky defile, a long line
of armsmen, behind the crimson banners of Dumar. Behind the
horsemen were wagons and spare mounts. The road appeared
to slope upward.
Wendella nodded. "That looks like the road to Dumar, though
it cannot be far."
"How might you know that?" inquired Jecks.
"I once rode with my late lord to Finduma-that is the first
trading town inside Dumar. If my memory serves me, that part
of the road leads to the Vale of Cuetayl." She shrugged. "That
was when first I came to Stromwer, though I think the road has
changed little."
Anna was grateful for Wendella's knowledge. "It is clear that
Ehara plans to attack." 
Yet the spell left so much undetermined. What could she do? In
the silence, she launched into an improvised second spell
immediately.

"Danger near the Vale, soon so near, 
show me that land bright and clear…"
The glass shimmered, then slowly rippled silver before fading
into a map-picture, displaying a small hamlet and a river that
seemed to run east-northeast-at least that was the way Anna
interpreted it-toward a larger valley. The valley was divided
into three sections by low Y-shaped hills.
"Those hills… Cuetayl was a trading stop in the old days," said
Wendella, her voice shaky. "There was a town there, but Uhlan
the elder razed it when he could not take Stromwer, and it was
never rebuilt."
Anna studied the maplike image in the large wall mirror,
wondering where on the map might be Ehara's forces. There
was no sign of them. She looked more closely at the Vale of
Cuetayl. The hills formed a Y that split the lower ground,
mostly fields and meadows, into three distinct sections.
"The hills inside the valley control the road to Dumar," observed
Jecks, turning to Wendella. "Is there another road?"
"There may be tracks, but no roads that any have talked of."
Hanfor kept sketching, his grease marker flying across the
wide sheet of brown paper. "You can see where the road from
Encora and from Stromwer enters the valley or the vale from
the east here." Hanfor's marker ticked off a point on the right
hand side of his sketch. "The hills are upthrust sandstone. They
overlook the road."
"If Ehara and the Sea-Priest get there," mused Jecks, "they

could use the rocks for cover and blanket the road with arrows."
"You could not see where they might place archers," Hanfor
said.
Anna nodded. Even she could see that the terrain would
severely limit the use of sorcery-unless she wanted to destroy
the whole valley-if she even could. There had been volcanic
activity around Vult, already harnessed by the Evult. By
comparison, to her amateur eye, the Sudbergs looked old and
decidedly unvolcanic.
Abruptly, she strummed the lutar, trying another variation.
"Mirror, mirror on the wall, 
show us where Ehara's attack will fall…"
The mirror remained blank.
Anna set aside the lutar and reached for the greasemarker and
some paper. Improvising wasn't making matters much clearer.
After a time, she looked at the next spell, then picked up the
lutar.
"Show us in great outline this day, 
where Dumaran forces ride their way." 
The mirror obligingly displayed a close-up of riders in crimson,
looking forward over a rider in white and one in red toward the
same defile that the first image had displayed.
"That… that is the west entrance to the Vale," said Wendella.
Anna sang the release couplet. As the image faded, she set
down the lutar on the chest by the wall. "I need some wine."

She poured the dark red wine from the pitcher into the goblet
on the writing table, then sat, sipping slowly in the growing
twilight. No matter what she tried, there were clearly limits to
what the mirror would show-or what she could get it to show.
Ehara was headed to the Vale of Cuetayl, and it looked like he
wanted to set up an ambush there.
"We'll have to find a way to avoid whatever trap they have in
mind, and then make them vulnerable."
"How might that be, Lady Anna?" asked Hanfor.
I wish I knew. "That's something I'll have to think about. I can
try another spell. After I rest for a moment." She took another
sip of wine, conscious that the others had remained standing,
except for Hanfor who sat on the floor cross-legged, continuing
to sketch something on the brown paper.
Wendella glanced from Anna's drawn face to Jecks, then to
Hanfor.
"Yes, Lady Wendella," Jecks said. "Sorcery can be as tiring as
battle. It can be more tiring. We have seen that."
Wendella nodded, almost to herself.
No one spoke.
When Anna finally rose and took up the lutar, all eyes were on
the mirror as the sorceress sang.
"Show me now and show me clear 
a road or trail to avoid this danger near… 

Like a vision, like a map or plot…"
Light strobed from the mirror, so brightly that Liende covered
her eyes. Anna felt her own eyes watering as she saw vision
after vision flash across the glass so quickly she could not even
comprehend one of those images.
Crack! Glass showered out of the mirror frame, and the wood of
the frame steamed.
Anna stepped back involuntarily.
"Oh…" murmured Liende.
"Are you all right, lady?" asked Jecks.
Anna looked down. Although silvered glass lay almost to her
feet, none had apparently touched her. "I'm fine. Except I've
ruined another mirror."
Hanfor nodded, his face somber. 
Wendella kept looking from the darkened and empty mirror
frame to Anna and back to the wall.
"I'm sorry about the mirror," Anna told Wendella.
"A mirror is nothing, Lady Anna."
"I'm sorry," Anna repeated. "I have this problem with mirrors."
She cleared her throat. "There seem to be many possible roads,"
she continued, after a moment, trying to inject a dry tone into
her voice. "That's one good thing."
"Many… ?" Alvar's voice was shaking.

"That was the problem. The mirror was trying to show us all
the trails we could use to avoid that danger." Anna was glad to
explain and felt her voice strengthening as she talked, even if
she was certain of her explanation. "There were just too many
things possible, and they flashed too quickly to see what any of
them might be."
Alvar's face retained a puzzled expression.
"We'll see what happens as we near Dumar," Anna said. "That's
all we can do." She just hoped she happened to be right.
95
VALE OF CUETAYL, DUMAR
THE Sea-Priest surveys the hills to the left and to the right, all
crested with sloping red sandstone. He coughs and then wipes
his forehead. Below him, to the south and overlooking the road,
the white-and-green-clad archers set the reddish net blinds that
will conceal them. JerRestin nods as the last of the nets are tied
into place, and the archers seem to vanish, then shifts his
weight in the hard saddle.
"Not so comfortable as on your fine ships, is it, friend?" asks
Ehara with a laugh.
"Our ships are never this hot." The Sea-Marshal continues
dryly, "But I would take this heat to the cold of the frozen lands
below Pelara. There, in winter, when one throws wine into the
wind, it freezes before it can strike the ice."
"You jest, of course." Ehara's eyes look northward from the

ridge overlook where his own archers take their position behind
the exposed sandstone. The flatiron-shaped stones crest the hills
that control the flat on the north side of the valley.
"Sea-Priests never jest."
"Your pardon, I beg. My deepest apologies for doubting your
veracity."
The Sea-Marshal turns in the saddle, and his cold eyes fix upon
the Lord of Dumar as though he were but a junior captain of
lancers. "Lord Ehara, listen carefully. The sorceress may call
down her wizardry on my lancers or upon yours. I have
insisted on the separation so that she must use great powers.
My sea-captains know what to do if the wizardry falls upon
you. If it falls upon my lancers, you must wait only until the
sorcery ceases. Then you must attack immediately, before she
can regain her strength."
Ehara frowns. "You speak as though you will not be with your
lancers or with me."
"No. I will be concealed near the entrance to the Vale. Even the
sorceress will not discern me. If I am successful, she will not
have the chance to work any wizardry. If not, you must know
what to do."
"What if she does not come? Or arrives by another route?" asks
Ehara.
"There are no other routes," states JerRestin.
"There are always other ways." Ehara laughs easily.

"She could take a game trail and have her armsmen strung out
like an unraveled net, where they could be picked off at every
turn by archers." The Sea-Marshal shrugs. "She would still have
to attack our armsmen from below, and her wizardry is limited
to two or three mighty spells. That is why our forces are on
separate hills."
"She has used mighty sorcery before," points out Ehara.
"And every time she has been laid low for weeks, if not longer.
She will attempt to avoid such sorcery because she wishes to
conquer Dumar, not destroy it."
"You seem to know a great deal about her." Ehara chuckles.
"Does she appeal to you? You know of what I speak."
JerRestin shakes his head, with a slight body shudder. "The
woman appalls me. She is an unnatural creature from the mist
worlds. I would not have her in chains or in any other fashion.
She must be defeated, destroyed if that is possible."
"I might like her in chains," muses Ehara.
"Only with her mouth gagged," responds JerRestin. "She
turned Lord Behlem into ashes with but her voice."
"That was no great loss." Ehara scans the hills to the north side
of the Vale again, then nods. His archers have seemingly
vanished into the red boulders, and his lancers are well
sheltered under the natural overhangs and out of sight of the
road.
"Except to Neserea." A grim smile plays over jerRestin's lips. "I

must go to instruct my officers on how to put an end to the
sorceress."
"The harmonies be with you." 
"And with you, friend and ally." The two horsemen separate,
one heading down the ridge to the east, the other to the north.
96
THE gelding whuffed once, and then, a dozen paces later, once
more. "We'll be stopping for water before long." Anna glanced
ahead along the curving road that descended into another
narrow valley and toward a line of trees. A stream? She hoped
so as she leaned forward in the saddle and patted Farinelli. "Just
hold on, fellow."
Her light green shirt was plastered against her shoulders with
sweat raised by the summer sun beating down from behind,
and the back of her neck was going to be even more
sunburned. Even with the return of the rains, Anna reflected,
Defalk was just plain hot, hotter than Iowa in summer, more
like Georgia or Alabama or south Florida away from the
water-except hotter.
Riding beside her, Jecks looked over, but did not speak.
She knew his unspoken question, and she still had no clear
answer in her mind, except that they couldn't take the main
road into the valley where Ehara was sure to set up an ambush.
She hoped that, once they were closer to the Vale of Cuetayl,
her sorcery would provide a clearer view of the options open to
her.

The sorceress and regent looked toward the arms commander.
"Hanfor?"
"Yes, Lady Anna?"
"Will we be stopping to water the mounts at that stream?"
Anna brushed aside a pesky horsefly, once, twice.
Farinelli's tail swished as the horsefly buzzed around the
gelding's hindquarters.
"The scouts have said that the road toward Dumar remains
clear for the next five deks," answered Hanfor. "I had thought
we would water our mounts and let the men stand down. Have
you a problem?"
"Oh, no. I was going to try the mirror again."
"The players could use a rest also, Lady Anna," Liende added.
Anna laughed. "Everyone gets a break." Except you. You have
to do sorcery. She stood in the stirrups for a moment, ignoring
the tightening muscles in her thighs, then eased back into a
saddle that was getting harder by the dek for the ride down to
the stream.
"Does the shield spell draw too much from you?" Jecks asked
quietly.
"No. I can feel it, like a spiderweb or the faintest brush of
something against my skin… but so far…" Anna shrugged,
looking down at the shield in the case by her knee. 
"Good." Jecks nodded.

The trees by the narrow river were some form of willows
growing so thickly that the vanguard had to ride two-thirds of
the length of the short valley to find a clear approach to the
water.
"Purple Company… take your mounts downstream from
where water bottles are filled. Down by the gray rock."
"Green Company! Wait for Purple… I said, wait, Mykli! You
want to fill every water bottle in the company…"
"… don't push, Distek…"
"… enough water for everyone…"
Anna let Farinelli drink, then guided him back to a grove a
dozen yards north of the stream, where she dismounted and
tied him to a sapling. By the time she had the mirror unpacked
and the lutar tuned, she had been joined by Hanfor, Jecks, and
Liende.
They waited quietly as she ran through her vocalises. To the
southwest, the watering and muted clamor continued. The
sorceress pushed away the thought that watering the mounts of
a full-sized army would have been impossible and concentrated
on the words and chords of the spell.
"Danger in the Vale, danger near, 
show Dumar's armed danger bright and clear…"
Anna lowered the lutar and took a deep breath.
The glass turned to a map-picture of the Vale of Cuetayl and
the Y-shaped hills, centered on the spot where the road from

Stromwer entered the west end of the valley. A small hill
flanked the road, and then dropped away to a flat. The
Y-shaped hills were farther back.
"That hill-if there is an attack against you, it will come from
there," said Jecks.
"Me?"
"You remain the force of Defalk," the lord pointed out. "I know
little, except there are books that say the Sea-Priests have
enchanted javelins- much as the enchanted crossbow bolt of
Sargol's. The javelins are barbed. Sometimes they smear the
barbs with the poisons of fish."
"Lovely," said Anna. The more she heard about the Sturinnese,
the worse it got, and no one seemed to think that much about
it-except her. Was she overreacting? Again? Avery had always
claimed she overreacted to everything. "Let's see if the mirror
can show us another route into the Vale."
From behind Jecks' shoulder, Liende nodded. Hanfor held his
portable sketching gear, his face blank. Jecks watched Anna,
concern in his hazel eyes.
Anna took out the spell folder and rechecked the words, the
small changes she'd made in the spell, hoping to avoid a repeat
of the mirror-smashing in Stromwer. Before, the mirror had
flickered through images so rapidly that none of them had
been able to see anything-except that there were clearly many
possible solutions, so many that they couldn't be sorted out,
even by sorcery. 

At the time, Anna had wanted to scream. She hadn't been able
to think of one decent solution, and she still couldn't, except in
the general sense that she needed a way to flank the armsmen
waiting in the Vale.
She cleared her throat, then lifted the lutar once more, and sang.
"Show me best and show me clear 
the route to avoid this danger near; 
Like a vision, like a map or plot…"
This time the glass came up blank.
Shit!… So now what? Anna frowned. "This is going to take a
bit." Trying to compose another spell in her head took what
seemed forever. Finally, she lifted the lutar once more.
"Show the route, where it will start 
to take us to the Vale's very heart, 
away from that road that all do take, 
above the lines our foes do make…"
A lousy spell… truly lousy …
Weak spell or not, the glass presented another map-picture,
showing a depression in the road where a trail wound off to the
left. Anna could see what looked to be the narrow gorge that
held the road and stream leading down into the Vale of Cuetayl.
"How far from the entry gorge?" she asked.
"Two deks, mayhap." Hanfor sketched rapidly.
Anna thought and waited, thinking. She needed a better map

or idea.
When Hanfor nodded, she had another spell ready, one
probably equally shaky. Nonetheless, she tried it.
"Show us now and from the air, 
the southern trail to Vale, 
and how it winds its way to there…"
Anna looked at the image in the glass, and there was an image,
much to her surprise. The so-called trail looked more like a goat
track winding along a series of switchbacks, but eventually
coming out on a plateau overlooking the middle of the Vale.
"The destination… that is good. But the trail, that is
dangerous." Jecks fingered his clean-shaven chin.
As the steam began to rise from the mirror frame, Hanfor
sketched even more rapidly, speaking as he did. "We won't
reach that trail until late today, I would hazard. The stream is
still close to the road. We could stop there." 
Anna said nothing, just nodded and studied the image as
Hanfor continued to sketch out what he needed.
Finally, he nodded in turn, and Anna released the image with a
couplet, and then a deep breath. She lowered the lutar and
walked slowly to Farinelli to get her water bottle.
After drinking, she packed the mirror, and then the lutar.
"That's a narrow trail for mounts," mused Jecks. "Even if
blessed by sorcery."

"Do you have a better idea?" Anna asked.
Jecks flushed.
"I'm sorry," she apologized. "We have to get rid of Ehara."
"We do what we must," he said stiffly.
Anna pursed her lips. She'd apologized once, and once was
enough, she was getting tired of apologizing. Even for a lord
who looked like a movie star.
91
VALE OF CUETAYL, DUMAR
THE Sea-Priest chants over the silvered water glass in a thin
falsetto. Sweat beads on his forehead, mixing with dust to form
rivulets of mud down his cheeks while he struggles with the
melody and the tempo.
As he finishes, a small and wavering image fills the center of the
glass, an image that shows a long line of horses on a narrow
trail, a trail clearly not the main road into the Vale.
"The bitch… the unpredictable sow…"
The image shatters into silver globules that chase each other for
several moments. JerRestin sits down on a boulder, breathing
heavily and ignoring the heat that seeps through his
dust-smeared white trousers.
After a time, he chants again, using a voice more tenor than
falsetto.

When an image forms, it shows a figure in green atop a flat hill.
Behind the slender woman in the brown hat, a line of players
forms. Behind them are dusty armsmen, still mounted.
Flanking the sorceress are two mounted guards bearing heavy
shields.
The Sea-Priest chants quickly, and the image dissolves into
silver globules once more. He seats himself for a time, breathing
heavily, before he climbs wearily from the shelter of the oblong
rock overlooking the road and slowly scans the valley, a valley
all too still for the life it encompasses. 
He can sense the hidden archers and lancers to the west, but the
sun has fallen on the side of the sorceress, not on her face.
The sounds of strings and horns echo faintly in the distance, so
faintly he can barely hear them-but they come from the south.
He scrambles down the scree of the slope toward his mount.
"… bitch… the bitch…"
His mumbled words are lost in the clatter of the small stones
dislodged by his boots.
98
THE midmorning sun beat down as fiercely as at midday in
Falcor, and Anna's shirt was again plastered to her back with
perspiration as she shifted her weight in the saddle -carefully,
given the steepness of the slope to her left. The trail was less
than that, barely wide enough for a single mount, as it wound
upward, back and forth on the southern side of the flat-topped
mesa. According to Anna's scrying, the mesa overlooked the

south side of the Vale of Cuetayl and the central hills where
Ehara's forces and the Sturinnese waited to ambush the
Defalkan contingent.
Jecks glanced ahead, at the scouts posted on each switchback,
and then at Hanfor.
"No one has seen us," the arms commander confirmed. "They
do not know about this trail, or"-he smiled-"do not believe that
a sorceress would stoop to such trickery."
"Archers could inflict much damage here," Jecks said.
"They have to be here to do such," pointed out Hanfor, as he
gestured upwards at the barren side of the mesa where little
grew except for waist-high scrubby junipers at wide intervals,
and intermittent patches of grass already browning. "And there
is as little cover for them as for us. They would be seen from
deks."
Jecks nodded.
Anna said nothing, just used the kerchief, once gray and now
reddish brown from sweat and dust, to wipe more moisture off
the back of her neck. The air was drier than it had been at
Abenfel or Stromwer and smelled faintly of some form of
evergreen-juniper?
She'd stopped once to use the mirror, but it had shown no
armsmen on the trail or near it. She just hoped the spell had
been accurate enough.
"Still," continued the graying veteran, "I will be happier when

we can re-form all the armsmen."
Anna eased out her second water bottle and drank, nearly
draining the bottle. There were two more bottles, fastened
behind her saddle. Sometimes, she felt she loaded Farinelli like
a pack animal, with the extra water, the mirror and the lutar.
But the lutar was light, and she wasn't exactly heavy, not
anymore. Sometimes, it was hard to believe she'd ever fought
weight, now that she had to struggle to keep every pound.
The sun beat down, and on the slope above the narrow valley to
the south of the Vale, not a blade of the sparse grass stirred. Not
an insect hummed, and the only sounds were those of men and
horses climbing the narrow trail.
Wheeeeee… eee…
Anna glanced back-just in time to see an armsman and mount
seemingly rolling down the steeper slope below one of the
switchbacks, then a second as the mount following took a
similar misstep… or lost footing on part of the trail weakened
by the first mishap. She took a deep breath as the figures
bounced, and slid out of sight. Shit…
The line of riders slowed.
"Better that than hundreds of arrows," suggested Hanfor from
ahead.
Anna knew it to be true, but she still felt for the men and their
mounts. Then she checked the path ahead.
Near the top of the mesa, the trail entered a depression slightly

wider than the path had been on the lower slopes, a U-shaped
gulch scooped out by infrequent rain runoff over the years. The
sides came nearly to Farinelli's shoulders. The end of the gulch
flattened, broadened into a fan-shaped jumble of shallow and
dry rivulets opening onto the flat of the mesa.
Just before leaving the gulched part of the trail at the top of the
mesa, Anna glanced back. The line of mounts still stretched a
third of the way down the slope like a snake running from
switchback to switchback. Her eyes turned northward. The
generally flat plain of the mesa stretched ahead for nearly a
dek, dotted with the same scattered junipers and clumps of
grass as the slope Farinelli had carried her up.
In the distance, the sorceress could see the more jagged rocky
peaks on the north side of the valley. Was the valley a juncture
between geologic plates? Anna pushed the vagrant thought
away. She needed to know where the Dumaran and Sturinnese
armsmen and archers were.
Liende and the players had reined up to Anna's left, west of
where Hanfor, Jecks, and Anna remained mounted. The guards
had fanned out in front of the sorceress, watching as the rest of
the armsmen appeared, mount by mount, riding up out of the
low gulch.
"Best we form up here, and wait until the others are here,"
suggested Hanfor.
"I'll try the mirror to see where Ehara and his forces are now,"
Anna said.
Hanfor nodded, his eyes still on the armsmen as they rode onto

the mesa. 
The sorceress rode Farinelli another fifty yards westward to a
space clear of the scrubby junipers and even lower creosote
bushes, but sheltered by the higher boulders that cast enough
shade for the mirror. Jecks and the guards followed.
She reined up and dismounted, handing Farinelli's reins to
Lejun, since Fhurgen and Rickel still bore the heavy shields.
The white-haired lord dismounted as quickly as she did, and
took the leather-wrapped traveling mirror while she uncased
the lutar and began to tune it.
Jecks laid the mirror on the leather wrapping in the shade while
Anna ran through a vocalise.
She had to cough her throat clear of dust and mucus. A second
vocalise helped. At the sound of hoofs she looked up to see
Hanfor and Liende nearing.
"Alvar is forming the companies. I should see where our
enemies are drawn up," said the weathered armsman.
"I should have thought of that." There were still so many things
she should have thought of, but she hadn't been trained to be a
sorceress or a regent or a ruler. Like everything else, she seemed
to have to learn what she was supposed to be doing on the job.
Liende dismounted in a businesslike fashion, and Anna
motioned for her to join the group. You've got to make more of
an effort to keep Liende included. Don't treat her like furniture…
Lord, Anna hated that when Dieshr and Avery had acted as
though she were Queen Victoria's chair- just expected to be

there.
Hanfor smiled as he dismounted and walked toward the
shadowed space under the largest sandstone boulder. "A regent
and sorceress cannot remember everything all the time."
For his words, she was grateful. She cleared her throat, and
stood over the mirror, humming softly to try to get the pitch
right.
"Show me now and oh so clear 
Where our enemies now appear; 
whether hidden or in sight, 
show their places in your light."
An overhead view of the vale appeared in the oblong mirror,
bordered by a thin band of silver mist. Anna studied the mirror,
with Jecks, Alvar, and Hanfor practically at her shoulder.
Liende stood farther back.
Anna couldn't see anything.
"There… you see they have the archers in the center, where
they can blanket the road. Those are nets… darker than the
rocks." Hanfor spoke softly, but clearly. "The white and
green… the man by the overhang right there-he's gone
now-lancers-those are the ones from Sturinn- they are on the
south hills."
"The ones from Dumar are on the north?" Anna wasn't sure
she'd seen anything. 
Jecks nodded.

She studied the image again before singing the release couplet.
"That valley is wide, and the hills in the middle are high enough
to block my voice, even from here. I don't know if any spell will
reach the north side- not unless it's strong enough to destroy the
whole valley."
"The Sturinnese are more dangerous," Hanfor said. "They are
better trained. The Sea-Priest put them closest to the road."
Anna took a deep breath. "We'd better get ready." She turned
to Liende. "The first spell will be the flame spell. After that…
we'll see."
"The flame spell," Liende repeated with a nod.
"I don't think that the arrow spell will carry far enough." Anna
doubted that the arrows would carry, even boosted by her
spells.
"You rely heavily on sorcery," offered Jecks.
"I know. But what else do I have?"
"I will have the archers form up near the north edge of the
overlook. That is the closest to the Sturinnese armsmen."
Hanfor remounted and rode back toward where the last of the
armsmen were emerging onto the mesa.
Jecks wrapped the mirror, while Anna replaced the lutar in its
case. Liende mounted and rode back toward the waiting
players.
"They have not moved from their positions," Jecks said quietly.
"I worry that the Sea-Priest may have yet another surprise. Is

your shield yet enchanted?"
"It feels that way." The faintest sense of an unseen spiderweb
tugging at Anna remained.
"Good."
Anna remounted and guided Farinelli toward the section of the
mesa that formed an overlook, reining up a good ten yards
back from the edge, marked by fissured white limestone, partly
covered with the red dirt. The hills in the center of the Vale,
dotted with green spots that were junipers and greenish blue
splotches that were creosote bushes, seemed almost close
enough to touch in the hot clear air.
After studying the Y-shaped line of hills below for a moment,
the sorceress dismounted and handed Farinelli's reins to Lejun.
Fhurgen and Rickel dismounted quickly and stepped forward
of Anna with their shields, one in front of each shoulder, so that
they could close quickly to block any arrows or quarrels.
"Archers on the flanks!" Alvar ordered, and the armsmen who
doubled as archers dismounted and formed a double row on
either side of Anna and Jecks and the piayers who stood behind
Anna and continued to tune their instruments.
"The warm-up song," said Liende.
Anna edged closer to the edge of the overlook, and her guards
moved forward with her.
The wind rose from the valley, carrying cooler air from
somewhere, air with the faintest scent of… something. Horses? 

Without the mirror, the sorceress could see nothing but dirt and
junipers, red rock and shadows-and the track of the road that
traversed the seemingly empty Vale below.
After exhaling slowly, and trying to relax her shoulders, Anna
turned to Liende. "The flame spell first." She'd tried to craft the
spell to cover the widest range, and it should work. "Should"
doesn't mean it will. Anna forced back the vagrant thought
and concentrated on the vocalise. When she finished, feeling
her cords firm, her throat clear, she nodded to the chief player.
"Ready."
"On my mark… mark!" Liende gestured, and then the notes of
the clarinet-like woodwind joined with those of the other
players.
Anna sang.
"Archers strong, armsmen strong, 
Enemies bathed in flame from this song, 
Against Defalk and you will burn…"
Anna shivered, suddenly tired from the short and full-voiced
effort. Her eyes scanned the valley, but for what seemed an
eternity, all remained as before, silent, except for the insects and
the occasional unknown birdcall.
The points of fire flared across the closest range of hills… then
faint cries followed… and more cries.
Anna looked away, her stomach turning, trying to rationalize it
all. You offered terms… warned them. … Would they be any less
dead with an arrow through their chests… ?

The space around Anna, except for the breathing of horses,
remained silent.
Jecks handed her a water bottle, and she drank, deeply. Then
he offered her a chunk of bread and a small wedge of cheese.
She ate both, and then took another deep swig of the lukewarm
water.
As she finished, he gestured toward the Vale of Cuetayl, where
a single horseman in white galloped along the road, dust rising
behind his mount.
"Archers!" called Alvar.
A rain of arrows arched out over the road, somewhat more than
a half dek north and a good three hundred yards lower.
"The arrows curved," snapped Jecks. "Shields!"
The rider turned from the road and continued to ride up the
lower slope of the base of the mesa, aimed directly toward the
overlook. Abruptly, he halted and pulled a spear from his
lanceholder.
Anna couldn't see what happened next because Rickel and
Fhurgen stepped in front of Anna, blocking her from the
charging wizard.
Still… she could feel a tingling-like a smaller version of the
great chords she had called over Vult.
A second tingling seemed to fly from her momentarily, though
she had done nothing, spelled nothing at that moment. Then a
dark streak flew from Farinelli, crashing into something else

perhaps three yards in front of Anna, before falling onto the red
soil. A barbed javelin seemed to vibrate in the small spelled
shield that had hurled itself from the open case attached to
Anna's saddle. 
Both javelin and shield, bound together, inched across the bare
reddish ground toward Anna. The sorceress retreated toward
Farinelli and the lutar, trying to recall what spell she could use
to stop the magic in the javelin.
Jecks flung himself from his saddle and ran toward the edge of
the mesa.
Anna pulled the lutar from its case.
Moments later, Jecks straightened, lunging back toward Anna,
and the still-vibrating javelin and the shield, but carrying a flat
stone more than a yard long, struggling with the weight.
Fhurgen handed his shield to the guard mounted beside him.
"Lejun, cover her!" The black-bearded guard followed Jecks'
example, sprinting for the rocks at the edge of the plateau,
while Lejun held the shield, edge to edge with Rickel.
Jecks almost eased his stone onto the still-vibrating javelin, then
straightened slowly as Fhurgen added another stone. Two other
guards added more stones, but the pile vibrated and inched
toward the sorceress.
Anna fumbled with the lutar, her mind struggling for
something she could adapt.
Fhurgen added yet another stone to the pile, but the stones

shifted again as the javelin continued to vibrate toward Anna.
What frigging spell… Think! Think… Her mind seemed blank
for ages, but it couldn't have been that long before she
swallowed. The flame spell!
She began to strum the lutar.
"Javelin magic, javelin strong, 
turn to flame with this song!"
The stones erupted in a cascade of flame. Liende and the
players stepped back from the heat, as did Anna and Jecks and
the guards. Hanfor mounted and rode closer to the overlook,
surveying the Vale below with only a glance at the burning
weapons.
By the time the flames died away, too quickly, it seemed to
Anna, even the red stones were dust, and nothing remained of
javelin or shield but rust and ashes.
She glanced at the road below, but only a line of dust
remained, and the Sea-Priest had ridden somewhere out of
sight.
"I'm glad I brought a few other shields," Jecks said.
So was Anna. "I'm glad you insisted my spelling the shield."
"I worried about something such as that." His head inclined
toward the ashes. "The Sea-Priests are well-known for their
attacks on strong leaders. It is said that was how they brought
down the Ostisles-with treachery such as that under a parley

banner." 
"The burning… it is terrible…" Yuarl, violino still in one hand,
stood near the dropoff, pointing out across the Vale with her
bow.
Anna edged forward, behind the shields carried by Lejun and
Rickel. She could see thin columns of smoke rising across the
nearer hilltops below. Of course… Fires just don't vanish…
Anna wanted to shake her head. How could there ever be peace
with a land such as Sturinn where the Sea-Priests would try
anything rather than admit that women were people? Where
any trickery was acceptable for them, but where an honest
attempt not to fight was condemned?
Anna continued to look for the Sea-Priest who had flung the
javelin, but even the dust had settled.
"Why not the wizard?" murmured one of the players. "How did
he escape?"
Anna knew, but didn't explain. Her spell had been directed at
archers and armsmen, not wizards. She'd gotten what she'd
spelled, not exactly what she'd meant, and that had resulted in
an angry wizard getting free.
"The Dumaran armsmen are retreating." Jecks pointed to the
northwest, at the puffs of dust.
"We cannot do much from here," said Hanfor.
"We had best leave before they catch us on that trail,"

suggested the white-haired lord.
"They could not reach us quickly, but I would agree with Lord
Jecks, Lady Anna," added Hanfor.
Anna nodded. "We'll return to where we camped, and then
we'll see how we'll enter Dumar." Her vision was blurring, and
sparks flashed before her eyes. She needed to eat, and rest.
Jecks exchanged glances with Hanfor, but neither spoke.
Anna could feel herself starting to seethe at the unspoken male
questions, but she clamped her lips shut.
99
THE dew had barely lifted from the grass along the shoulder of
the road, a road churned the day before with the hoofprints of
the retreating Dumaran forces, hoofprints since blurred by
heavy dew or light rain.
"They retreat now, but Ehara must face you once more before
he returns to Dumaria," Jecks said.
"Politics?" asked Anna. 
At the puzzled expression on the white-haired lord's face that
appeared and vanished as fleetingly as it had come, Anna
added, "He won't be able to face his lords or holders unless he
does?"
"I would not think so."
"Do we have any idea where?"

"I would guess that he would attempt to hold the Dumaran hills
northeast of where the rivers join." Jecks shrugged. "There he
could make us attack uphill. Or he could make a normal host
attack so."
"That is another three days' ride, four if not pressed," pointed
out Hanfor, riding to Anna's left.
"Five-or six," Anna corrected. "We aren't leaving hostile towns
behind us. Not large ones."
Jecks and Hanfor's eyes crossed.
"We need some loyalty here." Anna slowed Farinelli as the
Defalkan column neared the gray stone oblong by the side of
the road. The dek-stone was clear enough: Finduma - 
3d.
"Are you contemplating more sorcery?" ventured Jecks.
Anna surveyed the terrain. A small hill rose less than a half a
dek north of the road and perhaps two deks ahead, apparently
overlooking the town itself. The hilltop had been grazed bare,
or logged, or something, and grayish dots that were sheep
grazed on the intermittent grass and vegetation.
"I can't use a loyalty spell…"
"You did so at Stromwer," pointed out Jecks.
"I almost didn't live through that, and the next time would be
worse, the backlash is… exponential."
Jecks frowned again, briefly, and Anna was left with the feeling

of strangeness… of being in a culture where certain terms and
ideas just didn't exist.
"The mirror shows no dangers, neither Sturinnese nor
Dumaran armsmen," said Jecks. "What have you in mind?"
"I don't want Dumar to ever again present a threat to Defalk or
Jimbob," Anna said. "Ever" or "never" are dangerous words.
"Not for a while, anyway."
"I would have your armsmen take the town and request
provisions. Then we should ride on," suggested Jecks.
Hanfor reined his mount up. "The scouts say there are no
armsmen. The town is shuttered."
"Jecks thinks we should provision here, and leave them alone
otherwise."
"I would do the same. One never knows when provisions will be
short, and country folk love best those leaders they see the least
of."
Anna smiled at Hanfor's words. While she didn't like the idea of
leaving a potentially hostile town behind her, again, the
alternatives were worse, and Finduma was small.
She turned in the saddle and gestured to Liende, riding at the
head of the players and behind Anna's guards. "Chief player?" 
Liende urged her mount onto the shoulder of the road and
around the guards. "Yes, Lady Anna?"
"Lord Jecks has suggested that we request provisions in

Finduma, and then ride on."
Liende swallowed. "Ah… after the Vale… ?"
"The Sturinnese died there, not people of Liedwahr. I'd be
surprised if most people in… Finduma… here, even care that
much. Most people don't care who rules, as long as their lives
don't change." Anna hoped she were right, but with a force as
small as hers, a little less than five hundred, she couldn't leave
garrisons in every towns that might be disloyal.
"Liende…" Anna said gently. "I'm trying to protect Defalk with
as little loss of life as possible-on both sides." How many other
leaders have said that, and then killed thousands? "I want the
players to stand ready in case something happens, but I don't
think it will."
"That we can do." Liende smiled wanly. "We will stand ready."
"Thank you."
Liende eased her mount back toward the players.
"Your players have experienced more than they expected," said
Jecks.
"Haven't we all?" Anna shook her head, then coughed from the
road dust, omnipresent despite the intermittent rains.
"Let me send a company into the town," Hanfor said. "And the
wagons."
"We'll wait here," Anna said, "and try the seeking spell."

As the arms commander rode off, Jecks looked at the sorceress.
"It matters not to garrison Finduma, but have you thought of
what you must do when you reach the Falche, and the larger
towns?"
"The same as all other conquerors. Ask for surrender and
allegiance, and destroy the town if it's not forthcoming." Anna
found the words bitter in her mouth.
"That rests most heavily on your sorcery and players."
"I'm relying almost entirely on my sorcery and players." Anna
laughed softly and ironically. "What else do I have?"
"If you destroy the Sea-Priest and Ehara, all will bow when you
pass. And after?"
"I could build another dam," Anna ventured. "Would Dumar
want that?"
"Lady, you are terrible."
"Terrible"? "I suppose I would have to make sure that whoever
stays in charge here knows that.T You're planning for
something that might not even happen… You have to defeat
Ehara and destroy most of his army. … A chill settled over her.
"That's something to worry about later. First, we need to deal
with Ehara."
"And the Sea-Priests."
Anna gestured to Liende. "Let's try that new seeking spell, the
one like the flame spell." Anna coughed, found her second

water bottle, and swallowed a little before replacing it,
dismounting, and beginning a vocalise. "Polly, lolly, polly…" 
"Warm-up tune," announced Liende as the players started to
tune.
On the road behind and before Anna and the players, the
Purple Company formed a line, mounts and riders facing
Finduma. While Jecks unfastened the mirror and laid it out,
Anna forced her thoughts onto the seeking spell, concentrated
on the words and humming the tune as the players became less
ragged and the strains of the warm-up tune merged into an
actual melody.
Finally, Anna looked at Liende.
"We are ready, lady."
Anna nodded.
"On my mark… Mark!" Liende gestured, and then the notes of
the clarinet-like woodwind joined with those of the other
players.
Anna sang.
"Find, find any Dumaran close to here, 
an armsmen bearing his weapons hard and near…"
After she finished Anna watched the glass, but it remained
blank silver, not reflecting, a sign that no armsmen-or none
with arms-remained in Finduma.
"They can get ready to ride." Anna nodded to Liende.

"Prepare to ride."
Jecks helped Anna replace the glass in its leather padding and
back on Farinelli.
"In some towns, you will have to use that spell often," he
observed.
"I know. Why do you think I want the players to do it? It's
simple enough for the lutar, but…"
They sat in the hot sun for a time longer. Anna took the gray
cloth from her belt and blotted her forehead and neck, then
readjusted the floppy brown hat that had definitely seen better
days.
Alvar rode up to the pair. "The arms commander says that we
may proceed."
"Thank you." Anna flicked Farinelli's reins.
The road curved slowly to the left, toward the southwest. Fifty
yards ahead on the right was a rutted lane, its center filled with
dark green vinelike weeds, that led toward the hill overlooking
Finduma.
As the column of riders passed onto the lane, Anna glanced
down the road toward the first roofs of the town a dek or so
away. How did you end up invading another country? Because
someone else invaded first… that's why.
She wasn't sure that her answer was all that good, not sure at
all.

Baaaa… aaahhh… The sheep lined across the road slowly moved
away under the not-too-gentle prodding of the vanguard.
A man with a long staff barreled out from behind the cot to the
left of the road, then came to a halt as he saw the armsmen and
the pale blue banner of Defalk. His eyes went from the armed
men to the banner, and then to the scattered sheep on the slope. 
"Ah… your pardon, sers…"
"We won't be long," Anna said politely. "We're just passing
through."
At the sound of the sorceress's voice, his eyes went to her, and
the sheepman paled, backing slowly away until he was out of
sight behind the cot.
"Your reputation precedes you, lady," said Jecks.
"I'm not sure I like whatever that reputation is."
"Better to be feared than disrespected."
That was what Machiavelli had written, or words to that effect,
but they'd just been words when she'd read them in college.
Somehow, it was different when the words applied to her.
Anna twisted in the saddle to extract the lutar.
"You expect trouble? I doubt any here will stand against your
spells. Not in such a small town."
"I hope not." Anna's fingers went to the lutar she had wrestled
from the case, almost absently tuning the instrument as they

neared the first of the houses on the outskirts of the hamlet.
The road into Finduma remained empty-and dusty. The town
was more like a hamlet, with less than fifty houses, half lining
the road to Dumaria and the remainder scattered among sparse
pastures and the few intermittent tilled patches of ground. A
narrow stream ran along the south side of the main road,
punctuated by scattered willows and something else-tamarisk
trees?
As the column neared the first houses, a woman glanced up,
saw the armsmen, and fled from her wooden washtub,
scooping up a toddler tied to a line around her waist. The
weathered door slammed as the first of the riders passed the
first small umber-brick house with the straw roof.
"She does not seem overly joyed," said Liende, riding on Anna's
right.
"Would you be?" answered Anna.
"Aye, and it would be an incautious woman to remain out with
strange armsmen passing," observed Jecks.
A brown-and-white dog ambled out across the dirt of the main
street, then scurried behind a wooden shed at the sound of
hoofs.
A rail-thin and bearded man stood on a wooden porch in the
shade of a signboard so faded that Anna couldn't make out the
letters. The narrow building itself was of the umber brick and
had a cracked and faded red-tile roof. The man looked like he
wanted to spit in the street as the sorceress rode past, but his

face twisted, and he took a deep breath.
"Peace to you," Anna said, wondering what other phrase she
could have used.
The bearded man nodded, reluctantly.
The center of the town was an enlarged crossroads without a
central square or a statue. A handful of two-storied brick
buildings sprawled along the main road. Anna spotted the
faded crossed candles of a chandlery, and the three wagons
lined up before it. Around the square were stationed armsmen
with bared blades. Another ten or twelve formed a line into the
chandlery. 
Hanfor gestured, and Anna turned her mount toward the
weathered veteran.
"Do we have enough golds to pay for this?" asked Anna as she
reined up.
In turn, Hanfor glanced at Jecks.
"We have some…"
"But we really shouldn't use them?" she asked. "All right.
Promise to pay. We'll have to send them later." Her eyes fixed
on Jecks. "We need to keep our word on this." Then she turned
to Hanfor. "Keep a record of what we take and what it is worth."
"Yes, Lady Anna."
"I mean it." Her words were firm, almost cold. In the end, all
she had was her word. She'd learned that a long time ago, and

that was one thing that hadn't changed. And it wouldn't.
100
THE late-afternoon sun cast long shadows, and Anna pulled
down the brim of the floppy hat. Her shirt was soaked, as was
the inside band of the hat, and her hair felt gummy and sticky.
The air was still, without even a hint of a breeze. The road bore
the traces of the still-retreating Dumaran armsmen. Anna's last
scrying with the mirror showed Ehara and his forces nearly at
the Falche, another day and a half from where the Defalkan
forces slowly rode westward.
Anna chewed the bread slowly as Farinelli carried her toward
the low sun. She glanced back over her shoulder as the column
passed the dek-stone. Her eyes blurred as she tried to focus on
the words.
Hrissar-2 d.
Hrissar was a large town with five squares, lots of granaries,
and no hills. She'd blanketed the place with so many
armsmen-seeking spells that she felt her eyes were swimming,
but she'd found nothing. Even the local armsmen had been
conscripted and dragged off by Ehara, and the shutters and
doors to the town were closed.
After four days of riding, and using enemy-seeking spells, in
every town near or along the main road, she was tired. So were
the players.
"You cannot keep casting spells such," said Jecks quietly. "Not

if you must cast a large spell when we meet Lord Ehara."
"I know. I know," said Anna tiredly, wiping stale dark crumbs
from around her mouth before she reached for the water bottle.
"I'll have to get some rest tonight and take it easy tomorrow,
but there aren't that many towns between us and the river." 
"They are small enough that you need not spell them now.
Hrissar was the only town worthy of the name."
"I know that, too." The sorceress not only knew it, but felt it.
She was so tired she could also feel the drain of the enchanted
shield, a spell Jecks had practically demanded she renew as
soon as they had camped the second time outside the Vale of
Cuetayl.
"You are the sole force of Defalk," Hanfor said mildly.
"Now," she answered. "Now." Somehow, some way, she had to
build an army worthy of the name. She couldn't keep riding
from border to border and beyond. Had conquerors like
Alexander the Great and Genghis Khan felt that way? Oh…
more delusions of grandeur? You're a great conqueror now?
The sorceress pushed away the nagging thoughts, reaching
instead for the remaining water bottle.
"Have you considered the spell against ensorcelled weapons?"
pressed the white-haired lord.
"Lord Jecks," Anna said wearily, "in the last year I have had to
develop and learn dozens-scores-of spells. Today, we scoured a
small city. Right now, my brain is frazzled, and I couldn't come

up with another if Ehara or the Evult appeared on the road in
front of us."
"… 'frazzled'… betimes, she speaks strangely…" The murmur
from a guard somewhere behind Anna, a guard whose voice
she didn't recognize, filled the comparative stillness.
The squeaking of a provisions wagon drifted from the east on a
sudden puff of wind that cooled the sweating sorceress
momentarily, then stilled.
"More than betimes I speak strangely," Anna said hoarsely.
"More than betimes. Dissonance, I'm strange all the time. Who
else would be riding through Dumar in this heat? Mad dogs
and Englishwomen?" She laughed.
"I think you need rest," said Jecks. "And soon."
"The regent is losing it?" The sorceress shook her head. "Not
yet. Not until we put an end to the Sea-Priests in Liedwahr.
Chains… Who do they think they are?"
Jecks extended a chunk of stale bread.
Anna took it, and began to eat slowly. Low blood sugar?
Emotional overextension? Fatigue? She kept her thoughts to
herself as she forced herself to keep eating.
Her eyes caught a pinpoint of light, with a reddish glint, in the
western sky-Darksong, the moon of dark sorcery, of power that
led to the need for using yet more power. Was that what she
faced? Was she becoming the Clearsong sorceress of evil for the
best of motives?

101
MANSUUS, MANSUUR
AND her forces are approaching the Falche north of Dumaria."
Bassil clears his throat and waits. "She has destroyed two fleets
of the Maitre of Sturinn and is pushing Lord Ehara back to the
Falche? With how many armsmen?" Konsstin unfastens the
blue cloak and walks to the open door. His forehead is beaded
with sweat, and he stands in the doorway between the study
and the balcony, letting the slight western breeze blow around
him.
"Less than thirtyscore, sire," answers Bassil. "Perhaps less than
twenty-five. She cast a spell on the Sturinnese lancers, and they
burst into flame. Ehara and his men retreated."
"Have the Sea-Priests sent no sorcerers themselves? Dissonance
knows, they've spent years training them."
"They sent three, or more, according to your seers. All but the
strongest died in the flood she sent down the Falche."
"I'd wager the Maitre loved that." Konsstin chuckles, but the
sound fades as his eyes darken. "The harmonies help us if she
can build a true force of armsmen, and that's where she's
headed." The Liedfuhr's eyes drift eastward and to the city
below, beyond the port and the triangle where the Ansul and
the Latok join to form the mighty Toksul. The angular sail of a
river trader billows as a gust of wind crosses the river. "We need
not assist her in that." He shakes his head. "Take notes."

"Yes, sire." Bassil bobs his head.
"And listen! Try to understand why I'm ordering these things."
His fingers touch his brown-and-silver beard. "Double the
bonus for reentered contracts for armsmen. Have recruiters
from anywhere else exiled or imprisoned. Announce the
formation of new companies of lancers. Give them
honorable-sounding names, and find the best officers from the
existing companies. I don't care about names. Put the officers
we have to placate in charge of things they cannot damage too
greatly and keep track of them until they make a mistake for
which they can be exiled or executed." Konsstin walks onto the
balcony to the north end which retains a modicum of shade.
Bassil follows, marker and paper in hand.
"Also, make sure that no one ships any iron from the Deleatur
mines eastward-to Ranuak or anywhere else."
Bassil lifts his dark and bushy eyebrows.
"Buy it, if you have to. Use the procurator's funds. That's what
they're for. And horses-draft a dispatch-two dispatches-one to
my darling grandson and one to the lizard Nubara. Tell them
that any of the High Grassland nomads that trade horses to
Defalk are to be executed in whatever is the most unfavored
fashion." 
"The conquest of Dumar… if she manages it… is that such a
threat?"
"Let us see, Bassil. There was the Evult, reputedly the greatest
sorcerer of a generation. She buried him in hot lava, and a

volcano named after her still grows in the northern Ostfels. In
less than a year, she has managed to unify a country no one
has been able to govern in generations. Half of Ebra already
acknowledges her as sovereign. By the way, send more coins to
Hadrenn. Not many, but enough to make him grateful."
Konsstin pauses. "She's killed the ruler of Neserea and stolen
some of the best officers from his forces. That ruined the morale
of those left. She's on the verge of adding Dumar to her
empire." Konsstin turns on the dark-haired lancer officer. "She's
done all of this in less than two years and with fewer armsmen
than we have as a casual guard in Hafen, where no one's
threatened in hundreds of years. Are you going to tell me I
shouldn't be worried? Oh, and don't forget, she just killed off
another handful of some of the stronger sorcerers in Liedwahr
without even realizing she had."
Bassil nods, not meeting the older man's eyes.
"That doesn't even count the fact that she's remaking the whole
society by giving women power. Do you want every scheming
lady in Mansuur thinking she can run lands better than her
consort?" Konsstin coughs twice before continuing. "If the
Sea-Priests can't stop her in Dumar, the way they feel about
women, they'll send every vessel and armsman they have into
Ebra or Neserea."
"But she is their enemy."
"That's true enough, but they'll want to flank her, and the
Matriarch would invite the sorceress into Encora in a moment if
the Maitre attacked Ranuak."

"The South Women wouldn't like that."
"They wouldn't. That's true. But given the choice between the
sorceress and chains, just whom would they choose?"
"I see."
"No, you don't. If the Maitre is thrown out of Dumar and he
doesn't or can't attack Ranuak, exactly where will he attack?"
"Us?"
"That's a possibility. We're closer than Ebra, but we're the third
choice. More likely, next summer he could flood the Bitter Sea
with ships and take Esaria." Konsstin offers a twisted smile.
"That would solve my problem with Rabyn, but I'd probably
have to ally Mansuur with the sorceress to stop Sturinn."
"Maybe the Maitre will seek out Ebra?" Bassil bobs his head.
"That might be better."
"For a time… perhaps." Konsstin pauses. "We will see. Now…
hmmm… what else? Oh, I suppose, you can ship some of that
extra iron plate or ingots that the foundries in Deleatur will
have left over to Bertmynn. Some of it, anyway. The rest of it…
well, we need more blades, and iron quarrels and crossbows." 
"Yes, sire."
"That should keep you busy, Bassil."
"Yes, sire." The dark-haired lancer backs out of the study.
From the small patch of shade on the northern end of the

palace balcony, Konsstin stares westward, beyond Mansuus,
beyond the mighty Toksul, in the direction of the Western Sea.
102
THE muted sound of harnesses and horses rose slowly as the
light brightened outside the silken tent, now off-white from all
the imbedded red dust and grit. Anna found the bucket of
water and splashed her face and hands, washing slowly, then
pulled on her clothes, and finally, her boots, listening to the low
murmurs of the guards.
"… she up yet?" That was Fhurgen's deep voice.
"… not about to look. You want to?" asked Rickel.
Fhurgen offered a muted laugh.
"You been with her longer than any of us… Why are we here?"
"I could guess, Rickel. I won't. I know that she does nothing
without a reason, and most folks who wager against her lose.
Them that don't, die. Hard for mighty lords like Jecks it is."
Another low laugh followed. "A woman doing what they
couldn't."
The words got even less distinct, and flashes of light flickered in
front of Anna's eyes. After deciding she'd better eat, she sat on
the end of the cot under the silk canopy of her tent, slowly
forcing her way through the strong yellow cheese wedges. She
couldn't afford a repetition of her performance the afternoon
before.

The bread was so stale and hard that her trousers were covered
with crumbs by the time she crunched through what was left.
Still, she could stand without feeling as though she would
topple over.
At the sound of Jecks' voice, Anna washed down the last of the
cheese, and the last crumbs of the hard dark bread, then stood
and stretched before opening the thin flap of the tent and
stepping into the half-gray, half-rose light of dawn.
"Good morning." She smiled although she still felt logy.
"How do you feel this morning?" asked Jecks.
"Better than yesterday afternoon, if that's what you mean. I ate
more this morning, and that will help. Yesterday was a long
day." She grimaced. "So was the day before." And the day
before that, and that… 
"I worry that you attempt too much, Lady Anna."
Behind Jecks, by the tent, Anna caught the hint of a nod from
Fhurgen. Or she thought she did.
"Sometimes, like now, I do too." She paused. "I know that we
have to keep the Sturinnese out of Dumar."
"It is the weakest land in Liedwahr. Now." He smiled, and the
warm hazel eyes smiled as well.
Anna smiled back in spite of herself. He tries… and he is
intelligent and handsome . . . and he does look like… No, he is
more handsome than Robert Mitchum… If only he'd understand
a little more…

"I would suggest that we only ride to Gewyrt today. That is a
good ten deks short of the river hills." His smile turned
half-apologetic, half-worried.
"You're saying that the sorceress needs rest before she attempts
another battle?"
"So do your players."
Jecks was probably right about that, too. When he was worried,
he had good cause. It was what he didn't worry about that
caused problems between them.
"You're right." She offered another smile, and absently, couldn't
help smiling inside as the handsome and muscular lord who
tried so hard smiled back.
103
THE EASTERN RIVER HILLS, DUMAR
JERRESTIN stands, then walks around to the far side of the
small cooking fire. He stares into the darkening east. "I do not
look forward to facing this sorceress," muses Ehara, not looking
at the taller man.
"You have few choices, Lord Ehara. Not a hamlet east of the
Falche and north of Dumaria remains loyal to you. And no
holder west of the Falche will support you if you do not
confront her."
"I did so poorly as lord?" Ehara snorts. "That I find hard to
believe."

"She has used sorcery to force loyalty." The Sea-Marshal turns
toward the Lord of Dumar. "There is a price to be paid for that,
but unhappily for us, she has already paid much of that coin." 
"How has she paid? What has she given up?"
"Her life on the mist worlds. From what your spies say, her
children. From what I know of youth spells, her ability to have
more children. From what I know of power, any chance at
friends in a strange land. And the ability to sleep with any ease
at night." JerRestin's voice hardens. "True as it may be, all that
is little consolation to you or to me."
"No consolation at all," agrees Ehara. "How do we defeat her
and reclaim my land?"
"She cannot handle many sorceries. You must split your forces
into groups-each larger than her total force."
"She will destroy them one by one."
"No. Before each large force, a dek forward, will be a smaller
force, and that force will attack. All the small forces will attack
at once. Because they will attack from separate positions, she
must address each with a different spell." JerRestin glances from
the rose-lit clouds over the river hills to the west to Ehara. "Once
she has committed her sorceries, the larger forces will rush
forward, when she is exhausted."
Ehara looks long at jerRestin. "Was that not your strategy at
the Vale of Cuetayl?"
"It would have worked there, but none save I attacked the

sorceress."
"And what of you, Sea-Marshal? You escaped, but you did not
slay the sorceress."
"I had to ride too close, and I was seen. I will not be seen this
time. I will not be seen." JerRestin's eyes burn.
Ehara looks away from those eyes, and his big hands knot
around each other, but he does not speak.
104
THE five figures stood on the shady side of the barn wall as
Jecks unwrapped the leather from the mirror. He glanced up at
the sorceress. "Have you thought-"
"About the ensorcelled weapons? Yes." Anna felt almost cruel in
the way she cut him off, but at times she felt, in subtle ways,
everyone was asking something, somehow. "I might have
something," she added quickly to assuage her guilt.
"That would be good." He handed her the mirror with the
battered frame.
Anna hung the traveling mirror from an old iron bracket. In
the mid-afternoon sun, the meadows to the north were empty
of sheep, the fields empty of workers. The houses had all been
abandoned, hurriedly, with tracks and animal prints in the
road dust showing that even the animals had been driven
away. 
Anna smiled as she stepped back and caught sight of a tan

chicken pecking at the side of the empty cot fifty yards
westward. Not all animals had vanished.
Jecks followed her eyes. "A chicken supper, later."
"If you can catch it," said Hanfor.
Anna bent down and took the lutar from its case, beginning to
tune it, as she ran through a vocalise.
The faint hum of summer insects rose again once she stopped,
clearing her throat. On the south side of the road, Alvar
directed the Defalkan forces as they lined up to water their
mounts from a long stock-trough.
Anna cleared her throat a last time, then sang.
"Show from the west, danger to fear, 
All the threats to us bright and clear…"
Surrounded by silver mist, the image was clear-a series of green
fields, crossed by narrow lanes for horses and wagons, roughly
a semicircle in shape, flanked on the north, south, and west by
low and irregular hills.
"Ehara must have his forces on the back side of all of those hills,
and all are mounted and well-rested," said Hanfor.
Liende inclined her head, ever so slightly. "You can see
armsmen before the hills, but a few."
"He has foreguards or vanguards in front of each group,"
confirmed Hanfor.

"Each company is more than a dek from each other company,"
added Jecks with a glance at Anna. "And shielded by the hills."
"Can you use sorcery on them all at once?" asked Hanfor.
"Not as long as they're on the back sides of the hill," Anna
admitted. "Not unless we could take the heights to the west."
"We could circle to the north," ventured Jecks, "and take them
from the side, one by one. Or take the first two companies and
seize the higher ground to the west."
"We would still face half his forces, almost a hundredscore."
Hanfor touched his trimmed and gray beard. "They hold the
higher ground. To defeat them would cost us armsmen, or
require much sorcery from the lady Anna."
That was clearly what Ehara and his Sea-Priest advisor or
sorcerer, or whatever, had in mind, and Anna didn't like that
option, not if there were a better one.
"We're what?-ten deks from the nearest of those hills?" she
asked.
"Mayhap twelve," said Liende.
"What if we stop here for today?"
Jecks smiled, and Anna could tell he'd hoped she'd come to that
conclusion. 
"That would rest mounts and men," Hanfor acknowledged.
"And on the morrow?"
"We move slowly."

"To place them on blade edge? That would help," Hanfor said,
following her unspoken logic.
"Do we have enough arrows?" Anna asked.
"How much is enough?" asked Hanfor. "What have you in
mind?"
"At least one for every enemy armsman," said the regent and
sorceress. "I think we let them attack," Anna said, "but I'd like
to be able to prod them if necessary."
With more destruction? She held in the wince at her own
self-question, forcing a bland smile that had to appear cold and
cruel.
105
PAMR, DEFALK
I DON'T see what you're doing, Farsenn." The drummer in the
stained and sleeveless brown tunic rubs his forehead. "Your
spells… they make a fellow's head ache. My eyes cross, and
you don't spell that long."
"Mine do, too." Farsenn smiles. "Darksong isn't like Clearsong.
It's more like poison. Use a little here… a little there." A laugh
follows. "You'll see."
"The sorceress… she's still high and mighty." The drummer
turns and gestures at the rough clay figure that is perhaps
three-quarters human size on the crude wooden pedestal. "Not
like that. No matter what you make them see, it's still just clay."

He massages his forehead again, blinking rapidly.
"For now, Giersan, my brother, for now. Darksong must be
used slowly, bit by bit… but the time will come when every
man not on the estates of that bitch Lady Gatrune will rise, and
we will hold Pamr."
"And then the sorceress will come and destroy us." The
drummer's words are flat.
"No. She will come, and I will destroy her."
"How?"
"Never before has an entire town risen, with every man bearing
arms.
The sorceress has but a fewscore armsmen, and she cannot use
levies against the people within Defalk. And while she struggles
with the people, I will strike her with Darksong, pierce her
soul." 
"She will use her fires from the heaven."
"Against who? Every soul in Pamr?"
"She might."
"When she rests upon the support of the people themselves?"
Farsenn smiles cruelly. "We will be Lord of Pamr, and she will
be dead, and that little boy she has propped up as heir will treat
with us. He will."
106

Rickel and Fhurgen, shields resting on the lanceholders, rode
before Anna as the Defalkan forces advanced to the crest of the
low rise. Beyond the lush grass of the hill spread out a series of
fields, bordered by hedgerows not even as tall as Farinelli's ears.
Farther to the west and north and south of the fields, the
meadows resumed, merging into the low hills.
The road traveled due west, vanishing into a gap between two
of the larger hills.
"This is the highest point on this side of the valley." Jecks rode
on Anna's right.
"It is hard to believe that the river is only a dozen deks beyond
the hills," added Liende from Anna's left.
Anna's eyes ranged over the flat fields ahead, and then studied
the hills. The entire area was empty of people or animals-just
fields filled with green plants of differing shades, narrow lanes
splitting fields, the hedgerows, and grass. The low wind blew
out of the west, into Anna's face, bearing the faint scent of
damp earth and grass.
"I'd like to stop here, Hanfor," Anna called to the arms
commander. "I need to see where the Dumarans are."
The arms commander nodded. "That might be best."
The sorceress dismounted, giving Farinelli a pat on the
shoulder. "You're a good fellow." She blotted her forehead,
damp as much from the more humid climate as from the
late-morning sunlight.

Rickel took Farinelli's reins, and Anna unstrapped the scrying
mirror. Jecks, who had dismounted quickly, took it from her.
Then Anna unstrapped the lutar and took it from its case,
beginning a vocalise even before she had begun to tune the
lutar.
One of the guards behind Fhurgen held the reins to Jecks'
mount, and those of Liende's. Hanfor held his own, standing
where he could see the mirror, but still surveying the valley
while he waited. 
Anna's chest felt heavy-asthma again, or too much sleeping on
a cot in strange places with barely adequate food? Then, how
long had it been since she'd slept in a bed that was considered
hers? Almost two seasons? And some ancient kings of earth had
enjoyed military campaigns?
She coughed some mucus clear and started the second vocalise.
The valley remained ominously silent, except for the sounds of
her voice, the low murmurings of the Defalkan armsmen, and
the tuning notes of the lutar.
Finally, the sorceress cleared her throat a last time and glanced
around the group of those who waited.
Hanfor took a last look at the valley and then turned his eyes to
the mirror as Anna began to sing.
"Mirror, mirror on the ground, 
show me where Dumar's forces can be found…"
Again, the silver mists swirled around the glass briefly, then

cleared to show an aerial view of the valley. The Dumarans,
crimson-uniformed dots against the green of the grass and
vegetation, remained grouped generally the way they had been
the afternoon before. There were two battle groups behind each
of the five hills-a smaller group higher on the back side of each
grassy hill, and a larger group lower and more shielded from
arrows… or sorcery. From what Anna could see from the small
images in the silvered glass, none of the Dumarans were
mounted, and their mounts remained on tielines.
"The nearest group is about two deks there." Jecks pointed to
the northeast. "The most distant more than three deks."
After a moment, Anna sang the couplet to release the image.
She didn't want to hold it any longer than she had to, not with
the spells she knew she'd have to sing shortly and the small
drain from the newest enchanted shield. She swallowed, then
licked her lips.
"They are not in ready battle order," observed Hanfor.
"They do not expect us to attack immediately," said Jecks.
"Even if we attacked," said Hanfor, "they could withdraw
quickly."
"How long will it take them to mount and organize for an
attack?" asked the sorceress.
Hanfor shrugged, squinting at the mirror. "Almost a glass."
"And how long would it take for us to form up if you gave
everyone a break?" asked Anna.

"Half that."
"Is it safe to give our armsmen a rest?"
"If they stay by their mounts." Hanfor nodded.
"Do as you think best," Anna said. Her instincts told her that
the Dumarans weren't about to attack, not anytime soon. Then,
what happened if the Dumarans didn't attack at all? And
where were the damned Sea-Priest and his magic javelins? The
mirror hadn't shown him, and that bothered Anna. 
"They would appreciate such a rest, Lady Anna," said Hanfor.
"So would I." He nodded to Alvar.
"Scouts! Maintain posts. All companies! Stand down for
rations!" bellowed the swarthy captain. "Blades at hand! Blades
at hand!"
"So they can remount and form up immediately," said Jecks.
Anna had figured that out, but she nodded politely as she took
the chunk of bread Jecks offered. She'd need every bit of
nourishment and then some. She turned in the saddle toward
the chief player. "Liende, the players can dismount and stretch
and… whatever. Just keep them close so that they can play
quickly if the Dumarans decide to attack."
"We will be ready." The older woman nodded and turned her
mount.
"Stand down for rations!… Down for rations!…" The
commands echoed along the triple line with which Hanfor had
advanced the Defal-kan force the last dek or so. "Blades at

hand. Ready for remount!"
"Players," called Liende from behind Anna, "you can dismount.
Have your instruments ready before you take water or food."
Anna nodded. Her eyes went again to the fields and grasslands
to the west. The wind sighed across the vegetation, bringing
only the smell of earth and dampness, of grass and a faint
fragrance of something-bean blossoms? Anna didn't know the
odor.
She took the reins from Rickel and walked Farinelli a dozen
yards to a more lush patch of grass. Now what? The two forces
could each sit on high ground until harvest time. The valley
was small enough that her sorcery-if she wanted to exert all the
force she could-might reach half of the Dumarans. Maybe…
She took a wedge of the hard yellow travel cheese from her
provisions bag and gnawed off a corner. All that kept the
cheese from being rank was that it was hard and dry. She
forced herself though the entire wedge, knowing she'd need the
nourishment.
Jecks stood beside her and ate, but far less than Anna, as
always.
After almost a glass, a time of walking and studying the valley,
and sipping from her water bottle, near midday, Anna took out
the lutar once more.
This time the scrying spell revealed that the Dumaran forces
had taken their mounts off the tielines and reformed in loose
ranks, very loose ranks. None had moved from their basic

positions before and behind the hills.
Anna took a deep breath and replaced the lutar and mirror on
Farinelli. Then she walked to the front of the ridgetop,
accompanied by Fhur-gen and Rickel and their omnipresent
battle shields.
Hazy clouds appeared just above the western horizon, and the
wind had freshened, but still carried only the scent of damp
earth and vegetation.
"Lady… what if they do not come?" asked Hanfor.
"Can the men wait longer?" she asked. "I'd like to see if Ehara
will attack."
"Armsmen can always wait," answered the gray veteran, with a
low laugh, "especially if there's a better chance of not getting
killed." He eased his mount away and back toward where
Alvar had reined up.
Anna ate more of the stale bread that tasted more like sawdust
than bread, and left crumbs everywhere.
"I wonder," she said quietly, after eating the last of the loaf
she'd taken from the canvas bag.
"Why do you pursue Lord Ehara?" asked Jecks, standing
beside her as she again surveyed the empty valley.
"Why anything, I suppose. Why do I have to destroy half the
armsmen in two countries to prove I'm serious? Why is it that
someone like Madell would desert his consort and children
because he can't beat her? Why do the Sturinnese want to put

women in chains?" The sorceress sighed. "It seems like so many
people think they can do whatever they're strong enough to
force others to do. But there's always someone out there
stronger or nastier or meaner… or something…"
"Most men would not wish to admit that. Or many women, I
think," answered Jecks.
"So they want their women to be slaves, and they kill hundreds,
destroy a country to keep women down? Dencer went crazy
when he thought Wendella had been even a bit influenced by
me. Sargol sacrificed everything… for nothing."
Jecks did not answer.
"But why?"
"We like to think we are in control of our own destiny, my lady.
You who have been tossed between worlds, you understand
that we often do not have such certainty. Most souls will not
accept such." The white-haired lord shrugged. "Even for me,
watching you, it is difficult."
"It doesn't seem that hard for me to understand," Anna said
slowly.
"You do not understand how much you know that others
cannot see even dimly, my lady. That is why you are regent
and will always be regent." Jecks chuckled.
"Maybe." Anna wasn't convinced, but she didn't want to
discuss it further, not before a battle, but she could feel her
blood close to boiling. So many of the men of Liedwahr

reminded her of the Arabs who'd chased her in London, who'd
thought that any free woman was a whore, or a devil, or both.
She shook her head. Liedwahr was definitely getting to her.
Almost a full glass passed, and still the valley remained empty,
the Dumaran armsmen waiting behind the hills, the Defalkan
force resting on the low ridge.
To the west, the clouds had begun to build, mixed white and
gray, climbing slowly until they blocked the early afternoon
sunlight. The valley took on a grayish cast.
Anna climbed into the saddle and rode slowly northward along
the ridge, with Fhurgen and Rickel shielding her, Jecks beside
her. 
"They will not attack," opined Jecks. "They wish you to attack
and to weaken yourself."
It made sense, but Anna didn't have to like it. "We'll wait a little
longer." Suddenly, within a few moments, she felt tense, as
though something were about to happen. She scanned the
valley, but nothing had changed, not that she could see.
Hurriedly, she dismounted, unfastened the mirror once more,
and fumbled out the lutar. Jecks hurriedly vaulted to the
ground and took the mirror, glancing toward the clouds and
hills.
Anna sang the scrying song quickly.
The image wavered, showing two images, one that seen earlier,
the second of a figure in white easing along a hedgerow
bearing something like a rifle. Rifle?

"Crossbow," Jecks said.
Anna released the spell, glancing downward. The nearest
hedgerow was less than half a dek below the ridge. She
practically threw the lutar into its case and quickly fastened the
mirror back in place before remounting and riding Farinelli
back to where the players sat on the grass.
Liende stood. "Lady Anna."
"You need to warm up quickly," Anna said. "We'll do the long
flame spellsong first-from the front of the ridge, about where
Lord Jecks is. Let me know when you're ready."
Liende inclined her head, and a strand of white-streaked red
hair fell across her forehead. She brushed the lock of hair back
as she straightened. "Yes, Regent."
"Thank you." Anna guided Farinelli the handful of yards back
to where Jecks, Hanfor and her guards waited, all still
surveying the valley and hills for any sign of movement.
Anna's stomach tightened. As she dismounted, her fingers
brushed the round shield in the open-topped case at her knee.
Was it vibrating ever so faintly?
"Hanfor. Have them form up. Something's happening. Get the
archers ready. But wait for my order. That will be the second
spell."
"Yes, Regent!" The arms commander turned to Alvar. "Form up
and stand ready! Archers to the front. Archers to the front."
"Form up and stand ready!" The orders echoed down the line,

and a long sigh seemed to follow.
Fhurgen and Rickel had dismounted and stationed themselves
slightly in front of Anna, one at each shoulder. Each guard
studied the empty valley.
The sounds of the instrumentalists' warm-up tune slipped
westward as Anna began a warm-up vocalise, not that she
expected to need that much. The day was warm enough, not
quite so hot as the previous days, but even more humid, and
the humidity made singing easier than in the drier heat of
summer in Defalk.
Her stomach twisted. Something was wrong. She had to get the
spell off. Quickly. Anna turned. "Ready?" 
"As you wish, lady."
"Now!"
"Mark now!" called Liende.
Anna followed the first notes, then began, using full concert
voice, facing the empty valley-or a valley empty of all but a
Sea-Priest sorcerer.
"Turn to fire, turn to flame 
Those weapons used against my name 
Turn to ash all tools spelled against my face 
and those who seek by force the regency to replace."
A thrumminglike humming filled the air, not from where Anna
stood, but below and to the northwest. The sorceress forced
herself to remain calm, singing as easily and as strongly as she

could.
"Turn to fire, turn to flame…"
A single point of fire flared in the air less than a dozen yards
from Anna, and tumbled into the ankle-high grass below the
ridgetop. Fhurgen and Rickel edged the shields closer together,
but Anna continued to the end of the spell.
Another enchanted arrow-or something… Another Sea-Priest
trick. The enchanted arrow continued to burn, throwing off
sparks, and a heavy gray smoke as the wet grass began to burn.
Anna repressed a shudder, thinking about what would have
happened if the thrower-was it the Sea-Priest?-had gotten
closer. Or would her shield have stopped it? She wasn't sure she
wanted to find out. Her eyes lifted, looking out across the valley.
Fires like falling stars streaked westward, rising and spreading,
then falling like fireworks across the semicircle of hills
half-surrounding the Defalkan forces.
Points of flame geysered skyward from behind hills, here and
there.
A single horn-note sounded from the west, then another. And a
third.
Anna watched the hills. For a moment, nothing occurred. Then
mounted men appeared. The smaller lancer companies-the ones
that had been positioned higher on the hill-rode over the crests
and down and eastward, five separate bodies of riders, clearly
trying to remain separated-less than five hundred in all-nearly

as much as her entire force, and they just represented a fraction
of Ehara's forces.
"We should wait until they reach the end of the hedgerows,"
advised Jecks.
Anna tried to judge. "That seems awfully close."
"You could start the spell earlier, when they cross the last lane,"
Jecks said after a moment.
The sorceress gestured to Hanfor.
"Yes, Lady Anna?" 
"Would it be all right for the archers to fire just after the first
horsemen ride across the lane down there-the last one?"
"Yes. I would do that." He smiled crookedly. "Even if you did
not so order."
"Do it." Anna turned. Several of the players, especially Delvor,
gaped at the unforeseen fireworks. "Chief player!"
"Yes, lady?"
Anna cleared her throat, trying to get rid of a glob of
something, then gestured to Liende. "Once through-the first
arrow song. When I tell you."
Liende nodded. "Stand ready for the first arrow song. At my
mark."
Anna turned and watched the approaching riders. The ground
was damp enough that no dust rose. Fhurgen and Rickel eased

their shields nearer to each other, giving Anna a narrowed field
of vision.
One moment, the riders were a dek away, the next they were
nearing the lane before the end of the hedgerow.
"Now!" Anna commanded.
"Mark!" snapped Liende.
"Archers!" ordered Hanfor, the command echoed by Alvar.
As the music rose, in tune, she sang.
"These arrows shot into the air, 
make each head strike one armsmen there 
with force and speed to kill them all, 
all those who stand against our call!"
"Arrows! Arrows!" came the command from the ridge, and a
thrumming as bowstrings released shafts.
"These arrows shot into the air…"
"Arrows! Second volley!" Another thrumm of bowstrings
followed the first.
When the music ended, Anna took a half-step forward, then
caught herself, watching as lancers tumbled from mounts, as
mounts swerved sideways. Not a single rider remained erect in
a saddle, and most saddles were empty.
A slow sigh issued from the ranks of the Defalkan forces.
"Never… never have I seen that," murmured Jecks.

Anna wished she hadn't. Idiots… Why… ? She shook her head,
absently recalling "The Charge of the Light Brigade." Was that
the job of soldiers and armsmen? To carry out suicidal orders?
She swallowed. She couldn't think about that. There were still a
good two thousand Dumaran armsmen somewhere, and that
meant four to five times what she and Jecks and Hanfor had.
The sorceress wiped the sweat from her forehead, glad she
didn't seem dizzy or light-headed. She glanced toward Hanfor,
but the arms commander had his eyes on the carnage and the
hills beyond the fields and the low hedgerows. 
Were they all so blind? Did Ehara have to spend every last man
to prove he was lord? Anna gritted her teeth. Why were all the
lords in Liedwahr like that? Or most of them? Idiots.
Still seething, Anna glanced toward her chief player. "Liende?
Have them rest for a bit. They'll have to mount up and do that
spell again. Can you and the players manage it?"
"We can, Regent. Especially with a moment to catch our
breath." Liende turned. "Players! You heard the regent. Make
ready to ride. Then drink and get something to eat."
Before Anna turned, she saw the young Delvor nearly stagger
toward his mount. Was she asking too much?
Hanfor rode to within a few yards of Anna. "Regent, most of
their forces remain behind the hills."
Anna looked up. "Can we ride into the center of the hills there?"
She pointed. "And have the archers fire all their arrows at the

same time?"
The graying veteran nodded. "We can. Will that destroy all of
them?"
"I'm strong enough for another spell after that if it doesn't." And
mad enough. If Ehara and the damned Sea-Priest want it this
way, then they'll get it. Women barefoot and pregnant? Women
in chains? Not while I'm regent…
"Will you… ?" Hanfor laughed ruefully and broke off the
question. "We follow where you lead."
They would, but did she have any right to lead them into such
danger? The image of chains slipped through her thoughts, and
her jaw tightened. Who else would take on the Sturinnese?
She forced herself to wait until the players had eaten before she
flicked the reins, and Farinelli started forward.
Half the armsmen rode on each side of the players, Jecks, Anna,
and her guards, down the road between the hills. The road was
at least a half-dek from the top of the hills that flanked it.
"Would that those hills were not so close," murmured Hanfor.
"You chance much."
"They won't attack," Anna said, hoping she were correct, "not
until we're in the center. Can you have the archers ready to fire
their arrows, some in the direction of each hill? Once I start the
first spell?"
"I will ensure that." Hanfor edged his mount away from Anna

and toward Alvar. Shortly, commands flowed along the lines of
armsmen as the Defalkan force neared the center of the low
hills.
Anna licked her lips, shifting her weight in the saddle. Rickel
and Fhurgen rode in front of the sorceress and regent, their
eyes scanning the nearing hillsides. Jecks rode beside Anna, and
Liende and the players close behind.
The wind had gotten stronger once the growing afternoon
clouds had blocked the sun, and with the smell of earth came
also the faint scent of burned meat, and occasionally the
intermittent smell of smoke, grassy smoke. 
Anna glanced around. "Here."
As the armsmen circled to form almost a ring around the
regent, the players dismounted and formed up on the road,
facing westward.
Anna dismounted, cleared her throat, and glanced at Liende.
"We need to hurry."
"Half warm-up! Then the arrow song. The long one."
The sorceress nodded to herself and waited.
"At my mark!" commended Liende as the warm-up ended.
Anna turned to Hanfor. "Have them shoot once I start singing."
"Archers! Arrows! Now!"
"Mark!" ordered the chief player.

Anna sang.
"These arrows shot into the air, 
make each head strike one armsmen there…"
Even before Anna completed the spell, the archers had released
a second volley of shafts, and horsemen began to appear on the
slopes above, galloping out of formation but straight toward
the Defalkan armsmen.
Anna swallowed, ignoring the light-headedness she felt.
Perhaps half of the charging figures in crimson were cut down
by the last of the Defalkan arrows, but more than a thousand
armed lancers poured over the hills toward the Defalkan force.
At least, it looked like that many to Anna.
She looked back at the players. Delvor lay sprawled on the
ground. Liende stood panting, exhausted, almost unable to lift
her horn.
Jecks had his blade out and his mount shadowing Anna.
The sorceress sprinted to Farinelli and yanked out the lutar. 
Shit! Shit! Shit! No matter how you plan, it doesn't quite work…
The only spell she had down cold enough to rattle off that
quickly was the short flame song. She forced a quick and
rough strum/tuning of the lutar, and tried to match the pitch
she wanted before she sang.
"Armsmen wrong, armsmen strong, 
turn to flame with this song…"

She forced the image of Dumaran figures into the spell, and she
had to sing the entire spell twice before fires crackled out of the
sky, before the awful whips of fire raked the hillside.
Then, fires flared in front of her own eyes, and she couldn't even
see Farinelli or Jecks. She tried to sit down, tried to cradle the
lutar… half hoping she had managed that before blackness
and flames lapped over her like tides of ice, tides of fire.
… ice and fire, fire and ice, and will the world end twice…
Whips of fire flayed men, except they were boys, boys like
Mario, boys like Birke and Skent… just boys… 
Horses screamed as flames burst from the saddles on their
backs and a hot fire rain fell on ashen valleys and low hills, hills
and valleys that had been green, oh so green…
… fire and ice… ice and fire… mist and flame…
Some time later, when the sky was dark, Anna found herself
wrapped in a blanket, sweating, on her cot. Jecks sat on a stool,
as if he had been waiting.
Her head ached, and her stomach twisted. She struggled into a
sitting position. Large unseen hammers pounded at her skull,
and knives slashed at her eyes. She closed them. That didn't
help. She opened them. They still hurt.
"How fare you, my lady?"
"Like shit," she rasped. "As usual, for this sort of thing."
The white-haired lord extended a bottle.

She sipped the warm wine, once, and swallowed. Then she took
another longer swallow. "Maybe… that will help."
"Your players are exhausted. The armsmen do not look this
way." Jecks' voice was low and bleak.
"What happened?" Did they capture us? Where are the guards,
then?
"Once again, you have utterly destroyed an enemy," Jecks said
quietly.
"I… didn't plan it that way. They didn't give me much choice."
"You gave them less, lady." Jecks did not meet her eyes.
"Wait a moment," Anna snapped, sitting up and letting the
blankets fall away. "Here we go again. Ehara sends golds and
tries to grab some of Defalk. He sends lancers, and he won't
admit it. He won't pledge to keep his hands off, and everyone
sits around and says, 'Sorry, Lady Anna, you just don't have
the armsmen to stop him.' So I try to make everyone happy
and build a dam to suggest I have the power to stop Ehara.
"Now it's all my fault, and you're saying that I gave them no
choices? I gave them plenty of choices. They just weren't 
honorable choices. That's the problem with your great and
'honorable' Liedwahr, my dear Lord Jecks. If it doesn't involve
lots of bloody killing, with dull swords and men on big horses,
it's not honorable." Anna laughed harshly, and jabbed a hand
at Jecks as he started to open his mouth. "No. You have no
right to judge me. Don't you dare to judge me. Every time I try
to do something, it's going to offend the Thirty-three. You sit

there and look away. Don't upset the lady Anna. She might do
something horrible. Don't get the sorceress-woman angry.
Well, I am angry! I'm pissed! Do you think I wanted to kill all
those men? Do you think I like the smell of blood and burned
flesh? You say I gave them no choices. I've given everyone a lot
of choices. All my life. And you men, all of you, give me none.
'Do it our way. Do it the honorable way. You can't do it that
way, Anna. That would displease someone. That would upset
someone.' What about me? I've saved your grandson's ass, and
your precious lords' asses, and it's never enough… Everyone
looks sideways at me, like I'm going to… explode… Well… you
can see it. I'm exploding. I am the unreasonable madwoman.
I'm the screaming, wild bitch-sorceress! That's what everyone
wants… to learn that I'm unreasonable. That I don't
understand. Well… I don't. I don't understand why… why…" 
Anna found herself gasping, her head spinning, suddenly
aware that the entire camp was silent. So silent that no one
moved. She took one deep breath, and then another.
Jecks' eyes were on the ground.
Anna took the bottle he had set on the damp clay and
swallowed deeply. Maybe she could drink enough that she
could sleep. Whatever she said didn't matter. No one really
listened. No one wanted to hear. She took another swallow.
Lord, she was tired. She sat, shaking from rage and exhaustion,
on the edge of her cot, her head throbbing, her eyes seeing dark
double images… wondering what had set her off.
What choice had she had? She couldn't use spells that didn't

kill- they were Darksong. Are you any better than any man
aroused with bloodlust? She'd gotten angry at the enchanted
arrows or javelins or whatever, so angry she really hadn't
thought.
Was Jecks right? That force was the only answer? Or that she
had given them no choice? But had they given her any, really?
Or was that just rationalization? But no one had ever given her
any real choices, just choices that looked like they were real.
She sat in the twilight and looked through the open tent flaps at
the embers of the fire. Her head throbbed still, and her eyes
burned, and double hot and cold images danced before them.
Jecks sat on the stool, equally silent, eyes still averted.
Inside, Anna continued to seethe. Don't judge me… You have no
right to judge me…
Outside, only the faintest of murmurs filled the damp night.
Finally, Anna reached for the blankets, knowing she would
collapse if she did not lie down again, wondering if she had
pushed Jecks too hard… wondering…
107
THE warm rain, slightly heavier than a mist, fell around the
Defalkan riders as they continued westward out of the valley,
out of yet another valley of dissonance, chaos, fire, and death.
Anna took a breath of damp air. The rain had deadened the
odor of burned meat and death. She glanced ahead at the
churned hoofprints in the mud of road, far less dense, far fewer

than when Ehara had fled the Vale of Cuetayl. 
Hanfor rode next to her while Jecks rode behind, not
surprisingly, since Jecks had not spoken to her since the night
before, and she wasn't about to speak to him.
"On to Dumaria," she murmured, more to herself than to Jecks
or Hanfor.
The sorceress glanced over her shoulder past Lejun and Rickel
to where Liende rode before the players, all looking as tired and
bedraggled as Anna felt.
So much for your ideas of not having Liende play for battles… so
much for so many ideas. She took a slow deep breath. You've got
to relax some. Then she shrugged her shoulders and bent her
head forward, trying to stretch out the tightness.
"We will need to cross the river somewhere," Hanfor said, "to
reach Dumaria."
You don't think I know that? Anna bit back her first retort, then
swallowed before speaking. "One way or another, we'll
manage. We always do." Anna supposed she could use her
marvelous sorcery to build a bridge-or find a ford. She felt like
laughing, but held back the feeling, knowing it was close to
hysteria. "Ehara has to find the ford or bridge he used."
"If he does not," added Alvar, riding slightly ahead of Anna,
"then he must face us again, and now our forces outnumber
his."
"He will find a ford," predicted Hanfor, wiping away the

rainwater collecting on his brow.
Anna glanced down. The lower part of her trousers and her
boots, where not protected by the leather of the stirrup guards,
were mud-splattered once more. The sky seemed to lighten,
and she hoped that meant the rain was passing. Then, the way
things were going, it could mean a lightening before a heavier
rainfall.
Her eyes went to the road ahead, the one taken by Ehara. She
had defeated his forces twice. Close to five thousand Dumarans
were dead. The two major cities were flood-ravaged wrecks…
and she still had to keep pursuing and fighting.
Won't it ever end? Do I have to destroy every last chauvinist in
power on the fucking planet? And if I do that, will I turn every
one of their sons into a fanatic? But if I stop now… nothing's
resolved… nothing at all, for all the deaths…
Was that how all conquerors felt, rationalizing killing with
more killing?
She still felt like yelling at Jecks-or breaking down and sobbing.
Neither would help. Instead, she took another deep breath and
looked at the muddy road ahead.
108
WEI, NORDWEI
ASHTAAR'S fingers run over the oval of black agate briefly
before she steeples her fingers on the polished surface of the
desk and waits for Gretslen to seat herself in the

straight-backed ebony chair that has replaced the older chair.
The blonde seer sits, clears her throat gently, then begins. "My
congratulations on your selection to the Council."
"Thank you, Gretslen. The sorceress?"
"The sorceress has destroyed the last of the lancers of Sturinn,
and all save one of the Sea-Priest sorcerers. She has chased
Ehara out of the northeast of Dumar. Ehara has less than
twentyscore armsmen from more than ten times that number."
"They are dead? Or wounded? Or deserters?"
"All of them are dead. Kendr and I could not discern any
deserters through the reflecting pools. There could be a very
small number."
"You are cautious. Good. Where is the sorceress now?"
"On the eastern bank of the Falche, north of Dumaria. She
cannot cross the Falche without risking her forces. The rains
have swollen it mightily, and her earlier sorceries ripped away
the bridges."
"Gretslen?" asks Ashtaar deliberately. "Why do you dislike the
sorceress so much that you blind yourself to what she can and
cannot do?"
"Mightiness?"
"You heard me. Why do you hate her so much? Because you
think you could do so well in her boots?" Ashtaar laughs, and
the laugh is hard and cruel. "You would have failed long before

now. You are neither ruthless enough, nor compassionate
enough."
Gretslen does not respond.
"Since you will not ask, I will tell you." The spymistress's fingers
caress the black agate oval again. "She will do what must be
done, because she has suffered enough, and knows the
consequences if she does not. She suffers because she knows too
well how hard her actions fall, and she will struggle to balance
them, and she will fail. Yet she will struggle well enough that
most of the people she rules will forgive her and follow her.
Those who do not…" Ashtaar shrugs. "They will essay her
destruction, and perhaps one will succeed. You have great
ability, and you believe that force always succeeds. It does, but
not all force is obvious."
She smiles. "Thank you. You may depart. Please keep me
informed." 
"Thank you, Mightiness. We will do our best." Gretslen's voice
is even, and she rises, and bows, then turns and walks
gracefully to the door.
109
DUMARIA, DUMAR
THE Sea-Marshal glances up from the drums as Ehara steps
into the small room off the armory. Heavy wrappings cover his
arms, and his dark hair is short and frizzled. One of the burns
on jerRestin's cheeks oozes a reddish fluid.

"Yet more sorcery?"
"What else would you suggest, Lord Ehara? My own iron
quarrels burst into flame. Iron-flaming-before I could even
approach the bitch. Yet she used no sorcery to seek me."
"She is braver than most lords." Ehara's voice holds a touch of
amusement. "She rode into a trap, and turned it on us."
"You and your men did not move quickly enough."
"Neither did you, Sea-Priest, but you escaped. Most of my men
did not, and another score who did drowned in trying to cross
the Falche."
"It took all my sorcery to hold off the sorceress's fires." JerRestin
looks at his arms. "I was not entirely successful even so. I did
lower the waters at the ford."
"Yes. Not enough."
"Enough to leave the sorceress on the eastern side. She will not
risk the river with such a small body of armsmen."
"Her twenty-fivescore no longer look so insignificant, and I am
confident she will find her way across, if she has not already."
Ehara looks pointedly at the drums. "You labor at more
sorcery?"
"We have lost more than forty fine ships to the first attack of
the sorceress. I have lost over three thousand of the best lancers,
dying in agony. A handful of us remain, and I can never return
to Sturinn. Not with such disgrace. I can but atone."

Ehara's heavy eyebrows lift.
"The sorceress will die. She has power, but not cunning. She
must live to succeed. I must die to succeed."
"Then you had best die soon, and well, Sea-Marshal, for my
armsmen are few and thin." Ehara's booming laugh rings
hollow. "She has foiled you twice. What will be different a third
time?" 
"She has used her glasses before attacks. This time, I will be
along the line of march, well away from any battle site, in the
most innocent of settings. You will be farther westward…"
"I should retreat… leave Dumaria defenseless, and open to
those barbarians of the north?"
"She will not sack a defenseless city. She has never done that.
She will pursue you-and me."
"My Siobion? My heirs?"
"Leave them. She has yet to kill an heir."
Ehara frowns. "I should listen to a man who is already dead?"
"You can listen or not." The Sea-Marshal binds the last of the
drums into the framework. His lips are tight together between
words, as though each movement, each word, is agony. "You
cannot defeat Defalk while she lives. After I die, one way or the
other, you are no worse off."
"That is the first true statement from you since you came to
Dumar." Ehara's lips twist.

"Watch how you call upon truth, Lord Ehara. The harmonies
have a way with those who would make truth their
handmaiden." The Sea-Marshal's eyes glitter. "I, above all, have
learned that. So will the sorceress."
110
ANNA glanced up through the rain that continued to fall, and
then down at the swollen Falche, as it swirled around and over
the piles of rock and masonry that had once been bridge
abutments and piers. Despite her jacket, and her sodden felt
hat, she was soaked through, and the wind had turned cooler, if
not cool enough to chill her- yet.
Downhill from where she sat on the big gelding, Hanfor
received another scouting report. Beside her on his mount sat
Jecks, stolid and silent in the late-afternoon damp, silent as he
had been since the slaughter in the hills.
Anna turned in the saddle and glanced at the white-haired lord,
then turned away. "Lady Anna?" She turned back. "Yes."
"Perhaps I should return to Falcor… if you find my presence so
distasteful."
"I don't find your presence distasteful. I'm just tired of being
judged when I'm the only one doing anything and everyone
else is coming up with reasons not to do things."
"I did not presume-"
"Lord Jecks… you did presume, and you have presumed all
along. Not so much as the other lords, but you have judged,

and I hate being judged that way." Anna met his eyes. "I
shouldn't have yelled at you, and I'm sorry I did. But I was
tired." She paused. "I know you were tired, too. Let's leave it at
that. We still have a lot to do."
"As you wish."
I don't wish. I just wish you'd stop silently judging me.
Hanfor finished listening to the scout, then turned his mount
and rode back up the road to Anna.
"The scouts can find no bridge, not within fifteen deks north or
south of Dumaria," reported Hanfor. "The river is too high to
ford."
You don't think I see that? "Then we'll have to make a bridge,"
Anna declared.
Jecks glanced at her through the light rain.
"We're going to rest, and eat, and then we're going to build a
bridge. I'm not crazy, my dear Lord Jecks." Anna gestured
downhill at the swirling gray-blue water of the Falche where it
lapped at the end of the road and the ruins of the old bridge.
"We're going to lose armsmen if we have to ford that." And my
swimming isn't much better than a dog-paddle for survival.
"We could wait," suggested Hanfor.
"For what? Rain lasts forever here. Besides, then we'll have to
chase Ehara farther. I want to get this mess over. Lord-the
harmonies only know what problems have happened in

Defalk." And whose fault is that, with your chasing Ehara?
Anna ignored the self-recrimination, wiped water off the back
of her neck, and turned Farinelli back eastward until she
covered the dozen or so yards separating her from the players.
Fhurgen, Rickel, and Jecks followed.
Liende inclined her bare head as the regent reined up.
"Liende? Do the players recall the building song, the one we
used for the bridge at Cheor?"
"Once we have learned a spell, Lady Anna, we can always
recall it." Liende paused. "But… with the rain…"
"We have one tent-mine. You'll have to huddle together, but I
trust it can be done."
Liende nodded. "With cover, we can play."
"Good." Anna turned in the saddle. "Fhurgen, we need to set up
my tent beside the road, with the front facing where the bridge
was."
"Yes, Lady Anna," answered the bass-voiced and dark-bearded
guard. 
"It's not for me. The players need shelter so that we can sing a
spell to build a bridge. That might get us out of this rain."
"Yes, lady." The guard grinned. Beside him, so did Lejun.
Behind them, Kerhor, bare-headed with black hair plastered
against his skull, nodded.
"You would spend sorcery on Dumar?" asked Jecks slowly,

evenly.
"Why not? We need the bridge, and I did destroy the one that
was here." Anna laughed, holding it to a chuckle, rather than
yielding to the hysterical shriek she felt like loosing. "I said
Liedwahr needed better bridges."
"You did say such," Jecks admitted.
"I would have liked to do more in Defalk, but things have a
way of getting out of hand." Like life… and would you stop
questioning everything I do that's different?
"They do, my lady."
Anna nodded, then watched as Fhurgen and Rickel quickly
began to erect the tent, whose once-white panels now appeared
tan-and-pink, depending on which dust from where had
worked its way into the fabric. The tan-and-pink turned dark
where the rain streaked the silk.
Beside her, Jecks watched impassively, his eyes straying toward
Anna occasionally.
Once the panels were in place, the players crowded under the
silk and began to extract instruments and true, bumping into
each other with almost every movement. Yet no one
complained.
Was that because she watched? Or because musicians on Erde
were less spoiled than the students of earth?
Fhurgen found another pole and strapped the front flaps to it,

creating another oasis free of rain. He gestured, and Anna
dismounted.
As the players tuned in the crowded confines of the tent, water
dribbling off the silk, Anna stood under the extended front flap
and sang the melody, using nonsense syllables, but thinking
the words.
As the players completed their warm-up, she cleared her throat
gently, eyes on the roiling water at the base of the hill where the
road vanished under the muddy torrent. On the far side a
causeway began in midair and extended across flooded fields to
a gap in the bluff-the same bluff that, some twenty deks south,
bordered the upper part of the city of Dumaria.
"We stand ready, Regent," offered Liende.
"Anytime," Anna answered.
"On my mark...Mark!"
Anna used full concert voice, helped by the humidity of the
gentle rain, letting the words flow forth.
"… replicate the blocks and stones. 
Place them in their proper zones… 
Set them firm, and set them square…"
The ground on which she stood shifted as she completed the
first verse. Strophic spell, the thought came again, and she
wondered if she'd always think of versed spells that way. Then,
she couldn't afford the luxury of through-composed spells, with
no repetitions of the melody throughout the entire song. 

The gray clouds darkened as she wound up the second verse,
and the rain began to fall even more heavily. A white-glared
bolt of lightning flashed across the blackened western sky, and
the very hillside shifted once more, with rumbling from the
ground to match the rumbling from the sky. Dust puffed into
the rain-momentarily, before it was dampened out of existence.
Another lightning flash seared across the heavens, revealing a
shimmering mist that thickened, then cloaked the river where
the old bridge had stood. The sorceress, miniature flares
exploding across her field of vision, staggered. A chord, then
two paired chords, strummed on that unseen gigantic harp,
shivered the silver fog covering the Falche, a fog of sorcery,
steam, and rock dust.
The river boiled, becoming even more turbulent, and the fog
seeped up from the ground where the rain around the tent
struck puddles or damp ground. Anna's eyes burned, although
the light flares before her were subsiding. Because you did the
spell in the rain… ? An archway of gray-and-red stone
emerged from the heavy gray fog that the roiling waters of the
Falche carried downstream in patches.
Anna staggered and grabbed for one of the poles holding up
the flap, and Jecks caught her other arm, supporting her.
"You will need that tent on the other side. And some food and
drink." His voice was slightly hoarse.
"Do we have any?" Anna tried to grit her teeth, tried to ignore
the flashes of light before her eyes.

"Enough. No one will gainsay your food or rest when you have
ensured none die in crossing the river."
And who decided they needed to cross the river? "I suppose not."
Anna felt embarrassed that she had to lean on Jecks, but her
legs were like water. "I suppose not. Let's get that tent down
and get over the river."
Jecks practically lifted her into the saddle.
"Thank you."
"Thank you, my lady. I did not relish swimming that river or
waiting in the rain." He flashed a smile, and Anna wondered,
again, why things seemed so possible with the handsome lord
at times, and so impossible at others.
She pushed away the judgments and urged Farinelli downhill
and toward the stone bridge-another structure that would
doubtless outlive her, and her name.
Jecks rode beside her, and she was glad he did.
111
Anna wiped her forehead. The hot midmorning summer sun
searing through a clear sky had already turned the rains of the
previous days into humidity resembling that in a steambath.
"This is worse than summer in Defalk with no rain."
Absently, she wondered if all went well in Defalk. How could
she know, now that the flow of scrolls from Menares and
Dythya had stopped? She scarcely had enough energy for the

business at hand, let alone scrying Falcor and elsewhere in
Defalk for who knew what.
"It's hot," she said, realizing she was repeating herself.
"Even my old bones find it hot," admitted Jecks.
"Your bones aren't that old," said Anna. "Not that much older
than mine."
"Yours look to be much younger, much younger," the
white-haired lord pointed out.
"It's what's inside that counts." Anna reached for her water
bottle again. The water helped some, but not so much as it had
in the drier heat of the Sudbergs.
The road toward Dumaria was empty except for Anna's
force-and the tracks that showed horses, carts, people fleeing
the terrible sorceress of Defalk. Then, every road in Dumar had
been empty, the same way. Anna wanted to scream-again.
The few farming cots visible from the road were silent, shutters
tight.
Anna wondered if poor souls hunkered in fright inside, stifling
in the heat. She also wondered what tales had been told about
her. Not even a stray dog was in evidence.
Ahead in the distance along the flat road were a pair of white
marbled gates, each gate nearly ten yards high. The gates
connected to no walls, no ditches, no earthworks. Behind the
gates, the road angled to the right and wound up a low slope.
On the slope were trees and at least a few large dwellings. On

the top of the hill was a line of trees bearing leaves of intense
green, and from behind the trees rose the white marbled palace
that Anna had scried often enough in seeking Lord Ehara.
"Impressive," she murmured.
"Lord Ehara and his forbearers were not known to stint on their
comforts," said Hanfor. "But Dumar is a richer land than
Defalk, if smaller. The scouts have found no sign of armsmen,
and the roads to the city are deserted."
"Not quite," said Jecks. "There's someone waiting up there."
Anna squinted in the bright light, following Jecks' gesture.
Three mounted figures under pale blue banners waited on the
road, several hundred yards ahead, and a half dek outside the
north gates to Dumaria.
"Break out the ensign," ordered Hanfor. "All guards to the fore!
Blades at the ready!"
Anna twisted in the saddle. "Players stand ready." She eased
her lutar out of its case, and held it one handed, across her
thighs as she rode south toward Dumar.
"They seem unarmed," Jecks observed, "and no one is near."
The Defalkan force rode slowly, easing to a stop a good fifty
yards from the trio.
"Lady Anna, Sorceress and Regent of Defalk. Know that we
supplicate you." The words came from the rider on the right, a
slender man with a pencil-thin mustache and equally-wispy

ginger hair. "Know that we understand that nothing can stand
before you should you decide to destroy Dumaria for its error
and wickedness in attacking your lands…"
"Who are you," asked Hanfor brusquely, "to make such an
offer?"
"We are of the merchants' council. All the lords have departed,
fearing your wrath. We, alas, dare not depart. Be merciful, we
beg of you. The city lies open to you." The ginger-haired man
bowed in the saddle.
"We will see." Anna's voice was as cold as the day was hot and
steamy. "Dumar brought this upon itself by attempting to
create rebellion in Defalk."
"We had nothing to do with that, lady and sorceress, nothing at
all."
"We'll see," Anna repeated, rather than say what was on her
mind. No one ever had anything to do with anything when
things went wrong. It was never the students' fault that they
didn't study. It was never the lords' fault that they plotted. It
was never the merchants' fault that they profited from war.
"Be merciful, we beg," echoed the merchant on the left, a figure
with greasy black hair and oily skin.
"What of Lord Ehara?" asked Jecks.
"He and his armsmen have fled along the Envar River road."
The squat man in the middle, whose face was wreathed in
sweat, swallowed. "He said that you would spare the

defenseless."
"As long as they swear allegiance to Defalk and the Regency,"
said Anna. "As long as they do not attack me or my armsmen."
All three men's heads bobbed. "That will not happen, lady and
sorceress. All have seen your might."
It wouldn't happen immediately, they meant. Anna didn't
intend for it to happen ever-or not for a long time.
"We will lead you to the palace. It, too, stands open to you."
"In a moment," Anna said. "In a moment." She dismounted and
took out the mirror and lutar-letting Jecks help her.
Then she quickly sang the danger spell, accompanying herself
with the lutar.
"Show from Dumar, danger to fear, 
All the threats to me bright and clear…"
The mirror showed a single image, that of the Sea-Priest in
white, riding beside Lord Ehara, with the flat silver of a river to
their left. 
Anna sang the release couplet.
"Still, you must take care," cautioned Jecks.
"Hanfor?" asked Anna.
"I would that one company precede you and two follow
immediately. Put the merchants in the middle, but ahead of
you with guards behind them."

"Set it up the way you think is best." Anna offered a quick
smile.
"Green company! To the fore! Arms ready!"
The three merchants winced nearly simultaneously as the
armsmen rode around them and formed up. They winced
again to find themselves surrounded by guards.
The column passed through the open gates.
Like the road leading into Dumaria, the winding avenue that
climbed to the north side of the palace past large and
impressive homes was also empty. Anna looked across a small
parklike space, past a fountain where water still jetted from a
spray of marble flowers into a scallop-shaped pond. Around the
pond was a garden, where small yellow flowers alternated with
larger purple blooms. A faint scent of something like lavender
reached Anna with a vagrant breeze that died as quickly as it
had risen.
The iron gates, bearing some heraldic symbol, were closed, as
were those of the houses above and below. Not a soul appeared
on any of the well-trimmed grounds.
"Those with coins have left," said Alvar from where he rode in
front of Anna.
"With their coins," muttered Rickel.
"And everything else," murmured Fhurgen beneath his breath.
Anna silently agreed, but studied the road, ready to use the
lutar at any provocation.

When the road leveled out on the hilltop, the houses ended, and
another arched iron gate straddled the road another hundred
yards south. The gate was open.
"That is the palace. It is yours. Lady Siobion stands ready to
offer every courtesy," babbled the squat Dumaran. "Anything
you desire… just spare what remains of Dumaria, we beg of
you."
"It could not hurt to spare the city," said Hanfor with a wry
smile. "If it acknowledges you as sovereign."
Anna understood. There was nothing to be gained now by
sacking Ehara's city, or what was left of it, except angering the
common people. Ehara had certainly taken the majority of
armsmen, and probably all the gold he could gather.
She knew she was filthy, tired, hungry, and wanted the
damned war to be over, and it didn't look like it ever would
end. First, she'd have to ensure the capital was somehow loyal,
and then chase down Ehara, and if they survived that, pacify,
through visiting and using the mirror to seek out hostile
armsmen, the big port of Narial, and who knew how many
other towns. 
Then… maybe they could head home. Maybe… if she could set
up some halfway workable and friendly government in Dumar
so that she didn't have to repeat the current mess in five or ten
years.
"Sorceress?" prompted Jecks.
"The palace had better be ready for our forces, and with plenty

of food."
"All awaits you… everything…"
Anna wanted to shake her head again as they rode through
what had to be the royal park, with trimmed topiary
displaying a range of game animals, a low boxwood hedge
maze, and two marble fountains. To the south, ahead of them,
rose the white building she had seen a time or more in her
scrying spells.
Anna gestured to Hanfor and reined up on the well-fitted paved
road less than two hundred yards from the palace-or one of its
buildings.
"Companies… halt!" Hanfor stood in his stirrups and raised his
voice.
Anna eased Farinelli back toward the players. "Liende… we
need one spell before you and the players eat. The
armsmen-seeking spell."
"Here, lady?"
"I'm being cautious. I want no treachery within the palace."
Anna smiled grimly, and Liende nodded.
"After we eat, we'll repeat the process, say-a half-dozen
times-until I'm convinced we've located every remaining
armsman in Dumaria."
"Yes, Regent."
"Some will die rather then pledge to you," murmured Jecks.

"A lot fewer than if we took the city with fire," Anna answered.
She waited as the players dismounted and began to tune. After
going over the seeking spell a dozen times in her mind, she
finally dismounted and stepped before the players.
"Now, after this spell, you can eat and rest for a time. For a
glass or so. Then we'll have to go to work again."
Anna faced the palace, waiting for Liende's signal.
"Mark!"
Without preamble, the sorceress sang.
"Find, find, any armsman close to here, 
who bears his weapons hard and near…"
After she finished Anna watched the glass, as did Hanfor, as it
split into sections.
"Guards in the palace." Hanfor nodded. "And some in a
barracks." He looked up. "Purple Company… search the
palace. Harm none, save those who lift arms against you."
Anna eased Farinelli back toward the players.
"Green Company. Search the grounds," continued Hanfor.
"There is a guard barracks somewhere near." 
"We'll have to wait. I know you're all tired," Anna told Liende,
"but I want no treachery within the palace." Anna smiled
grimly, and Liende nodded.
"Yes, Regent." Liende's tone was formal, not quite resigned.

"Now, after we get settled and eat, you can rest for a time.
Later, we'll have to go to work again."
Anna faced the palace, hands on lutar, watching as her forces
swarmed across the grounds and the palace, waiting for
Hanfor's signal.
She could see the merchants squirming on their mounts, and
she wondered what she could do about them-or if she had to.
Jecks, his blade out, followed her eyes. "You do not trust them."
"No."
"Nor I, but they will acknowledge you, so long as they fear
you."
Anna was afraid that was the way it would always be. She sat
on Farinelli, watching, watching others watch her.
Lord, she was tired, and the day was far from over, far from
it… far, far from it.
112
MUST you do this, lady?" asked Alvar, as Anna led Farinelli
out of the palace stable into another sunlit, hot, and humid
morning. "How else do I ensure that we hold Dumaria?" asked
Anna.
"The armsmen have fled," suggested Alvar.
"No," added Jecks, leading his own mount out behind Anna.
"Some have said that they fled. The mirror shows no danger

now, but what after we pursue Lord Ehara?"
Anna wanted to nod. No matter what anyone said, she would
have to leave some force at the palace, and that meant there
couldn't be any organized opposition remaining in Dumar. Out
in the courtyard, in the long early-morning shadow cast by the
stable, she handed Farinelli's reins to Kerhor. The sharp-faced,
dark-haired guard bowed slightly.
An unfamiliar birdcall wafted on the slight breeze from the
palace park that lay to the north of the stable courtyard.
The players stood outside, their mounts held by some of the
armsmen, their instruments ready.
Anna cleared her throat, though she'd already warmed up in
her chambers, then looked at the players. "Today is going to be
long, and possibly dangerous. I hope not. What we need to do
is to seek out any armsmen left in Dumaria, and either obtain
their allegiance to the Regency or kill them." She could see the
lank-haired Delvor wince at her last words. "It's very simple.
The Dumarans have to know that I can find anyone, and that
no one bearing arms against Defalk will survive." Of course, you
still can't find that sorcerer in eastern Defalk… 
Beside her, Jecks laid out the scrying mirror on the stones of the
courtyard.
She pushed away the errant thought. "We probably won't find
every single deserter or armsman who hides, but we must
create the impression that we can. That's what we've already
done in places like Finduma and Hrissar." She smiled and

paused. "We didn't find too many, but that shouldn't be a
problem in Dumaria."
A low laugh echoed from the armsmen reined up and waiting.
Anna nodded to Liende. "Any time, chief player."
"The seeking song… on my mark… Mark!" Liende dropped
her hand, and lifted her horn, and the clarinet-like woodwind
melded with the falk horn and the strings.
Anna's voice, more rested, rose above the players.
"Find, find, any Dumaran close to here, 
any armsman bearing weapons hard and near…"
Again, the mirror showed three men in gray-not
crimson-gathered around a table. One looked over his shoulder,
as if to a door.
Alvar studied the image, and Anna hoped his memory was
good. Hanfor's sketching might have been better, but the arms
commander was wrestling with other problems-such as how to
divide their forces, and what was needed to keep a handle on
Dumaria.
Alvar nodded, as did Jecks.
"Again," Anna said. This time she used the second verse of the
spell.
"Show the armsman in that exact place 
from outside from where we saw his face 
show the place both clear and bright, 

so we may find it in the light…"
The image in the mirror sparkled up from where it lay on the
stones. The building that appeared in the glass seemed to slant,
as if it had been pushed somehow sideways, and debris was
piled against part of the front.
Flood damage, Anna suspected.
A signboard showing a black ram lay propped against the wall
beside the open front door.
After a moment, Anna sang the release couplet, and then
mounted Farinelli.
"Need you go?" asked Alvar.
"If I am not seen…" Anna shrugged. Again, she couldn't quite
explain it, but all she had, really, was the threat of force, and
the impression of invincibility-and hiding in the palace wasn't
going to bolster that impression. Besides, the mirror spells
earlier hadn't shown any immediate danger. That could mean
there was so much that sorcery couldn't detect it, or that
Dumaria was momentarily cowed. 
Either way, she had to do something-quickly.
"We will wait while you find the way to the Black Ram." Anna
glanced down at Jecks, wearing what she thought of as battle
leathers, then at Alvar. "I'd bet it's close to the bottom of the hill
the palace sits on and a bit toward the river."
"I would not wager against that." Alvar smiled and swung up
into his saddle.

Jecks swept up the scrying glass and efficiently packed it back
in its leathers, then began to strap it in the harness behind
Anna's saddle. Farinelli sidestepped slightly.
"Easy… easy…" Anna glanced out to toward the east. "We'll
want to surround the place. I'd rather not have to turn anyone
into flame." But you will if you have to… and you know you'll
need an example or two. She pursed her lips momentarily,
knowing, given human nature, and the macho nature of the
men of Liedwahr, that she wouldn't have to create the example. 
Which is worse… their nature or your willingness to use it…?
As Alvar led off the company of armsmen, standing beside his
mount, Jecks cleared his throat.
Anna turned in the saddle, realizing that she and Jecks were
alone, alone in a circle of players and mounts that had given
them a wide berth.
"You do not look forward to this day." The older lord mounted.
"As you did not look forward to the last battle."
"No. But we have to root out anything that may cause trouble
for Alvar. We have to leave some armsmen, but I don't want to
leave many."
"Nor I." Jecks smiled. "Yet all you need armsmen for is to
protect you. There will be no true battles, no blades against
blades, shafts against shafts."
"You think using sorcery is wrong?"
"Once I might have thought so." The white-haired lord

shrugged, then patted the shoulder of his mount. "Those who
love the excitement and the smell of death and blood… they
will still claim a kingdom won by sorcery will not last…
because blood anchors a conquest."
"There has been enough blood to anchor this." More than enough
…
"They will claim that sorcery is ease, as though sweeping stones
from a Vorkoffe board." Jecks added quickly. "I have seen
otherwise, my lady, and you should know that."
"Ease…" Anna wanted to laugh. How many weeks had she
been prostrated? How many times had others tried to use
sorcery against her? How many thousands had died?… Was
there something about people that found weapons despicable if
they didn't cause equal devastation and risk to both sides?
Well… her own world hadn't exactly liked nuclear weapons… 
"Let's see… once a battle's over, and the victor goes home, the
dead remain. Once my sorcery's over, and we return to Defalk,
the dead remain. Is there any difference?" Except that men who
have strong arms and blades think that sorcery is unfair… that
women should do the fair thing and fight with blades… and give
away how much in size and strength and muscle mass? "No… a
spellsong war is as fair as any other kind of war."
A frown crossed Jecks' face before he nodded. "You would say
no war is fair."
"No war I've heard of."
Alvar rode into the courtyard, a wry smile on his face. "The

Black Ram lies less than half a dek below us."
Anna nodded toward Liende, then flicked the reins. She and
Jecks rode almost shoulder to shoulder, behind Rickel and
Fhurgen. Her guards did carry the shields, and every one of her
personal guard rode with blades unsheathed as they descended
the cobblestone road into Dumaria.
Below the hill the road narrowed, but ran straight eastward
toward the Falche River. Farther ahead, where the street
seemed to narrow in the distance, she could see whole buildings
seemingly slumped into piles.
The road seemed empty, windows shuttered, but she wondered
how recently the shutters had been closed. A rank odor, of
mud, and sewage, and worse, hung over the town. Anna knew
who had caused that-or whose flood.
The Black Ram stood on a corner, the front door closed, the
shutters on the timbered second-story windows closed.
"The Green Company is behind the inn," Alvar said quietly.
"Your wishes, Regent?"
"I know it will be dangerous… but I'd like the three armsmen
brought out."
"It must be done." Alvar turned.
Anna watched as the stocky overcaptain drew aside a group of
armsmen, speaking quietly and gesturing toward the inn.
Shortly, a dozen archers had their bows strung and arrows
ready to nock.

Then a burly armsman stepped up to the barred door of the inn
and pounded on the door. "Open… in the name of the regent
and sorceress."
The door remained closed. Anna glanced up the street in the
direction of the palace, but the street remained empty.
"Open… in the name of the regent and sorceress." The burly
armsman lifted his arm to hammer on the door a second time,
when the door opened, and a bearded man peered out. He
glanced at the ranks of armsmen, then shrugged, as if to cast
himself to his fate.
"Stand aside. We seek three fleeing armsmen."
"Sers… there be none… I know."
"They were here," said Jecks.
Anna could sense the whispers from the inn and from the
buildings around. She felt exposed, and she noted that Fhurgen
had moved slightly back, setting the shield as to protect her
from behind. 
"The sorceress… at the Black Ram?"
"… looks more like a young beardless lord…"
"… hard… her face be…"
Anna nodded at Alvar. "Send armsmen after them."
A dozen men dismounted at signal from the overcaptain,
blades drawn, stepping past the innkeeper and into the

building.
Anna waited as the muted sounds of boots-and yells-sifted onto
the street. Perspiration oozed down her neck.
Rickel shifted the heavy shield. Jecks checked his bare blade yet
again.
Abruptly, two men in nondescript leathers walked
out-dejectedly, heads down. Behind them came four armsmen,
blades still bare and ready.
More muffled sounds preceded the third man-ginger-bearded,
from whose slashed cheek blood streamed as he was half
carried, half dragged from the building. Despite another
wound, evidenced by the dark stains across his shirt, the
wounded man struggled violently in the grip of the two
armsmen.
A third armsman followed, holding an arm as if to staunch
blood from a slash to the biceps.
"Frig… your sorceress… Frig all you…" yelled the wounded
prisoner as the two armsmen frog-marched him into the street.
"Frig… you woman-loving sisters… Frig you all…"
"So you will not swear allegiance to the Regency of Defalk?"
Anna asked loudly.
"Frig you!" The man spat toward Anna.
Alvar raised his hand.
"No." Anna dreaded what came next. "When I start to sing,

release him. If he tries to attack you, you may do as you
please." She lifted the lutar, coughed once, and began to sing
and play.
'Armsman strong, armsman wrong, 
who would not swear in heart along, 
be cloaked in flame, and fire song, 
be flayed by fire before this throng."
The two armsmen holding the wounded prisoner literally
hurled the man to the cobblestones, and had their blades out
before he sprawled on the hard surface. The man struggled to
his knees before the whips of fire began to lash him.
Standing by the door, the innkeeper turned and retched in the
general direction of the open sewer.
As the fire died away, Anna swallowed hard as she looked at
the heap of charcoaled meat and ashes, smelling the odor of
burning flesh. She turned in the saddle to the other two
armsmen. "As I found you now, should you ever turn against
Defalk, you can be found again." She waited. "Do you swear
allegiance-" 
Even before she had finished, both men were on the
cobblestones, on their knees, mumbling, "We swear by all the
harmonies, by anything you wish…"
"We accept your allegiance." She turned to Alvar. "Have them
taken to the palace and sworn into that special guard Hanfor is
forming."
The special guard was designed to patrol areas, such as the

port, where, hopefully, they would reduce theft… and could be
watched, halfway. You hope…
The whispers from behind shutters rose momentarily.
"… see why…"
"… wouldn't want to cross her…"
"… glad she's leaving us alone…"
Anna hoped all those ideas reached throughout the people. She
turned to Liende. "We'll need the seeking spell again."
"Here?"
"Why not?" The basic theory of Clearsong was known to
everyone. It wasn't the idea that was difficult-just the execution.
At that thought, her eyes went to the charcoaled body.
"The body?" asked Alvar.
Anna steeled herself and said forcefully, so that her voice would
carry, "Leave it. Leave it so all know the price of disloyalty."
"Yes, Regent." Alvar squared his shoulders, then shouted,
"Leave this carrion so all will know the price for disloyalty."
"The seeking spell," Anna repeated, looking toward Liende.
"Yes, Regent."
Anna turned in the saddle, but Jecks already was unfastening
the traveling mirror.

Another spell… another hiding armsman, or deserter-or
fanatic. She hoped there weren't too many of the latter. With a
deep breath, a calm smile plastered on her face, she waited.
113
AFTER laying her spell file on the antique writing desk and
setting the lutar on top of the shorter bookcase, Anna paused
and glanced in the wall mirror of Ehara's private study, which
she'd commandeered as a conference and workroom.
Despite a bath, a good night's sleep, and an enormous
breakfast of eggs, fried ham slabs, cheese and bread, the
woman who looked back at her hardly looked feminine at
all-an angular and thin face, hard blue eyes, tanned skin
rougher than was fashionable anywhere, and a firmly set jaw.
Even the short blonde hair could have passed for masculine. 
She shook her head, and her reflection did also. After another
look at the reflection she found hard to believe, she turned,
walked past the low bookcases, and sank into the chair behind
the desk, waiting for Jecks to join her. She remained tired.
Nearly a dozen seeking spells had dragged her and half the
armsmen all over Dumaria the afternoon before-and they'd
discovered a score of armsmen-half of whom were wounded.
Three had tried to attack… one way or another, and there were
three charcoaled bodies lying in the streets of Dumaria. The
others-shamefaced-had just pledged loyalty to Anna, and were
being "reeducated" toward greater loyalty to Defalk, along with
being required to serve in the special armsmen-paid slightly
more generously than the locals had been.

And that pay may bind them… maybe…
Even so, after the long ride to Dumaria, the spells had
exhausted her, and wiped out the players. Liende had been
staggering, and Delvor and Yuarl had collapsed halfway
though the last spellsong. For now, Dumaria was officially loyal
to Defalk, and the Regency.
Anna permitted herself a slight smile. Even if Ehara did elude
her, even if something happened to her, the Lord of Dumar
would find his capital city and much of northeastern Dumar
subdued for years, and certainly wary of Defalk. Not for years .
. . people here are as shortsighted as anywhere.
Anna ran her fingers across the slightly dusty surface of the
dark wooden writing table. The mantel of the oil lamp was
sooty, as though Ehara had spent many late nights in his
study. Perhaps he had.
Slowly, she took out the spell file. She needed to work out in
final form the ideas she had for destroying enchanted weapons.
The spell probably had to be through-composed, with no
repeating words or music, and more complex.
The sorceress was finishing the last lines when Jecks peered in
the door.
"Come on in." She slipped the spell into the folder. She'd need
to work on that later.
"You look more rested," he said, sitting down in one of the
straight-backed chairs set at an angle to the writing table.

"I couldn't have looked less rested than last night," she pointed
out. "I'm still tired."
"You essay making Dumar part of Defalk in weeks. For most
rulers it would take years."
"We don't have months or years. We may not even have weeks.
Lord knows, I mean-the harmonies only know what's going on
in Defalk." She focused on him. "We have been sending scrolls
chronicling our great victories, haven't we?"
"We have. So long as you report victories, little will happen." 
"But we don't know for sure-even with my scrying. We haven't
seen one scroll from Falcor."
"No… that is the difficulty with extended campaigns." Jecks
offered a bland smile. "With those in Defalk, all should be well."
"But we don't know."
"No."
"Everyone loves a winner. Let's hope that's enough." She
paused. "You checked Ehara's treasury?"
"There is little enough there-a few thousand golds, probably
what he could not take with him. Mysara-he is the chief
bookkeeper, like Dythya is-he said that Ehara rode off with two
large chests. He thought there were two thousand golds in
each."
"Dumar is going to pay for this war." Anna shook her head.
"But I can't take everything, or it will make things worse."

"Mayhap we can recover the golds."
"I don't think we can count on that."
"The lady Siobion," announced Fhurgen from the study door.
"At your request."
Both Jecks and Anna stood.
The slender brunette stepped into the study and bowed. "What
would you have of me?"
"Your loyalty," Anna said bluntly after Fhurgen had closed the
study door. "Defalk deserves that at least. Your consort
fomented rebellion in my land."
"What matters my loyalty now? My consort flees you, and you
will kill him." A sad smile crossed Siobion's thin lips. "And us, at
your pleasure, no matter what you promise now."
Anna wanted to shake her head. "Please sit down." Siobion
eased into the chair directly across the writing table from Anna,
her eyes flicking toward Jecks, then back to Anna, who seated
herself.
Jecks sat last, with a quirk of his lips, as though at some
unspoken jest.
"I probably will kill your consort if he remains in Dumar, if I
possibly can," answered Anna. "But someone has to rule this
place, and I'm not interested in creating some sort of empire,"
Anna said. "First, even if I were, it wouldn't last. Those things
don't. Second, what's the point?" We can maybe get Jimbob to be

a good ruler of Defalk, but an empire would be too much,
especially if he takes power young.
"Do not jest with me… I beg of you." Siobion's voice was thin,
but firm.
"Lady Siobion, I don't jest or joke."
"Many have discovered that, to their rue," added Jecks.
"I really want to clean up this mess in Dumar and go home."
"Did you not create… this mess?"
Anna admired the woman's spunk, but not her naivete. "Not
until your consort started funding rebellions and sending
lancers into Defalk." The sorceress squared her shoulders.
"Which child of yours is most fit to be Lord of Dumar?" 
Siobion pursed her lips, remaining mute.
With a sigh, Anna stood and walked to the bookcase,
reclaiming the lutar and tuning it as she stood there. "Do you
want me to enchant your will? Or just drag in all your
children?" 
Siobion's eyes widened. "You cannot drag in Haeron. He is
with his sire.
"Then he will probably die," Anna said coolly. "Do you wish to
tell me…" She turned to Jecks. "Have the remaining children
brought in."
"No…" After a moment, Siobion stammered, tears running

from her cheeks. "Clehar. He is strong, and he is just."
"You're not doing that to save another?"
"No…" Siobion's voice was low. "Byon is but six, and Feharn
five, and Eryhal is still in the cradle."
Anna set the lutar on the thin-planked floor beside the table leg,
then looked at Jecks.
The white-haired lord stood and walked to the door, opening it.
"Rickel, have Clehar, the son of Lord Ehara, brought here, if
you would."
"Yes, ser."
Jecks closed the door and took his seat again.
"No…" sobbed Siobion. "No… he has done little wrong. Spare
him… Please spare him."
Anna looked coldly across the writing table, knowing she must
appear a total bitch. She almost didn't care; no one ever seemed
to want to take her at face value, and it didn't seem as though
that would change anytime soon. "Lady Siobion, you're
assuming I'm like your consort. I'm not. There's no point in my
talking about it, though. No one believes me."
Anna seated herself to wait.
Siobion fidgeted ever so slightly in the chair.
"Young Lord Clehar," Fhurgen announced, escorting the youth
into the room.

Clehar was thin like his mother, but dark-haired like his father,
and looked to be slightly younger than Jimbob-eleven or
twelve, Anna judged. He stood just in front of his mother's
shoulder, his thin lips like his mother's, set tight.
Anna rose and looked at the two. "Try to listen. Try to
understand what I am telling you. Even when three lords
rebelled against me in Defalk, I did not kill the heirs. The only
lands I took were those of one who died without heirs-and his
offspring died long before I ever came to Liedwahr. You can
believe me or not, but it is true." Anna paused, wondering if
anything she said penetrated.
"I sent your consort a scroll, Lady Siobion. I asked for peace
between our lands and a thousand golds in payment for the
unrest he created in sending armsmen of Dumar into Defalk.
Your consort mocked me, and demanded golds of me. I
blocked the river, and requested peace and the thousand golds.
He refused that. The river destroyed much of Dumaria and
Narial, and your consort still refused peace. What choice did I
have? To let him continue to send armsmen into my land? I
would not have it, and I will not." Anna's eyes hardened, and
she fixed the brunette with them. "You will be loyal to me and
Defalk, and you may rule as regent for your son until he is of
age.
"Now. It's very simple, Lady Siobion. You are the Lady Regent
of Dumar. You will administer Dumar, with the assistance of
whoever I name as your chief armsman. You will also pay for
the cost of my coming into Dumar. Once those costs are paid
off, you owe Defalk nothing except free and open trade, and

resistance to all invaders. And, of course, the continued
appointment of whoever the Regency chooses as your chief
armsman. We do expect formal friendship. I doubt that any of
us will remain too fondly in your thoughts, but blame that on
your consort."
"You jest…" Siobion's tone was uncertain, for the first time.
"I don't jest. I never have. All I'm interested in is keeping Defalk
strong and independent and keeping the dissonant Sea-Priests
out of Liedwahr." Anna paused. "And probably keeping the
Liedfuhr out of any place he isn't already."
"You do not intend to make an example of… us?"
"Why?" Anna asked. "All that would do would be to make
people mad and wanting to hate Defalk more, especially later.
Some already hate me for the flood, but that was your consort's
fault, not that any good Dumaran would wish to believe that."
She took a deep breath. "If I killed you all, then I'd have to
figure out how to govern Dumar, and I'd be spending more
time here than in Falcor. It's your land. You can run it. You just
have to be loyal to Defalk, and since we don't really want a
war, and you can't…" Anna laughed, not quite harshly. "…
Why, things should work out."
"How can you trust...?" asked Siobion.
"I can raise enough of a flood to make the last one look like an
afternoon rainstorm. Do you want all your main towns and
cities washed away again?"
Siobion looked down. "You will not live forever."

"No. I won't. But I hope by then everyone will figure out that
peace is easier… and more profitable."
Siobion frowned. "Do you think to stop the Sea-Priests?"
"I don't have to," Anna pointed out. "You do."
Siobion paled. "You are cruel."
"I'll help, as I can. But would you would rather spend the rest of
your life in chains, the way the Sturinnese women do?" asked
Anna.
"You… leave few choices."
"Your consort left me none," Anna said quietly. Did you really
have to invade Dumar… or are you rationalizing again? "Not if
Defalk were to remain independent for long."
Jecks nodded at Anna, and she realized she'd said enough,
possibly more than enough.
The sorceress stood. "You may go." 
"By your leave, Regent?" asked Siobion. Her hand touched
Clehar's shoulder.
"By your leave?" echoed the dark-haired Clehar.
Anna nodded, watching as the two walked to the study door,
opened it, and slipped from sight.
"Did I say too much?" the sorceress asked once Fhurgen again
closed the door firmly.
"I would not say such. There was no need to say more."

"I'm becoming such a bitch," Anna mused. "I don't like it."
"As you said, my lady, the harmonies have left you little choice.
As you also made most clear to me…" Jecks' voice was warm,
sympathetic, and Anna wished-for a moment-that he would
just hold her. Not long before, she'd wanted to clout him.
Would it always be like that?
"Damn… dissonantly little," she agreed. "Tomorrow, we'd
better start after Ehara. The mirror says he's moving slowly,
but it'll still take nearly a week to catch him. I just want this to
be over."
Jecks frowned momentarily.
"Are you saying it won't ever be over?"
"I had thought to enjoy my lands once Alasia consorted with
Barjim." Jecks offered a wry smile. "Now I accompany a
warrior sorceress and consider myself lucky to have survived."
"I've never been that angry at you," Anna said with a grin.
"There have been times…" Jecks' voice was ironically rueful.
They laughed, and Anna enjoyed the laughter, pushing away
thoughts of the morrow… and those to follow.
114
ANOTHER hot and sweaty afternoon on the road in Dumar,
and Anna wondered why she'd even bothered to get her riding
clothes clean in Dumaria. Two days on the road in the humid
summer air of Dumar, and one of her two sets of trousers and

shirts already smelled like she'd spent weeks in it.
The Envar River, smaller even than the Chean in Defalk east of
Sor-prat, where Anna had yet to rebuild the ford, lay on the
south side of the road from Dumaria to Envaryl. The
ever-present sheep kept the brush low, and only scattered trees
dotted the water course. The land was almost flat, with the
stretched-out hills no more than a few yards higher than the
river bed. Even to the northwest, where Envaryl lay three more
days over the horizon at the base of the southern Mittfels,
according to both maps and glass, the land extended in the
same featureless flat plain to the horizon. 
Anna leaned forward in the saddle and patted Farinelli on the
shoulder. "You're a good fellow."
The gelding continued at an even pace, as if to indicate that, of
course, he was, and there was no point in acknowledging such
fatuous praise.
The road contained the hoofprints of Ehara's fleeing forces, the
only evidence of life along the road, except in the towns, with
their boarded doors and shuttered windows.
"What would happen if Ehara escaped us and returned?" she
asked. "Would people follow him as readily?"
"No," said Jecks, "but it would be better that he-and the heir
with him-not escape. Fewer still would cross you."
"Oh? The sorceress who never relents? Who will destroy every
hostile armsman in order enslave an entire land?"

Jecks laughed. "Can you imagine a better reputation in
Liedwahr? Do you think Sargol would have spurned your rule
had he seen what you have done?"
"Probably not," the sorceress admitted. "But it's force again.
Not reason, not intelligence, just force."
"Since when has it been otherwise, my lady?" Jecks offered both
a smile and raised eyebrows.
Anna couldn't offer any rebuttal to what was clearly a
rhetorical question-either in Liedwahr or on earth. "You're
right, but I don't have to like it. I can try to change it." How? By
using more force through sorcery? Her own self-inquiries
reminded her that she still had to deal with her conscience, and
the nagging questions it prompted.
"Am I relying on sorcery so much that when we leave Dumar
no one will even consider remaining loyal?"
"Once… once…" Jecks pulled at his chin. "Once I might have
thought that. Now… thousands of the finest armsmen of
Sturinn and Dumar lie dead. Now… much of Dumaria and all
of Narial lie in ruins. A huge stone bridge spans the Falche, one
that would doubtless withstand even another flood you sent
forth. The Lord of Dumar flees you, and all have seen your
armsmen. And no armsmen remain where you have been save
as are loyal to you."
"At least in name," she added.
"I doubt that many will forget you." He smiled, half sadly. "Or
cross you."

"But Jimbob will have problems?"
"Each generation must solve its own. You have given him the
chance."
Anna's eyes went to the gray dek-stone on the right shoulder of
the road, its lower part obscured by grass. As Farinelli carried
her closer, she could make out the words: Jusuul-3-d.
Anna glanced from the gray stone along the flat road toward
the hamlet ahead, a gathering of several dozen roofs in the
hazy afternoon. Behind her, the players began to talk more
loudly.
"… how many towns are there?" 
"Dissonance… another town, another seeking spell…"
Anna recognized Delvor's voice, and she turned in the saddle
and called, "Liende… would you explain to Delvor that if we
find people disloyal to Defalk before they find us, they aren't
likely to fill him with arrows?"
A low laugh ran through the guards, and a broad grin crossed
Rickel's face.
"Hanfor?" Anna gestured.
"Companies… halt!"
She guided Farinelli back to Liende, offering an ironic smile.
"Chief player… we will need another seeking spell."
"I had thought as much, Regent, and we will be ready." Liende
offered a crooked smile, and raised her voice slightly. "Even

young Delvor will play his best."
Delvor flushed, and subdued smiles and chuckles crossed the
faces of the mounted players.
After the column slowed and stopped, Anna and the players
dismounted, performing the all-too-familiar procedure with the
scrying glass.
"Show from Dumar, danger to fear, 
All the threats to me bright and clear…"
The mirror flickered through a series of images, but Anna could
not discern a one because one image replaced another so
quickly.
"There's a danger ahead… but I can't tell what it is." Anna
pursed her lips.
"The Sea-Priest?"
"Might be."
She tried again, using the same spell, except with the name
Jusuul in place of Dumar. The mirror remained clear, showing
no danger.
Then came the armsman-seeking spell-but Jusuul harbored no
armsmen.
Anna glanced along the flat road toward the roofs of the town
ahead. "There's no problem here, anyway."
"That cheers me not greatly, my lady."

It didn't cheer Anna exactly, either, especially since the danger
spell had shown nothing when they had passed through the
three other river towns earlier in the day.
"Does the enchantment hold on the small shield?" Jecks asked.
"It's still there." Anna could sense the slight drain on her
strength, but that was a small cost. Jecks' idea had already
saved her life once. She wondered if the shield, and the
additional spells she'd developed, at his insistence, would be
enough. Nothing's ever enough.
"Thank you, chief player… all of you," Anna said, with a nod of
acknowledgement before turning and walking back to where
Rickel held Farinelli's reins. She remounted the big gelding
quickly.
"We stop for provisions here?" asked Hanfor.
"It's small, but there might be something," Anna agreed,
reaching for her water bottle to moisten her throat before she
had to sing again.
Rain, humidity, heat, dust, rain, humidity, with seeking spells
every few glasses, and never a sight of the fleeing Ehara-the
pattern seemed unending, yet she'd only been doing it for a few
weeks. At the same time, she couldn't help worrying about
what might be occurring in Defalk- even though she could do
nothing at all about it.
No… she wasn't cut out to be a horse-warrior and a conqueror.
Definitely not.

She took a long swallow from the water bottle as the Defalkan
forces resumed their advance on small Jusuul.
115
BY midmorning of the fourth day on the road out of Dumaria,
Anna was sweating profusely, her shirt glued to her back, the
band of her floppy felt hat sodden with perspiration, and
driblets of sweat running down the back of her neck.
The afternoon and evening rains had done little more than
damp the road dust and raise the humidity, so that the
sorceress felt she were riding through a steambath. Farinelli
swished his tail almost constantly, trying to hold off the
continual swarms of small white flies that buzzed around all
the horses-and stung.
Because of the profusion of towns, and the delays involved in
using spells to seek out any recalcitrant armsmen-and they'd
discovered but a handful, Envaryl remained at least another
two days away. What bothered Anna even more than the effort
involved was the realization that she was reaching but a
fraction of the people, just enough to ensure the safety of her
forces, and that only so long as Ehara remained on the run.
And, of course, it delayed her return to Defalk and multiplied
the problems arising there that she'd have to resolve. Still, she
was instilling the idea in the Dumarans that it was hard to hide
from the sorceress. Great… More fear… Machiavelli would have
loved it.
She shook her head and glanced to her left. The Envar River
had shrunk to little more than a stream not more than ten

yards wide and only a few yards deep. Beyond the river to the
south stretched deks of fields filled with knee-high plants,
beans, wheat, or corn, as it was called in Liedwahr, and oilseeds
of some sort.
Anna's stomach tightened, and she found herself gripping the
leather of the reins so hard that her hands had begun to ache.
Finally, she spoke. "I need to use the glass." 
Riding on her right, Jecks nodded.
"Hanfor," Anna continued, "I need to stop and see what Ehara's
doing."
As Alvar and Hanfor brought the force to an orderly and now
well-rehearsed stop, Liende rode up beside the sorceress. "Have
you need of us, Lady?"
"No… actually, yes, thank you." Anna forced a smile she
definitely didn't feel. "I'm just looking, but it would help-if it
won't tire you too much. I'll need you all when we catch up
with Lord Ehara."
"We could do a spell now and still stand ready."
"Thank you." Anna dismounted, unwrapped the traveling
scrying glass and took a deep breath as she waited for the
players to tune, afraid of what the glass might show. Jecks and
Hanfor had also dismounted and stood only slightly back of
her as she prepared to sing the spell. Anna's guards held the
reins of the three mounts.
She glanced at the mirror where it lay on the lush grass that

seemed to grow everywhere in western Dumar, then cleared
her throat. When the players began, so did she.
"Mirror, mirror on the ground, 
show me where Ehara's forces may be found…"
The image in the glass was clear. The Dumaran forces neared a
small town.
"That must be Hasjyl… if the maps are correct," murmured
Hanfor.
Anna squinted as she tried to recall the maps she had pored
over. Hasjyl-less than a day's ride from Envaryl, the last sizable
town in the west of Dumar before the southern rim of the
Westfels, or was it the western end of the Mittfels? The two
ranges intersected north of Envaryl, and geography, Anna was
discovering, was even less precise in Liedwahr than it had been
in Iowa where to her, one cornfield, one low hill, had pretty
much resembled another.
She released the image quickly. Jecks handed her a water
bottle-her own orderspelled water-even that spell took effort.
But everything in a military campaign cost, she'd discovered.
"He will try to fortify Envaryl-or plot some trap there,"
predicted the white-haired lord. "Or before we reach there."
Anna nodded, wondering why she bridled so much every time
Jecks offered some totally obvious observation. She handed
back the bottle and wearily lifted the lutar once more.
"Show from Dumar, danger to fear, 

All the threats to me bright and clear…"
The mirror flickered through a series of images, but Anna could
not discern a one because one image replaced another so
quickly. She canceled that spell even more quickly.
"The same danger ahead… but I can't tell what it is." Anna
pursed her lips.
"Can you call an image of the Sea-Priest?"
This time she used a variant of the mirror spell.
"Show from the Sea-Priest, danger to fear…"
The image of the Sea-Priest was clear enough, but it showed
little beside the man's face-and the burns across it, one almost
festering, and the hatred in the dark eyes. Those-and the
background of fields-or perhaps long grass.
"That one-he will kill you any way that he might," said Jecks.
Anna could see that, but it didn't help when she couldn't
formulate spells precisely enough to determine where the
sorcerer was or what he had in mind.
She tried a last spell, the danger spell, using the town name of
Hasjyl in place of Dumar. The mirror remained clear. The
sorceress lowered the lutar and glanced along the flat road
toward the roofs of the town ahead. "There's no problem there,
anyway."
"I am not greatly cheered, my lady Anna," Jecks said wryly.

Neither was Anna. Every time she had used the general danger
spell, she'd gotten the flickering response, but it had shown no
danger in any of the river towns through which they had
passed. There was danger, but she couldn't find it. Or didn't
know how. Or the Sea-Priest had a way of hiding it from her.
Or…
Tiredly, she replaced the lutar in its case, while Jecks rewrapped
the mirror.
"We continue, Lady Anna?" asked Hanfor.
"Until we find Ehara," she answered. "Until we can end this
mess." She climbed into the saddle, then wiped away more
sweat. She flicked the reins gently, and Farinelli started forward.
Once the column was moving, she reached for the water bottle.
Another swallow of lukewarm water helped, but she still
sweated in the midafternoon sun. To the west, the afternoon
clouds were building for the storm that would ensure the next
day would be another steambath.
116
ANNA rubbed her eyes. Although it was well after dawn, and
she had munched through bread and cheese, the standard
travel breakfast, she still felt groggy. Not enough sleep?
Worrying too much? Coffee would have helped, but coffee, or
anything drinkable with the same effect, wasn't one of the
plants known in Liedwahr. Brill had brewed a bitter evergreen
tea, so bitter that one or two sips on those first hot days in
Loiseau had convinced Anna that she was better off without it.

Her stomach was dubious enough about the morning without
the kind of jolt provided by Brill's bitter yellow tea. Cider, hot
or cold, wasn't much better first thing in the morning.
She licked a stray bread crumb from her lips, tired of stale
bread and cheese, and looked down at the mirror on its leather
wrappings. Then she began her morning spell-scrying.
Despite three different spells, the mirror showed nothing new.
Ehara had almost reached Envaryl, from what she could tell,
and the Sea-Priest was next to the Envar-somewhere-but the
images of scenes that posed possible danger continued to shift
so rapidly that she could tell nothing.
After rewrapping the traveling mirror and recasing the lutar,
she slipped the heavy blanket onto Farinelli, and then the
saddle.
Whufff…
"I know. It's early. Tell me."
Farinelli declined the opportunity, and Anna cinched the girths,
then patted the gelding's shoulder.
"Another long day." She looked westward, along the river road,
though the Envar was now more like a stream.
Clearsong hung just above the western horizon-the smallest dot
of light as the pink haze of sunrise flooded into orange before
the sky turned pale blue.
Anna looked at the disc of the small moon, searching for the

smaller, redder point of light that would be Darksong and not
finding it. She'd never really even followed earth's moon. How
did she expect to follow the motions of the two moons of Erde?
As Hanfor rode up, signaling that the armsmen were ready, so
did Liende. Jecks led his mount toward her and Farinelli.
"Players are mounted and ready, Lady Anna," said the chief
player.
"Thank you." Anna mounted easily, but slowly, as did Jecks.
Fhurgen and Rickel slipped their mounts in front of the
sorceress. Jecks rode on her right. To the left, the Envar glittered
silver in the postdawn light.
Anna rode silently for nearly a glass, trying not to yawn
overmuch, as the column continued on the damp clay of the
road. The humidity already had her sweating, but the rains had
kept the dust down-one advantage. She didn't itch from the red
grit of eastern Dumar and the Sudbergs. The disadvantage was
that by midmorning she'd itch from the salt of her own sweat. 
"We should reach Hasjyl by noon," Jecks said, breaking the
long silence. "Perhaps we should rest there."
"Before getting too close to Envaryl?" Anna yawned. Lord, she
was tired. The way she felt, she'd need some sort of rest.
"I would not wish that we face Lord Ehara and his Sea-Priest
sorcerer with a tired sorceress and players," answered Jecks. "A
day or two more spent in Dumar will not changes matters
overly. You will have done the impossible."

"Impossible?" Anna had to laugh at the thought. She was no
horse-warrior, no Genghis Khan or Napoleon-just a very tired
woman trying to keep a country of religious chauvinists from
getting a foothold in Liedwahr. The Sea-Priests reminded her of
Islamic fundamentalists, in a roundabout way, and she'd never
been that fond of Islamic men after the year studying in
London. "I doubt that anything I've done is impossible."
"We left Stromwer in late spring. It is not yet late summer, and
Dumar lies in your grasp. None would have deemed that
possible, not even for the Liedfuhr of Mansuur or the Traders of
Wei."
"It may not be possible for us. We haven't done it yet."
"And how would anyone undo it?" Jecks laughed. "If you
vanished this moment, Ehara would find it impossible to avoid
allying himself with Defalk."
"That might be, but the Sturinnese would be back." With their
damned chains … Anna couldn't help it. She still saw red when
she thought of women in chains-even the so-called chains of
adornment.
Her eyes flicked ahead and to the left, down toward the river.
Less than a hundred yards away, a section of the knee-high
grass bordering the river seemed to shimmer. Anna rubbed her
eyes, then blinked. The whole area seemed out of focus.
Dissonance! Was she that tired?
Her stomach tightened and she twisted in the saddle, fumbling
for the lutar, even as she yelled, "The Sea-Priest! By the river!"

A low screaming, thrumming sound shivered the ground, like
drums being beaten so fast that the individual impacts and
their resonance blended into a seamless percussive texture, a
strange form of homophony. But you can't do that with
drums… Brill said… Yet Brill had died. Drum homophony?
What else would she find out too late?
Anna yanked the lutar from the case, her fingers curling over
the strings as her other hand positioned itself on the
instrument's neck.
Streaks of gray light flashed from the flickering silver and
green, angling straight toward Anna.
The sorceress found her mouth open, trying to find a spell, as
the small round shield flew from its holder up toward the first
screaming streak of gray. Javelin and shield crashed into the
clay of the road.
Anna jerked her head left toward the second streak, just in time
to see Jecks half throw himself into the vibrating line of fire-or
steel. Lord and javelin smashed toward the road with a dull
thudding sound. 
The third streak ended in another thud and rattling as Fhurgen
seemed to wrestle the third javelin away from Anna, buried as
it was through his ribs and breastplate.
Anna coughed, looking down as the heavy iron-headed
weapon buried in her defensive shield inched across the clay,
still creeping toward her.
From out of the tall grass sprang a tall figure in soiled white,

climbing onto a mount once concealed by some manner of
sorcery. The horse scrambled up the riverbank and onto the
road, headed westward.
Alvar raised a blade, and spurred his mount into a charge,
followed by a full squad of Defalkan armsmen.
Trying to ignore the fleeing sorcerer, Anna forced herself to
concentrate… to concentrate on the spell she had worked out
because Jecks had insisted. Her fingers touched the strings of
the lutar.
"Weapons of sorcery, weapons of night, 
hidden by spells and away from Clearsong… 
your powers rebound to your speller so strong 
with double the power and double the might… 
Burn into dust and sear unto ashes and light…"
The interlocked half-couplet scheme was supposed to make it
stronger… would it? Anna wondered as she sang, but forced
her voice into the spell, forced herself to finish it, slamming
home the last note with all the power she had.
Then she vaulted from Farinelli, half noting the scream and the
column of flame that flared from the road ahead. She
stumbled, but did not fall as she dropped to her knees beside
Jecks, where Liende already worked with a cloth to stanch the
blood. The javelin had vanished, the result of Anna's spell. She
only hoped that the spell hadn't made the wound worse.
Jecks' face was pale, whiter than his hair, and his breath was
light and ragged.

Liende looked at Anna.
The sorceress bolted to her feet, fingers on the strings of the
lutar. She had hoped never to use the song, but the words were
burned in her mind, from another time, another battle, and she
could only improvise quickly, hoping she would be quick
enough, and sure enough.
"… always strong, as though young, 
spells always cleanly sung, 
back from danger, bring him life… 
through all strife…"
Again, she had to struggle to keep her voice open, free, against
all the strains pressing in on her, ignoring the press of horses,
and the clamor of voices-all pushed away as she finished the
darksong spell. 
Strophic Darksong…
Around her, strange chords were reverberating in a pattern of
polyphony she couldn't quite grasp. But polyphony is a
pattern… or is it a texture? You should know …
"Too much…" That was what she thought someone said.
Above her, despite the scattered puffy white clouds, the sky
shimmered silver and black, alternating like a strobe light, the
black quickly predominating, the silver vanishing, as the sky
turned the jet of night around her
"The lutar…"
Her fingers were as numb as her mind as she tumbled forward

into the darkness, the darkness of Darksong.
When Anna woke, lying on her cot, Liende was sitting beside
her on a stool-rather, two images of Liende were, no matter
how hard Anna squinted. The chief player's white-streaked red
hair was tangled, almost matted, and dark circles ringed
Liende's eyes, but the player smiled faintly.
"Jecks… ?" Anna rasped.
Liende extended a water bottle, and Anna fumbled for it, eyes
unable to gauge the distance, before she drank gratefully.
"He will live. It will be seasons before he lifts a blade."
Anna nodded. She tried to lift her head, but laid back when
dissonant bass chords slammed through her skull, rippling the
double images of tent silk overhead.
"You stopped breathing," Liende said, her tone matter-of-fact.
"I had to move your chest."
"Thank you." Anna blinked. Her eyes burned. "I'm sorry. It
didn't seem right… Now, I've messed up everything."
"That is not so." Liende shook her head. "Your armsmen respect
you for saving him-and for destroying the Sea-Priest. Your
players are resting, and Ehara still remains behind the walls of
Envaryl."
Anna took another swallow of water. The dissonant chords
assaulting her subsided, slightly, but the two images remained.
"Fhurgen?"

Liende glanced down, confirming what Anna had already felt.
Yet what else could she have done?
"He was dead… almost before you dismounted."
Anna wanted to shake her head. Even before she had been
regent, the big black-bearded guard had looked out for her.
Then… Jecks had been looking out for her as well.
"Darksong is dangerous." Liende paused. "Do you love Lord
Jecks?"
"Sometimes I think so. Sometimes, I don't know." There's so
much I don't know… been so little time… so much to do…
Liende smiled more broadly. "There is a saying about actions
revealing the heart." 
Do you love Jecks? Because be has stood by you. Or for more? Or
are you desperate? That desperate?
Before Anna could think more, her eyes closed.
117
Struggling against the faint double images that still cloaked her
sight after more than four days, Anna stood in the doorway
and looked from the sleeping white-haired figure in the bed to
the chief player, and then to the guard at the door.
"He sleeps more easily," said Liende. "There is no fever. The
wound is clean. Your elixir, it kept out the poisons." Her lips
pursed. "And your spells."

Anna sometimes wondered if her greatest legacy might not be
distilled alcohol, rather than anything else. She glanced back to
Jecks. "I still worry about leaving him here in Hasjyl. The
javelin ripped up his chest and shoulder badly." Would she
have had the courage to take enchanted javelins meant for
someone else? She hoped she could have been so brave, but she
doubted she had that kind of courage. She was a survivor, not a
hero.
She'd been lucky to be able to cast a Darksong spell without
being totally destroyed, as she had been at Stromwer. Then, the
spell over Jecks had been limited to one person at close range,
probably before there had been too much damage from the
wound. Even so, it would be more than a week before she was
fully recovered, she suspected.
"You have spell-searched the town, and left twoscore of
armsmen to guard him. He should not be moved until he is
better, a few days, at least," Liende pointed out. "Once you
finish Lord Ehara, you can watch over Lord Jecks on the return
to Dumaria."
"I know, and I can't let Ehara get away," Anna said. "I don't
have to like it." How many times over how many years had she
thought those words? You have to do it, but you don't have to
like it… Was that always the way it would be?
Jecks' eyes fluttered, then opened. Anna stepped nearer the bed.
"You… are… here…" The raspiness of Jecks' voice tore at her.
Where was the strong leading man? The man who had taken a

javelin meant for her?
He's right there, you idiot…
"I'm here," she said quietly. "You'll be fine, but you need to rest."
"You… saved… me." 
"You saved me. You did a better job," Anna said.
"The… Sea-Priest..."
"Lady Anna turned him into flame with her anger," interjected
Liende
"Fhurgen… ?"
Anna looked down at the stone floors she'd insisted be washed
before moving Jecks into the house she'd borrowed-or
commandeered.
"He was dead before Lady Anna could even begin a spell," said
Liende.
Anna wasn't sure that was so, but she'd only had the chance to
save one of them, and she'd made a choice.
"He… good… man."
"Just rest," Anna urged.
Jecks' eyes closed slowly, almost unwillingly, and Anna stroked
his forehead for a moment.
"Just rest," she repeated softly before straightening, carefully,
hoping that the double images and semi-migraine headache

would fade before she reached Envaryl, hoping, as always, that
she did the right thing-and fearing she wouldn't.
118
ENVARYL, DUMAR
EHARA paces across the room, at ten yards long and half that
in width, large for the trading town. He goes to the third-story
window and peers out from between shutters bleached white
by sun and lack of oil at the gently rolling hills, dotted with
irregular shadows cast from the scattered summer clouds.
Beyond the low yellow-brick walls less than a hundred yards
from the window, nothing moves in the meadows and empty
fields. A handful of armsmen walk the walls. Several carry
bows already strung.
Two lancers in the crimson of Dumar ride to the front of the
building, the trader's mansion the Lord of Dumar has
commandeered. Ehara straightens his tunic, brushes back his
dark hair and waits.
At the single thrap on the door, he coughs, then answers.
"Come in."
The stocky lancer officer enters and bows. "The scouts have just
returned, sire."
Ehara waits.
"The sorceress's forces have passed through Hasjyl, Lord
Ehara." The lancer officer bows again. "They ride toward the
walls of Envaryl." 

"Does she ride with them?"
"The bear the banner with the crossed spears. They would not
ride westward, save she were directing them."
Ehara nods reluctantly. "I had thought for a time, when the
sorceress stopped short of Hasjyl, that the Sea-Priest had
succeeded."
"None have seen him. A shepherd from Hasjyl said that
harmony and dissonance clashed six morns ago, and that the
ground shook." The lancer adds apologetically, "That was all he
could say, sire."
"More like dissonance and dissonance," mutters Ehara. He
looks at the lancer. "Thank you. Would you have Captain
Fional join me?"
"Yes, sire."
Even before the door is fully closed, the dark-bearded Lord of
Dumar returns to the window, gazing eastward. "Who would
have thought it? One sorceress, and all of Liedwahr turned
upside-down. A harmless ploy to gain territory in Defalk, and
she invades Dumar. A mere attempt to kill her, and she pursues
me like a harpy of dissonance. I have nowhere to turn, nowhere
to go-nor does my son and heir. If I confront her directly, I will
be turned to flames or spitted with arrows like a stag. If I die on
the field against her, I honor her, and that I will not do… not
now. For that, for that she must wait." He shakes his head. "So
little I have left. So little that I must content myself with making
a sorceress wait. So little… She does not understand Liedwahr,

and we all will suffer." Ehara laughs, a sound bitter and
booming simultaneously, a roaring that fills the room for but a
moment. "I will suffer most of all."
119
ANNA reined up on the low hillside to the southeast of the
yellow-brick walls of Envaryl, walls that still lay more than a
dek westward. In the seven days it had taken her to recover
from the aftereffects of the Darksong used to save Jecks and to
move her forces to within ten deks of Envaryl, Ehara had kept
all his troops inside those yellow-brick walls.
As Farinelli tossed his head gently, Anna's hand dropped to the
open-topped shield carrier and the respelled round shield that
had saved her life twice so far-and had failed to save Fhurgen
or to protect Jecks. She couldn't even make a gesture for
Fhurgen, not even with cold gold. The black-bearded guard
had never told anyone where he had come from, not even the
most seasoned veterans from the volunteers who had followed
Hanfor from the Prophet's service to Anna's. What had he fled
from? And from where? She shook her head. 
Alvar reined up on her right, Hanfor on her left. Rickel and
Lejun eased their mounts forward of Anna, the protective
shields up and ready. To her right, south of the rise, the river
road wound along the Envar River for close to half a dek before
turning more northward toward the main gates-those on the
south wall. The heavy wooden gates were closed, and the
crimson banner of Ehara flew from the right-hand gate tower.
From what Anna had found from her previous work with the

scrying glass, Envaryl was enclosed by a pentagon of
yellow-brick walls, each side roughly a dek in length. The town
was one of the few walled ones in Dumar, possibly because it
was an old town, and the western entrance to Dumar from both
Mansuur and Neserea.
To the north, Anna could barely make out a dark line just
above the horizon, the nearest mountains, those where the
Mittfels and the Westfels joined to separate Dumar from
Neserea.
In the early-morning light, the sorceress could see the length of
both the south and the eastern walls, and the watchtowers on
three of the five corners, but not any individual figures in the
towers or along the walls.
"Quiet for now," observed Alvar. "It was not so yesterday.
Watch for a moment."
Anna watched. So did Hanfor, and so, Anna presumed, did the
two-score armsmen behind them.
Shadows from the summer clouds cast slow-moving shadows
across the hills, across the empty fields, and the summer grasses
that barely bent in the light breeze. Although the air remained
damp, Anna appreciated the warm breeze, a relief after so
many days of hot and sticky travel.
A movement caught her eye, and she glanced north where two
figures sprinted from somewhere behind the corner watchtower
away from Envaryl and in the general direction of the distant
Mittfels.

"Yesterday was worse," Alvar said from her right. "Jirsit's scouts
counted scores of them running away. The armsmen just
watched, those that hadn't thrown rags over their uniforms and
joined them."
"Ehara's armsmen shoot deserters," Hanfor pointed out. "Jirsit's
scouts saw that as well."
"When they see them, ser," answered Alvar. "Or when they are
forced to use their bows… or crossbows."
Anna gained the definite impression that Alvar disliked
crossbows. She wondered what he would have thought of
machine guns. "We could wait a day or two, or a week," she
suggested, "until Ehara had no armsmen left. Or fewer
armsmen."
"Lady Anna," Hanfor said slowly from her left, "I seldom
question your thoughts…"
"But you do this time," Anna said. "What have I missed?"
Hanfor shifted uneasily in his saddle, turning to face the regent.
"Ehara knows he cannot best your sorceries, or even your
forces, now.
He will wait, because that will make you seem weak and
because he knows that you do not wish to use your power
against the innocent. So he huddles among the poor folk of
Envaryl. If you wish to end this war quickly, you must destroy
Envaryl, or you needs must visit and spell-seek each and every
hamlet and town in all of Dumar." 
Anna refrained from swallowing. Hanfor had always agreed

with her strategies to minimize death, carnage, and general
mayhem. Now, he was suggesting obliterating a town whose
major crime was harboring the former Lord of Dumar.
"Every war must have a battle, preferably a great battle, to
mark its end. We cannot hazard a battle, and so we must have
great destruction, destruction so great that all in Dumar will
understand the folly of crossing the sorceress of Defalk. There
must be a single… destruction… a monument… so vast that
none can deny your power." Hanfor swallowed. "This I like
little, but I have watched and I have listened. Men are not as we
would like; they respect but force, and you must supply that
force if you are to gain the respect you will need to enforce
peace."
As if to punctuate the arms commander's words, a volley of a
dozen arrows or so arched out from the walls, falling several
hundred yards short of where the three-and Anna's
guards-surveyed the town.
Anna looked at the arrows falling harmlessly into the grass,
then at Hanfor. "Lord Jecks said that, too, you know. Or
something like that."
"Lord Jecks has seen more of those in power than have I, lady.
In that, I would respect him."
"I have to respect your judgments, Hanfor, and those of Lord
Jecks. I don't like them, but I respect them." Again… it's back to
force, violence, power. Not reason, not common sense, not
decency… but power… force of arms, force of sorcery…

Anna took another look at Envaryl, then glanced northward,
but the pair of refugees had vanished over the low hills. Finally,
she nodded curtly. "Fine. Let's get on with it. Summon the
players. Ehara-and the lords of Dumar-and of Defalk-will
learn." Dissonance, will they learn… arrogant bastards. If you
want force… you'll see force.
Hanfor bowed his head.
"I'll need something to eat and drink while the players and the
rest of the armsmen gather. We can do it from here. There's no
sense in moving close enough for them to hit us with those
arrows." She looked from Hanfor to Alvar and back again.
Both veterans looked away from her.
Somehow, the way she felt, it didn't surprise her. She turned
Farinelli and rode back down to the depression on the other
side of the hill where she dismounted. Rickel and Lejun arrayed
the guards around her in a wide circle, deploying two on the
hillside above as lookouts or scouts. Neither guard spoke as she
handed Lejun Farinelli's reins.
She patted the gelding. At least, he didn't look at her in
reproach.
Standing by Farinelli, who had lowered his head to sample the
lush grass, she pulled out the provisions bag and searched for
some of the less-aged yellow brick cheese they'd picked up in
one of the towns along the river road. Had it been Jusuul? Or
Pemlirk? Or Genwal? Or another town whose name she hadn't
even noted? 

She bit into the hard cheese savagely. After several mouthfuls,
she broke off a crust of bread, a dry ryelike bread that scattered
crumbs everywhere. Two bites of bread, and she had to moisten
her mouth with a swallow from the water bottle.
Anna turned as Liende rode up and halted beside Rickel. The
sorceress licked her lips of the crumbs and took another
swallow of water.
"Good morning, Lady Anna." Liende dismounted, but
remained holding her horse's reins when she faced the sorceress.
"Good morning, Liende. Well… it's morning, anyway." Anna
cleared her throat. "We have work to do."
"Will you wish the flame song, or the armsman-seeking song?"
Anna shook her head. "Today… today I will need the battle
hymn."
"We have not played that spellsong in weeks, Regent." Liende's
face blanked.
"I know. You can gather your players, and practice for a
time-on the hilltop there." Anna offered a grim smile as she
pointed westward toward the top of the slope she had ridden
down. "I hope it will be the last time we have to use it." You
hoped that the last time, and here you are… again. How many
more times?
"You are regent, Lady Anna, and we are your players."
"I wish it didn't have to be this way," Anna said. Does it? Does

it really? "But Ehara began this war with blood and treachery."
The regent shrugged. "I can't offer him mercy-nor those who
still follow his treachery."
Liende nodded, a nod that was acknowledgment, but not
agreement. "We will make ready."
"Thank you."
"We are your players, lady and regent." Liende inclined her
head.
Anna nodded. "You may go."
After Liende remounted, Anna finished the last of the hard
yellow cheese, and the bread. Another swallow from the water
bottle, and she replaced the water bottle and began to warm up.
"Muueee, mueee…"
After three notes, she coughed up some mucus. She resumed
the vocalise, but only for another handful of notes before her
voice cut out. She cleared her throat, and tried again, pushing
back the battered brown felt hat. It was going to be a long
warm-up, not surprisingly, because she was agitated, and
agitation and tenseness didn't help the asthma that Brill's youth
spell hadn't removed either.
Anna felt as though the warm-up had taken her nearly a glass
by the time her cords and throat were clear. She remounted
slowly, her eyes going toward the west, where the clouds
continued to build. Rickel and Lejun eased up beside her as she
rode back to the low hillcrest, the intermittent sun falling on her

back, nearly a score of mounted guards around her. 
At the top of the rise, she slowed, then reined up, her eyes on
the walls to the west. Envaryl remained the same, the gates
closed, the town apparently still, the crimson banners billowing
now and again in the gusting winds. Ehara remained
barricaded inside the yellow-brick walls, waiting for the worst,
unwilling to surrender, unwilling to flee.
The players, standing on the grass to Anna's right and facing
the town, were in the middle of the warm-up song. None
looked in Anna's direction.
Hanfor eased his mount beside Anna, and Rickel and Lejun
moved forward, their shields up. Anna touched the small
ensorcelled shield in the holder by her knee, trying to sense any
draw of sorcerous power from her, then straightened in the
saddle.
"Arms Commander," she said.
"Lady and Regent."
Hanfor's eyes met hers, and Anna could see the darkness
behind them. She wondered if her own eyes held that
blackness, and feared that they did, and that the darkness
would only increase over the years.
"Lord Ehara will not come forth," Hanfor said quietly. "That
would give you honor."
"And if I destroy Envaryl?" she asked. "Will that dishonor me
and Defalk?"

"No." The arms commander shook his head. "You will triumph
by force of might, and all will understand."
Anna wanted to scream in frustration. To save lives she was
going to have to butcher a town. To save women from chains,
she was going to have to kill some of those same women. So
why should you be different? Military leaders had those decisions
for centuries. "Because," she murmured under her breath, "I
didn't want to be a military leader." You still chose, and you
have to pay. Lord, she was always paying, and if she said
anything out loud… well, everyone would think that the regent
was self-pitying and self-indulgent.
A low rumble of thunder echoed in from the west, and the
breeze stiffened. The crimson banners above the closed south
gates of Envaryl flew free in the wind.
To her right, the players started the battle hymn, raggedly at
first, and then with greater intensity, as if the stirring music
helped focus them.
When they finished, Anna glanced at Hanfor, nodded and rode
toward the waiting players.
Liende inclined her head. "We stand ready, Regent."
"Liende, the battle hymn."
"There is a storm nearing… Lady Anna." Liende looked at
Anna, almost pleading.
"I know, chief player. Have them play the battle song." There
won't be enough left of Envaryl or Ehara to … To what? Does it

matter? "It has to be this way." She shook her head. "Just have
them ready to play the battle hymn when I signal." 
"Yes, Regent." Liende looked down.
With a barely concealed sigh, Anna dismounted and handed
Farinelli's reins to one of the newer guards-Junert. The
armsman took them without meeting her eyes. The sorceress
walked to the open space in front of the players. A drop of rain
spattered against Anna's cheek.
Rickel and Lejun already waited, shields and eyes facing the
yellow-brick walls of Envaryl. Standing between them in the
narrow space pointed toward Ehara's last stronghold, Anna
began another vocalise. Between the hill and the yellow-brick
walls, the rain intensified, the heavy droplets flattening
individual blades of grass in waves.
Anna turned.
"At your command, Regent."
Anna looked toward the doomed town, toward the yellow-brick
walls set in green grass, toward the crimson banners that,
streaming in the quickening wind, shivered as the rain struck
the fabric.
"Ready," Anna said.
"The battle hymn. On my mark… Mark!" Liende gave a sharp
gesture then turned and lifted her own horn.
With the strains of the music, Anna sang, sang the song she'd

hoped never to use again.
"I have sung the glory of the thunder of the sky, 
I am bringing forth the voltage so the bolts of death can fly 
I have loosed the fateful lightning so Ehara's men will die, 
My songs will strike them dead. 
Glory, glory, halleluia; glory, glory, halleluia; 
Glory, glory, halleluia, my songs will strike them dead!
Out of the darkness came a violent gust of wind that whipped
Anna's battered felt hat off her head and into the storm
somewhere. She kept singing, ignoring the little voice that said, 
It's only a strophic spell… only a strophic spell. She
concentrated on a mental image of storms, earthquakes, and
lightning-all flattening and annihilating Envaryl and Ehara,
turning the town into a wasteland.
"In the terror of the tempest, death is brought between the hills, 
With a slashing through the bosom that flattens as it kills…"
The clouds swirled, their mottled white-and-gray turning
night-black well before the end of the spell. The wind's whistle
mounted into a howl, and Anna found herself bracing her legs
against the force of the wind as she finished the last words.
Flashes of strobelike intensity flickered within the building
storm-clouds. From out of the clouds over Envaryl white
globules fell, hammering at roofs and walls, enormous white
projectiles-hail. Hail such as Anna had never seen as she stood,
panting, horrified. 
The ground itself rumbled, once, twice, and the grass flattened

in circular waves rippling away from the walled town. Then,
chunks of the brick walls began to tumble, outward, a cascade
of bricks fragmenting, exploding, as the walls slumped into
heaps of broken and shattered yellow chunks, darkened with
the sheets of rain that swept over Envaryl.
Anna held her breath as a deep thrumming chord plucked the
dark sky, and a wave of blackness swept like a silent wind out
of the night clouds. For an instant, silence held the rolling hills
and doomed town.
The first bolt of lightning was almost hesitant, like Anna had
felt, forking down at the south gate towers, slashing into the
timbered gates themselves, splitting the left gate, and throwing
the right gate wide. A second bolt followed the first, farther
west, lashing down somewhere behind the yellow brick walls
that had turned green in the stormlight.
After the third, sunlike, slash of fire, the lightnings rained on
the tumbled buildings of Envaryl so quickly that a garish
arc-lamp illumination lit the hills, casting strange, elongated
shadows, shadows that shifted instantaneously, fluctuated.
Some of the horses around the sorceress screamed, and yells of
armsmen struggling with spooked mounts vied with the
thunder and sizzling of the rain of power that hammered at the
ancient town.
Abruptly, the lightnings stopped. The thunder rumbled into
dull and distant mutterings, and the intermittent sheets of rain
subsided into a cold drizzle.

From darkness emerged a gray dawn that slowly brightened.
Anna looked up at the dark clouds that covered the entire sky,
even as they lightened and began to turn back to mottled
white-and-gray. With the misting rain that fell all around her,
her hair was plastered against her skull, and her head ached,
inside and out. Her eyes burned, burned with faint double
images… as if to say that she had created Darksong through
Clearsong.
A last, long line of fire-lightning streaked across the
late-afternoon sky, well to the north, and a single rumbling, like
a distant timpani, faded away.
Anna forced herself to view what had been Envaryl. The
highest structures remaining were the heaps of blackened
yellow bricks that had been the walls, bricks that steamed
where the rain bathed them, creating a low ground fog that
misted the details of destruction. Occasional tongues of flame
leaped out of the fog, and the crackling of fires hissed across the
wet grass between the Defalkan force and the fallen town.
The ground rumbled and shook one last time, then shuddered
into silence.
Rickel and Lejun lowered their shields until the lower rims
rested on the ground. Their eyes remained focused westward,
as if they could not look away.
Thin trails of smoke, light gray and dark gray and white and
black, swirled out of the wreckage, weaving up and above the
steam and fog through the lightening rain, twisting together. 
Anna turned back toward the players. Delvor sat in a heap.

Yuarl stood, sobbing. Duralt, his black hair swirled in the wind,
looked blankly westward. Of all the players, only Palian and
Liende met Anna's eyes.
"What must be, must be," said Palian.
"It is done, Regent," said the chief player.
"No," Anna said heavily. "It is done here. Only here." Her eyes
went westward again, where the clouds fragmented. Despite
the knives stabbing from inside her eyes, despite the shivering
within that felt like dissonant chords, she watched the clouds,
their images doubled, and a few patches of blue sky, before her
eyes dropped to what remained of Envaryl.
The far hillside steamed, charred, sodden. The antlike figures of
those few survivors who were not armsmen-and there were but
a handful- staggered into the sudden light.
Anna walked with leaden legs to Farinelli and climbed
laboriously into the saddle. Her breathing was not quite
gasping as she sat, gazing westward, yet looking at nothing.
"No one will challenge you again in Dumar," said Hanfor.
"Not in Dumar." But everywhere else where she had not used
fire and sorcery… every leader in Liedwahr seemed to think
he-or she-was different. Hanfor and Jecks were right. Only
force worked. Only fucking force. At least in the short run…
and she'd never been given enough time to do anything… Not on
earth, not on Erde …
Anna turned Farinelli back toward the river road, and toward

Hasjyl, where Jecks rested, and, with luck, had recovered
enough for the trip back to Dumaria.
Hanfor wheeled his mount alongside Anna's, and they rode
eastward through the continuing drizzle, the silent lines of
armsmen following, turning away from the sodden steaming
heap of yellow brick that had been Envaryl.
Lord, she was tired.
120
ENCORA, RANUAK
VERIA stands at the entrance to the sitting room. "Come in,
and don't look so pleased with yourself," says the Matriarch.
"You see the beginning of a new age in Ebra. I see slaughter
and death and rape and pillage, and you and your
SouthWomen have created it."
"I didn't come to be insulted," answers the dark-haired Veria.
"I'd hoped we could talk as adults." She steps into the room,
and glances around, her eyes touching Alya, Ulgar, and the
Matriarch.
"What did you wish to discuss?" asks the round-faced
Matriarch.
"Why you talk and do nothing, and why you are so angered
when I undertake to act?" Veria stands beside the empty
straight-backed wooden chair, but makes no move to seat
herself.

"Veria, sometimes, had I not seen you emerge from my own
body, I would say that you could not have been my daughter."
The Matriarch's voice is nearly flat, empty of the cheer that
usually fills it. Her round face is stern.
"Mother…"
"Do not 'Mother' me, child!"
The sitting room grows silent, although Ulgar shakes his head
minutely.
"You think that, because I do not raise armsmen, I do not care.
You think that, because I prefer to work with coins and trade,
that I do not understand warfare. Child, you do not think at all."
Veria steps back, turning toward the door. "I did not come for
this."
"Sit and listen, my dear one. 
Listen 'til my tale is done!"
The raw power of the Matriarch's contralto voice, like a cascade
unloosed after ages, thrusts Veria down into the waiting chair.
Alya shrinks into her own seat. Ulgar's smile is bitter.
"You will listen. And then you will go to Elawha. If you survive
what you have created, you may come home." The Matriarch's
voice remains almost flat. "The sorceress and I are different, so
different that you do not see how we are the same."
Veria's eyes remain doubting.

"The sorceress has ridden to war. Have you noted how she has
achieved her success? She moves more quickly than her
enemies, and with a force small enough that she can survive
without huge supply trains and an endless outpouring of gold.
She spends herself more recklessly than her coins. She subjects
others to nothing she will not endure. 
"After less than a season, Dumar is hers. The Evult took two
years and never moved more than a hundred leagues into
Defalk. The late Prophet Behlem moved into Defalk in weeks,
and could not hold it for much longer than that. The sorceress
could hold Dumar for all her life, yet she will not keep it. On
that you can wager golds… if you have any to wager. Why
not, my child? Because possessions possess you. Dumar would
end up possessing Defalk, and she feels that, if she does not
know it." The Matriarch pauses and sips the hot cider Ulgar has
poured for her.
"She is not liked, not all that well, and I doubt that she ever will
be. She has gotten harder, and stronger, yet men will die for
her." The Matriarch's eyes narrow as they survey Veria. "None
will die for you, and yet many will die because of what you
have done. You have sent blades and gold to others so that they
might fight."
"So has the sorceress," protests Veria, her voice small.
"She risks all with every action she takes. You have risked little,
or so you thought. Now, my daughter, you will risk what you
ask others to hazard." The Matriarch clears her throat.
"Go now, go and fight 

for all you've said is right…"
When the spellsong ends, the tears stream down Veria's cheeks.
"You… my own mother… using Darksong…" She stumbles
from the room and down the corridor.
"Matriarchs pay prices as well," Ulgar says quietly to Alya.
"They must, you know?"
The Matriarch's face is blank, her eyes black behind their
natural darkness. For a time, for a long time, she holds the
cooling cider she cannot drink, the cider which she sees through
pain and double images.
121
MANSUUS, MANSUUR
SO… besides destroying two fleets of Sturinnese ships and
annihilating every one of their armsmen and Sea-Priests in
Liedwahr, she has added Dumar to Defalk. Ha! Let the Maitre
of Sturinn stew over that!" Konsstin smiles broadly, leaning
forward in his chair, arms half-crossed over the flattened scrolls
on his desk.
"That is not all she has done," cautions Bassil. 
"Oh?" Konsstin smiles brightly. "You sound displeased, or
cautious, Bassil. What else has our dear sorceress done?"
"Besides reducing Envaryl to lightning-scarred rubble? Or
roasting Ehara within its walls?"
"Nasty turn, she has," muses the Liedfuhr, leaning back. "Is

there more?"
"She has destroyed every armsman who would oppose her
throughout Dumar, and left reminders that failure to be loyal
to Defalk is deadly."
"Ha! Everyone promises that, but when it comes to the fact-"
"Have you seen the ruins of Envaryl, sire? Or that massive
bridge that spans the Falche? Or felt the sorcery that touched
the harmonies?"
Konsstin paused. "Are you certain she is that strong?"
"Your seers are, sire. They say her spells are bound with the
lyric tone, with anger, and with fire. For a generation, Dumar
will find itself bound to destroy any invader and any enemy to
Defalk."
For a long moment, Konsstin gazes toward the
orange-and-purple of twilight. Then he sighs. "It could be
worse."
"Those dispatches?" asked Bassil.
"We'll have to rewrite them. We can't send troops near Envaryl
now that she's removed the threat. And it wouldn't do any
good… now." Konsstin fingers his beard. "Perhaps… with all
the messages from Rabyn and Nubara… we should tell the
sorceress that we are deeply concerned about our grandson's
patrimony."
"You'd mention those messages from them?"

"Of course not. We'll just say that the recent example of
Sturinnese adventuring has created fears in many that Neserea
will be the next target of Sea-Priest expansion… No, make
that-will be among the next targets of Sea-Priest expansion.
Especially since Dumar is clearly now free of the threat of the
Sea-Priests." Konsstin smiles, and adds, "Oh, and make sure to
send another five hundred golds to Bertmynn. And more plate
iron. She'll have to deal with Defalk for a time, I suspect, before
she can address Ebra. She's been gone from Falcor for two
seasons-and more by the time she returns. That's too long for
someone who's held power for such a short time."
"You sound certain of that, sire."
"There are always internal politics, everywhere, and usually
they're more deadly than outside enemies. Look at my dear
grandson and Nubara. Or the sorceress and Behlem. Or the
Council of Wei." Konsstin stands and shrugs. "She will have
much to occupy her. Much. With all her power, I would not
stand in her boots." He shakes his head and looks to the
balcony door, then stands slowly. "Not I."
122
IN the study once used by Lord Ehara, Anna stood at the
window and looked out to the south, at the stones of the second
rebuilt bridge across the Falche, stones that shimmered in the
bright midday light of full summer.
Bridges… You should be back in Falcor, rebuilding Defalk,
building highways and bridges there.

She shook her head. She'd been undoing some of the
devastation she had created, and that had meant rebuilding the
main bridge in Dumaria and the one in Narial-as well as
singing the seeking spell over all of Narial-and publicly
incinerating another half-dozen fanatics. She didn't need
disloyalty in the main port city of Dumar.
Now… tomorrow, she would be leaving, perhaps in time to
reach Falcor by the beginning of harvest season. She turned
from the window, walking past the low bookshelves, and seated
herself behind the dark wooden writing table. The mantel of the
oil lamp was still sooty.
At the rap on the door, she looked up.
"Overcaptain Alvar, Lady Anna," Rickel announced.
Anna winced inside. Fhurgen should have been there. Lord,
how many will die for you before it's all over? Jecks should have
been sitting with her, too.
"Lady Anna, you requested my presence?"
"I did." Anna offered a smile to the swarthy and stocky officer
and gestured to the chair across the writing table from her.
"Have you thought about it? How do you feel about staying?
I'd like an honest answer. You don't have to stay here. I don't
want to force you."
Alvar smiled cautiously. "Chief armsman of Dumar, lady, and
you think I would turn that down? Not many's the armsman
who gets to be an overcaptain and chief armsman of a land. I'd
thought myself lucky to become a captain of lancers." His smile

turned to a grin. "Dumar is much like Nesalia, except warmer. I
can't say as I mind that." The grin faded. "I worry about you,
lady. You've been good to me, and I'd not wish you thinking I
was abandoning you."
Anna shook her head. "I need… The Regency needs… a strong
and honest man here. Both Lady Siobion and I have to be able
to rely on you. I don't need more worries about Dumar. You're
honest. You know people, and you're fair."
"I will be doing my best for you."
"We need to tell Lady Siobion." Anna smiled, then raised her
voice. "Rickel?"
The door opened.
"The lady Siobion. I told her that I needed to speak to her."
"Yes, Lady Anna." The study door closed.
"I will obey you first, lady," Alvar said quietly. "I am not from
Defalk… but you are my liege, no matter the title here." 
"Thank you."
After an awkward silence, the study door opened.
"The lady Siobion," announced Rickel.
Anna and Alvar stood.
"I have come at your request." The slender brunette bowed.
"What would you have of me?"
Anna gestured to the chairs, waiting until everyone was seated.

"The same as before, Siobion. This is Overcaptain Alvar. He will
be chief armsman of Dumar."
Siobion studied the swarthy armsman, then looked at Anna.
"You offer one of your own trusted officers. You rebuild our
bridges. Yet you slaughtered all in Envaryl… my son and my
consort."
"I had no choice," Anna said. "You should understand that."
A bitter smile crossed Siobion's lips. "I understand, and I must
be loyal. I do not have to like what has happened. I never will
like that. You, lady, must understand such."
"I understand and wish I'd never had to come to Dumar," Anna
said bluntly.
"I believe you, lady and my regent. I would that my lord that
understood that." Siobion shook her head. "For what has
happened, you have been more merciful than could have been
expected." Her eyes went to Alvar. "Your overcaptain will serve
us both well, and, I hope, the people of Dumar."
"I will, Lady Siobion," Alvar said.
"He will," echoed Anna.
Siobion offered a half-shrug. "Is there aught else you require of
me?"
"No. We've gone over everything else. You know when the
golds for repayment are due."
"I do. They will arrive. We have no choice, and that may make

it easier upon us all." Siobion bowed.
"You may go." Anna rose.
After Siobion had left the study, the regent turned to Alvar.
"Make sure your reports to me are honest. Don't try to make
me happy. If I know how good or how bad a problem really is,
I can work out something."
"Only from you, Lady Anna, would I trust such words. Every
word will be the truth as I know it."
"That's all I can ask." Anna nodded. "I'll talk to you later, before
we leave."
Anna followed Alvar out, but turned left and walked quickly to
the guest suite adjoining hers.
The bandaged Jecks smiled at her from his chair, then stood
slowly.
"Sit down. You're still a mess, and you don't need to reinjure
yourself out of courtesy." Anna waved the white-haired lord
back into his seat.
"Courtesy, my lady, that is much of what remains to me."
"Nonsense. You'll be back in the saddle before long."
"Tomorrow," Jecks promised. 
"We'll see. There's a padded seat on one of the wagons, just in
case. Or a litter."
"A wagon? I must ride a wagon?"

"We'll see," Anna repeated.
"You are troubled, still." Jecks frowned. "Yet you have won
great victories."
"Oh, I've won great victories. I'm the warrior sorceress." Anna
walked to the window.
From his chair, Jecks nodded. "A mighty one."
"I hate it, you know." Anna's voice thickened. She couldn't help
that, and she turned from Jecks, eyes blank as they saw
nothing beyond the open shutters. "At first, it wasn't too bad. It
was good to have power, not to always be ordered around by
men. To have some say. I still don't want to be ordered around.
Or judged." Her voice dropped to almost a whisper. "No one
listens to what I say. No one listens to the words. They only do
as I say because I have power, not because I'm right."
"You are not the first ruler to discover that." Jecks' voice was
warm, if slightly raspy.
"And I won't be the last. I know that. It doesn't help."
Her children hadn't listened, not that much. Avery certainly
hadn't listened. Brill hadn't listened when she'd wanted him to
try harmony, and it might have saved his life. Daffyd hadn't
listened to either her or Brill, and he was dead. Behlem hadn't
listened. Ehara hadn't listened. Did she leave or kill all those
who didn't listen? Was she that pig-headed?
"I hate it. Why don't men listen?" She shook her head. Women
didn't listen, either. "Why don't people listen?"

"Anna…" Jecks coughed. "I have done my best to listen. I am
old, and I have not always listened…"
"You're not old," she said, turning back into the room. "Not in
any way."
He laughed once, and she could tell the laugh hurt, and that
hurt her, too. But he was right about one thing. A handful had
listened-Liende, Hanfor, Alvar, Dythya, Secca, Skent… and
Jecks. Jecks… always there.
She stepped up beside his chair and took his hand, glancing
back toward the window and the gardens-and the
late-afternoon sun. Late afternoon-was that what they had?
She smiled. Better that than twilight. Far better. She squeezed
his hand gently. His fingers tightened around hers, just barely,
just enough.

