
Milestones in Discovery and Invention
*
MODERN ROBOTICS
BUILDING VERSATILE MACHINES
Harry Henderson

MODERN ROBOTICS: Building Versatile Machines
Copyright © 2006 by Harry Henderson
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form 
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or 
by any information storage or retrieval systems, without permission in writing from 
the publisher. For information contact:
Chelsea House
An imprint of Infobase Publishing
132 West 31st Street
New York NY 10001
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Henderson, Harry, 1951–
  Modern robotics: building versatile machines / Harry Henderson.
    p. cm. — (Milestones in discovery and invention)
  Includes index.
  ISBN 0-8160-5745-1
  1. Robotics. I. Title. II. Series.
  TJ211.H36 2006
  629.8'92—dc22  
 
2005031805
Chelsea House books are available at special discounts when purchased in bulk 
quantities for businesses, associations, institutions, or sales promotions. Please call 
our Special Sales Department in New York at (212) 967-8800 or (800) 322-8755.
You can find Chelsea House on the World Wide Web at 
http://www.chelseahouse.com
Text design by James Scotto-Lavino
Cover design by Dorothy M. Preston
Illustrations by Sholto Ainslie and Melissa Ericksen
Printed in the United States of America
MP FOF 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
To the researchers who are finding in robots
a mirror in which to learn more about humanity.

PREFACE 
ix
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
xiii
INTRODUCTION 
xv
 1  A NEW SCIENCE: 
NORBERT WIENER AND CYBERNETICS 
1
Child Prodigy 
2
Brilliant Mathematician 
4
Life at MIT 
5
Stopping the Bombers 
6
I Was There: “Wiener Walks” 
7
Feedback 
8
Computers and Controls 
8
Neural Networks 
10
Toward a New Science 
11
Cybernetics 
13
Cybernetics and Robotic Turtles 
14
The Boston Arm 
15
Parallels: Applications of Cybernetics 
16
Facing the Social Consequences 
17
Chronology 
18
Further Reading 
20
 2  REVOLUTIONIZING INDUSTRY: 
JOSEPH ENGELBERGER AND UNIMATE 
22
Hands-on Experience 
22
Developing Industrial Robots 
23
Other Scientists: George Devol (1920–  ) 
25
Robots on the Assembly Line 
25
e
CONTENTS

Industrial Robots Today 
27
Social Impact: Robots and Human Labor 
28
Robots in Service 
28
Elder Statesperson of Robotics 
31
A Wrong Direction? 
31
Trends: The Robotics Industry Today 
32
Chronology 
33
Further Reading 
34
 3  LEARNING TO WALK: 
MARC RAIBERT AND ROBOTS WITH LEGS 
36
Making of an Engineer 
37
Dynamic Walkers 
38
Robot Kangaroos 
40
Boston Dynamics 
42
Connections: Beasts and Bots 
43
Robot Mules 
44
Solving Problems: Robots and Animation 
44
A Dynamic Future 
46
Chronology 
47
Further Reading 
48
 4  REAL-WORLD ROBOTS: 
COLIN ANGLE, HELEN GREINER, AND iROBOT 
50
Hands-on Builder 
51
Teaming Up: Brooks, Angle, and Greiner 
52
Baby Doll 
53
Solving Problems: Doing Enough with Less 
54
Household Robots: A Different Approach 
55
Behavioral Building Blocks 
57
Robots on the Front Lines 
60
Future Household Robots 
60
Honored for Innovation 
62
Chronology 
62
Further Reading 
63
 5  ROBOT EXPLORERS: 
DONNA SHIRLEY AND THE MARS ROVERS 
66
A Love of Engineering 
66
Getting Respect 
67

Designing Space Robots 
68
Connections: Why Aren’t They Here? 
70
Missions to Mars 
71
Mariner 9 
71
Managing Risk 
72
Trends: Milestones in NASA’s Mars Exploration 
73
Better, Faster, Cheaper 
75
Robots and Rovers 
76
Sojourner’s Truth 
77
Issues: Should We Send People or Robots 
to Explore the Universe? 
80
Forging a New Career 
81
Chronology 
82
Further Reading 
83
 6 THOUGHTFUL ROBOTS: RODNEY BROOKS AND COG 
85
A Passion for Computers 
85
Studying Artificial Intelligence 
86
The Challenge of Vision 
87
A “Brainless” Robot 
88
Parallels: Artificial Life and Artificial Intelligence 
90
Robot Insects 
92
Humanoid Robots 
93
Cog 
96
Practical Robotics 
97
What Distinguishes Life? 
98
Chronology 
100
Further Reading 
101
 7 ROBOT AMBASSADOR: MASATO HIROSE AND ASIMO 
103
From Motorcycles to Robotics 
103
Learning to Walk 
104
Asimo Debuts 
106
Other Scientists: Sony’s Robot Researchers 
108
Robotic Ambassador 
110
Future Helpers 
111
Other Approaches 
111
Issues: Robots and Religion 
112
Chronology 
113
Further Reading 
114

 8 SOCIABLE ROBOTS: CYNTHIA BREAZEAL AND KISMET 
116
In Love with the Droids 
116
From Cog to Kismet 
118
Seeing, Hearing, “Speaking” 
119
Issues: What Might It Mean for Robots to “Feel”? 
121
Emotional States 
124
Parallels: A Robotic Garden 
124
Leonardo 
125
The Future of Sociable Robots 
126
Social Impact: Women in Robotics 
127
“A Robot That Can Be Your Friend” 
128
Chronology 
129
Further Reading 
130
 9  RADICAL ROBOTICIST: 
HANS MORAVEC AND THE FUTURE OF ROBOTICS 
131
At Home with Robots 
132
Robots à la Carte 
132
I Was There: Moravec the Hacker 
134
Robotic Vehicles 
135
Moore’s Law and the Quest for Robot Intelligence 
136
Solving Problems: In the Driver’s Seat 
137
Issues: Moravec v. Brooks 
139
Robots: The Next Generations 
140
Meanwhile, Back at the Warehouse 
142
Social Impact: Transcendence through Technology? 
143
Looking Forward 
144
Chronology 
145
Further Reading 
146
 10  CYBORG ODYSSEY: 
KEVIN WARWICK EXTENDS THE HUMAN BODY 
148
Science, Soccer, and Motorcycles 
148
Working World and University 
150
Boosting Productivity 
151
Helping the Disabled 
151
The Seven Dwarfs 
152
Solving Problems: Safer Baths 
153
“Hello, Mr. Chip” 
154

I Was There: Robot Bumper Cars 
155
From Humans to Cyborgs 
155
Issues: Convenience v. Privacy 
156
Cyborg 2.0: The Neural Implant Project 
158
Cyborg Experiments 
159
The Human Connection 
160
An Open Future 
160
Social Impact: “Enhanced” vs. “Normal” 
162
Chronology 
164
Further Reading 
165
CHRONOLOGY  
167
GLOSSARY 
169
FURTHER RESOURCES 
175
INDEX 
181

T
he Milestones in Science and Discovery set is based on a simple 
 but powerful idea—that science and technology are not sepa-
rate from people’s daily lives. Rather, they are part of seeking to 
understand and reshape the world, an activity that virtually defines 
being human.
More than a million years ago, the ancestors of modern humans 
began to shape stones into tools that helped them compete with the 
specialized predators around them. Starting about 35,000 years 
ago, the modern type of human, Homo sapiens, also created elabo-
rate cave paintings and finely crafted art objects, showing that tech-
nology had been joined with imagination and language to compose 
a new and vibrant world of culture. Humans were not only shaping 
their world but representing it in art and thinking about its nature 
and meaning.
Technology is a basic part of that culture. The mythologies of 
many peoples include a trickster figure, who upsets the settled 
order of things and brings forth new creative and destructive pos-
sibilities. In many myths, for instance, a trickster such as the Native 
Americans’ Coyote or Raven steals fire from the gods and gives it 
to human beings. All technology, whether it harnesses fire, electric-
ity, or the energy locked in the heart of atoms or genes, partakes of 
the double-edged gift of the trickster, providing power to both hurt 
and heal.
An inventor of technology is often inspired by the discoveries of 
scientists. Science as we know it today is younger than technology, 
dating back about 500 years to a period called the Renaissance. 
During the Renaissance, artists and thinkers began to explore 
nature systematically, and the first modern scientists, such as 
Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519) and Galileo Galilei (1564–1642), 
ix
e
PREFACE

used instruments and experiments to develop and test ideas about 
how objects in the universe behaved. A succession of revolutions 
followed, often introduced by individual geniuses: Isaac Newton 
(1643–1727) in mechanics and mathematics, Charles Darwin 
(1809–1882) in biological evolution, Albert Einstein (1879–1955) 
in relativity and quantum physics, James Watson (1928– ) and 
Francis Crick (1916–2004) in modern genetics. Today’s emerg-
ing fields of science and technology, such as genetic engineering, 
nanotechnology, and artificial intelligence, have their own inspir-
ing leaders.
The fact that particular names such as Newton, Darwin, and 
Einstein can be so easily associated with these revolutions suggests 
the importance of the individual in modern science and technology. 
Each book in this set thus focuses on the lives and achievements of 
eight to 10 individuals who together have revolutionized an aspect 
of science or technology. Each book presents a different field: 
marine science, genetics, astronomy and space science, forensic sci-
ence, communications technology, robotics, artificial intelligence, 
and mathematical simulation. Although early pioneers are included 
where appropriate, the emphasis is generally on researchers who 
worked in the 20th century or are still working today.
The biographies in each volume are placed in an order that reflects 
the flow of the individuals’ major achievements, but these life sto-
ries are often intertwined. The achievements of particular men and 
women cannot be understood without some knowledge of the times 
they lived in, the people they worked with, and developments that 
preceded their research. Newton famously remarked, “If I have seen 
further [than others], it is by standing on the shoulders of giants.” 
Each scientist or inventor builds upon—or wrestles with—the work 
that has come before. Individual scientists and inventors also inter-
act with others in their own laboratories and elsewhere, sometimes 
even partaking in vast collective efforts, such as the government and 
private projects that raced at the end of the 20th century to com-
plete the description of the human genome. Scientists and inventors 
affect, and are affected by, economic, political, and social forces 
as well. The relationship between scientific and technical creativity 
and developments in social institutions is another important facet 
of this series.
x   Modern Robotics

A number of additional features provide further context for the 
biographies in these books. Each chapter includes a chronology and 
suggestions for further reading. In addition, a glossary and a general 
bibliography (including organizations and Web resources) appear 
at the end of each book. Several types of sidebars are also used in 
the text to explore particular aspects of the profiled scientists’ and 
inventors’ work:
Connections Describes the relationship between the featured work 
and other scientific or technical developments.
I Was There Presents first-hand accounts of discoveries or inventions.
Issues Discusses scientific or ethical issues raised by the discovery 
or invention.
Other Scientists (or Inventors) Describes other individuals who 
played an important part in the work being discussed.
Parallels Shows parallel or related discoveries.
Social Impact Suggests how the discovery or invention affects or 
might affect society and daily life.
Solving Problems Explains how a scientist or inventor dealt with a 
particular technical problem or challenge.
Trends Presents data or statistics showing how developments in a 
field changed over time.
Our hope is that readers will be intrigued and inspired by these 
stories of the human quest for understanding, exploration, and 
innovation. We have tried to provide the context and tools to enable 
readers to forge their own connections and to further pursue their 
fields of interest.
PREFACE   xi


I 
would like to express my gratitude to robotics researchers Joseph 
Engelberger, Rodney Brooks, Marc Raibert, and Donna Shirley 
for taking the time from their busy schedules to answer questions 
and provide feedback and photographs. I would also like to thank 
the folks at Honda Motor Corporation and iRobot, Inc. for their 
help in obtaining information and photographs. My editor, Frank 
Darmstadt, deserves special thanks for his patient help seeing this 
project through to its conclusion. And also a special thanks to copy 
editor Amy L. Conver. Finally, I am thankful every day for sharing 
my life with my wife, Lisa Yount: fellow author, burgeoning artist, 
and always best friend.
xiii
e
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


A
lthough true robots are a creation of the second half of the 20th 
  century, the idea of the robot has stirred the human imagination 
for a much longer period of time.
Images of artificial people and mechanical servants stretch back 
even to the days of ancient myth. For example, the Greek god of 
metalwork, called Vulcan or Hephaestus, was said to have created 
two kinds of mechanical servants: graceful golden handmaidens 
and (more practically perhaps) tables that walked by themselves on 
three legs.
In medieval Jewish lore, a golem was a clay statute that could 
be animated by a magician using incantations from the Kabbalah. 
The instructions for a golem’s operation were inscribed on a scroll 
and placed inside the being’s head. In one legend, a golem was given 
instructions to fill a well, but its scroll did not tell it when to stop 
filling it. Soon the house was overflowing with water in what was 
perhaps the world’s first programming error. Fear of losing control 
has always been part of our primal response to robots.
Automatons and the Age of Reason
The Renaissance brought new interest in the structures and mecha-
nisms of the human body, and in the late 15th and early 16th cen-
turies, the famed artist-inventor Leonardo da Vinci made sketches 
of many mechanisms based on principles he found in nature. One 
such drawing showed a mechanical knight that could move its head 
and jaw, sit up, and wave its arms.
By the 18th century, the construction of elaborate automatons 
had become the rage in the royal courts of Europe. One inventor, 
xv
e
INTRODUCTION

Jacques de Vaucanson, built an android or humanlike automaton 
that could play the flute. Another Vaucanson creation, a mechanical 
duck, could simulate eating, digestion, and defecation. It should be 
noted, however, that these automata, despite their complexity, were 
not true robots in the modern sense. Everything they did was dic-
tated step by step by the action of clockwork, cams, or other mecha-
nisms. Their actions were fixed and unvarying, without regard for 
the people or things in the surrounding environment.
The automaton seemed to symbolize the triumph of the Age of 
Reason, a time when a newly confident science mastered the secrets 
of gravity and motion. To many observers, these developments in 
theory and technology suggested that if a machine could be made to 
imitate the actions of animals and even people, perhaps living things 
were merely elaborate automatons whose mechanism would soon be 
uncovered by science.
Anticipating Robots: 
20th-Century Science Fiction
At the dawn of the 20th century, an explosion of new scientific 
theories and inventions led to the creation of a literature that sought 
to explore their implications and a variety of possible futures. In 
the science fiction magazines of the 1920s and 1930s, the alien 
“bug-eyed monsters” were often accompanied by hulking robots. 
These robots were often relentless in their attempts to carry out 
some sort of evil plan.
Robots also appeared in other media. Indeed, the word robot 
is first found in the 1921 play Rossum’s Universal Robots by the 
Czech playwright Karel Capek. Here and in Fritz Lang’s 1927 
movie Metropolis, the robot took on a social dimension, symbol-
izing the threat of automation to human livelihoods and suggesting 
the relentless metronome-like pace of the industrial world.
While many writers caused people to fear robots, Isaac Asimov 
inspired a generation of engineers to build them. In Asimov’s sto-
ries, robots were the (usually) reliable servants of humankind, built 
to obey laws that would prevent them from harming people.
xvi   Modern Robotics

Robots’ First Steps
The development of the digital computer as well as sophisticated elec-
tronics and control systems during the 1940s gave engineers the prac-
tical means to start building real robots. This book’s first featured 
scientist, Norbert Wiener, a mathematician whose interests ranged 
from computers to game theory to neurology, provided in cybernetics 
a badly needed theoretical framework for understanding communica-
tion, feedback, and control in machines—including robots.
INTRODUCTION   xvii
A family tree shows how robots developed from increasingly complex tools and 
machines. After they gained mobility, robots then branched into a variety of roles, 
with the potential of becoming humanlike in structure and behavior.

Researchers such as Grey Walter began to build robots that 
rolled about on their own, searching for light sources or otherwise 
interacting with the environment. By the mid-1960s, a rather wob-
bly robot called Shakey was slowly navigating its way down the 
corridors of the Stanford Research Institute, attempting to interpret 
pictures taken through its television camera.
The first real impact of robots, however, came when engineer-
entrepreneur Joseph Engelberger and inventor George Devol created 
Unimate, the first industrial robot, which went to work in a General 
Motors plant in 1961. Unimate was essentially a big arm that could 
be fitted with various kinds of grasping devices and tools. Precisely 
positioned, the robot could work tirelessly at jobs that were either 
dangerous or unpleasant for human workers (such as casting and 
handling red-hot car parts) or were tedious but required consistent 
precision (such as riveting or painting).
Industrial robots increased productivity and helped factories 
remain competitive. The Japanese in particular embraced robots in 
the 1970s. Although some people feared that the industrial robot 
would lead to a massive loss of jobs for human workers, this first 
wave of robots did not cause much disruption.
Mobile Robots and Explorers
Industrial robots were fixed to the assembly line. Robotics research-
ers were also learning how to create robots that could move freely in 
the environment, perceiving and reacting to humans and their world. 
Starting in the 1970s, considerable strides were made in developing 
navigation systems for robots. By the end of the decade, Hans Moravec 
had improved the Stanford Cart, one of the first autonomously navi-
gating robots, so that it could (slowly) find its way through a room 
strewed with chairs without bumping into any.
By the 1980s, robots were even learning to walk like people 
and other animals. Marc Raibert’s “Leg Laboratory” at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) analyzed the gaits of 
humans and animals and created robots that could walk on two 
or four feet or even hop like kangaroos. Other researchers such as 
xviii   Modern Robotics

Rodney Brooks (also at MIT) looked to insects as their inspiration 
for walking robots.
The coming of the Space Age and the desire to explore the solar 
system beyond the reach of human astronauts led to the development 
of robot space probes. At MIT and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in 
Pasadena, California, researchers developed robots that could travel 
millions of miles to gather data from Mars and other planets. Viking 
landers sampled the soil of Mars in 1976. By the end of the century, 
thanks to the work of robotics researchers and engineer-managers 
such as Donna Shirley, mobile robots had become planetary rov-
ers that could drive around Mars looking for interesting rocks and 
formations.
From Helpers to Companions
Back on Earth, mobile robots have started to become useful in 
everyday life. In some hospitals, HelpMate robots (developed by the 
same Joseph Engelberger of Unimate fame) can be found delivering 
medicine and records without human supervision. Robots are even 
starting to become household appliances. The robot vacuum cleaner 
Roomba (created by Colin Angle, Helen Greiner, and Rodney 
Brooks) can do a decent job of keeping the floor clean. Tomorrow 
robots may help the elderly get around, fetch things for them, and 
monitor their medical condition.
The ultimate robots—the ones first seen in myth and later in sci-
ence fiction—are the ones that look and act like people. Honda’s 
Asimo robot (developed by a team led by Hirose Masato) looks 
like a tall child and walks and jogs sure-footedly. But the essence of 
humanoid robots also includes the possibility that they might think, 
learn, and even feel the way we do. Rodney Brooks’s and Cynthia 
Breazeal’s work during the 1990s with the robots Cog and Kismet 
expressed a much more organic approach to robot development. 
These robots generated their actions out of the complex interaction 
of sense perceptions, movement, and the cues they observed in the 
humans around them. The hope of these researchers is that robots 
can become social beings.
INTRODUCTION   xix

xx   Modern Robotics
Serious robotics research inevitably brings one to basic philosoph-
ical questions. As robots become more sophisticated, they become 
mirrors in which we see something similar to ourselves in some 
ways yet alien in others. Researchers draw different conclusions 
about how robots may challenge or transform us. Hans Moravec 
believes that robots will reach and then surpass human intelligence 
around the middle of this century. Kevin Warwick, creator of the 
first human neural implant, believes that as robots become more 
like us, we should become more like them—“cyborgs” who can use 
robotic technology to extend the capabilities of the human body 
and mind.
What will the future interactions of people and robots be like? 
Rodney Brooks sounded a hopeful note on the BBC news program 
Hardtalk on August 19, 2002: “Every technology, every science that 
tells us more about ourselves is scary at the time. We’ve so far man-
aged to transcend all of that and come to a better understanding of 
ourselves.”
On a practical level, this understanding is creating a new hybrid 
science of biology and robotics. Mitsuo Kawato, director of the 
ATR Computational Neuroscience Laboratories in Kyoto, Japan, 
explained new developments in the January 2005 issue of MIT’s 
Technology Review. Kawato’s laboratory is using detailed scans 
of human brains to help design a robot that has neural and brain 
structures similar to those of a human child. Kawato explained 
that “Only when we try to reproduce brain functions in artificial 
machines can we understand the information processing of the 
brain.”

1
1
B
y the 20th century, people had developed many sophisticated 
devices, ranging from steam engines and elaborate manufactur-
ing equipment to intricate telegraph and telephone networks. The 
more complicated the machine, the harder it is to control. As a 
result, there was an increasing effort to create automatic control-
and-switching systems that could prevent freight trains from col-
liding or route telephone calls across hundreds of miles. Further, 
the challenges of 20th-century warfare would bring the need for 
systems that could, for example, allow antiaircraft guns to track 
and predict a bomber’s path.
Only electronic circuits that could react at the speed of light 
would prove to be fast enough to respond to these challenges. But 
even as engineers created new electronics applications, scientists 
found they were lacking a comprehensive theory that could explain 
how signals—information—flowed between machines and their 
environment. Without such a theory, engineers were finding that 
controls were not behaving as expected—for example, an automatic 
antiaircraft gun would often slew back and forth rather than lock-
ing on to the target plane.
Gaining a true understanding of communications and control 
systems would require contributions from biology (particularly 
neurophysiology), new forms of mathematics, and the emerging 
field of digital computing design. One mathematician, Norbert 
Wiener, would draw insights from these and other fields together, 
creating a new science that he would call cybernetics. In turn, 
A NEW SCIENCE
NORBERT WIENER AND CYBERNETICS

2   Modern Robotics
cybernetics would form a crucial theoretical basis for modern 
robotics and automation.
Child Prodigy
Norbert Wiener was born on November 26, 1894. His father was 
a teacher of modern languages at the University of Missouri, and 
his mother was also well educated and cultured. Wiener’s par-
ents recognized quickly that he was an exceptional child. Wiener 
learned the alphabet when he was only 18 months old. When he 
was little more than a toddler, Wiener loved to sit under the desk 
in his father’s study and read books he had selected for their inter-
esting pictures and words that he could puzzle out. Illustrated 
Norbert Wiener contributed to many fields of mathematics and science, but 
his development of cybernetics, the science of communication and control, 
provided fundamental principles for the design of complex machines such as 
robots. (©American Institute of Physics, Emilio Segré Archive)

science books and magazines were his favorites—particularly 
natural history.
Surprisingly, young Wiener’s math skills fell short of his liter-
ary attainments. Wiener’s father decided to intervene in his son’s 
education. Under this attention, the boy progressed rapidly in math 
and other fields, but it was not without cost. In the first volume of 
his autobiography, Ex-Prodigy, published in 1953, Norbert Wiener 
recalled typical algebra sessions with his father:
Every mistake had to be corrected as it was made. He would begin 
the discussion in an easy, conversational tone. This lasted exactly 
until I made the first mathematical mistake. Then the gentle and lov-
ing father was replaced by the avenger of the blood. The first warn-
ing he gave me of my unconscious delinquency was a very sharp and 
aspirated “What!” and if I did not follow this by coming to heel at 
once, he would admonish me, “Now do this again!” By this time I 
was weeping and terrified.
Words of praise were few and far between, while shame and 
humiliation were often prolonged. In his autobiography, Wiener 
would express great respect for his father, but he would also recount 
the psychological pain involved in their relationship. Throughout 
his life, Wiener would also suffer from what is today called bipolar 
disorder, characterized by steep mood swings.
Unlike some child prodigies, young Wiener was energetic and 
enjoyed physical activity such as hiking and exploring the coun-
tryside, as well as taking part in farm chores. Unfortunately, the 
boy was physically clumsy, in part because of his poor eyesight. As 
Wiener later observed in his first autobiography:
Muscular dexterity . . . depends on the whole chain which starts in 
the eye, goes through the muscular action, and there continues in the 
scanning by the eye of the results of this muscular action. It is not 
only necessary for the muscular arc and the visual arc to be perfect, 
each by itself, but it is equally necessary that the relations between the 
two be precise and constant.
A NEW SCIENCE   3

4   Modern Robotics
In his second autobiographical volume, I Am a Mathematician, 
published in 1956, Wiener elevated walking to a metaphor about the 
precariousness of life:
The equilibrium of the human body, like most equilibria which we 
find in life processes, is not static but results from a continuous inter-
play of processes which resist in an active way any tendency for them 
to lead to a breakdown. Our standing and our walking are thus a 
continual jujitsu against gravity, as life is a perpetual wrestling match 
with death.
Perhaps it was because Wiener could not take natural coordina-
tion for granted that he would be driven to study it in such detail 
and create new science to explain it.
Wiener was eventually returned to the school system, graduat-
ing from high school when he was only 11 years old. A year later, 
Wiener enrolled at Tufts College (later Tufts University) in Medford, 
Massachusetts, and he was featured on the pages of the New York 
World as the youngest college student in American history. Wiener 
wanted to major in zoology, but as he noted later in his autobiog-
raphy, his chemistry classes resulted in “probably the greatest cost 
in apparatus per experiment ever run up by a Tufts undergradu-
ate”—and the results of dissections in the biology lab were little 
better. Gradually, these physical failures drove him to focus more on 
mathematics, where “one’s blunders . . . can be corrected . . . with 
a stroke of the pencil.” After only three years, the now 15-year-old 
Wiener earned a bachelor’s degree in mathematics. By then math-
ematics professors were even letting him lecture to their classes.
Brilliant Mathematician
Enrolling at Harvard, Wiener made another attempt to study zool-
ogy, but he proved to be as uncomfortable as ever with laboratory 
work. Partly at his father’s urging, he then accepted a graduate 
scholarship at Cornell University, where he studied philosophy and 
mathematics. Still dissatisfied, Wiener returned to Harvard in 1911, 

where he was able to pursue the philosophy of mathematics. He 
obtained his master’s degree in 1912, with the Ph.D. following only 
a year later. Wiener’s doctoral dissertation was on mathematical 
logic (rules for proving assertions). At this time, this was a “leading 
edge” topic in which mathematicians were struggling to define the 
limits of their field.
Along with his doctorate, Wiener had earned a fellowship that 
allowed him to study with some of Europe’s most prominent math-
ematicians. These included British mathematician-philosophers 
Bertrand Russell and Alfred North Whitehead (who had coauthored 
a book called Principia Mathematica that defined modern math-
ematics), G. H. Hardy, as well as leading German figures such as 
David Hilbert. After his return to the United States in 1915, Wiener 
took various instructorships.
As the United States began to edge toward entering the world 
war that had broken out in Europe in 1914, Wiener joined the 
staff at the Proving Ground at Aberdeen, Maryland. He became 
involved in the effort to find faster ways to calculate the tables 
needed for aiming the increasingly rapid-firing artillery that was 
coming into use.
Life at MIT
After the war, Wiener obtained a teaching position at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), where he would spend 
the rest of his career. At the time Wiener arrived, mathematics was 
only a secondary concern at that institution, which was principally 
an engineering school. Wiener’s strong interest in the mathematical 
explanation of physical processes meshed well with MIT professors 
who were concerned about the institute’s lack of theoretical rigor 
and the need for mathematical sophistication to match the complex-
ity of the new electronic devices researchers were creating.
During the 1920s, Wiener would make important contributions 
to the study of Brownian motion (the seemingly random, continu-
ous movement of molecules) as well as harmonic analysis. The lat-
ter involves the breaking down of complex waveforms (such as in 
electronic signals) into manageable components.
A NEW SCIENCE   5

6   Modern Robotics
In 1933, Wiener met Arturo Rosenblueth, a Mexican neuro-
physiologist who had started a wide-ranging informal seminar that 
brought together biological and physical sciences. Wiener was drawn 
to it not only from his lifelong interest in natural history but also 
by the challenge to apply mathematical ideas and communications 
theory to biology, a field that had seen little mathematical analysis. 
Wiener began to think about the similarities between electronic cir-
cuits and the nervous systems of animals.
Meanwhile, Wiener had also worked with Vannevar Bush, 
another versatile mathematician and systems thinker who had 
developed a complex analog computer that could solve equations 
with many variables. (An analog computer uses physical forces 
such as electricity to model and solve equations.) In beginning to 
think about the structure of computing machines, Wiener joined 
other researchers who would soon be launching a revolution in 
information processing.
Stopping the Bombers
In 1939, Europe again plunged into war. Weiner, who had not 
learned much about his Jewish ancestry until later in life, worked 
hard to help German Jewish scientists who had become refugees in 
America. As it became clearer that the United States would enter 
World War II, Wiener also returned to the problem of ballistics, or 
the analysis of trajectories of flying objects.
Bomber planes could now fly much higher and faster than the 
early machines of the previous war. This in turn meant that track-
ing planes and aiming antiaircraft guns by hand would no longer be 
sufficient. This was particularly true because bomber pilots would 
be maneuvering to throw off the gunners’ aim. Nevertheless, Wiener 
was able to apply the statistical analysis that had enabled him to 
work with the random Brownian motion of molecules to dealing 
with the gun-aiming problem. He realized that while the evasive 
maneuvers might be somewhat random, they were limited by the 
physical characteristics of both plane and pilot. For example, a plane 
can only turn or dive so fast without having its wings come off or 
the pilot “black out.” Applying appropriate “statistical constraints,” 

I WAS THERE: “WIENER WALKS”
Fellow faculty members and students at MIT found Norbert Wiener 
to be an intriguing, baffling, and sometimes infuriating “human 
phenomenon.” In their biography of Wiener, Flo Conway and Jim 
Siegelman described what became known as “Wiener Walks”:
[Wiener] was a man in near perpetual motion. Inquisitive, gregarious, 
garrulous. Wiener made a habit of walking MIT’s maze inside and out. By 
the mid-1930s, the entire campus had adapted to the daily spectacle of the 
bespectacled Wiener waddling along the university’s byways and beaten 
paths, waving an ever-present cigar, expounding in his booming voice on 
the most near and far-fetched topics . . .
Many amusing Wiener stories became part of campus lore. One 
time Wiener apparently went into the wrong classroom and delivered 
a lecture to the bemused students. Another time Wiener entered a 
class (one of his own, this time), strode up to the blackboard, wrote 
a “4,” and walked out. Only later did the students realize that Wiener 
had indicated that he would be away for four weeks’ vacation.
There was usually a method to Wiener’s waywardness, though. 
Conway and Siegelman quoted one student describing his encounter 
with Wiener:
He stopped me halfway, we happened to be going in opposite direc-
tions, and he raised some question he wanted to discuss. When we finished 
talking, he started to walk away and then he turned around suddenly, 
came back and asked, “By the way, which way was I headed before we 
met?” I said, “You were going toward Building 8.” And he said, “Thanks, 
that means I’ve already had my lunch.”
Wiener could be rude and inconsiderate. He fell asleep easily 
(he suffered from apnea, a condition where breathing is disrupted 
and sleep interrupted). Yet Wiener could snore away quite loudly 
during a lecture but then wake up and make a comment that seemed 
perfectly relevant.
A NEW SCIENCE   7

8   Modern Robotics
Wiener was able to create a prototype gun-aiming device that could 
predict a target plane’s location with enough accuracy to improve 
considerably the chances of shooting it down.
Feedback
The ballistics work would help Wiener develop a key concept, feed-
back. As the plane moved, the tracking device had to readjust con-
tinuously according to the target’s changing position. Electronically, 
this meant feeding a signal from a sensor (something that monitors 
the environment) to an effector (something that makes a response, 
such as moving the gun barrel). As soon as the effector acts, the 
incoming information will also change (for example, the angle 
between the gun and plane will change). This is feedback.
Feedback can be either negative or positive. In negative feedback, 
the incoming information is used to correct the device’s action 
continuously to minimize the difference between the incoming and 
outgoing information. If this works properly, the shells from the gun 
will converge on the position of the plane, destroying it. Positive 
feedback, on the other hand, responds to an input by increasing or 
diverging the output. An example is an amplifier that accentuates 
(and thus amplifies) an incoming wave signal. The “feedback” that 
sometimes makes an audio amplifier squeal when a musician gets 
too close is positive feedback.
Computers and Controls
By the end of the war, the first electronic computers (such as ENIAC) 
were coming into use. While Wiener was involved only indirectly in 
computer development, he saw great potential for the computers as 
controllers for sophisticated machines such as communications sig-
nal processors. In a classified mathematical paper distributed widely 
to military researchers, Wiener pointed out that communications 
operations “carried out by electrical or mechanical or other such 
means, are in no way essentially different from the operations com-
putationally carried out by . . . the computing machine.”

Wiener also saw a broader application for the new computing 
technology. To encourage research, in December 1944, Wiener 
sent out a letter to mathematicians, experts in the emerging field of 
electronic computing, and neurophysiologists. The letter, calling 
for a two-day conference in Princeton, was signed by Wiener, pio-
neer computer designer Howard Aiken, and John von Neumann, 
a versatile mathematician who had helped design ENIAC. It 
explained that
One of the earliest forms of feedback was the governor used to regulate the 
pressure in a steam engine. As the engine speed increased, the spinning balls 
drew farther apart. A linkage then squeezed the throttle valve, which reduced 
the amount of steam pressure, slowing the engine. If the engine was too slow, 
the process reversed and opened the throttle. The engine was thus kept near a 
constant speed.
A NEW SCIENCE   9

10   Modern Robotics
A group of people interested in communication engineering, the engi-
neering of computing machines, the engineering of control devices . . . 
and the communication and control aspects of the nervous system has 
come to a tentative conclusion that the relations between these fields 
of research have developed to a degree of intimacy that makes a get-
together meeting between people interested in them highly desirable.
Neural Networks
While others worked on the organization of programs and data in 
computers, Wiener remained focused on communications and con-
trol. For him this meant how these processes were carried out by liv-
ing things and the similarities between neurological and electronic 
structures.
Since the 1930s, Wiener had closely followed Arturo Rosenbleuth’s 
work, particularly his study of nervous spasms involving a progres-
sive loss of control. Rosenbleuth had found that in these condi-
tions the nerve signals were not being accurately processed. Wiener 
realized that, similar to the antiaircraft gun that was slewing and 
unable to track the moving plane, these nerve circuits were suffering 
from feedback problems. The same principles that could be used to 
understand automatic control systems should also be applicable to 
neurology.
Rosenbleuth, together with Warren McCulloch (a leading neuro-
psychiatrist) and the logician Walter Pitts, had begun to develop a 
new mathematics to describe networks of nerve cells (neurons) that 
made up the brain’s information processing systems. McCulloch and 
Pitts further demonstrated their theories by constructing the first 
“neural network,” an electronic circuit whose components behave 
in ways similar to neurons.
Neural networks would help answer a difficult question: How 
does the brain make sense of the images created by the eyes’ arrays 
of light-sensing cells? In other words, how does the brain recog-
nize a pattern (such as the numeral “5”) from the surrounding 
background? This research also helped validate Wiener’s growing 
belief that a single framework could be applied to control and com-
munication in living things, computers, and a coming generation 
of robots.

Toward a New Science
As Wiener and his colleagues began to draw together their differ-
ent strands of thought, they were aided greatly by a unique series 
In a neural network, a large number of processing nodes are “trained” to perform 
a task (such as recognizing a letter) by reinforcing correct responses.
A NEW SCIENCE   11

12   Modern Robotics
of conferences sponsored by the Josiah Macy Jr. Foundation, an 
organization devoted to improving medical education. The first 
meeting in 1942 cast the net wide, going beyond the physical sci-
ences by bringing together psychologists, physiologists, and social 
scientists. Participants included Walter McCulloch, as well as the 
noted anthropologists Gregory Bateson and Margaret Mead. Arturo 
Rosenblueth brought Wiener’s and his own ideas to the conference.
Rosenblueth suggested that a wide variety of biological and human 
communication processes needed to be understood not as simple 
cause-and-effect but rather as “circular causality”—feedback. This 
meant that action had an inherent purpose (such as maintaining an 
equilibrium or tracking sources of light or heat).
Meanwhile, Bateson sought to apply feedback theory to social 
interactions. Margaret Mead later observed in her 1968 paper 
“Cybernetics of Cybernetics” that she became so excited by this idea 
that “I did not notice that I had broken one of my teeth until the 
Conference was over.”
Wiener proposed that a new group be formed to provide for the 
ongoing interdisciplinary study of communication, control, feed-
back, and other key concepts. He called the group the Teleological 
Society. Teleology is an approach to philosophy that focuses on the 
purpose or goal of a design or process. For example, instead of only 
studying how signals move between neurons in the visual cortex, 
a teleological approach looks at the organism’s purposes or goals. 
What is the visual system (the eye and brain) “trying” to recognize? 
How does it go about adjusting or reinforcing the nerve signals in 
order to recognize, for example, a dangerous predator? (It should 
be noted that teleology as envisioned by Wiener does not mean con-
scious purpose; rather, it refers to the goals designed into the system, 
either by evolution or by human engineers.)
The Teleological Society had its first meeting at Princeton’s Institute 
for Advanced Study on January 6 and 7, 1945. As he would report in his 
autobiography, Wiener was quite satisfied with these first proceedings:
Very shortly we found that people working in all these fields were 
beginning to talk the same language, with a vocabulary containing 
expressions from the communications engineer, the servomechanism 
man, the computing-machine man, and the neurophysiologist. . . . All 

of them were interested in the storage of information. . . . All of them 
found that the term feedback . . . was an appropriate way of describ-
ing phenomena in the living organism as well as in the machine.
Cybernetics
By 1947, Wiener decided he was ready to bring his ideas to both the 
larger world of science and to the scientifically literate public. As 
he retired to Mexico City to write his book, Wiener was faced with 
a simple question: What should he call the new science he and his 
colleagues had been developing?
As he later wrote in his second autobiography:
I first looked for a Greek word signifying “messenger,” but the only 
one I knew was angelos (angel). . . . Then I looked for an appropriate 
word from the field of control. The only word I could think of was 
the Greek word for steersman, kubernetes.
Weiner decided that the Greek steersman was a good analogy to 
the mechanisms about which he would be writing.
Published simultaneously in France and the United States in 1948, 
Cybernetics was not an easy book to understand. Nevertheless, the 
general public found intriguing ideas nestled among the math. The 
prestigious magazine Scientific American made the book its cover 
story, and Newsweek also featured it. Even at the end of the cen-
tury, Scientific American would still consider Cybernetics to be one 
of the most “memorable and influential” works of 20th-century 
science. Wiener noted, though, in his second autobiography that 
“when [Cybernetics] became a scientific best-seller we were all 
astonished, not least myself.”
Readers who persevered were rewarded with a comprehensive 
look at the ideas that would characterize the coming revolution in 
computers, communications, industrial technology, and robotics:
•  The idea of information as a central and measurable quantity
•  Information expressing the degree of organization of a system 
(making it the opposite of entropy, or disorder)
A NEW SCIENCE   13

14   Modern Robotics
•  “Control by informative feedback,” where a machine is guided by 
the results of previous actions
•  A balance between negative (self-correcting) and positive (ampli-
fying) feedback
•  The creation of communications networks and their analogy to 
nervous systems
•  The broad applicability of cybernetics to fields ranging from 
computer science to sociology and psychology
In the 1950s and early 1960s, cybernetics became a sort of cul-
tural phenomenon. It offered buzzwords for facile commentators but 
also potential areas of exploration for researchers in dozens of fields 
and applications.
Cybernetics and Robotic Turtles
In the early 1950s, some practical applications of cybernetics aroused 
considerable interest. Grey Walter’s “tortoise” robots, which were 
featured in Scientific American, demonstrated how a cybernetic 
system could be designed so that it interacted with its environment 
(through feedback) and exhibited lifelike behaviors. Primarily an 
analog rather than a digital device, the simple robot first checks for 
obstacles so it can change its direction of motion to avoid a collision. 
Just as humans do this automatically while walking, even while pur-
suing some higher goal (such as the refrigerator), Walter’s tortoise 
had the “higher” goal of seeking and moving toward light sources. 
This movement was governed by several rules:
•  If the area around the robot is dark, the robot searches for light 
and moves toward it if found.
•  As long as the light level is moderate, the robot continues to move 
toward the light source.
•  If the light becomes too bright, the robot reverses direction to 
avoid becoming “dazzled.”
Depending on how the light sources in the room are arranged, the 
result is surprising, unpredictable behavior. Even with only a few 

sensors and switches, the tortoise robots seemed to behave in intri-
cate ways. When lights were mounted on two robots, they began a 
sort of “mating dance.” The cybernetic tortoise can be viewed as the 
first mobile robot to interact meaningfully with its environment.
The Boston Arm
Another project had a more immediate practical use. For many 
years, Wiener had expressed an interest in designing mechanical 
aids or prostheses to help people who had lost a limb. In 1961, 
Wiener’s interest was further piqued by comments made by his 
doctor while Wiener was hospitalized for a broken hip.
A NEW SCIENCE   15
Grey Walter’s robotic tortoise used simple motors, relays, and a photocell to 
detect light. Nevertheless, its feedback circuits produced remarkably complex 
behavior, particularly when interacting with other tortoise robots. (© Science 
and Society Picture Library)

16   Modern Robotics
Early in the 20th century, leg prostheses were clumsy and uncom-
fortable, while artificial arms were barely useful for grasping. 
Wiener realized that since the human muscular system created elec-
trical signals, there was no reason why signals from the stump could 
not be used to actuate a mechanical limb.
In the early 1960s, Wiener and MIT engineer Amar Bose designed 
a motorized arm that could be strapped to the wearer’s remaining 
stump. Sensors placed above the point of amputation would pick up 
nerve signals and translate them to control signals to move the arm. 
By using what would later be called biofeedback training, the wearer 
could become increasingly dexterous in using the prostheses. The 
PARALLELS: APPLICATIONS OF CYBERNETICS
In Cybernetics, Wiener had supplied what science historian Thomas 
Kuhn would later call a “paradigm”—a model that could provide a 
satisfying explanation for a group of phenomena. What was most 
unusual about cybernetics is that it was a sort of “super paradigm” 
that offered itself to many seemingly unrelated sciences and tech-
nologies. Some of the fields influenced by cybernetics include:
•  Computer science—computer architecture, artificial intelligence, 
networking, and control applications
•  Industrial automation—computer-controlled machines and, even-
tually, industrial robots
•  Robotics—robots that can sense and interact with their environment
•  Electronics—signal processing, amplification, and circuit design
•  Information theory—the relationship between information and order
•  Sociology—communication and information exchange within cultures
•  Neurology and cognitive science—structure and function of the 
brain and nervous system
•  Psychology—mental illness as a breakdown in information process-
ing, communications, or feedback
Although the specific use of the word cybernetics has declined in 
recent decades, the underlying ideas remain important and have 
contributed to interdisciplinary advances such as the creation of new 
prosthetic devices.

project, which became known as the Boston Arm, was sponsored 
by MIT, Massachusetts General Hospital, the Harvard Medical 
School, and Liberty Mutual Insurance Company.
When the prototype arm was completed, it was attached to 
a volunteer amputee. As Bose recalled in Flo Conway and Jim 
Siegelman’s biography of Norbert Wiener:
We attached the arm—I can remember the reaction very clearly—the 
man was sitting down and the arm came up and he said, “My god, It’s 
chasing me!” But in ten minutes time he was able to wear it beautifully.
Facing the Social Consequences
Although the technological potential of cybernetics was exciting, 
during and after World War II, Wiener became increasingly con-
cerned—even depressed—about what he saw as possible negative 
consequences of the new science.
Wiener’s greatest concern about cybernetics was how a revolution 
in automation might affect society. In a 1946 conference at the New 
York Academy of Sciences, Wiener predicted that the computer will 
become the “central nervous system in future automatic-control 
machines.” He also saw the eventual “coupling of human beings 
into a larger communication system.”
But what would this mean for the world’s economic or social life? 
Wiener noted that
[Cybernetics] gives the human race a new and most effective col-
lection of mechanical slaves to perform its labor. Such mechanical 
labor has most of the economic properties of slave labor, although 
unlike slave labor, it does not involve the direct demoralizing effects 
of human cruelty. However, any labor that accepts the conditions of 
competition with slave labor accepts the conditions of slave labor, 
and is essentially slave labor.
Wiener’s remarks foresaw what would half a century later become a 
growing unease with the prospects of economic globalism—although 
the latter is focused more on the threat of cheap human labor.
A NEW SCIENCE   17

18   Modern Robotics
Wiener did not see any way that the new technology could be 
undone or its development delayed significantly. As he warned in the 
introduction to Cybernetics:
We can only hand [cybernetics] over into the world that exists about 
us, and this is the world of Belsen and Hiroshima. We do not even 
have the choice of suppressing these new technical developments. 
They belong to the age. . . . The best we can do is to see that a large 
public understands the trend and the bearing of the present work, and 
to confine our personal efforts to those fields . . . most remote from 
war and exploitation.
Wiener retired from MIT in 1960. In 1964, he received the 
prestigious National Medal of Technology from President Lyndon 
Johnson. Wiener died on March 18, 1964, after collapsing suddenly 
while visiting Stockholm, Sweden.
By the time Wiener’s productive career was ending, the first 
industrial robots were beginning to work on automobile assem-
bly lines. Their more agile cousins would soon be scurrying 
along the corridors at MIT and other research institutions. 
Norbert Wiener had created a new conceptual framework for 
understanding such machines as well as the human brain and 
nervous system. He also left as a legacy a warning that the new 
machines would challenge people to treat each other as more, 
not less, human.
Chronology
1894 
Norbert Wiener born November 26 in Columbia, Missouri
1901 
 Wiener enters elementary school and is placed with much older 
students. Dissatisﬁ ed, his father starts to educate him at home
1905 
 Wiener graduates from high school at the age of 11
1906 
 Wiener is enrolled at Tufts College, where he is hailed as the 
youngest university student in the nation’s history

1909 
 Wiener graduates from Tufts with a bachelor’s degree in 
mathematics
Wiener enters Harvard to study zoology but does not do 
well
1910 
 Wiener switches to Cornell University and studies mathemat-
ics and philosophy; he soon returns to Harvard to pursue 
mathematics
1912 
 Wiener receives his master’s degree in mathematics from 
Harvard and obtains his Ph.D. a year later
1913 
 Wiener begins to tour Europe, visiting prominent mathematicians
1917 
 As the United States enters World War I, Wiener does work in 
ballistics at the Aberdeen Proving Grounds
1919 
 Wiener accepts a faculty position at the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology (MIT), where he will remain for the 
rest of his career
1921 
 Wiener publishes his ﬁ rst major mathematical paper, on 
Brownian motion
1926 
 Now an associate professor, Wiener marries Margaret 
Engemann, an assistant professor of modern languages
1935 
 Wiener lectures for two years at Tsing-Hua University in 
Beijing, China, forming an attachment to Chinese researchers
1939 
 World War II begins in Europe. Wiener helps with efforts to 
rescue Jewish scientists from the Nazis
1945 
 On January 6 and 7, Wiener’s Teleological Society has its ﬁ rst 
meeting
1948 
 Wiener publishes Cybernetics, his most inﬂ uential work
1950 
 Wiener increasingly turns his attention to the potential misuse 
of technology and automation. He publishes The Human Use 
of Human Beings
1960 
 Wiener retires from MIT and devotes his efforts to discussing 
the impact of technology on society
A NEW SCIENCE   19

20   Modern Robotics
1964 
 MIT researchers develop an artiﬁ cial arm based on Wiener’s 
design
Wiener receives the National Medal of Technology; he dies on 
March 18 in Stockholm, Sweden
Further Reading
Books
Conway, Flo, and Jim Siegelman. Dark Hero of the Information Age: 
In Search of Norbert Wiener, the Father of Cybernetics. New York: 
Basic Books, 2005.
A new and full biography that explores Wiener’s tangled life and the 
significance of his work.
Wiener, Norbert. Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in 
the Animal and the Machine. 2nd ed. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 
Press, 1961.
The book that defined and popularized cybernetics as a discipline.
———. Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth. Cambridge, Mass.: 
MIT Press, 1953.
Wiener’s account of his intellectual development and the emotional 
pressures of being raised as a “project” by his father.
———. The Human Use of Human Beings. 2nd ed. New York: Avon 
Books, 1970.
Wiener’s warnings about the economic and social consequences of 
automation.
———. I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a Prodigy. Garden 
City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1956.
Continues Wiener’s autobiography and describes his career and the 
founding of the discipline of cybernetics.
Article
Gasperi, Michael. “Grey Walter’s Machina Speculatrix.” Available 
online. URL: http://www.plazaearth.com/usr/gasperi/Walter.htm. 
Accessed on June 16, 2005.
Describes Grey Walter’s robot tortoises and their behavior. The site 
also includes some information about Lego Mindstorms robot kits 
and projects.

Web Sites
History of Cybernetics. American Society for Cybernetics. URL: 
http://www.asc-cybernetics.org/foundations/historyrefs.htm. 
Accessed on September 20, 2005.
Provides overview and resources for the history of cybernetics as a 
discipline.
Principia Cybernetica Web. URL: http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be. Accessed 
on September 25, 2005.
Resource site from an international project devoted to developing a 
comprehensive philosophy of cybernetics.
A NEW SCIENCE   21

22
REVOLUTIONIZING 
INDUSTRY
JOSEPH ENGELBERGER AND UNIMATE
2
I
n 1961, a new worker joined the General Motors assembly line in 
Turnstedt, New Jersey. The worker’s job was to cast parts such 
as car doors from molten metal, give them a cooling dip in a vat 
of water, then handing them off to other workers who would trim 
and finish them. The worker belonged to no union, received no sal-
ary, and never needed a rest break. The worker was a robot called 
Unimate, and it revolutionized industry perhaps as much as pow-
ered machinery had done a century earlier. Unimate and later robots 
were largely the achievement of Joseph Engelberger, an engineer 
turned entrepreneur, and his partner, inventor George Devol.
Hands-on Experience
Joseph Engelberger was born on July 26, 1925, in New York City. 
Engelberger recalled in a telephone interview with the author that 
his navy service in World War II was a career turning point. He 
became one of 14 candidates selected for the V12 program that paid 
for them to study physics (particularly nuclear physics) at Columbia 
University. Just after the war, Engelberger worked as an engineer 
on early nuclear tests such as at Bikini Atoll in the Pacific. He also 
worked on aerospace and nuclear power projects. After complet-
ing his military duties, Engelberger attended Columbia University’s 

School of Engineering and earned B.S. and M.S. degrees in physics 
and electrical engineering.
Engelberger said that he believes his grounding in physics 
served him well in his later work in developing robots that had 
to deal with the physical world. (Engelberger also expressed mis-
givings about modern researchers who think that “everything is 
software.”)
Developing Industrial Robots
During World War II, there had 
been tremendous progress in devel-
oping servomechanisms, or auto-
matic controls, such as on the 
automatic gun turrets of the huge 
B-29 bomber. Servomechanisms 
allow for precise positioning and 
manipulation of parts of a machine. 
The rise of nuclear power and the 
need to handle radioactive materi-
als safely also spurred the devel-
opment of automatic controls. 
Engelberger’s business ventures 
into this field included his starting 
a company called Consolidated 
Controls.
In the mid-1950s, Engelberger 
met George Devol, an inventor 
who had patented a programma-
ble transfer machine. This was a 
device that could move components 
automatically from one specified 
position to another, such as in a 
die-casting machine that formed 
parts for automobiles.
Engelberger realized that Devol’s 
machine could, with some additional 
Joseph Engelberger and inven-
tor George Devol pioneered the 
development of industrial robot-
ics, automating some of the most 
tedious and dangerous jobs on 
assembly lines. Here Engelberger 
is shown with Lab Mate, a robot 
used to prototype mobile helper 
robot applications. (Photo courtesy 
of Joseph Engelberger)
REVOLUTIONIZING INDUSTRY   23

24   Modern Robotics
extensions and capabilities, become a true robot. At Columbia, 
Engelberger had met Isaac Asimov, the science fiction writer whose 
robot stories have inspired several generations of robotics engineers. 
Starting in 1954, Devol concentrated on developing the new machine, 
called Unimate (for “Universal Automation”). Engelberger worked to 
raise business interest and obtain financing to manufacture the robots. 
In 1956, Engelberger and Devol founded Unimation, Inc.—the world’s 
first industrial robot company.
Their robot, called Unimate, was—and is—essentially a large 
“shoulder” and arm. The shoulder can move along a track to posi-
tion the arm near the materials to be manipulated. The arm can 
be equipped with a variety of specialized grasping “hands” to suit 
the task. The robot is programmed to perform a set of repetitive 
motions. It is also equipped with various devices for aligning the 
“work piece” (the object to be manipulated) and for making small 
adjustments in variations.
A basic robotic manipulator arm, with joints equivalent to the base (torso), 
shoulder, elbow, and wrist of a person. 

Robots on the Assembly Line
In the spring of 1961, the first Unimate robot began operations on 
the assembly line at the General Motors Plant in Turnstedt, a suburb 
of Trenton, New Jersey. Most of the factory’s 3,000 human workers 
welcomed the newcomer. Unimate would be doing a job involving 
the casting of car doors and other parts from molten metal—hot, 
dangerous work. Steve Holland, chief scientist for manufactur-
ing at General Motors, told U.S. News & World Report in 2003 
that robots at first were mainly considered for “the three ‘D’ kinds 
of jobs. Jobs that are dirty, difficult, and dangerous.” That first 
Unimate worked for nearly 10 years, keeping up tirelessly with three 
OTHER SCIENTISTS: GEORGE DEVOL (1920–  )
Much of the credit for the development of industrial robots goes 
to George Devol, a talented engineer and inventor. Born February 
20, 1920, in Louisville, Kentucky, Devol was fascinated by mechani-
cal and electronic engineering. Devol’s first manufacturing efforts 
included phonograph arms, amplifiers, and an automatic “people 
counter” to tally attendance at the 1939 New York World’s Fair.
In 1946, Devol patented a key device for industrial automation. It 
was a magnetic recorder that could store the details of mechanical 
motion. This meant that once a robot arm and gripper were “taught” 
how to perform a task by manually putting it through the motions, 
it could then “play back” the task over and over again, such as on an 
assembly line. As Devol noted in the patent application: “The pres-
ent invention makes available for the first time a more or less general 
purpose machine that has universal application to a vast diversity of 
applications where cyclic control is desired.”
In 1954, Devol built upon this principle to patent a robot called 
Unimate, short for “Universal Automation.” In 1956, Devol got 
together with Joseph Engelberger to form Unimation, the first robot 
company. In later years, Devol also did important work in machine 
vision and bar-code processing.
REVOLUTIONIZING INDUSTRY   25

26   Modern Robotics
shifts of human workers each day. This proven reliability would go a 
long way toward convincing industrialists about the value of robots 
on the assembly line.
The first industrial robots attracted modest public attention, but 
Engelberger found it hard at first to convince American investors 
and industrialists that robots were a good investment. By the mid-
1960s, Unimation was demonstrating PUMA, a robot that had a 
more humanlike appearance than Unimate. The robot was shown 
to television viewers on The Tonight Show starring Johnny Carson. 
Engelberger recalled in an interview with the Trentonian that “The 
robot did a beer commercial and the people loved it. It took over 
the whole show. But after that, the only calls I got were from people 
who wanted my robot to be the entertainment at the county fair.”
To this day, Engelberger is not impressed by toy robots that do 
cute tricks. As he told Red Herring magazine in 2000,
This Unimate robot is used for precision placement of fibers. (Photo compliments 
of ADC Acquisition Co.)

The buyers of robotics wanted economic justification. So we studied 
6 plants of Chrysler and 5 plants of Ford and 20 plants in Bridgeport, 
Connecticut. Out of that we built a spec. We said, “if we could build a 
device to meet this spec it would have broad utility in various jobs in 
industry.” The hard fight was to convince someone to put the money up. 
We finally got financing, and finally got our first installation in 1961, 
which was a General Motors plant in Turnstedt, New Jersey. It served 
very well for many years and is now in the Smithsonian as the first indus-
trial robot. From there it’s been a long fight to convince people.
Industrial Robots Today
Today’s industrial robots undertake a wider variety of jobs for 
which they are more efficient and less costly than human workers. 
Common applications include materials handling (moving parts 
from one assembly station to another), spot welding, and paint-
ing. In 2003 alone, manufacturing companies in the United States 
bought about $877 million worth of industrial robots—a 19 percent 
increase over the previous year’s total. The automobile industry is 
still the leading user of robots, purchasing about two-thirds of the 
units sold in 2003.
While even Unimate’s successors have little in the way of true 
artificial intelligence, they are more flexible and versatile than their 
predecessors. For example, a robot called C-Flex can identify differ-
ent models of cars and perform different types of welding operations 
depending on which vehicle is passing on the assembly line.
Robots working in lighter industrial settings include machines 
that use their vision system to identify the tops and bottoms of Oreo 
cookies on the assembly line and then match them together at rates 
of up to 2,000 cookies per minute. (No human could do this job so 
quickly, and probably no human would want such a job.)
As the costs of human labor (including such expenses as health 
insurance) continue to rise, it seems likely that industrial robots 
will find their way into many more applications in coming decades. 
McDonald’s has already tested a robotic burger-flipping machine. 
Some libraries have reconfigured their shelving so robot pages can 
fetch books on demand.
REVOLUTIONIZING INDUSTRY   27

28   Modern Robotics
Robots in Service
In 1980, Engelberger published Robotics in Practice. This book and 
Robotics in Service (1989) became standard textbooks that defined 
the growing robotics industry by translating Engelberger’s practical 
experience into workable approaches. The two titles also marked 
a shifting of Engelberger’s focus from industrial robots to service 
robots—robots that function in workplaces such as warehouses or 
hospitals.
In 1982, Unimation was acquired by Westinghouse. By then 
Engelberger had founded Transitions Research Corporation, which 
SOCIAL IMPACT: ROBOTS AND HUMAN LABOR
The growing use of industrial robots in the United States has inevita-
bly raised the question of what their impact will be on the jobs and 
pay of human workers. Joseph Engelberger has always claimed that 
robots have improved conditions for labor. In an interview with the 
Trentonian, Engelberger recalled that “There was very little opposition 
to robotics from American labor. It helped with working people that 
the first robots were put to work doing hot, hazardous and dull labor.” 
Engelberger has suggested that the appropriate response to people 
losing their jobs to robots is retraining.
Workers have feared automation since the beginning of the indus-
trial age. (In the late 18th century, the British followers of Ned Lud—
the “Luddites”—broke into factories and destroyed machines.) This 
fear is not unreasonable: If a person has limited skills and performs 
repetitive work, his or her job description matches the strengths of 
robots. Robots can perform this kind of work to a high degree of 
consistency and, if necessary, can work three shifts a day. And while 
robots do require maintenance, they do not get sick nor do they 
require expensive health care. In some cases, robots may displace 
human workers entirely, while in others the availability of robots 
might depress the wages of human workers who have to compete 
with them.
In a way, robotlike devices have already displaced many service 
workers. Many people can fulfill their banking needs at an ATM and 

in 1984 became HelpMate Robotics, Inc. The company’s most suc-
cessful product has been the HelpMate hospital robot. The robot is 
designed to dispatch records, specimens, and supplies throughout a 
busy hospital. The robot received extensive field testing thanks to an 
arrangement with Danbury Hospital in Connecticut.
Automatic delivery vehicles are nothing new, but the HelpMate 
robot and its successors are much more flexible and capable. 
HelpMate does not follow a fixed track. Rather, it is programmed 
to visit a succession of areas or stations and to make its own way, 
using cameras to detect and go around obstacles. HelpMate can even 
summon an elevator to go to a different floor!
have not seen a human teller for years. Many supermarkets and librar-
ies are installing self-checkout machines. According to Marshall Brain, 
author of “Robotic Nation,” it is these specialized robotic machines 
that will have the real impact on workers. They will be followed by 
more sophisticated walking humanoid robots that might take over 
such jobs as receptionist, museum guide, store greeter, or even 
security guard. Brain predicts that by 2055 robots will have practi-
cally taken over the workplace. Their development will be driven by 
Moore’s Law—the observation that computer power roughly doubles 
every two years.
Whether the threat is robots or cheaper foreign labor, there would 
seem to be three possible responses on the part of society. The first is 
to somehow stop the influx of the cheaper labor into the workplace. 
This seems unlikely to happen, in particular because the interests 
that most benefit from cheaper labor are politically influential. The 
second possibility is that enough new jobs will arise that require skills 
that are beyond the capability of robots. New technologies do bring 
new opportunities—look at all the jobs created in Internet and Web 
development and in venues such as eBay, despite the “dot-bust” early 
in the new century. But it is far from clear that enough such jobs can 
be created and that people can be retrained to do them. (People who 
work in the kinds of jobs that are likely to be automated are also more 
likely to lack sufficient educational background for more sophisticated 
jobs.) The last possibility is that our society and economy might be 
fundamentally restructured so that most people no longer need to 
work in order to live.
REVOLUTIONIZING INDUSTRY   29

30   Modern Robotics
Along with other robotics entrepreneurs, Engelberger has pointed 
out in interviews with the author and others that he is also looking 
toward a time when robots will be able to perform a number of use-
ful tasks in the home. In particular, Engelberger sees great potential 
This schematic shows how a HelpMate robot can deliver and pick up materials 
in a hospital. If necessary, the robot will even politely ask persons to step aside 
so it can move.

for robots in helping to care for the growing population of elderly 
people who need assistance in the tasks of daily life. He points out 
that no government or insurance company can afford to hire a full-
time human assistant to enable older people to continue living at 
home. A suitable robot could fetch things, remind a person when 
it is time to take medication, and even perform medical monitoring 
and summon help if necessary.
Elder Statesperson of Robotics
Joseph Engelberger’s achievements in industrial and service robotics 
have won him numerous plaudits and awards, including the Leonardo 
da Vinci Award of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 
the Progress Award of the Society of Manufacturing Engineers, the 
Japan Prize, and Columbia University’s Egleston Medal. Engelberger 
was elected to the National Academy of Engineering in 1984. He has 
also received honorary doctorates from five institutions, including 
Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh—one of the great centers 
of robotics research in the United States.
In 1992, Engelberger was included in the London Sunday Times 
series on “The 1000 Makers of the 20th Century.” In 2000, 
Engelberger delivered the keynote address to the World Automation 
Congress, which was also dedicated to him. In 2004, he received the 
IEEE Robotics and Automation Award.
Since 1977, the Robotics Industries Association has presented 
the prestigious annual Joseph F. Engelberger Awards to honor 
the most significant innovators in the science and technology of 
robotics.
A Wrong Direction?
Engelberger continues to have strong opinions about the future of 
the robotics industry and robotics research. At a time when many 
researchers are making robots that look increasingly like human 
beings, Engelberger focuses on functionality rather than appearance. 
As he told Red Herring magazine in 2000,
REVOLUTIONIZING INDUSTRY   31

32   Modern Robotics
I want to make a robot that is in the image of the principles set out by 
my mentor, Isaac Asimov. The model is the human being. It doesn’t 
have to look like a human being. It doesn’t have to be physically the 
same, but it has to operate in our environment and use our data and 
our tools. And that is the challenge. That is where the robot will 
break out.
Engelberger went on to tell Red Herring that he thinks much of 
the work of academic robotics researchers in trying to give robots 
humanlike qualities is on the wrong track:
It sounds nice to have a robot that can recognize gestures. But 
language is so powerful. Tell the robot what you want. If a robot 
can read sign language, then it can cope with input from a deaf 
person. The research community has been very sad in its ability 
to do things. When I see MIT working on giving a robot face 
emotion, I say, “What the hell is going on? Who cares about the 
robot’s emotion? I want to know what it’s doing.” Why is that? 
Because maybe someone got a Ph.D. for making the robot smile 
and frown. But really what they should have made it do is cook 
and clean.
TRENDS: THE ROBOTICS INDUSTRY TODAY
According to the 2004 World Robotics Survey by the United Nations 
Economic Commission for Europe, the robotics industry is booming. 
In 2004, orders for industrial robots increased 18 percent, reach-
ing the highest level ever recorded. There are now at least 800,000 
industrial robots in use (see pie chart). Japan became the world 
leader in robotics in the 1980s, but the rest of the industrialized 
world has been rapidly catching up.
Meanwhile, robots are also entering the home, with 600,000 in 
use by 2004 and several million more likely to be purchased in the 
next few years.

Similarly, according to an article in Robotics Online, Engelberger 
is not impressed by walking robots, let alone hopping or running 
ones. He believes wheels are quite adequate for most of the applica-
tions where robots are actually economically justified. Engelberger 
argues that industry experts should formulate realistic, real-world 
goals for robotics research, focusing on practical service applications 
and the creation of “personal robots.”
Chronology
1925 
 Joseph Engelberger born July 26 in New York City
1946 
 Engelberger graduates from Columbia University School of 
Engineering
1954 
 George Devol invents a programmable industrial robot
This chart shows the estimated number of industrial robots in use as of 2004. 
(Source: United Nations Economic Commission for Europe.)
REVOLUTIONIZING INDUSTRY   33

34   Modern Robotics
1956 
Devol and Engelberger found Unimation, Inc.
1957 
 Engelberger founds Consolidated Controls Corporation in 
Danbury, Connecticut
1961 
 An industrial robot (Unimate) is installed for the ﬁ rst time on 
a production line, at General Motors
1966 
 A robot appears on The Tonight Show starring Johnny 
Carson, demonstrating bartending, golﬁ ng, and music skills
1977 
 The Robotics Industry Association establishes the Joseph 
Engelberger Award for outstanding achievement in robotics
1980 
Engelberger publishes Robotics in Practice
1982 
 Unimation is acquired by Westinghouse. Engelberger 
soon leaves the ﬁ rm and founds Transition Research 
Corporation
1984 
Engelberger founds HelpMate Robotics, Inc.
1989 
Engelberger publishes Robotics in Service
1999 
HelpMate Robotics is acquired by Cardinal Health
2000 
 Engelberger gives the keynote speech at the World Automation 
Congress
2003 
 About $877 million worth of industrial robots are purchased 
in the United States alone
Further Reading
Books
Engelberger, Joseph F. Robotics in Practice: Management and 
Applications of Industrial Robots. New York: AMACOM, 1980.
In this textbook of industrial robotics, Engelberger gives a nod to his 
mentor by including a foreword by Isaac Asimov.
———. Robotics in Service. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1989.
Reflects Engelberger’s later focus on service robots in nonindustrial 
workplaces, including technology for obstacle sensing and navigation 
and a survey of 15 possible application areas.

Nof, Shimon Y. Handbook of Industrial Robotics. 2nd ed. New 
York: Wiley, 1999.
Both a handbook and an extensive resource guide to the state of the 
art in industrial robotics, with contributions from 120 leading experts 
from 12 countries.
Articles
Brain, Marshall. “Robotic Nation.” Available online. URL: http://
marshallbrain.com/robotic-nation.htm. Accessed on September 
26, 2005.
Describes how robots and other automatic systems are rapidly displac-
ing human workers in service jobs.
Engelberger, Joseph. “Whatever Became of Robotics Research.” 
Robotics Online. Available online. URL: http://www.roboticson-
line.com/public/articles/articlesdetails.cfm?id=769. Accessed on 
July 28, 2005.
Engelberger argues for a more practical focus for robotics research.
Mickle, Paul. “1961: A Peep into the Automated Future.” Trentonian. 
The Capital Century, 1900–99. Available online. URL: http://www.
capitalcentury.com/1961.html. Accessed on August 30, 2005.
Describes the first Unimate robot and how people in Trenton, New 
Jersey, reacted to it in 1961, as well as later developments.
Pethokoukis, James M., Margaret Mannix, and Tim Smart. “Meet 
Your New Co-Worker.” U.S. News & World Report 136 (March 
15, 2004): EE2 ff.
Describes how robots are used today, using as an example a manufacturing 
plant in Illinois. Also discusses the economics of industrial automation.
“Mr. Roboto.” Red Herring, August 1, 2000. Available online. URL: 
http://www.redherring.com/Article.aspx?a=7597&hed=Mister+
Roboto#. Accessed on August 15, 2005.
Engelberger assesses the achievements and shortcomings of current 
robotics research.
Web Site
Robotics Online. http://www.roboticsonline.com. Accessed on 
October 18, 2005.
Site sponsored by the Robotics Industry Association; provides news 
and background information on the robotics industry and gives the 
annual Joseph F. Engelberger Awards for excellence in robotics.
REVOLUTIONIZING INDUSTRY   35

36
M
any robots in science fiction movies walk like people, striding 
along confidently. But most real-world mobile robots (such as 
those that deliver prescriptions in hospitals) roll along on wheels. 
It is not easy to get a robot to master walking, a skill that humans 
learn as toddlers. But there are some very good reasons to make 
robots that can walk or run.
In a 1986 article for Communications of the ACM, the journal of 
the Association for Computing Machinery, robotics engineer Marc 
Raibert pointed out:
There is a need for vehicles that can travel in difficult terrain, where 
existing vehicles cannot go. Wheels excel on prepared surfaces such as 
rails and roads, but perform poorly where the terrain is soft or uneven. 
Because of these limitations, only about half the earth’s landmass is acces-
sible to existing wheeled and tracked vehicles, whereas a much greater 
area can be reached by animals on foot. It should be possible to build 
legged vehicles that can go to the places that animals can now reach.
Raibert went to explain a key reason why legs can be better than 
wheels:
One reason legs provide better mobility in rough terrain is that they 
can use isolated footholds that optimize support and traction, whereas 
a wheel requires a continuous path of support. As a consequence, a 
3
LEARNING TO WALK
MARC RAIBERT AND ROBOTS WITH LEGS

legged system can choose among the footholds in the reachable terrain; 
a wheel must negotiate the worst terrain. A ladder illustrates this point: 
Rungs provide footholds that enable the ascent of legged systems, but 
the spaces between rungs prohibit the ascent of wheeled systems.
Additionally, Raibert pointed out that with legs, the main body 
(and whatever it is carrying) can move independently of the propul-
sion system—thus a pizza delivery person can walk up stairs while 
keeping the pie level. Finally, of course, with legs, one can step over 
obstacles that would stop a wheeled cart in its tracks.
Making of an Engineer
Marc Raibert was born in New York City in 1949. He graduated 
from Northeastern University with a bachelor’s degree in electrical 
engineering in 1973, receiving a 
doctorate from the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology (MIT) in 
1977. Raibert then worked at the 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) 
in Pasadena, California, as a staff 
engineer from 1977 to 1980. JPL 
was (and is) the nation’s foremost 
center of research and development 
in space robotics, including plan-
etary probes and rovers. Working 
there spurred Raibert’s interest in 
finding better ways for robots to 
move across terrain.
In 1981, Raibert went to Carnegie 
Mellon University, where he was an 
associate professor of computer sci-
ence and robotics until 1986. Raibert 
established the Leg Laboratory for 
the study of legged robot locomo-
tion. He then went to MIT, taking 
Marc Raibert’s research has drawn 
on animal locomotion to develop 
legged robots that can walk, hop, 
and even run dynamically. (Photo 
courtesy of Marc Raibert)
LEARNING TO WALK   37

38   Modern Robotics
the Leg Laboratory with him. Raibert served as a professor of electri-
cal engineering and computer science at MIT until 1995.
Dynamic Walkers
In the 1980s, legged locomotion was one of the largest undeveloped 
frontiers in robotics. Progress had been slow. Inventors had experi-
mented with walking machines as early as the 19th century. These 
machines could only place legs in sequence stiffly and mechanically, 
without regard to obstacles or uneven terrain.
In the 1970s, computer control began to be applied to creating 
more sophisticated walking machines. For example, in 1977, Robert 
McGhee at Ohio University led the successful development of an 
insect-like hexapod (six-legged) walker that could climb stairs. In 
1980, Japanese researchers built a four-legged machine that used 
more sophisticated computer algorithms to enable it to negotiate 
obstacles.
This first generation of computerized walkers had a fundamen-
tal characteristic in common. They were “static crawlers.” Such 
machines balanced by keeping most of their feet on the ground. 
As a leg moved forward, the center of mass remained balanced 
over the stationary legs. While this kept the robot stable at all 
times, it also meant that the robot lacked the agility of a walking 
human. In an article published in 2001 in Science News, Raibert 
recalled that early walking robots were “like tables with moving 
legs.”
As Raibert had noted earlier in a 1990 article in U.S. News & 
World Report, “Biology already has the solutions—if we can tease 
them out.” Consider how people walk. People have only two legs, so 
they cannot remain balanced in a static way while moving forward. 
Indeed, people sort of fall forward with each step, accelerating. We 
do not fall over because part of us tips backward at the same time, 
compensating and keeping an overall balance.
Raibert pointed out that there are important advantages to this 
dynamic form of locomotion. For one thing, with no need to keep 
rigidly over our center of mass, we can vary how far apart our feet 
are placed—for example, to avoid rocks while hiking along a path.

Walking is a pendulum-like motion, and back in the 1950s, 
famed computer scientist Claude Shannon, Robert Cannon, and the 
latter’s graduate students at Stanford University experimented with 
These drawings show how Marc Raibert and his team identified the elements in 
a kangaroo’s hopping gait and determined the location of the center of mass.
LEARNING TO WALK   39

40   Modern Robotics
upside-down pendulums mounted on moving carts. They developed 
mathematical equations that specified the ranges of motion in which 
balance could be maintained.
Using related ideas, Ralph Mosher at General Electric developed 
walking devices that would be controlled by a human operator. The 
operator would be placed in a harness such that his or her walking 
motions would be translated into powered walking movement by 
the machine. In 1968, Mosher demonstrated his “walking truck” 
for the military.
Robot Kangaroos
Building a dynamic walking robot involves several different systems. 
Besides controlling the specific motion of each leg joint, some sort 
of master controller must determine the sequence in which the legs 
move. In turn, these instructions must take account of feedback that 
informs the robot when it is getting out of balance (and in what 
direction). Finally, there has to be a sort of “strategic planner” that 
determines the robot’s desired destination, examines possible foot-
holds (places to step down), and picks the best route.
Raibert and his team at the Leg Laboratory began with a very 
simple proof-of-concept: a robot “pogo stick.” It consisted of a com-
puter-controlled piston that determined how far the robot could stride 
forward without losing its balance and another control that deter-
mined how much “spring” or “bounce” could propel the leg from one 
stride to the next. By combining legs, Raibert and his team later built 
two-legged (bipedal) and four-legged (quardapedal) robots.
They got their idea for the robot from one of nature’s most accom-
plished hoppers: the kangaroo! They studied the structure of the 
animal’s bones and muscles and analyzed its hopping gait.
One special thing about Raibert’s approach is that it did not 
require exhaustive calculations or some sort of central control 
system. As long as each leg (or coordinated leg pair) was kept in 
balance, the robot as a whole remained in balance. Nevertheless, 
the filmed trials of the robots include blooper reels featuring the 
worst stumbles and crashes of the early prototypes. But progress 
continued. By 1984, a quadrupedal robot could trot across the 

laboratory floor. A year later, a more humanlike bipedal machine 
could run while changing gaits. This improvement reflected a 
growing understanding of the fundamental elements involved in 
legged locomotion.
Raibert’s approach breaks the process into three forms of control. 
Consider again how people run. Part of the energy is expended for 
a sort of hopping motion, pushing the leg like a spring to overcome 
the force of gravity. Meanwhile, legs are alternately moved forward. 
While this is going on, the body also has to maintain an appropri-
ate posture, controlling the angle between the trunk and legs and 
remaining upright.
The design of the running robot involved creating a computer 
algorithm for each of the three kinds of motion—upward, forward, 
and postural. This is a simpler task than trying to control everything 
Raibert’s three forms of control for legged locomotion are shown with a robot 
quadraped. The three motions to be adjusted are forward (roll), up and down 
(pitch), and tilting (yaw).
LEARNING TO WALK   41

42   Modern Robotics
at once. The algorithms could then be fine-tuned to synchronize the 
three aspects of motion under a wide range of conditions.
The simplest form of locomotion is where only one leg moves at 
a time. To walk like a human or a cat, however, it is necessary to 
have more than one leg moving simultaneously. Raibert solved this 
problem by combining two or even four legs into a single “virtual 
leg,” where the individual legs are coordinated so they act like the 
simpler single leg model.
Boston Dynamics
Practical walking robots would have to have far more extensive 
capabilities than those in the Leg Lab’s simple walking demonstra-
tions. In the real world, robots would have to navigate around fur-
niture and people . . . or clamber over rock-strewn terrain. Vision 
systems and artificial intelligence would be needed for the robot 
to “know” how to adjust its stride to fit the kind of surface it was 
traveling over.
In 1992, Raibert began to move from the academic world to 
the realm of industry. He became president of an innovative soft-
ware company called Boston Dynamics. The company special-
ized in simulations of human movement for the government and 
military.
In particular, Raibert applied his concepts of robot motion to 
the problem of generating realistic animated simulations of motion 
for simulations, games, and even movies. Using his software, a 
special-effects designer would not have to animate each tiny stage 
painstakingly in the motion of, for example, a dinosaur. He or she 
could simply set the necessary parameters, tell the software where 
the dinosaur should move on the screen, and have the animation 
sequence generated automatically.
Using a product called Di-Guy, makers of games and simulations 
can easily add lifelike human characters. The product has become 
quite popular with the military, which can use pre-built characters, 
including various types of soldiers and specialists such as landing 
signal officers and “first responders,” complete with protective 
masks and other gear.

CONNECTIONS: BEASTS AND BOTS
Scientists and engineers since the time of Leonardo da Vinci (1452–
1519) have studied biological anatomy and often tried to incorporate 
its principles in building such things as flying machines. Generally, it 
has turned out that direct imitation of nature’s mechanisms has not 
worked well with machines—thus airplanes do not fly the way birds 
do, although aspects of their wing structure are similar.
In building robots (sometimes colloquially called “bots”) that have 
more of the capabilities of animals and people, today’s researchers 
have studied creatures ranging from the cockroach to dogs and even 
kangaroos. But at the same time that nature may be teaching the 
engineer, the engineer may also be helping to unlock the secrets of 
nature. As Raibert pointed out in his 1986 article, “Legged Robots,” 
in Communications of the ACM:
One way to learn more about plausible mechanisms for animal loco-
motion is to build legged machines. To the extent that an animal and 
a machine perform similar locomotion tasks, their control systems and 
mechanical structures must solve similar problems. By building machines, 
we can gain new insights into these problems and learn about possible 
solutions.
Another way to look at the possible convergence of biological 
and mechanical systems of control and locomotion is to consider 
how evolution has often guided different types of creatures to 
develop similar structures for similar tasks. (For example, insects, 
birds, and even mammals [bats] all developed wings for flight). In 
a way, robots, too, may be “evolving” similar structures to fit the 
niches or applications in which they will increasingly be found in 
the future.
Just as Raibert found that relatively simple overall adjustments 
(such as changing stride length and posture) were enough to 
maintain balance while running, animal research is now suggest-
ing that the nervous system does not “micromanage” locomotion 
but instead uses relatively simple overall controls. As Raibert told 
Stephen Budiansky, “the mechanical system has a mind of its 
own.”
LEARNING TO WALK   43

44   Modern Robotics
Robot Mules
An important early advance in many civilizations was the use of 
beasts of burden such as horses, mules, oxen, and camels to carry 
goods. In the past few years, Raibert has been a key researcher in 
a project to create the mechanical equivalent of the mule. Called 
“BigDog,” a prototype walking robot offers the military the 
ability to increase the carrying capacity of infantry. The robot 
SOLVING PROBLEMS: ROBOTS AND ANIMATION
In 1872, photographer Eadweard Muybridge (1830–1904) set up a 
series of cameras at a racetrack. Each camera was set up so that as a 
galloping horse passed, a cord would break and a picture would be 
taken. The result was the first photographic study that revealed the 
exact sequence in which the legs of the horse moved. If one takes 
enough such pictures in rapid succession the result is a “moving pic-
ture”—a movie.
While film can be used to “decompose” walking or running into 
discrete movements, traditional animation is the reverse process. It 
attempts to create smooth action from a series of discrete images. 
There have been many approaches to animation, ranging from car-
toons with hand-painted frames (cels) to computer animation that uses 
algorithms to create smooth transitions from one defined “key frame” 
to the next.
The ultimate problem for animators is how to turn discrete images 
into smooth, realistic motion. One approach commonly used is to cap-
ture the motions of live human actors and incorporate them into the 
animation model. Unfortunately, the ability to integrate such captured 
motion smoothly is limited—fundamentally, because the modeler lacks 
real understanding of the mechanics and dynamics. Without knowing 
why things move the way they do, the ability to determine where they 
should move next is limited.
One of Raibert’s key insights is that the same algorithms that 
enabled his robots to walk or run smoothly and realistically could also 

dog—or perhaps better, “mule”—will be capable of intelligently 
finding its way around the terrain as it follows troops in combat. 
Able to carry supplies and ammunition, such robots could extend 
the range and duration of combat patrols in areas where vehicles 
are either not available or unable to clamber over terrain, such as 
the mountains of Afghanistan. (In addition to Boston Dynamics, 
the BigDog development team includes MIT, Harvard, and 
Stanford.)
be used to generate animation sequences. This worked by creating a 
“virtual robot” and subjecting it to real-world physics while simulating 
real-world mechanics. In a 1991 paper for the ACM Computer Graphics 
journal, Raibert and IBM researcher Jessica Hodgins explained how 
they constructed animation models for bipeds (running and hopping), 
quadrupeds (trotting, bounding, and galloping), and even kangaroo-
style hopping. As with the original robot models, the general approach 
was to simplify the system by focusing on a single moving leg or 
coupled pair of legs. A leg is modeled as rigid segments connected by 
joints. Much of the complexity arises from dealing with the way energy 
is stored and released by muscles (actuators) and transformed via the 
joints, as well as accounting for the “springlike” characteristics of the 
feet as they contact and release from the ground.
Since that original work, great advances in computer power and 
the availability of many other sophisticated animation models (such as 
for human facial expressions) have combined to enable products from 
Boston Dynamics and other companies to include highly realistic por-
trayals of the human body under many different types of conditions.
The connections between legged robot locomotion, motion simu-
lation, and animation are a striking illustration of how traditionally 
distinct fields such as biology, mechanical engineering, and computer 
graphics can develop together by tapping into a growing body of 
physical understanding. The results are likely to include more useful 
and versatile robots as well as educational simulations and games with 
greater accuracy and realism.
LEARNING TO WALK   45

46   Modern Robotics
In designing the robot, Raibert noted to David Hambling of the 
British newspaper the Guardian that “There are tradeoffs with 
speed, the roughness of the terrain, and the payload.” To be use-
ful for its military application, the robot must be able to travel fast 
enough to keep up with the pace of marching soldiers. At the same 
time, it must be able to carry enough supplies to be worthwhile. So 
far the prototype BigDog has been able to climb a steep 30-degree 
slope while carrying a load of more than 110 pounds (50 kg.) As 
development continues, there are likely to be faster robots as well as 
specialized versions for scouting and rescue work.
An alternative way to help people carry big loads is to build robot-
ic extensions to their own legs. In Robert Heinlein’s novel Starship 
Troopers, soldiers of the future have powered suits that let them leap 
hundreds of yards and carry wounded comrades easily to safety. 
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency has announced a 
project for developing powered “exoskeletons” that would enable 
soldiers to carry hundreds of pounds.
Finally, Boston Dynamics’ growing robot menagerie now includes 
RHex, a remote-controlled robot that can climb or clamber over any 
terrain and even swim and dive in swampy environments. The com-
pany has an even more remarkable climbing robot, the six-legged 
RiSE, which can climb straight up a wall, fence, or tree. These 
robots feature a variety of adaptations for dealing with different 
types of surfaces.
A Dynamic Future
The best testament to Marc Raibert’s more than 25 years of research 
into legged and other mobile robots is seen in the robots and anima-
tion products from Boston Dynamics, as well as in the industry as a 
whole. Thanks to Raibert and other researchers (such as the devel-
opers of Honda’s Asimo robot), walking robots are making their 
sure-footed way into applications ranging from planetary explora-
tion to entertainment.
Raibert has been a featured speaker at many robotics confer-
ences, including the 25th anniversary conference on “Robots and 
Thought” sponsored by Carnegie Mellon University in 2004.

Raibert’s main focus these days is in the business world, where he 
is devoted to the further development of a variety of mobile robot 
designs and applications, as well as innovative animation and simu-
lation software.
Chronology
1870 
 Early walking machines are developed, but they can only walk 
stifﬂ y and in a straight line
1872 
 Eadweard Muybridge begins photographic studies of locomo-
tion in 40 different animals
1949 
Marc Raibert born in New York City
1968 
 Ralph Mosher’s prototype “walking truck” is tested by the 
U.S. Army
1973 
 Raibert graduates from Northeastern University with a degree 
in electrical engineering
1977 
Raibert earns his doctorate at MIT
A computer-controlled six-legged (hexapod) robot is developed 
by Robert McGhee’s group at Ohio State University
1977–80 
 Raibert works for three years as an engineer at the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California
1980 
 Japanese researchers build a four-legged (quadrapedal) machine 
that can climb stairs
1981 
 Raibert becomes an associate professor of computer science 
and robotics at Carnegie Mellon University; he establishes the 
“Leg Laboratory” for research on walking robots
1982 
 Raibert’s ﬁ rst hopping robot moves in place and can keep its 
balance
1983 
 A one-legged hopping robot runs and balances on an open ﬂ oor
1984 
 Balancing techniques are successfully applied to a quadrupedal 
robot, which can then trot
LEARNING TO WALK   47

48   Modern Robotics
1986 
 Raibert moves to MIT, along with the Leg Laboratory
A two-legged (bipedal) robot can do flips and other 
acrobatics
1989 
A bipedal robot jumps through a hoop
1991 
 A kangaroo-like robot hops, using an articulated leg and tail
Raibert coauthors a paper that applies robot models to 
animation
1992 
 Raibert becomes president of Boston Dynamics, seeking to 
apply his robotics studies to animation
1995 
 Raibert leaves MIT and becomes president of Boston 
Dynamics
2005 
 Boston Dynamics offers “Di-Guy” software providing realistic 
human modeling for simulations
The Defense Department funds ongoing research in walking 
“mule” robots to carry supplies for soldiers
Further Reading
Books
Raibert, Marc. Legged Robots That Balance. Reprint. Boston: MIT 
Press, 2000.
Describes the principles, implementation, and simulation of dynamic 
legged locomotion, including single-legged, bipedal, and quadrupedal 
machines.
Articles
Budiansky, Stephen. “The Scientist Who Dances with Robots.” U.S. 
News & World Report 117, 14 November 1990, n.p.
Popular introduction to Marc Raibert’s work with robots at the MIT 
Leg Laboratory.
Hambling, David. “A Breed Apart: Robots Could Yet Hit the Big Time, 
Now That the Pentagon Has Set Its Sights on the Four-Legged Variety.” 
Guardian, February 24, 2005, n.p. Available online. URL: http://

technology.guardian.co.uk/online/insideit/story/0,13270,1423657,
00.html. Accessed September 4, 2005.
Describes BigDog, LittleDog, and other robots being developed for 
military applications.
Pratt, Gill A. “Legged Robots at MIT—What’s New Since Raibert.” 
Reproduced from Proceedings of the 1999 International 
Conference of Climbing and Walking Robots 199. Available 
online. URL: http://www.uwe.ac.uk/clawar/newsletters/issue4/mit.
html. Accessed on September 1, 2005.
Describes further development of walking robots at MIT after 
Raibert’s departure, including use of new forms of actuators and con-
trol mechanisms.
Raibert, Marc. “Legged Robots.” Communications of the ACM 29 
(June 1986): 499–514.
Describes the utility of walking robots and the principles behind their 
operation.
———, and Jessica K. Hodgins. “Animation of Dynamic Legged 
Locomotion.” ACM Computer Graphics 25 (July 1991): 349–358.
Describes the innovative application of research into animal and robot 
locomotion to the creation of animations.
Weiss, Peter. “Hop . . . Hop . . . Hopbots!: Designers of Small, Mobile 
Robots Take Cues from Grasshoppers and Frogs.” Science News, 
February 10, 2001, n.p. Available online. URL: http://www.find
articles.com/p/articles/mi_m1200/is_6_159/ai_72058401. Accessed 
on September 3, 2005.
Describes highly mobile robots inspired by watching grasshoppers’ 
agile evasion tactics. NASA is adapting the technology to designing 
new Mars rovers.
Web Sites
Boston Dynamics. URL: http://www.bostondynamics.com. Accessed 
on September 6, 2005. 
Presents digital motion simulation and modeling products, including 
“Di-Guy” package.
MIT Leg Laboratory. URL: http://www.ai.mit.edu/projects/leglab. 
Accessed on September 1, 2005.
Describes the people and projects underway at the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology’s “Leg Laboratory.”
LEARNING TO WALK   49

50
4
REAL-WORLD ROBOTS
COLIN ANGLE, HELEN GREINER, AND iROBOT
A
lthough the first electronic digital computers appeared in the 
 mid-1940s, they would be confined for the next 30 years to 
big corporations, government agencies, and universities. Even when 
desktop personal computers first arrived in the 1970s, most people 
considered them to be novelties or toys for adventurous electronics 
hobbyists. Today, though, the personal computer in all its forms is 
nearly as commonplace as the television and telephone. The explo-
sion in personal computing happened not only because the machines 
became increasingly powerful, inexpensive, compact and versatile 
but also because of compelling applications such as word process-
ing, e-mail, and the World Wide Web.
Household robots are at a stage of development similar to that of 
the early days of the PC. Industrial robots have worked in factories 
since the 1970s, and experimental robots have rolled and walked 
through research labs, testing theories of artificial intelligence and 
interacting with people in increasingly sophisticated ways. But 
where is “Rosie,” the housekeeping robot from the old Jetsons tele-
vision show? The robot that can clean the house, do the dishes, take 
out the trash, and even babysit while the parents have a night out?
Such robots remain far in the future. But thanks to pioneer inventor-
entrepreneurs Colin Angle and Helen Greiner of iRobot Corporation 
(and their colleague and mentor Rodney Brooks) more than a million 
robots were at work in American households by 2005, with growing 
numbers appearing in other countries as well. Right now, they are 
only cleaning the floor. But tomorrow a robot menagerie may take 

over many of the time-consuming tasks of daily life, while making 
homes safer and more responsive to peoples’ needs.
Hands-on Builder
Colin Angle was born in 1969 and grew up in Niskayuna, a small 
town in upstate New York. A large General Electric research facility 
was nearby, and young Angle became fascinated with its intricate 
machines. As he noted to an interviewer for Business Week Online, 
“I was always more interested in hands-on building than theory.”
Angle went to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) 
and received his B.S. in electrical engineering and M.S. in com-
puter science. While studying at MIT, Angle happened to notice the 
Mobile Robotics Laboratory run by 
pioneer robotics researcher Rodney 
Brooks. After they chatted, Brooks 
hired Angle as a summer helper on 
the project to build Genghis, an 
insect-like walking robot.
The opportunity to build or work 
on a variety of innovative robots 
was exhilarating. Jeff Sutherland, a 
computer scientist working nearby, 
recalled in his “Scrum Log” blog 
that “[Colin] had his early robots 
hunting me down in my office” using 
their infrared sensors. Angle also 
had the opportunity to work at the 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in 
Pasadena, California. Here he helped 
explore designs for new, smaller, 
and cheaper planetary exploration 
rovers. The National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration (NASA) 
gave him a special commendation 
for his development of Tooth, an 
innovative “microrover.”
Colin Angle helped robotics pio-
neer Rodney Brooks build plan-
etary rovers. Today, his company 
iRobot makes robots that clean 
floors and help the military and 
law enforcement. (Photo courtesy 
of iRobot)
REAL-WORLD ROBOTS   51

52   Modern Robotics
Teaming Up: Brooks, Angle, and Greiner
In 1990, Rodney Brooks, eager to bring mobile robot technology 
into the marketplace, joined Colin Angle and fellow MIT researcher 
Helen Greiner to form a company that eventually became known as 
iRobot Corporation. (The name is a nod to Isaac Asimov’s I, Robot 
collection of robot stories.)
Greiner was born in 1969 in London, though she grew up in 
Long Island, New York. As a young girl interested in science 
and mathematics, Greiner was inspired by the original Star Wars 
movie to think about building robots like the friendly and versa-
tile R2D2. (She was disappointed, though, to learn that the robot 
had a human controller inside.) By the time she was 11, Greiner 
was writing her own programs on 
an early personal computer and 
trying to connect it to control the 
movements of toys.
Like Angle, Greiner earned a 
B.S. in mechanical engineering and 
an M.S. in computer science and 
studied with Brooks at the MIT 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) Lab. She 
had also worked at JPL. According 
to her MIT faculty adviser, Greiner, 
unlike some of the more theoretical-
ly minded students, was interested 
in how to turn robotics applica-
tions into business opportunities.
Greiner’s skills in robot design 
and hands-on engineering served 
her well as iRobot struggled to 
bring its first products to market. 
Although she soon found herself 
the target of tempting offers from 
other companies, she was deter-
mined to follow through with the 
vision she shared with Brooks and 
Angle.
Together with Colin Angle and 
Rodney Brooks, Helen Greiner 
founded iRobot Corporation 
Greiner uses finely honed engineer-
ing and business skills to bring new 
robots to market. (Photo courtesy of 
iRobot Corporation)

Baby Doll
Rodney Brooks’s robot laboratory at MIT has undertaken a long-
term effort to develop robots that can in some sense understand and 
respond appropriately to human body language, facial expressions, 
and vocal intonations. At MIT, Brooks had developed a research 
robot called “IT” by 1995. In 1998, Brooks and Angle decided to 
create a new kind of baby-doll toy based on IT. It would eventually 
be called “My Real Baby.”
Besides having realistic skin and simulated facial muscles, the 
robot was able to sense how it was being handled. In addition to 
being able to move its lips, cheeks, and forehead (allowing it to raise 
its eyebrows, smile, or grimace, for example), the robot could also 
perform other behaviors, such as sucking its thumb or a bottle.
The doll’s “emotional state” changed according to how it was 
handled. For example, if held upside down, it became “unhappy” 
and complained with varying degrees of intensity. The doll would 
laugh when tickled and burp when patted on the back—though it 
sort of flinched if approached too quickly from in front. The doll 
even appeared to “learn” by speaking increasingly complex state-
ments after it had been played with for many hours.
This rather sophisticated behavior required that the doll have a 
large variety of parts. For example, a ball-bearing in a cage sent sig-
nals that the robot could interpret to determine whether it was being 
gently rocked or roughly handled. Light sensors tried to determine 
whether the doll was being hugged or tickled. A magnetic sensor 
reported whether the baby was being given its bottle.
Angle and Brooks believed they had the basic technology in hand, 
but when they showed the prototype (called BIT for “Baby IT”) to 
toy companies, they were in for a rude awakening. It turned out that 
the toy industry did not know what to do with this sophisticated 
robot disguised as a doll. To start with, the typical retail price for 
“talking dolls” and similar toys was less than the cost of BIT’s parts 
alone. Further, toy industry marketers had no idea how to market a 
doll that had so many new and hard-to-explain features.
Finally, in 1998, iRobot and Hasbro, one of the world’s leading 
toymakers, made an agreement that iRobot would develop new toy 
concepts and Hasbro would market those it felt were appropriate. 
REAL-WORLD ROBOTS   53

54   Modern Robotics
My Real Baby was the first fruit of this agreement, reaching stores 
just in time for Christmas 2000.
While sales of My Real Baby were disappointing, the toy was a 
milestone in robotics. As Rodney Brooks noted to Joseph Pereira 
of the Wall Street Journal Classroom Edition Online, “for the first 
time our robots [had] to interact with countless thousands of real 
SOLVING PROBLEMS: DOING ENOUGH WITH LESS
With the need to make My Real Baby simpler and cheaper, Brooks 
and Angle had to modify both its components and its behavior. They 
had to find ways to fit the software on cheaper processor chips. The 
five separate motors the prototype had used to control the facial 
muscles were replaced with a single one that still allowed for the 
necessary expressions.
As for behavior, the original BIT acted more like a real baby in 
that it would keep crying until “fed.” But since My Real Baby had to 
meet the more limited attention spans and patience of children, it 
was modified so that even if not fed, it would eventually get over its 
hunger and be ready to play again. And instead of having the doll 
determine whether its diaper had been changed for a new one, they 
reconfigured the doll to make it satisfied even if the same diaper is 
removed and put back on—from “virtually wet” to “virtually dry.”
These changes highlight the difference between the research 
robots found in Brooks’s MIT lab and the products sold by iRobot. 
Research robots are designed for exploring interesting concepts and 
problems in as much depth as possible. But while what is learned 
in research can be applied to create innovative products, when an 
inventor becomes an entrepreneur, a different goal must be kept in 
mind. The customer can be intrigued but must ultimately be satis-
fied—and at a price he or she is willing to pay.
Another key to iRobot’s success may have been the way it has 
been able to reuse and build upon its technological base. Thus the 
logic and behavior for a doll could be applied to a robotic pet as well. 
The behaviors for an automatic vacuum cleaner should be applicable 
to, for example, an automatic mopper or duster or even a robotic 
lawn mower. Additional behaviors can be added to account for par-
ticular requirements.

people in ordinary homes, not graduate students interested in eso-
teric aspects of human psychology.”
In the following years, a number of other companies also decided 
that robot toys and “pets,” such as Sony’s Aibo dog, were the wave 
of the future. iRobot and Hasbro responded with a walking dino-
saur robot for the 2002 season.
Household Robots: A Different Approach
As Angle, Greiner, and Brooks looked for new robot applica-
tions, one that soon came to mind was building a smarter vacuum 
cleaner. While dolls were something of a niche market, virtually 
everyone owned a vacuum cleaner and faced the regular, tedious 
chore of pushing it around the house in the never-ending battle to 
eliminate dust.
The question was how to build a robotic vacuum cleaner that 
could do its job virtually unattended. While at MIT, Angle, Greiner, 
Brooks and other researchers built generally very complex experi-
mental robots. As Angle told Robotics Trends,
When I was at MIT, I built a robot that had everything you could 
dream of in a robot, it was small and had 23 motors, 11 computers, 
150 sensors, everything. It was over the top, but it could never work 
for more than an hour at a time.
After I finished it I thought, what’s next? I had built the robot 
of my dreams, but I was not satisfied. The answer was that it was 
a research project. It was not a robot that would touch people in 
their daily lives. The visions portrayed in science fiction novels had 
not yet been achieved. I wanted a robot that could clean my house. 
I wanted to do something other than making interesting “one off” 
robots.
Angle and Greiner learned that it is not easy to turn high-fly-
ing robot ideas into viable products. First, there is the difference 
between the design of a research robot and a product that has to 
be cheap enough to find a consumer market. As Angle noted to 
Business Week Online:
REAL-WORLD ROBOTS   55

56   Modern Robotics
That’s [the] big problem with robotics in general: People want to sit 
down and build robots that cost hundreds of thousands of dollars, 
and in some cases, that funding has been there. Without worrying 
Built around 1960 at the Stanford Research Institute, Shakey was the prototype 
of a traditional artificial intelligence–based mobile robot. Even though computers 
are far more powerful today, a simpler approach may be better for creating 
simple robot appliances.

about costs, you can do anything. The challenge is building something 
for which the final value exceeds the bill of materials.
Working with Brooks, Angle and Greiner realized that a whole 
different approach was necessary for making robots a consumer 
appliance as affordable and accessible as vacuum cleaners, micro-
waves, or washing machines. Drawing on Brooks’s ideas about 
robots that combine simple behaviors to perform desired functions, 
they removed nearly all the AI from the equation.
Consider how a typical AI researcher would design a robotic 
vacuum cleaner. First, the robot would get a complete computer 
vision system and software to maintain an internal map of each 
room. The robot would calculate an optimum path to ensure that 
it missed no spot of dirt on the floor, while identifying obstacles 
in advance.
To do this, the robot would need cameras (probably with 
stereoscopic vision) and software that could characterize and 
locate objects in the room. It would also need some way to keep 
track of which areas had been cleaned and which were still 
dirty.
The iRobot team realized that robots with that level of intel-
ligence were complex and hard to make reliable. Indeed, even the 
most advanced experimental AI robots would have problems deal-
ing with the changing environment of the home. What happens 
when one of the objects in the robot’s internal map is the family 
cat, which moves between the time of initial calculation and the 
beginning of the cleaning pass? (It is doubtful the cat will appreci-
ate being vacuumed!)
Assuming they could even build such a robot, it would probably 
cost about as much as a new car. Not many consumers will pay that 
kind of price for a humble household appliance.
Behavioral Building Blocks
The iRobot team decided to take a radically different approach, 
following Brooks’s principle of combining simple behaviors to get 
REAL-WORLD ROBOTS   57

58   Modern Robotics
effective performance. The robot, called Roomba, follows a random 
spiral-like path around the room, cleaning as it goes. It has no idea 
where it is located in the room or where obstacles may be located. 
When it bumps into something, it reverses itself (using a few special 
tricks for dealing with corners and such).
Roomba does not know what parts of the room have already 
been cleaned; however, this is not a problem because its modified 
random path is designed to make sure it eventually reaches every 
area. When the machine detects a wall, it follows it while a spin-
ning side brush collects dirt in edges and corners. There are also two 
counter-rotating brushes that bring larger pieces of debris within 
range of the vacuum nozzle.
Roomba has an additional feature that helps it clean efficiently. 
When special sensors near the brushes detect high concentrations 
of dirt, Roomba switches to a tighter cleaning pattern so it spends 
more time cleaning in the immediate area. When dirt is no longer 
detected, the robot reverts to its general wandering. This combina-
tion of random navigation and focused cleaning behavior results 
in a quite satisfactory job—Roomba can clean an average room in 
about 20 minutes.
Roomba uses infrared beams to 
detect stairs and other “cliffs.” 
As long as the robot is on a level 
surface, the beam bounces back 
to a detector. If the beam does 
not bounce back, Roomba reverses 
direction to avoid falling. Finally, 
the robot can be confined to a 
particular area by placing a special 
beacon.
Even with a good design, iRo-
bot’s developers also had to master 
the practical problems of mass-
producing consumer products. 
With a single research robot in a 
laboratory, it is not a problem to 
fix glitches or replace parts that 
are not up to spec. With consumer 
The compact, unthreatening 
Roomba can quietly keep floors 
clean and return to its recharging 
station when necessary. (Photo 
courtesy of iRobot Corporation)

products, quality control and reliability are paramount, as iRobot 
found when they had to send out a hundred thousand plug-in adapt-
ers to fix a problem with the Roomba’s battery-recharging systems.
Fortunately, engineering and marketing seemed to come together 
in an ideal match with Roomba. By 2005, more than 1.2 mil-
lion Roombas had been sold, at about $200 each. Later that year, 
Scooba, a robotic mopper, was introduced.
In its more recent Roomba Discovery model, iRobot made a 
number of modest improvements to the robot’s cleaning, storage, 
Roomba’s effectiveness comes from its simple design as well as a combination of 
cleaning routines that provides good floor coverage.
REAL-WORLD ROBOTS   59

60   Modern Robotics
and power-charging systems. But the most interesting advances 
make Roomba smart enough to change its cleaning pattern accord-
ing to the size of the room and the amount of dirt it collects, as 
well as using an infrared beacon to home in on its docking station 
when a recharge is needed. Other companies, such as Applica and 
Sharper Image, have come out with competitive cleaning bots. The 
household robot, at least in specialized form, seems to have won 
consumer acceptance.
Robots on the Front Lines
Military and law enforcement agencies are intensely interested 
in using robots to perform tasks that are difficult or dangerous 
for humans, such as disarming an improvised explosive device or 
approaching a suspect in a hostage situation safely. iRobot has 
developed a machine called the PackBot for these functions.
The PackBot weighs about 50 pounds (23 kg), so it can be easily 
transported in the trunk of a police car or even carried by its opera-
tor. The robot has tracks like a tiny tank, but its rotating flippers 
enable it to clamber over rubble and even climb stairs. Specialized 
versions are equipped with different types of sensors, cameras, and 
attachments for a particular task.
Greiner has noted with pleasure the letters she receives from U.S. 
soldiers in Iraq and Afghanistan whose lives have been saved by one 
of the more than 150 Packbots that have helped them search for and 
disarm explosive devices found in buildings and caves.
In July 2005, iRobot introduced the PackBot Explorer. This 
model was designed for a variety of surveillance missions. It has 
three separate cameras and can be fitted with specialized sensors.
Future Household Robots
Angle and the crew at iRobot believe the future for consumer 
robots is promising. They believe that while many household tasks 
are much more complex than vacuuming floors, it should be pos-
sible to eventually build robots to do them. As entrepreneurs, their 

challenge is to identify the time when available technology and an 
appropriate design can deliver robots whose performance will justify 
their cost.
Meanwhile, as Angle noted to Business Week Online:
The Roomba is a first step. It’s not intimidating. And it works. 
People find that surprising. The Roomba has gotten more people to 
accept the idea that robots can be useful. Maybe it could be a home-
maintenance system, where your floors are forever clean. Then think 
about robots taking care of people, especially for elder care. That’s 
ultimately the killer application for robotics.
In an interview with Engadget.com, Greiner expanded on this 
vision. She believes that
in 30 years chores around the house will be a thing of the past. The 
robots will have evolved from automatic appliances to home automa-
tion systems. iRobot (and others) will be selling clean floors, clear 
windows, organized closets, mowed lawns, sparkling toilets, and 
dust-free surfaces that the consumer never has to think about. The 
robots just come out and do the job when it needs to be done.
There will be a robot in every squad car and it would be unthink-
able to send an officer into an unknown situation. Robots will help 
the massive problems caused by the world aging demographic. 
Predictions currently are dire about the availability of caregivers for 
the folks who will need them. Enter the robots, that allow doctors to 
go on house calls through telepresence, that bring your grandmother 
water in order to hydrate, assure medication compliance, and even 
find the spectacles that Grandpa has lost for the 1000th time.
In the nearer term, iRobot has a prototype remote-control robot 
that could allow someone to “phone home” via the Internet and 
guide the robot around the house (it can even climb stairs). Besides 
checking to make sure everything is all right, the user can use the 
robot’s communications abilities to chat with family members, per-
haps even read a bedtime story to the children.
REAL-WORLD ROBOTS   61

62   Modern Robotics
Although iRobot is now, with more than 200 employees, the 
world’s largest robot maker, Greiner, Angle, and other robot-
ics entrepreneurs will face many tough obstacles in developing 
new applications. The remote control and telepresence applica-
tions (such as military, law enforcement, and home monitoring) 
are probably easier, since they do not involve having the robot 
make autonomous high-level decisions. There would be great 
consumer interest in being able to buy a “Jetson’s” robot that is 
smart and versatile enough to perform many different tasks, but 
even the most advanced laboratory research robots can perform 
only limited, well-defined tasks in simplified environments 
(lawn-mowing robots are already modestly popular). Perhaps 
we will have to be content with specialized robots for some time 
to come.
Honored for Innovation
Angle and Greiner were named New England Entrepreneur of the 
Year for 2003 by Ernst and Young. Greiner has also been honored 
as an “Innovator for the Next Century” by MIT’s Technology 
Review magazine, as well as receiving the “Demo GOD” award 
from the prestigious DEMO Conference, a showcase for cutting-
edge technology.
No doubt the publicity that Angle and Greiner have garnered 
(and the sight of Roombas patrolling the floors of millions of 
homes) is likely to help inspire the upcoming generation of young 
robot designers. Indeed, by 2005, it was reported that young “robot 
hackers” were modifying Roombas to serve as platforms for their 
own robotics projects.
Chronology
1968 
Helen Greiner born in London
1969 
Colin Angle born in Niskayuna, New York

1988 
 Angle and others in Rodney Brooks’s research group develop 
the Genghis walking robot
Angle graduates from MIT with an undergraduate degree in 
electrical engineering
1990 
 Angle, Greiner, and Brooks cofound a company called 
Artiﬁ cial Creatures—the company eventually becomes iRobot 
Corporation
1991 
Angle receives NASA award for Tooth microrover
1999 
iRobot markets the “My Real Baby” robot baby doll
MIT Technology Review dubs Greiner an “Innovator for the 
Next Century”
2002 
 iRobot’s ﬁ rst Roomba robotic vacuum cleaner hits the market
2003 
 Ernst and Young name Angle and Greiner New England 
Entrepreneur of the Year
iRobot’s PackBots are used in Afghanistan and Iraq
2005 
“Scooba,” a robot that can mop ﬂ oors, is introduced
Further Reading
Books
Brooks, Rodney. Flesh and Machines: How Robots Will Change Us. 
New York: Pantheon Books, 2002.
Describes Brooks’s work and approach to robotics as well as his role 
with iRobot, Inc.
Articles
Jewell, Mark. “iRobot Co-Founder’s Perseverance Now Pays Off.” 
Technology Review, May 31, 2005. Available online. URL: 
http://www.technologyreview.com/articles/05/05/ap/ap_3053105.
asp?p=1. Accessed on September 9, 2005.
Interview with Helen Greiner giving some personal background as well 
as discussion of iRobot’s products.
REAL-WORLD ROBOTS   63

64   Modern Robotics
Kanellos, Michael. “Invasion of the Robots.” CNET News.com 
March 10, 2004. Available online. URL: http://news.com.com/
Invasion+of+the+robots/2009-1040_3-5171948.html?tag=nl. 
Accessed on August 15, 2005.
Describes recent developments in robotics that are being spurred by 
the availability of cheaper, more powerful processors, sensors, and 
software.
———. “The Leader of the Robot Pack.” CNET News.com, July 
7, 2005. Available online. URL: http://news.com.com/The+leader
+of+the+robot+pack/2008-1008_3-5776430.html. Accessed on 
September 7, 2005.
Interview with Colin Angle.
Pereira, Joseph. “Natural Intelligence: Helen Greiner Thinks Robots 
Are Ready to Become Part of the Household.” Wall Street Journal 
Classroom Edition Online, October 2002. Available online. 
URL: http://www.wsjclassroomedition.com/archive/02oct/COVR_
ROBOT.htm. Accessed on September 24, 2005.
Discusses Helen Greiner’s work and plans for bringing robots into the 
home.
“Robots: Today, Roomba. Tomorrow . . .” Business Week Online, 
May 6, 2004. Available online. URL: http://www.businessweek.
com/print/technology/content/may2004/tc2004056_2199_tc_168.
htm?tc. Accessed on September 8, 2005.
Interview with Colin Angle discussing the prospects for consumer 
robotics.
Torrone, Philip. “Interview: Helen Greiner, Chairman and Cofounder 
of iRobot, Corp.” Engadget.com, August 2, 2004. Available online. 
URL: http://features.engadget.com/entry/8154940951659251. 
Accessed on January 15, 2006.
Interview with Greiner talking about iRobot’s products and future 
plans.
“Vendor Spotlight: Do What You Love and Success Will Follow: 
An Interview with iRobot’s Colin Angle.” Robotics Trends, 
September 12, 2003. Available online. URL: http://roboticstrends.
com/displayarticle95.html. Accessed on July 14, 2005.
Colin Angle discusses iRobot’s consumer and military robots and the 
robotics industry as a whole.

Web Sites
iRobot. URL: http://www.irobot.com. Accessed on August 5, 2005.
Corporate Web site describing iRobot’s products and plans.
Robotics Online. URL: http://www.roboticsonline.com. Accessed on 
September 25, 2005.
Sponsored by the Robotics Industry Association, this site includes 
news and a buyer’s guide for robot products.
REAL-WORLD ROBOTS   65

66
5
ROBOT EXPLORERS
DONNA SHIRLEY AND THE MARS ROVERS
I
n 1997, humankind’s first mobile robot planetary explorer bounced 
across the surface of Mars, astride a lander platform surrounded 
by giant air bags. Called Sojourner and smaller than a child’s 
wagon, the little machine would begin a new era of exploration of 
our most enigmatic planetary neighbor. Built for less than the cost 
of a hit Hollywood movie, Sojourner represented not only new ideas 
in robotic space exploration but also a style of creative management 
much different from the top-down bureaucracy that had troubled 
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) for 
years.
The manager who guided and helped shape the complex Mars 
Pathfinder program was Donna Shirley, a woman whose own 
sojourns in traditionally male-dominated fields continually chal-
lenged her perseverance and creativity.
A Love of Engineering
Donna Shirley was born in the small town of Wynnewood, 
Oklahoma, in 1941. Because her father was the town doctor 
and her mother the daughter of a prominent minister, Shirley 
and her younger sister Margo were closely scrutinized for 
“proper” behavior. This was a real problem for the young girl. 
In her autobiography, Managing Martians, Shirley recalled that 
as a child,

I had a difficult time making friends 
with the girls anyway because I 
wasn’t interested in dolls, dress 
up games, or pretending to be a 
princess. . . . I much preferred to 
play cowboy or detective, but few 
of the boys were willing to play 
those kinds of games with a girl.
Shirley loved to read books about 
airplanes and flying adventures, 
imagining that she was a bush pilot 
transporting “flying doctors” in the 
Australian outback. When she was 
10, she saw a reference in a gradu-
ation ceremony to “aeronautical 
engineering.” When she asked what 
that meant and was told “building 
airplanes,” she knew that was what 
she wanted to do.
Shirley also became fascinated 
by space exploration, particularly 
as portrayed by science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke’s novel The 
Sands of Mars. Shirley’s interest in aerodynamics was visceral as 
well as intellectual. She was eager to learn to fly, and by age 16, she 
was ready to go “solo,” having learned the feel of flying an Aeronca 
Champ, a fabric-winged trainer with a tiny 65-horsepower engine.
Getting Respect
After high school, Shirley attended the University of Oklahoma. 
Telling her adviser that she wanted to enroll in the engineering pro-
gram, Shirley recalled in her autobiography the curt response that 
“Girls can’t be engineers.” When she was enrolled in engineering 
courses for which she had not been prepared, Shirley had to struggle 
to earn a passing grade in her first year. Seeking an alternative that 
Donna Shirley managed many 
aspects of the program that brought 
Sojourner, humankind’s first 
mobile robot space explorer, to the 
surface of Mars in 1997. (Photo 
courtesy of Donna Shirley)
ROBOT EXPLORERS   67

68   Modern Robotics
still suited her interest in aviation engineering, she changed majors 
and graduated in 1963 with a degree in technical writing.
Shirley went to work at McDonnell Aircraft in St. Louis, Missouri, 
as a specifications writer. There she had her first experience of dis-
dain and even sexual harassment in a virtually all-male workplace. 
She decided to go back to the University of Oklahoma, where she 
received her bachelor’s degree in aerospace and mechanical engineer-
ing in 1965. When she returned to McDonnell Aircraft that year, it 
was as an aerodynamicist.
In 1966, Shirley visited the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in 
Pasadena, California. This was the research organization that was 
powering America into the space age with innovative propulsion sys-
tems and vehicles. In the late 1960s, Shirley had the opportunity to 
help design a space probe that would later become Mars Pathfinder, 
while finishing studies leading to a master’s degree in aerospace 
engineering in 1968 from the University of Southern California.
In the early 1970s, Shirley worked as a specialist and then became 
a manager on the Mariner 10 project, which would successfully send 
back the first detailed high-quality pictures of Venus and Mercury. The 
challenges and rewards of managing complex projects began to appeal 
to her almost as much as the desire to build innovative machines. Shirley 
was also designated as the group’s media representative, responsible for 
explaining the exciting but complicated world of space science in terms 
that ordinary people could understand. The result of her excellence in 
all of these roles was a NASA Group Achievement Award.
In 1979, Shirley reached project leader status, being placed in 
charge of the effort to design a mission to Saturn. (This would even-
tually become the Cassini-Huygens mission, which explored Saturn 
and its moon Titan starting in 1997). Shirley also worked on proj-
ects to design better computer systems for military satellites and to 
develop a viable space station.
Designing Space Robots
During this time, Shirley also became interested in robotics and its 
application to the design of space probes. Space applications impose 
special requirements on robots. The environment of space is incred-

ibly harsh: Temperatures can change rapidly from hundreds of 
degrees (in direct sun) to nearly absolute zero in shadow. A constant 
sleet of charged particles and radiation strikes the spacecraft, and 
it can be suddenly augmented by solar flares. Here on Earth, the 
atmosphere protects living things and machines from most of these 
effects, but materials used in spacecraft and space robots must be 
specially selected and “hardened” in order to survive in the hostile 
environment of space.
Space probes must also endure the shock of liftoff from Earth and 
survive a journey of tens or hundreds of millions of miles. Probes 
intended to visit the surface of a planet will undergo what will at 
best be a bumpy landing. Although some redundancy (development 
of duplicate or backup systems) can be built into the spacecraft 
design, this can only go so far. Weight is the main constraint: Every 
additional pound or kilogram means the launching rocket has to be 
bigger. A related constraint is cost—particularly in the modern era, 
in which NASA’s budget has greatly declined from the triumphant 
Apollo days of the 1960s.
The engineers on Shirley’s team thus had to make hard choices. 
For example, could they afford the weight and cost of a backup 
radio transmitter? If the main transmitter failed, having a second 
one might ensure that the space probe could send back at least a 
portion of the planned pictures and instrument readings. Or should 
the money and weight allowance be used instead to improve the 
landing system (increasing the chances of a safe touchdown) or per-
haps to allow a rover to carry an additional scientific instrument?
As an engineer and designer of space probes, Shirley became 
familiar with the need to make such trade-offs. But as her manage-
rial responsibilities increased, so did the challenge in getting highly 
opinionated scientists and engineers to work together effectively. 
Each instrument on a space probe, lander, or rover represents a 
capability that someone has probably spent years working and 
planning for. Theoretical scientists generally want the biggest and 
best instruments possible, seeking always to see or sense farther. 
Engineers, on the other hand, want the system to be as reliable as 
possible. They know that unlike laboratory experimenters, they will 
have no opportunity to try plugging in a different part once the mis-
sion is underway.
ROBOT EXPLORERS   69

70   Modern Robotics
CONNECTIONS: WHY AREN’T THEY HERE?
While our space probes go out into the solar system and beyond, 
should we expect to meet robot spacecraft from other worlds?
Since the mid-1900s, scientists and science fiction writers have 
speculated about the likelihood and prevalence of intelligent civiliza-
tions in the universe. SETI (Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence) has 
attempted to detect radio signals from such civilizations, but so far 
there are no confirmed signs that anyone is out there.
What is the real likelihood that we are not alone in the galaxy? 
One approach to answering this question, taken by radio astronomer 
Frank Drake, was to plug probabilities (such as the presence of suit-
able stars and Earth-like planets) into an equation, which seemed to 
yield thousands of possible intelligent civilizations in the Milky Way 
galaxy alone. But this brings up the “Fermi paradox,” first suggested 
by the famous nuclear physicist Enrico Fermi: “If there are so many 
civilizations out there, why has no one visited us?”
The usual answer is that the distances between stars are so 
immense that even advanced civilizations would have to consume 
most of their available resources to send starships to visit even nearby 
stars. Perhaps civilizations do not last long enough to explore very 
far—or they do not consider the effort worthwhile.
The possibility of building advanced, self-reproducing robots 
changes the equation somewhat. If such robots can mine the 
resources they need, build their own starships, and spread from 
star system to star system, calculations suggest that such a robot 
“swarm” should be able to spread through our galaxy in only a few 
hundred thousand years. Shouldn’t humanity already have been vis-
ited by space robots?
Of course, there are far too many unknowns for us to be confi-
dent about such speculations. Perhaps the robots came and went 
millions of years ago, after deciding that Earth was not that inter-
esting. Or perhaps there were no robots because such a mechani-
cal civilization would presumably have begun through the efforts 
of flesh-and-blood roboticists. If paleontologist Peter Ward and 
astronomer Donald Brownlee’s argument in their book Rare Earth 
(2000) is correct, advanced intelligent life may be exceedingly rare. 
It may be humans who will get to build the robots who ultimately 
explore the galaxy!

Missions to Mars
The red planet Mars has had a special place in the human imagina-
tion as long as people have looked at the sky. About a century ago, 
the astronomers Giovanni Schiaparelli and Percival Lowell thought 
they saw the canals of an advanced civilization on the Martian sur-
face. Science fiction writers such as Arthur Clarke, Ray Bradbury, 
and Kim Stanley Robinson have portrayed imaginative future histo-
ries of human exploration and the colonization of Mars.
As soon as people figured out how to launch spacecraft that could 
overcome the Earth’s gravity, Mars (after the Moon) beckoned to be 
explored. In the 1960s, many probes from the United States and the 
Soviet Union failed to reach the red planet (or went silent), until in 
1969, when the U.S. Mariner 6 and Mariner 7 spacecraft sent the 
first stunning photos of the Martian landscape back to Earth.
Mariner 9
After earning her master’s degree in Aerospace Engineering at the 
University of California in 1968, Shirley began a new job at JPL, 
where she would spend most of her career. At first she worked on 
a team that analyzed the complex trajectories, or paths, that space-
craft must take in order to navigate the solar system. This work is 
difficult because, unlike cars or even airplanes, spacecraft cannot 
take more or less direct paths in planning trips from, for example, 
the Earth to Mars.
A trajectory not only has to be designed to bring spacecraft from 
one moving planet to another, but it must also account for the gravi-
tational forces of the Sun, Moon, and other planets. Even the pres-
sure of the Sun’s light on the craft must be accounted for, because 
even a small uncorrected acceleration over time can push the craft 
off course and cause it to miss its target.
Because the amount of fuel is limited, some long-range space 
missions use the gravity of one planet (such as Venus) to acceler-
ate the craft on its way to another planet (such as Mercury in the 
case of Mariner 10). Since planets are not perfectly round, their 
gravitational field is also irregular, and the exact angle and area 
ROBOT EXPLORERS   71

72   Modern Robotics
of approach has to be calculated in order for the “slingshot” effect 
to work properly. In her autobiography, Shirley describes the whole 
process as being like “trying to thread a needle from 50 million 
miles away.”
Although this work might interest people with a more theoretical 
and mathematical bent, Shirley soon became bored with planning 
trajectories for hypothetical missions that were not yet funded. 
In 1973, Shirley was able to get a job as a mission analyst for the 
Mariner Venus-Mercury mission. Her first task was to schedule an 
exact launch date for the mission. For each interplanetary mission, 
considerations of planetary positions and available fuel dictate a 
range of time called a “launch window,” in which a launch is fea-
sible. Shirley had to then pick a time within the window that would 
best ensure that the many different experiments to be done by 
Mariner would be ready for flight. This task led to conflict among 
the seven principal investigators (the people in charge of the main 
experiments). For example, researchers involved with photography 
naturally wanted the craft to pass on the sunlit side of Mercury. 
On the other hand, people concerned with studying charged par-
ticles and magnetic fields wanted to be on the dark side of the 
planet, where interference from the nearby Sun would be minimized. 
Shirley’s skills at diplomacy and the art of compromise were put to 
the test!
Managing Risk
Shirley had to develop her communications skills in reconciling the 
conflicts over priorities for space missions. Since the only language 
the different scientists seemed to have in common was mathematics, 
Shirley devised simple equations that related the different consider-
ations to one another. She then asked the scientists to give numeri-
cal “goodness values” to the importance of, for example, certain 
photographic opportunities. Shirley’s innovative conflict resolution 
approach must have impressed her superiors because she won a pro-
motion to project engineer.
Another aspect of management that interested Shirley was the need 
to manage risk. Space flight is full of risks, of course, but the attitudes 
toward risk among the different people involved in a mission vary 

TRENDS: MILESTONES IN NASA’S MARS EXPLORATION
Humanity has explored Mars for more than four decades. The follow-
ing chart summarizes the most significant successful missions.
Year Spacecraft
Mission
1964
Mariner 4
Small space probe sent on long trajectories to 
Venus, Mars, and Mercury. Collected first close-up 
photos of Mars
1969
Mariner 6 
and 7
Mars flyby missions returned many pictures and 
atmospheric data
1971
Mariner 9
First probe to orbit Mars rather than just fly past. 
Photo mosaics had many spectacular features, 
including giant volcanoes and canyons
1975
Viking 1 and 2
First spacecraft to land successfully on another 
planet (July 1976). Conducted soil analyses and 
searched for possible signs of life
1996
Pathfinder
First landing of a rover (Sojourner) on Mars (in 
1997). Used a new landing method with parachutes 
and airbags. In addition to taking pictures, the rover 
visited rocks and performed spectroscopic analyses
2003
Mars 
Exploration 
Rovers
Rovers Spirit and Opportunity have ranged 
for unprecedented distances and are continuing 
to operate more than two years past their 
design life
2006
Mars 
Reconn aissance 
Orbiter
Arriving in March, the orbiter will spend six 
months adjusting its orbit before beginning 
science operations
The history of Mars exploration has also been marked by painful 
failures. Several Soviet probes failed in the 1960s and early 1970s, as 
did two of NASA’s Mariner missions. Communication was lost with 
the Mars Polar Lander (launched in 1999), while the Mars Climate 
Orbiter, launched in 1998, burned up in the planet’s atmosphere. 
The ambitious Russian Mars ’96 spacecraft mission was also lost.
ROBOT EXPLORERS   73

74   Modern Robotics
according to what they are invested in emotionally. The research sci-
entist is often driven by the desire to learn as much as possible from an 
experiment, even if this might have a negative impact on other aspects 
of the mission. To the engineers who are responsible for particular 
components, any risk that puts unnecessary stress on the component 
is to be avoided.
Even choosing the launch date involved a balancing of risk. 
If there is a four-week launch window, a launch date two weeks 
into that period might allow for better final preparation of experi-
ments—but it brings the risk that if something goes wrong there will 
not be enough time to fix it and still launch within the window.
On November 3, 1973, Mariner 10 launched successfully. Then, 
as the craft approached its first rendezvous at Venus the following 
January, one thing after another began to go wrong. The star tracker 
that was supposed to keep the star Canopus lined up as a navigation 
reference instead began to follow the little glowing flecks of paint 
that were peeling off the spacecraft. The gyros that were supposed 
to keep the craft stable also began to fail.
As Shirley offered suggestions and helped keep people communi-
cating, the guidance control team had to figure out how to maneuver 
the spacecraft without turning it and possibly losing control. To 
make things worse, the main power system went out. On top of all 
that, the scientists had accidentally vented much of the gas that was 
supposed to be used for controlling the craft’s attitude, or angle.
Finally, the Mariner team came up with a plan. The craft had 
two big movable solar power panels. They decided to use these 
panels like sails, using the pressure of the “wind” of photons from 
the Sun to turn the craft in the required direction. This had to be 
done very carefully because if the craft turned too fast the auto-
matic attitude control system would fire the jets, wasting the small 
amount of gas that was left. To control the operation of the space-
craft, extremely precise commands had to be sent to the onboard 
computer, which could hold fewer bytes of data than are needed to 
store this paragraph.
Despite these difficulties, Mariner 10 was a spectacular success, 
looping around Venus to take pictures and readings. About a month 
later, the craft passed Mercury in the first of three flybys, getting 
the first good pictures and data from that tiny sun-seared world. 

The mission cost $98 million, the cheapest planetary mission yet 
attempted. That suggested the possibility of even greater achieve-
ments to come.
Better, Faster, Cheaper
Meanwhile, Mars continued to beckon. The results of the Mariner 
Mars missions had whetted scientists’ appetite for learning more 
about the planet’s geological history and the possible presence of 
life. In 1976, NASA’s two Viking landers became the first space 
probes to achieve sustained operations on the Martian surface. In 
addition to the orbiters and their landers taking numerous high-
quality photos, the landers obtained and tested soil samples for 
signs of chemicals that might indicate the presence of life. (The 
results were inconclusive.)
As impressive as it was, Viking was also both very expensive and 
limited in its capabilities, since it had no ability to move around the 
Martian surface. In general, NASA was finding itself in the position 
of launching only one or two expensive planetary exploration mis-
sions each decade or so. With all their eggs in only a few baskets, 
the failure of a communications or landing system could mean 
wasting hundreds of millions of dollars and many years of effort. 
For example, Mars Observer, launched in September 1992, was 
intended to be an ambitious, instrument-filled orbiting laboratory 
for the study of the Martian climate and geology. In August 1993, 
however, contact with the spacecraft was lost just as it was sched-
uled to enter orbit around Mars.
The lack of support for a faltering NASA space exploration 
program led the agency’s new chief administrator, Daniel Goldin, 
to shake up the bureaucracy. His “better, faster, cheaper” slogan 
meant that for new space missions, designers would have to be bold 
and creative in figuring out how to build less expensive, smaller 
space probes. On the other hand, they would get to launch more 
often—for Mars, this meant taking advantage of more of the launch 
windows that arrive every two Earth-years or so.
Shirley had previously worked on a massive one-ton Mars rover 
design that would have cost about $10 billion to build. Now she 
ROBOT EXPLORERS   75

76   Modern Robotics
was brought back and asked to come up with mini-rovers similar to 
those some of the more innovative robotics experimenters had been 
designing—machines small enough to ride along on the “better, 
faster, cheaper” missions being planned.
Robots and Rovers
Building a robot that can keep itself out of trouble while navigat-
ing through its environment is hard enough. Now put that robot on 
another planet, where it is not possible to make “service calls.” Even 
sending commands to the robot is more complicated than on Earth, 
since the radio commands can only travel at the speed of light. In the 
case of a mission to Mars, the lag between sending and receiving a 
signal averages about 10 minutes, depending on how far apart Earth 
and Mars have moved as they follow their respective orbits.
Because of this signal lag, a rover cannot be steered like a remote-
control toy car here on Earth. Suppose an obstacle such as a rock 
The “rocker bogie” carriage system on the Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Mars 
rovers allows the wheels to push up and roll over obstacles of considerable size.

or a pit appears suddenly in the rover’s path. It would take at least 
10 minutes for that information to reach controllers on Earth and 
another 10 minutes for a command such as “turn right 30 degrees” 
to reach the rover. By then the rover may have crashed into some-
thing or become hopelessly stuck.
This means that a rover must have considerable autonomy, or the 
ability to make its own decisions about the environment. With a rover 
like Sojourner, the controllers send detailed instructions for each 
planned activity, including the location (such as a rock) to which the 
rover is to move. The robot then takes over, using a camera and laser 
system to chart a course around obstacles. (This would be greatly 
aided by an innovative locomotion system featuring wheels that can 
“rock” or tilt up in order to roll over the smaller obstacles.)
By the 1980s, robotics researchers at JPL and a number of uni-
versity research labs were developing robots that had some of these 
navigation capabilities. As computer processors became more pow-
erful and smaller, it began to be possible to put more intelligence 
aboard a roving robot. Nevertheless, Shirley and the other manag-
ers and engineers on the rover team felt they could not adopt the 
most ambitious ideas of the artificial intelligence researchers. Only 
an effective partnership between human controllers and the robot 
would allow for reliable operations on the Martian surface.
Besides navigating and avoiding accidents, software aboard the 
rover must also include default instructions such as what to do if it 
loses radio contact with base—in this case the lander, which relays 
the rover’s transmissions to and from Earth, either directly or via 
satellites in orbit around Mars.
All of the necessary computers, control and communications sys-
tems, solar and battery power systems, locomotion systems, and the 
cameras and science instruments would have to fit in a rover that 
weighs only 23 pounds (10.5 kg)—less than many dogs!
Sojourner’s Truth
Besides her role in planning and organizing the Mars Pathfinder 
mission and rover development, Shirley continued to work with pub-
lic relations. In one mildly controversial initiative, she organized a 
ROBOT EXPLORERS   77

78   Modern Robotics
contest to name the Mars rover. The winning student’s essay offered 
the name Sojourner, in honor of Sojourner Truth, the American 
woman who had played an important role in rescuing African 
Americans from slavery in the mid-19th century. “Sojourner” also 
means someone who undertakes a long journey, and that would cer-
tainly apply to the little Mars rover.
After a journey lasting seven months, Pathfinder and its Sojourner 
landed on Mars on July 4, 1997. Or rather, it crashed, bouncing off 
its air bags 15 times until it finally came to rest almost precisely on 
the planned target. The elation brought by the first pictures from the 
lander was matched only by the photos a little later that showed that 
the rover had been driven down the ramp to plant its wheels firmly 
on the Martian soil.
As Shirley recounted to interviewer Sally Richards:
My proudest moment was having my daughter, my second moment 
was when the Pathfinder and Sojourner actually worked. When you 
consider that it was going 17,000 miles an hour and it wasn’t sup-
posed to make just another hole in the ground—well, that was a great 
achievement.
It is hard to imagine how elated Donna Shirley and her colleagues were 
when they saw this photo. The lander has arrived, and the cushioning 
airbags have deflated. Sojourner is poised to begin an epic exploration of 
Mars. (NASA photo)

The adventures of Sojourner on Mars attracted unprecedented 
attention on the Internet, which was becoming an increasingly 
important outlet for news and outreach. The designers had hoped 
that the rover would be able to continue its mission for 30 Martian 
days (called “sols”), but in fact Sojourner lasted for 83 Martian 
days. It was only the failure of the lander’s batteries (which had 
been anticipated) that cut the rover off from being able to relay its 
The current generation of Mars rovers are larger and more capable than 
Sojourner, but they are her true descendents in design and technology.
ROBOT EXPLORERS   79

80   Modern Robotics
communications with Earth. As Shirley noted in her autobiography, 
Sojourner was programmed to keep trying to make contact:
On Sol 87 [Sojourner’s computer] would have ordered her to start 
circling the lander, constantly checking, trying to hear a signal. We all 
had a sad image of the little rover rolling jerkily around the lander like 
a lost child, calling “Hello? Hello? Is anyone listening?
In 2004, Sojourner’s larger and more gifted children, the rov-
ers Spirit and Opportunity, landed on Mars. While Sojourner had 
covered a total distance about equal to the length of a football 
ISSUES: SHOULD WE SEND PEOPLE OR ROBOTS TO EXPLORE THE 
UNIVERSE?
Many critics of the space program argue that human presence in space 
is a luxury and a waste of resources if we truly want to learn as much as 
possible about the solar system. While spectacular, the manned Apollo 
Moon landings did not bring back data that could not have eventually 
been gathered by robot explorers and sample return missions. The 
expensive International Space Station and the dangerously unreliable 
space shuttles that served it have returned little scientific benefit. As of 
2006, both programs appear to be in trouble and facing an uncertain 
future.
During those same few decades, robotic explorers have visited every 
planet in the solar system except Pluto. Landers and rovers have begun 
an extensive exploration of Mars. Missions such as Galileo and Cassini-
Huygens have probed the giant planets Jupiter and Saturn, landed on 
the mysterious moon Titan, and even impacted a comet to see what 
kind of material lay under its surface. (In January 2006, the Stardust 
probe returned a cannister of comet dust to Earth for study.)
When humans travel in space, the bulk of the resources and effort 
has to go to keeping them alive and healthy. A round-trip journey 
to Mars would take several years, during which time the astronauts 
would have to be supplied with food, water, and air and protected 
from the hard radiation of space. Long-term weightlessness also has 

field, the new rovers could travel farther than that in a single day. 
Spirit and Opportunity were still operating more than two years 
after their arrival on Mars. Nevertheless, these and future rovers 
owe much to the engineering and operational knowledge gained by 
Shirley and her colleagues from Sojourner.
Forging a New Career
Shirley retired from JPL and the Mars program in 1998 and began 
a new career as a writer and management consultant, drawing upon 
her decades of experience in managing cutting-edge engineering and 
physiological effects (such as wasting of muscles) that are not fully 
understood by researchers. Robots do not need air, food, or water. 
They are much more resistant to radiation, and some space probes 
have continued to function more than two decades after launch.
Proponents of manned space exploration point out that no robot 
has the resourcefulness needed to deal with unforeseen emergencies. 
(This resourcefulness enabled the astronauts in Apollo 13 to survive 
their harrowing journey around the Moon.) Robots also lack the broad 
intelligence and versatility of people. A human geologist on the scene 
may be able to make better decisions about where and how to explore 
than a robot and its earthbound controllers.
Advocates of human exploration in space also point out that people 
identify much more strongly with their fellow humans than with 
machines, no matter how clever. They argue that support for the 
space program declined when people stopped doing interesting things 
in space. Ultimately, only by going to other worlds themselves can 
humans decide whether they can (or want to) live there.
As of the first decade of the 21st century, the edge seems to belong 
to the robots. Despite various presidential proclamations, no manned 
mission to Mars has yet been scheduled. Perhaps as the century pro-
gresses our robots will become so sophisticated that they can explore 
with little direction needed from Earth, while sending back such a 
broad and rich stream of data that humans can experience other 
worlds in virtual reality without having to undergo the perilous journey 
themselves.
ROBOT EXPLORERS   81

82   Modern Robotics
science projects. That same year, she published her well-received 
autobiography, Managing Martians. She has also developed an elec-
tronic book called Managing Creativity. In January 2003, Shirley 
became director of Seattle’s innovative Science Fiction Hall of Fame 
and Museum.
In addition to receiving two Group Achievement Awards from 
NASA, Shirley has been honored by groups such as Women in 
Technology International. She has also been chosen as a Woman 
of the Year by Ms. magazine and received Glamour magazine’s 
“Women Who Do and Dare” award. Recognition aside, Shirley 
believes that what really counts is the number of women who are 
overcoming obstacles to achieve top-rank careers in engineering and 
science. In a “chat” on a NASA Web site, she had this advice for 
young people:
The main thing is to be flexible. Usually you don’t get to work in the 
same field your whole career. If you get a sound technical education 
and are willing to learn and work hard throughout your whole life 
you’ll be O.K. and get to do fun stuff.
Chronology
1941 
Donna Shirley born in Wynnewood, Oklahoma
1963 
 Shirley graduates from the University of Oklahoma with a 
degree in technical writing; she works for McDonnell Aircraft 
in St. Louis
1965 
 Having returned to the University of Oklahoma, Shirley earns 
a B.S. degree in aerospace engineering
1966 
 Shirley begins work at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in 
Pasadena, California
1968 
 Shirley earns a master’s degree in aerospace engineering at the 
University of Southern California
1970 
 Shirley becomes the mission analyst for NASA’s Mariner 10 
Venus-Mercury expedition

1973 
 Mariner 10 is launched successfully; Shirley becomes a “proj-
ect engineer” with management responsibilities, as well as a 
spokesperson for the program
1974 
 Shirley heads a team researching alternative energy sources in 
the wake of the fuel crisis
1979 
 Shirley leads a team that plans what will eventually become 
the Cassini-Huygens mission to Saturn and Titan
1980s 
 Shirley works on research and planning for manned space sta-
tions
1987 
Shirley and her team begin designing robotic Mars rovers
Early 
NASA adopts the “better, faster, cheaper” approach to designing 
1990s  
space missions
1992 
Shirley becomes manager of NASA’s Sojourner rover team
1994 
Shirley becomes manager of JPL’s Mars Exploration Project
1997 
 The Sojourner rover successfully explores Mars in July
Shirley becomes president of Managing Creativity, a consulting 
and training ﬁ rm specializing in team-building
1998 
 Shirley retires from the Mars Exploration Program and pub-
lishes her autobiography, Managing Martians
2003 
 Shirley becomes director of the Science Fiction Hall of Fame 
and Museum in Seattle
NASA explores Mars with the Spirit and Opportunity rovers
Further Reading
Books
Mishkin, Andrew. Sojourner: An Insider’s View of the Mars Pathfinder 
Mission. New York: Berkeley Publishing, 2003.
A vivid account by the project’s operations team leader, explain-
ing how the team dealt with myriad technical and management 
problems.
ROBOT EXPLORERS   83

84   Modern Robotics
Shirley, Donna. Managing Martians. New York: Broadway Books, 
1999.
Shirley’s autobiography, culminating in the success of the Sojourner 
Mars rover mission in 1997.
Articles
Foust, Jeff. “Seeking a Rationale for Human Space Exploration.” Space 
Review, February 9, 2004, n.p. Available online. URL: http://www.
thespacereview.com/article/98/1. Accessed on September 11, 2005.
Discusses the conflicting views of physics professor Robert Park, who 
favors robotic space exploration, and Robert Zubrin, founder of the 
Mars Society, who supports human space exploration.
Richards, Sally. “Managing Martians.” WITI (Women in Technology 
International). Available online. URL: http://www.witi.com/wire/
feature/dshirley.shtml. Accessed on September 1, 2005.
Interview with Shirley, talking about her achievements and the chal-
lenges for women and girls in science and technology.
Shirley, Donna. “Donna Shirley.” NASA Archives. Available online. 
URL: http://quest.arc.nasa.gov/people/bios/women/dshirl.html. 
Accessed on September 3, 2005.
Shirley describes her work during the Mars program in 1996 and gives 
her philosophy about opportunity and achievement.
Web Sites
Managing Creativity. URL: http://www.managingcreativity.com. 
Accessed on September 10, 2005.
The site of Donna Shirley’s consulting and training service for develop-
ing effective teams that produce innovative products. Includes excerpts 
from her e-book on the subject.
NASA’s Mars Exploration Program. URL: http://mars.jpl.nasa.gov. 
Accessed on August 10, 2005.
The site describes significant past missions as well as providing updates 
on current missions and future plans. Includes many interesting images 
and videos.
Women in Technology International. URL: http://www.witi.com. 
Accessed on September 11, 2005.
Organization promoting women’s careers in scientific and technologi-
cal professions.

85
6
THOUGHTFUL ROBOTS
RODNEY BROOKS AND COG
I
t was like no robot anyone had ever seen. Most surprising were 
its big, owl-like eyes that followed visitors’ movements. Like a 
human baby, the robot, called Cog, tried to imitate and learn from 
what it saw. Also like a baby, it made and responded to vocaliza-
tions, although it did not truly understand the words.
Robotics researcher Rodney Brooks is the creator of Cog and 
other new types of robots. His ideas have found their way into 
everything from vacuum cleaners to Martian rovers. Today, as 
head of the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory at the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology (MIT), Brooks has extended his exploration 
of robot behavior into profound realms of philosophy as well as 
science, asking “What is different about being alive?”
A Passion for Computers
Rodney Brooks was born in Adelaide, Australia, in 1954. As a 
boy Brooks was fascinated when he read about computers, but he 
could only stare through the plateglass window at the city’s only 
visible computer, an IBM mainframe in a downtown office build-
ing. Brooks decided to build his own logic circuits from discarded 
electronics modules from the defense laboratory where his father 
worked. Eventually, he came up with a machine that could beat 
anyone at tic-tac-toe—if they accepted the restricted rules necessary 
to accommodate the machine’s limited number of switches.

86   Modern Robotics
Brooks also came across a book 
by Grey Walter, inventor of the 
“cybernetic tortoise” in the late 
1940s. He tried to build his own 
and came up with “Norman,” 
a robot that could track light 
sources while avoiding obstacles. 
In 1968, when young Brooks 
saw the movie 2001: A Space 
Odyssey he was fascinated by the 
artificial intelligence of its most 
tragic character, the computer 
HAL 9000.
Since Australian colleges had 
not yet established a computer sci-
ence curriculum, Brooks majored 
in 
mathematics 
at 
Flinders 
University in South Australia. He 
did have access to the universi-
ty’s computer, so he designed a 
computer language and develop-
ment system for artificial intel-
ligence (AI) projects. Brooks also 
explored various AI applications such as theorem-solving, lan-
guage processing, and games.
Studying Artificial Intelligence
Brooks was frustrated because there was no formal computer science 
curriculum in Australia. He then discovered that certain American 
universities were willing to provide research assistantships—
and so he enrolled at Stanford University in Palo Alto, California, 
in 1977.
Brooks’s choice was fortunate because by the 1970s Stanford was 
becoming one of the world’s foremost centers of artificial intelligence 
research. While working for his Ph.D. in computer science, awarded 
in 1981, Brooks met John McCarthy, one of the “elder statesmen” 
Rodney Brooks of MIT has 
pioneered a new architecture 
for robots, building in layers of 
behavior and enabling machines 
to learn through interaction with 
humans. (Photo courtesy of Rodney 
Brooks)

of AI in the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Lab (SAIL). He also 
joined in the innovative projects being conducted by researchers, 
such as Hans Moravec, who were revamping the rolling robot called 
the Stanford Cart and teaching it to navigate around obstacles.
In 1984, Brooks moved to the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. Like Stanford, MIT was a burgeoning center of AI 
research and robotics. There he would undertake more than two 
decades of innovative research. Much of it would stem from a 
decision to begin thinking about artificial intelligence in a dif-
ferent way.
The Challenge of Vision
For his Ph.D. research project, Brooks decided to tackle one of the 
toughest challenges in AI: creating systems that can identify and 
“understand” objects in a three-dimensional environment. First, 
Brooks and his fellow graduate students needed a robot chassis on 
which to mount the cameras and other gear. Fortunately, a high 
school student named Grinnell More and two of his friends had 
started building a simple steerable robot called VECTROBOT. 
Brooks not only bought one of the machines but also enlisted Moore 
as an informal research assistant.
They equipped the robot with a ring of sonars (adopted from a 
camera rangefinder) plus two cameras. The cylindrical robot was 
about the size of R2D2. Since this was still the 1980s, there were 
no small computers powerful enough to run the AI software, so the 
robot was connected by a cable to what was then a powerful mini-
computer.
One reason why computer vision is so difficult is because the 
appearance of an object can change radically depending on the angle 
from which it is being viewed. A human has no problem knowing, 
for example, that an upright glass and a glass lying on its end is the 
same object. Computers, however, have to use complex mathematics 
to identify objects and their relative positions. These calculations 
are so intensive that a robot such as Stanford’s Shakey, from the 
1960s, had to “think” sometimes for hours before being able to 
move around an obstacle in the room. It took that long to create or 
THOUGHTFUL ROBOTS   87

88   Modern Robotics
update the internal map or representation that the robot needed for 
successful navigation.
Brooks began to wonder whether the computation-intensive 
approach to robot vision and navigation was a dead end. After all, 
as he noted in his talk “The Deep Question”:
We had a very complex mathematical approach, but that couldn’t be 
what was going on with animals moving their limbs about. Look at 
an insect, it can fly around and navigate with just a hundred thousand 
neurons. It can’t be doing this with very complex symbolic math-
ematical computations. There must be something different going on.
While visiting his wife’s family in Thailand, Brooks found him-
self with a lot of time on his hands. He began to think about how 
the human brain assimilates the data of the senses. A “classic” AI 
robot tries to create a “world model” based on the incoming data 
and then plan and calculate actions.
This could not be how life evolved. The simplest organisms must 
have developed a way to link quickly, for example, the sensing of a 
shadow, a vibration, or a rustle to appropriate behavior. The organ-
isms that could make successful connections would survive, repro-
duce, and pass the genetic blueprint for such neural circuitry on to 
the next generation.
Brooks realized that as organisms evolved into more complex 
forms they could not start from scratch each time they added new 
features. A mouse whose eyes were being completely “rewired” 
for a sharper image would likely end up inside a cat. Rather, new 
connections (and ways of processing them) would be added to the 
existing structure. An eye might thus be able to see motion or 
contrast better, giving the mouse a better chance of surviving and 
reproducing.
A “Brainless” Robot
Brooks decided to rewire his robot (which was now called Allen). 
Instead of connecting it to a computer that would calculate a map 

of the environment, he built three “layers” of circuits that would 
control the machine’s behavior. The simplest layer was for avoiding 
obstacles: If a sonar signal said that something was too close, the 
robot would change direction to avoid a collision. The next layer 
generated a random path so the robot could “explore” its surround-
ings freely. (Of course, if the robot got too close to something, layer 
1 would make it shy away.) Finally, the third layer was programmed 
to identify specified sorts of “interesting” objects. If it found one, 
the robot would head in that direction.
Each of these layers, or behaviors, was much simpler than the 
complex calculations and mapping done by a traditional AI robot. 
In a layered approach to robot behavior, the more complex behaviors (such as 
seeking goals or exploring) are built upon simpler behaviors (such as basic loco-
motion and avoiding collisions).
THOUGHTFUL ROBOTS   89

90   Modern Robotics
Nevertheless, the layers worked together in interesting ways. The 
result would be that the robot could explore a room, avoiding both 
fixed and moving obstacles, and appear to search “purposefully” 
for things.
In October 1985, Brooks presented his robot to an interna-
tional robotics research symposium that was attended by many 
of the world’s foremost robot designers. Brooks’s robot, Allen, 
startled observers by its seemingly intelligent navigation and 
exploration. When they realized that the robot had no “cognition 
box”—no AI brain in the traditional sense—many researchers 
in the audience were dismayed. (In Flesh and Machines, Brooks 
recalled learning that two had whispered to each other “Why 
PARALLELS: ARTIFICIAL LIFE AND ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
The field of artificial intelligence (AI) owes most of its beginnings 
perhaps to the work of Alan Turing (1912–54), a mathematician 
and pioneering computer scientist who speculated about the ulti-
mate capabilities of computers while the machines were still in their 
infancy. In 1950, Turing proposed the famous “Turing Test,” which 
basically suggested that a computer could be considered intelligent 
if its conversational output could not be distinguished from that of a 
human under controlled conditions.
In 1956, a seminal conference at Dartmouth College laid out the 
key problems and objectives of artificial intelligence, raising issues that 
are still at the heart of the field today. Early approaches such as those 
by Marvin Minsky (1927–  ) and John McCarthy (1927–  ) focused on 
developing artificial reasoning and problem-solving capabilities as well 
as finding ways to encode knowledge so it could be accessed and used 
automatically.
An alternative was the “bottom-up” approach that tries to generate 
sophisticated behavior from simple interactions. The earliest example was 
the neural network (which was also refined by Minsky), where process-
ing elements are arranged in a network resembling that found in the 
nervous system of an organism. The system is then given a problem (such 
as recognizing an image), and those elements that respond correctly are 

is this young man throwing away his career?”) Scientists who 
may have spent a lifetime designing and programming robots to 
act intelligently did not know what to make of a robot whose 
behavior seemed to emerge mysteriously from simple circuits and 
subroutines.
In a way, Brooks’s robot marked a parting of ways between 
artificial intelligence and artificial life (AL). AI researchers focused 
on simulating cognition (reasoning), but AL researchers would 
concentrate on building layers of sensation and reaction more like 
that found in the nervous system. Intelligent behavior would not be 
programmed so much as emerge spontaneously from the interaction 
of the components.
reinforced by giving a higher value. This “trains” the system to perform 
the task more efficiently. Today neural networks are used in a variety of 
applications, including image processing, robot navigation, speech recog-
nition, and even credit and security screening.
The field of artificial life (AL) has extended the modeling of natu-
ral life processes to mimicking the way organic life reproduces and 
evolves. An early example was John Conway’s Game of Life, a form 
of “cellular automata” where patterns are manipulated by applying a 
simple set of rules to each element. Researchers have made interesting 
applications of this principle, for example, to simulate the behavior of 
flocks of birds.
The other main thrust of artificial life is genetic programming. Here 
programs are tested as to how well they can perform a task (such as 
sorting). This results in a form of natural selection where the success-
ful programs have their code reproduced while the less successful are 
erased. Like neural networks, genetic algorithms have shown consider-
able promise in developing applications “from the bottom up.”
Most artificial life consists entirely of software simulations inside a 
computer. However, robotics researchers such as Hans Moravec at the 
Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, or SAIL, have built “flocks” 
of robots that use simple behaviors that, like cellular automation, can 
result in complex interactions. There has even been some attempt to 
couple a genetic simulation with a fabrication process to create robots 
that can “evolve” in form from one generation to the next.
THOUGHTFUL ROBOTS   91

92   Modern Robotics
Robot Insects
By 1988, Brooks and his research group were working on a variety 
of robots. One, called Herbert, could find and collect empty soda 
cans, perhaps a useful function for any university setting. Unlike 
Allen, Herbert had all its computers on board, demonstrating great-
er autonomy. Further, its ability to control its arm and pick up the 
cans pointed toward a variety of practical manipulative tasks.
Up to this time, nearly all robots rolled on wheels—none could 
walk like an animal. Fellow MIT researcher Marc Raibert had 
demonstrated some walking or hopping robots, but Brooks looked 
for a different approach to creating a more robust sort of legged 
locomotion. While watching videos of insects walking over rough 
terrain, Brooks noticed that they seemed to stumble when missing 
their footing, but then recovered quickly.
Working with Grinnell More and a new researcher, Colin Angle, 
Brooks began to build an insect-like robot called Genghis. In Flesh 
and Machines, Brooks said that
to this day Genghis has been my most satisfying robot. It was an 
artificial creature. It looked like a six-legged insect. A big six-legged 
insect. . . . As soon as its beady array of six [infrared] sensors caught 
sight of something, it was off. As long as it could track its prey it 
kept going, ruthlessly scrambling over anything in its path, solely 
directed toward its goal. . . . It had a wasplike personality, mindless 
determination.
Unlike Allen’s three layers of behavior, Genghis had 51 separate, 
simultaneously running computer programs. These programs, called 
“augmented finite state machines,” each kept track of a particular 
state or condition, such as the position of one of the six legs. It is the 
interaction of these small programs that creates the robot’s ability 
to scramble around while keeping its balance. Finally, three special 
programs looked for signals from the infrared sensors, locked onto 
any source found, and walked in its direction.
Each program was constantly sending or receiving signals (data 
values) from one or more other programs. For example, the program 

that read the sensor signals sent a signal to the “prowl” program if a 
target was detected. The sensor program also sent data to a program 
that would continuously correct the robot’s path, steering toward the 
target.
Brooks refers to robots like Genghis as being situated and embod-
ied. A situated robot responds directly to sensory input. Its behavior 
is shaped by response and interaction, not some abstract model of 
the world. An embodied robot is just that—in a body that in some 
sense experiences the world.
As Brooks and his crew began to build more robots that “embod-
ied” these concepts, he had a conversation in 1992 with Apollo 
15 commander David Scott that inspired Brooks to begin explor-
ing ideas for roving robots for planetary exploration. Following 
the “glory days” of Project Apollo and such probes as Viking and 
Galileo, putting mobile robots onto the surface of Mars or other 
planets seemed to offer an exciting (and perhaps affordable) way to 
take space exploration to a new level.
Brooks’s new layered architecture for embodied robots offered 
new possibilities for autonomous robot explorers. Brooks’s 1989 
paper, “Fast, Cheap, and Out of Control: A Robot Invasion of 
the Solar System,” envisaged flocks of tiny robot rovers spreading 
across the Martian surface, exploring areas too risky to venture into 
with only one or two very expensive robots. Colin Angle soon built 
Tooth, a 1.1-pound (0.5-kg) microrover. Although the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory did not use Brooks’s rovers, the Sojourner rover that 
explored Mars in 1997 used wheels similar to those in Tooth and 
had autonomous functions at least partly inspired by Brooks’s lay-
ered behavior architecture.
Humanoid Robots
In 1992, about 25 years after the movie 2001: A Space Odyssey 
was released, Brooks was thinking about HAL 9000, the humanlike 
intelligent computer featured in the story. According to the movie, 
HAL was “born” in a laboratory sometime in the 1990s. In the real 
1990s, though, computers and robots still seemed to be decades 
away from HAL-like behavior.
THOUGHTFUL ROBOTS   93

94   Modern Robotics
Having worked with robotic insects, rovers, and other mobile 
robots, Brooks decided to create a robot that might be able to inter-
act with objects and people in a more humanlike way. Drawing on 
his experience, Brooks approached intelligence, not by focusing on a 
brain with sophisticated cognitive programming, but by considering 
how intelligence actually arises in humans.
As Brooks noted in Flesh and Machines, “We humans are not just 
products of our genes. We are also products of our social upbringing 
and our interactions with the world of objects. Our culture, too, is a 
product of our embodiment within the world.” This suggested that 
a humanlike robot should in at least some way look like humans 
and be equipped with eyes and arms that are similar to ours.
Researcher Hirokazu Kato of Waseda University in Japan had 
already taken some steps toward creating a humanoid robot. His 
Wabot-1, built in 1973, could walk on two legs and grasp objects 
with its hands, as well as “converse” with people in a limited way. 
Its 1984 successor, Wabot-2, sat at an organ, where it could read 
music, play the appropriate keys, and push the pedals with its feet. 
(This sort of research would culminate in the remarkably lifelike 
P2, P3, and Asimo robots unveiled by Honda starting in 1998.)
Although these robots were humanoid and could even act in 
humanlike ways, they did not fully satisfy Brooks’s need for a situ-
ated or embodied robot. Their behavior was essentially controlled 
by a top-down central program. Harking back to Genghis and its 
insect-like kin, Brooks wanted to use the behavior-based, layered 
approach.
Brooks began with the eyes. Unlike a digital camera, the human 
eye does not have uniform resolution and color vision across its 
field of vision. The eye has a much wider panoramic view than 
most cameras (up to about 160 degrees horizontally), but it has 
much higher resolution and color sensitivity near its center, a 
place called the fovea. When the eye sees something interesting 
off to the side (for example, a running animal), it moves quickly 
or “saccades” to center the vision on that spot. During this time, 
a human is actually blind, though the brain creates an apparently 
seamless picture.
Further research suggests that unlike the AI robot, with its inter-
nal map of the world, humans are constantly scanning, reacting, 

and rescanning—programmed by evolution to pay attention to the 
things that are responsible for physical survival and social success. 
Thus, the main clue that someone is paying attention to another 
person is whether they maintain eye contact. Even an infant can tell 
whether its parent is looking at it. At an age of about nine months, a 
baby knows when the parent is looking at something else. Gradually, 
the child learns how to track from the parent’s eyes to the distant 
object.
In the human eye, the concentration of nerves (and thus of image processing 
power) is at the fovea, the center of the field of vision.
THOUGHTFUL ROBOTS   95

96   Modern Robotics
Cog
In the early 1990s, Brooks and his colleagues began designing a 
robot that would embody human eye movement and other behav-
iors. The robot would be called Cog, short for “cognition,” or 
thought. (There is a touch of irony in this name because Brooks 
was not emphasizing AI cognition in the usual sense.) Each of Cog’s 
two eyes had separate wide-angle and narrow-angle cameras that 
mimicked the human eyes’ central foveae. Cog’s eyes were mounted 
on gimbals so they could easily turn to track objects, aided by the 
movement of the robot’s head and neck (it had no legs). Cog also had 
“ears”—microphones that can help it find the source of a sound.
In “The Deep Question,” Brooks recalled that as he watched Cog 
interact with researchers and other visitors to the lab, he was sur-
prised at how humans reacted to their robotic mimic:
. . . the system with very little content inside it, seems eerily human 
to people. We get its vision system running, with its eyes and its 
Rodney Brooks is shown here with Cog, a robot that could see and “pay 
attention” in humanlike ways. (Photo ©MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 
courtesy of Rodney Brooks)

head moving, and it hears a sound and it saccades to that, and then 
the head moves to follow the eyes to get them back into roughly the 
center of their range of motion. When it does that, people feel it has 
a human presence. Even to the graduate students who designed the 
thing, and know that there’s nothing in there, it feels eerily human.
As an example of how Cog could engage human attention, film-
maker Sanjida O’Connell wrote in the London Times that the 
researchers
wanted to show that Cog was not programmed to behave in a set 
manner. So we threw a sixth birthday party for the robot with cake 
and champagne, and filmed Cog watching its guests. Cog, although 
only a torso, is humanoid—it has arms with touch sensors on its 
fingers, it can hear and see, and it is attracted by movement. It is 
also being taught to copy: for instance, a student will sort a pile of 
coloured bricks, with the idea that Cog will watch and learn.
One memorable moment was at the birthday party. A baby reached 
out to Cog and the two, robot and baby, interacted. The baby treated 
the robot as if it was a person. Cog appeared to be fascinated by the 
baby but is, as yet, unable to speak or to show emotion.
The work with Cog continued in the late 1990s with the develop-
ment of Kismet, a robot that included dynamically changing “emo-
tions.” Brooks’s student Cynthia Breazeal would build her own 
research career on Kismet and what she calls “sociable robots.”
Practical Robotics
By 1990, Brooks wanted to apply his idea of behavior-based robotics 
to building marketable robots that could perform basic but useful 
tasks. Enlisting two of his most innovative and hardworking stu-
dents, Colin Angle and Helen Greiner, Brooks founded what became 
iRobot Corporation. As the new millennium dawned, the company 
THOUGHTFUL ROBOTS   97

98   Modern Robotics
was marketing products such as a highly interactive baby doll, the 
Roomba robotic vacuum cleaner, and tracked robots for use in the 
military and law enforcement.
Meanwhile, at MIT, Brooks and the AI Lab are working on 
Project Oxygen, an effort to make computers pervasive and respon-
sive. Examples include voice control, screens that are also walls of 
rooms, and the seamless connection of telephone and Web services. 
The ultimate goal is to have all the power of computers available at 
a word or a touch wherever people are and whatever they are doing, 
alone or together.
What Distinguishes Life?
Brooks has not abandoned his quest to use robots to help humans 
understand how they came to be intelligent. Nevertheless, he has 
expressed dissatisfaction with the common attempts to apply com-
putation theory to the understanding of biology. It is not that he is 
seeking some mystical “vital essence,” but rather, as he said in the 
article “The Deep Question”:
We need a conceptual framework that gives us a different way of 
thinking about the stuff that’s there. . . . We see the biological sys-
tems, we see how they operate, but we don’t have the right explanato-
ry modes to explain what’s going on and therefore we can’t reproduce 
all these sorts of biological processes. That to me right now is the 
deep question. The bad news is that it may not have an answer.
Despite the remarkable achievements of robots such as Brooks’s 
Cog and the work of his innovative student Cynthia Breazeal with 
the “empathic” robot Kismet, there is still an intuitively recognized 
difference between robots and animals (including people). In his 
Nature article “The Relationship between Matter and Life,” Brooks 
compared the efforts of two related fields. Artificial intelligence 
has focused on modeling perception, cognition, and behavior. On 
the other hand, artificial life has concentrated on creating simple 
entities that simulate reproduction, selection, and evolution. Both 

fields have been successfully used in creating the advanced computer 
applications we use today.
In the article, Brooks asked why neither AI nor AL has yet 
succeeded in creating something that the average person would 
consider to be a living thing. In the early days of AI, it was easy 
to suggest that computers were simply not powerful enough to 
do the necessary calculations—and might never be. On the other 
hand, the well-accepted observation known as Moore’s Law states 
that computer power doubles every 18 months to two years. This 
has held true: Brooks pointed out that the 1965 chess program 
MacHack could process only a few thousand game positions a sec-
ond, while the Deep Blue program that defeated world champion 
Garry Kasparov in 1997 could churn through 200 million moves 
in that same time.
This raw power has fueled important advances, including vision 
systems that can much more quickly identify and analyze features 
in the environment, as with automatically driven vehicles on Earth 
and rovers on Mars.
In recent years, Brooks has turned his attention to what research-
ers have been unable to accomplish, despite ever-increasing com-
putational power. The complex way in which the many “layers” of 
functioning that comprise living behavior emerge from molecular 
structures and processes has continued to resist modeling. In his 
Nature article, Brooks suggested several possibilities:
(1) We might be just getting a few parameters wrong; (2) we might 
be building models that are below some complexity threshold; (3) 
perhaps there is still a lack of computing power; and (4) we might 
be missing something fundamental and currently unimagined in our 
models of biology.
Brooks has not given up on the quest. He is trying to identify what 
the “hard” parts of biology—those that do not fit mathematical 
models very well—might have in common. He is also looking at “dis-
tributed systems” where many cooperating systems work together to 
form a functional whole. This idea has become very important in the 
design of computer-operating systems and networks. It is also, after 
THOUGHTFUL ROBOTS   99

100   Modern Robotics
all, the way living organisms work—many specialized cells forming 
organs and systems that together make a complex life-form.
Meanwhile, Brooks has an assured place as one of the key inno-
vators in modern robotics research. He is a founding fellow of the 
American Association for Artificial Intelligence and a fellow of 
the American Association for the Advancement of Science. He has 
participated in numerous distinguished lecture series and has served 
as an editor for many important journals in the field, including the 
International Journal of Computer Vision. Besides being an articu-
late spokesperson for the possibilities of advanced robots changing 
human perception and society, Brooks has even portrayed himself 
in a movie directed by Errol Morris and titled Fast, Cheap, and Out 
of Control, named for one of his scientific papers.
Chronology
1954 
Rodney Brooks born in Adelaide, Australia
1966 
Brooks builds a machine that can play tic-tac-toe
1968 
 Brooks is inspired by the HAL 9000 computer from the movie 
2001: A Space Odyssey
1975 
 Brooks earns master’s degree in pure mathematics from 
Flinders University of South Australia
1977 
 Brooks goes to Stanford University to study computer science 
and artiﬁ cial intelligence
1981 
 Brooks receives Ph.D. in computer science from Stanford 
University
1984 
 Brooks joins the faculty at MIT and works on robot vision 
and navigation
1985 
 Brooks demonstrates a “behavior-based” robot at an interna-
tional conference
1988 
Brooks and his group begin to design walking robots
1990 
 Brooks founds iRobot Corporation with Colin Angle and 
Helen Greiner

1992 
 Brooks and his colleagues begin working on a new design for 
planetary rovers
Mid-1990s  Brooks develops the interactive learning robot Cog, who is 
followed by Cynthia Breazeal’s “emotional” robot Kismet
2003 
 Brooks becomes head of the new Computer Science and 
Artiﬁ cial Intelligence Laboratory at MIT
Further Reading
Books
Brooks, Rodney. Cambrian Intelligence: The Early History of the 
New AI. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1999.
A collection of Brooks’s early papers describing the development of his 
approach to robotic design; includes both technical detail and wide-
ranging philosophical speculation.
———. Flesh and Machines: How Robots Will Change Us. New 
York: Pantheon Books, 2002.
Brooks gives a vivid account of his research into computer vision and 
creating robots with humanlike behavior, as well as his speculation 
about the possible nature of living processes.
Articles
Brockman, John. “Beyond Computation: A Talk with Rodney 
Brooks.” Edge, 2000. URL: http://www.edge.org/3rd_culture/
brooks_beyond/beyond_index.html. Accessed on September 1, 
2005.
Transcript of video interview with Rodney Brooks in which he discuss-
es the limitations of computation and traditional artificial intelligence 
for understanding living processes.
———. “The Deep Question: A Talk with Rodney Brooks.” Edge 29 
(November 19, 1997). Available online. URL: http://www.edge.
org/documents/archive/edge29.html. Accessed on September 9, 
2005.
Transcript of video interview in which Brooks discusses the 
relationship between biological and digital reality and the pos-
sible unknown aspect that makes living things different from our 
machines.
THOUGHTFUL ROBOTS   101

102   Modern Robotics
Brooks, Rodney. “The Relationship between Matter and Life.” 
Nature 409 (January 18, 2001): 409–411. Available online. URL: 
http://people.csail.mit.edu/brooks/papers/nature.pdf.
Both living things and computational machines are ultimately built 
from nonliving matter. Brooks explores the possible reasons why 
living things behave differently from computers and robots.
O’Connell, Sanjida. “Cog—Is It More Than a Machine?” London 
Times, May 6, 2002, p. 10.
Describes encounters with Cog and discusses Brooks’s projects and 
thoughts about the future evolution and uses of robots.
Sebastian, Tim. “Robot Risk ‘Is Worth It.’ ” BBC News Hardtalk, 
August 19, 2002. Available online. URL: http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/
hi/programmes/hardtalk/2202825.stm. Accessed on September 1, 
2005.
Transcript of radio interview with Rodney Brooks, who discusses the 
imperative to explore human nature through robots, the possible risks, 
and the question of whether robots can actually feel emotions.
Web Site
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL). 
URL: http://www.csail.mit.edu. Accessed on October 3, 2005.
Founded in 2003 and directed by Rodney Brooks, this is an interdis-
ciplinary laboratory drawing from computer and cognitive science, 
bioengineering, and other disciplines.

103
7
ROBOT AMBASSADOR
MASATO HIROSE AND ASIMO
F
or about two decades, walking robots have strut their stuff in 
laboratories, with varying degrees of success. More practical 
service robots have rolled through hospital corridors or vacuumed 
floors. What if there could be a small, versatile humanoid robot that 
could not only walk gracefully but also climb stairs with ease? Such 
a robot could combine practicality with the ability to truly fit into 
peoples’ daily activities. In recent years, the answer to this quest for 
more versatile robots has begun to emerge. Masato Hirose and his 
fellow researchers at Honda Corporation have been astonishing and 
intriguing the world with a succession of such robots, culminating 
in one called Asimo.
From Motorcycles to Robotics
Masato Hirose was born on February 7, 1956, in Tochigi Prefecture, 
Japan. In 1980, he received a degree in precision engineering from 
Utsunomiya University. After further studies, he went to work for 
Honda Corporation. In 1986, Hirose was assigned to an innovative 
robotics project. Although he had no real prior experience in robot-
ics, Hirose, whose childhood had been filled with cartoon superhe-
roes such as “The Mighty Atom” was intrigued with the possibility 
of bringing science fiction ideas to reality.
Although such an interest in robotics might seem surprising for 
a company better known for motorcycles and automobiles, Hirose 

104   Modern Robotics
soon learned that Honda thought 
of itself not as a car company 
but as a “mobility company.” 
Honda was potentially interested 
in anything that could move and 
do something useful. Although 
the company (like so many of 
its Japanese competitors) uses 
industrial robots on the assem-
bly line, this new effort would 
be devoted to developing mobile 
robots that could go anywhere 
people needed them. In return, 
what Honda could learn about 
advanced control systems from 
robotics research would also help 
it develop “smarter” vehicles to 
gain an advantage in the highly 
competitive auto industry.
Learning to Walk
Working at the Honda’s new Wako Research Center outside Tokyo, 
Hirose and his four-person engineering team began with a relatively 
simple project: a walking robot that could carry materials from one 
part of a factory to another. They started by going to the zoo and 
observing how animals such as an ostrich walked. They also worked 
with a person who had two artificial legs, observing how he was 
able to hike and climb mountains.
Gradually, the researchers were able to identify the key aspects of 
walking in general and human locomotion in particular, including 
the range of movement for each joint under different conditions, such 
as walking on flat ground or climbing stairs. They also designed sen-
sors that could provide the robot with the same sort of information 
that humans perceive while they are walking. This includes the inner 
ear’s ability to judge speed and changing orientation, as well as the 
sensing of joint angles and pressure on the foot.
Honda chief engineer Masato 
Hirose astonished the robot-
ics world by unveiling Asimo, a 
humanoid robot that could mingle 
with people in everyday situations.

The data entering the robot as it moved was processed by three 
interacting control systems. The floor reaction control dealt with 
the impact and rebound of the soles of the feet on the floor and the 
need to compensate for any unevenness in the surface. The target 
ZMP control calculated the “zero momentum point”—the place 
where there is no inertia, taking into account the Earth’s gravity 
In Asimo-type humanoid robots a simple but effective arrangement of joints 
corresponds to the human foot, knee, and hip.
ROBOT AMBASSADOR   105

106   Modern Robotics
and the acceleration and deceleration from walking. As long as the 
ZMP remained within the area supported by the feet, the robot 
could, if necessary, like a human walker, apply appropriate forces to 
regain balance if it lost its footing. Finally, the foot-planting location 
control “shuffled” the feet when necessary to bring the torso into 
alignment.
Asimo Debuts
During the next decade, Hirose and his groups created a succession 
of prototype walking robots. The first of them, P1, which appeared 
in 1994, is believed by Honda to be the world’s first true humanoid 
walking robot. The next year they demonstrated P2, which dispensed 
Who would have thought that a robot could dance with such fluidity and 
assurance? (Photo courtesy of Honda Motor Corp., Japan)

with cables and carried all of its computing power on board. This 
rather hulking robot porter was 72 inches (1.82 m) tall and weighed 
a hefty 460 pounds (209 kg). P2 demonstrated the potential utility of 
walking robots for performing useful tasks, but it was rather clumsy 
and sometimes stumbled and came to a halt. Because of this, Honda 
released videos to the media, but did not present live demonstrations. 
In 1997, Honda showed the smaller, more agile P3.
Asimo’s method of walking involve balancing momentum and taking inertia, 
acceleration, and “rebounding” from the floor into account.
ROBOT AMBASSADOR   107

108   Modern Robotics
These prototype robots generated some interest in the robotics 
community, but they were just a prelude to the unveiling of a robot 
called Asimo in 2000. Although this name evokes famed science fic-
tion writer Isaac Asimov and his robots, Honda insisted that “Asimo” 
stands for Advanced Step in Innovative Mobility. The robot was about 
47 inches (1.2 m) tall and weighed 114 pounds (52 kg).
Asimo’s motion was very fluid. Although various forms of 
robotic walking had been demonstrated by researchers such as 
Marc Raibert, Hirose and the other Honda engineers wanted their 
robot to be able to walk in a crowded human environment. To do 
so, they decided the robot had to walk like a person, with its bal-
ancing point on the soles of its feet. They concentrated on smooth 
movement and the ability to change direction quickly without 
stopping or losing balance. The Honda researchers developed a 
feature called “i-Walk,” which includes the ability to predict the 
OTHER SCIENTISTS: SONY’S ROBOT RESEARCHERS
Sony is the other major Japanese corporation that has gone into mobile 
robotics in a big way in recent years. While Honda has focused on 
developing service robots, Sony has concentrated on designing robots 
for entertainment.
Unlike Honda’s Asimo, Sony’s robots have already walked their way 
into thousands of homes. The Aibo robotic dog, introduced in 1999, 
can walk, recognize and interact with objects, and respond to spoken 
commands. It even includes a simulated learning process where it can 
add new commands or behaviors to its repertoire. (Technically minded 
owners can also use a special programming language, and students 
can even use Aibo as a handy platform for artificial intelligence proj-
ects.) The latest version of Aibo can take pictures and post them on the 
Internet—making it the first robotic dog to have its own blog!
Sony has also been working on QRIO (short for Quest for cuRIOs-
ity), a humanoid robot that will attempt to blend Asimo-like walking 
skills with artificial intelligence and playful behaviors. More compact 
and agile than Asimo, QRIO uses a new type of joint actuator. Like 
Asimo, QRIO walks dynamically, based on precise positioning of the 
zero movement point (ZMP)—the point where the forces of gravity 

next required movement and shift the center of gravity (and thus 
balance) at the appropriate time. Another result of this technology 
is that the robot could change its pace and gait (such as from walk-
ing to running) seamlessly.
Researchers such as Honda’s Satoshi Shigami have also pointed 
out that working on a humanoid robot like Asimo can be a profound 
learning experience. The challenge of creating humanlike robot behav-
ior often surprises the researcher with reminders of just how complex 
and incredible humans are. Masato Hirose, on a Honda internal 
video about Asimo, notes that Asimo had something that made him 
smile “. . . a little bit like the feeling a parent might have.”
The latest version of Asimo is a bit taller and heavier. It now 
includes posture control, a faculty that improves the robot’s ability 
to bend and twist without losing balance, and can even run, albeit 
at a pace of less than 1.86 miles (3 km) an hour.
and inertia acting on the robot intersect with the ground. If the robot 
happens to fall, it knows how to “take” the fall in a way that minimizes 
damage, sticking out its arms and relaxing its “muscles.”
For sophisticated interaction with people, QRIO is equipped with 
face and voice recognition so it can remember particular individuals. 
The robot also has natural language abilities and can remember infor-
mation about a person for use in future conversations with that indi-
vidual. Finally, QRIO has an emotional model. Unlike Asimov’s robots, 
it can occasionally refuse a command simply because it does not wish 
to comply. A work in progress, Sony’s QRIO prototypes are designated 
SDR (Sony’s Dream Robot).
As reported by Yoshiko Hara in Electronic Engineering Times in 2002, 
Sony executive Toshinobu Doi believes that “robots [today] are at the 
equivalent of the pre-Cambrian era in biology.” In the fossil record, 
there is the “Cambrian explosion”—a relatively brief interval in which 
the basic plans for multicellular creatures emerged suddenly. In com-
ing decades, if there is to be an explosion in robotic forms and func-
tions, Japan remains a good candidate for the setting. Hara quotes 
Osaka University professor Minoru Asada as believing that “Japan will 
be the first society where robots and humans live together.” In this 
sense, Japan will function as a test bed for what happens when robots 
encounter humans.
ROBOT AMBASSADOR   109

110   Modern Robotics
Another feature, autonomous continuous movement, allows the 
robot to plot a new course around a suddenly appearing obstacle 
without breaking stride. Asimo’s improved visual and force-feedback 
sensors include wrists that can shake hands. If someone pulls or push-
es while holding the robot’s hand, it will step forward or backward as 
necessary. Finally, the robot can now run for an hour on its batteries, 
up from 30 minutes.
Robotic Ambassador
On New Year’s Eve 2001, an Asimo robot joined the Japanese pop 
group Smap in an onstage dance during a television performance. 
Masato Hirose was a bit anxious at first about having one of his 
robots in such a complex, fast-moving environment. As Hirose noted 
to a reporter for Asiaweek:
I watched anxiously from under the stage. Anything could have 
happened—40 people were dancing. Someone could touch Asimo by 
mistake or their costumes snag him. He mightn’t endure the vibra-
tions. I was so relieved when it went well.
Another triumph for Honda and Asimo came on February 14, 
2002, the 25th anniversary of Honda’s listing on the New York Stock 
Exchange. Traditionally, celebrities or other people of symbolic impor-
tance are invited to ring the exchange’s opening bell from the balcony 
above the trading floor. This time, though, the bell was rung by an 
Asimo robot. Soon a total of seven Asimos were traveling around the 
world to publicize Honda’s robotics research. Honda may soon see 
some tangible returns from its investment in robotics research. The 
company has announced that in 2006 some of its 40 Asimos will serve 
as receptionists in Honda offices, where the robot can greet visitors and 
even serve coffee from a tray. Other Asimos will be offered for lease to 
companies in Japan and abroad as receptionists, museum guides, and 
similar roles, at a fee of about 20 million yen ($166,000) a year.
Asimo’s greatest benefit for Honda in the coming years is likely 
to be in the way it has boosted the company’s image and served as 
a recruiting tool. Millions of television viewers in Japan and around 

the world are coming to associate Honda with not only cars but also 
nimble, even cute, robotic emissaries of the future. The company 
also has reported that many graduate engineers have cited Asimo as 
a reason why they would like to work for Honda.
Future Helpers
Honda’s development of Asimo illustrates the orientation of 
many Japanese companies to long-term research and development. 
Currently, the practical uses for an Asimo robot are limited. Hirose 
acknowledges freely that it may be many years before Honda’s 
robotics research will contribute substantially to the company’s 
bottom line.
Nevertheless, Hirose believes that there will eventually be consid-
erable demand for robots in settings such as hospitals, assisted living 
centers, and even homes. Hirose suggested to Asiaweek that a future 
descendant of Asimo will be “As you like him to be—your friendly, 
helpful worker. I’d like it to move and lift things, get them to you, 
freeing people from some chores.” A decade or more in the future, 
Hirose believes that the helper robots will be able to understand a 
wide range of instructions in ordinary language. Even though there 
are no plans to give Asimo a human face and humanlike expres-
sions, people may form attachments to the robots not unlike the 
bond formed between a person and a guide or helper dog today.
Other Approaches
In addition to corporations such as Honda and Sony, university 
researchers have also been taking new robotic “steps.” For exam-
ple, researchers at Cornell University, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, and the Delft University of Technology in the 
Netherlands are working together on a new approach to robot 
walkers that promises to make them more efficient.
When a human or animal walks downhill, a burst of energy is used 
only for the initial push of the leg against the ground, with momen-
tum and gravity doing the rest. Robots such as Asimo must apply 
additional power in order to control precisely where the step lands. 
ROBOT AMBASSADOR   111

112   Modern Robotics
ISSUES: ROBOTS AND RELIGION
When Honda announced its P2 walking robot in October 1995, 
Hiroyuki Yoshino, the company’s president, was worried that some 
religious groups might consider it blasphemous for people to create 
humanlike robots. He sent two company officials to the Vatican to 
ask for an opinion about the robot project.
Fortunately for Honda, the Rev. Joseph Pittau, rector of the 
Pontifical Gregorian University, was not concerned. He showed the 
Honda representatives a picture of the famous Michelangelo mural 
showing God’s creation of Adam, with the finger of God touching 
that of the man made in his image. He explained that just as God 
put the spark of life into man, he also gave humans the imagination 
to create things such as robots. As long as the robots were used for 
constructive purposes, the Vatican stated it would have no objection 
to them.
In her provocative book God in the Machine, Anne Foerst, who is 
both an MIT robotics researcher and a theologian, explored the rela-
tionship between robots, humanity, and God. She placed modern 
robotics research within a long line of human exploration, including 
the interplay between myth and science, stories and explanations. 
Looking at the Jewish tradition of the golem (an artificial human that 
is motivated by instructions on a special scroll), Foerst suggested that 
when God created humans in his image, that image included the cre-
ative impulse itself. In other words, creation is a “recursive function,” 
and in creating robots and other technology, people are continuing 
a chain of calls to create what may someday result in our creating 
true machine partners.
While celebrating the creativity of artificial intelligence (AI) 
researchers, Foerst warned in her book that “If we see the enterprise 
of developing artificial intelligence as purely scientific and ignore all 
the mystical and emotional elements, we will be in danger of falling 
into the trap of hubris [excessive pride].” Foerst therefore urged that 
theologians, philosophers, artists, poets, and many others bring their 
perspectives to understanding the implications of the technology of 
robotics and AI.

During part of the step, the robot’s motors may be actually pushing 
back against the leg to slow it down to the desired speed.
The researchers at the three universities studied this downhill 
motion and realized that the same general stroke could be used for 
walking uphill or on level ground. An initial push from a motor 
(directly or indirectly) substitutes for the energy that comes from 
gravity on a downhill walk. The result is a surprisingly simple way 
to simulate a humanlike gait. It is estimated that this way of walking 
would use only about a tenth as much energy as Asimo. With bat-
tery capacity being such an important factor in the design of mobile 
robots, this could be a big “win.”
Wherever the next steps of a new generation of humanoid robots 
take them, Masato Hirose and his Honda team have shown the world 
a new face of robotics—with Asimo as its friendly ambassador.
Chronology
1956 
Masato Hirose born February 7 in Tochigi Prefecture, Japan
1970s 
Honda begins push for advanced control technology
1980 
 Hirose graduates from Utsunomiya University with a degree 
in precision engineering
1986 
Honda sets up Wako Research center for robotics
Hirose goes to work for Honda as a robotics researcher
1987–91 
 Honda researchers study dynamic walking in a variety of 
animals
1994 
 P1 appears. It is claimed to be the ﬁ rst true humanoid walking 
robot
1996 
 Hirose’s group demonstrates P2, the ﬁ rst fully independent 
humanoid robot with all computing done on board
1997 
Honda shows the smaller, more agile P3 robot
2000 
Honda reveals Asimo in November
ROBOT AMBASSADOR   113

114   Modern Robotics
2001 
 Hirose becomes senior chief engineer at Honda
Asimo is improved with faster operation and onboard voice 
recognition software
2002 
 An Asimo robot rings the bell at the New York Stock Exchange 
on February 14
2004 
 Honda reveals a next-generation Asimo whose innovative pos-
ture control lets it jog and run
2006 
Asimo robots begin to serve as receptionists and guides
Further Reading
Books
Foerst, Anne. God in the Machine: What Robots Teach Us about 
Humanity and God. New York: Dutton, 2004.
Discusses the relationship between the quest for artificial intelligence 
and life and that of various spiritual traditions.
Ichbiah, Daniel. Robots: From Science Fiction to Technological 
Revolution. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 2005.
Includes a chapter on humanoid and entertainment robots, including 
Asimo and QRIO.
Articles
Hara, Yoshiko. “New Industry Awaits Human-Friendly Bipeds: 
‘Personal Robots’ Get Ready to Walk on the Human Side.” 
Electronic Engineering Times, 15 September 2002, n.p.
Includes interviews with Honda and Sony researchers about their 
humanoid robot projects.
“Next, the Helper.” Asiaweek, 8 February 2001, n.p.
Interview with Masato Hirose of Honda Corporation about Asimo 
and future robots.
Yamaguchi, Yuzo. “All Too Human: Honda’s Walking, Talking 
Robot, Asimo, Leads Automaker into Uncharted Territory.” 
Automotive News 76 (January 28, 2002): 100.
Describes how Asimo has fit into Honda’s corporate strategy since the 
1970s; also describes how the company sought advice from the Vatican.

Web Sites
ASIMO: The Honda Humanoid Robot. URL: http://world.honda.
com/ASIMO. Accessed on July 5, 2005.
Features news and technical background on Asimo, including the his-
tory of walking robot research at Honda and the gradual development 
of locomotion skills.
Sony Dream Robot: QRIO. URL: http://www.sony.net/SonyInfo/
QRIO. Accessed on September 15, 2005.
Web site for Sony’s project to build the ultimate humanoid robot.
ROBOT AMBASSADOR   115

116
8
SOCIABLE ROBOTS
CYNTHIA BREAZEAL AND KISMET
T
he baby watches the dangling toy with apparent interest—eyes 
wide, a happy burbling vocalization seeming to convey approval. 
But when the toy is spun too fast, she scrunches her eyes shut and 
issues a squeal or two of protest. What brought this change of 
mood? The new but attentive parent is not sure, but she goes back 
to dangling the toy slowly. The parent is learning how to play with 
a baby. The baby is learning how to communicate with other people 
and negotiate her needs. She is learning how to be a sociable mem-
ber of the primate species called Homo sapiens.
But what if the baby were not a baby, but a robot? This is not 
a robot that builds something in a factory or a robot that learns 
how to navigate laboratory corridors. This robot, named Kismet, 
is helping robotics researcher Cynthia Breazeal learn more about 
how babies become social creatures—and perhaps how humans and 
advanced robots can learn from each other.
In Love with the Droids
Born in Albuquerque, New Mexico, in 1968, Cynthia Breazeal (pro-
nounced like “Brazil”) grew up in a high-tech environment when 
the family moved to California. Her father was a mathematician, 
and her mother was a computer scientist at the Lawrence Livermore 
Laboratory. When she was only eight, Breazeal saw the movie Star 
Wars and, as she told Adam Cohen of Time, “I just fell in love 

with the droids. But I was old 
enough to realize that these kinds 
of robots didn’t exist.” Perhaps 
someday she could build them.
Besides robots, the young 
Breazeal was also fascinated by 
medicine and astronomy. When 
she attended the University of 
California at Santa Barbara 
(UCSB), Breazeal considered a 
future career in the National 
Aero nautics Space Administra-
tion, even the possibility of 
becoming an astronaut. (The 
first U.S. woman astronaut, 
Sally Ride, was frequently in the 
news at the time.) Breazeal 
noticed, though, that UCSB also 
had a robotics center, and there 
she learned about the work on 
building planetary robot rovers.
After getting her undergraduate 
degree in electrical and computer 
engineering, Breazeal applied for 
graduate school at the Massachu-
setts Institute of Technology. She 
had learned that the MIT robotics lab headed by Rodney Brooks 
was developing a new generation of small, agile robotic rovers based 
in part on how insects moved. Breazeal’s work on two such robots, 
named Attila and Hannibal, helped proved the feasibility of mobile 
robots for planetary exploration, while furnishing a topic for her 
master’s thesis. (This type of robot would be developed further by the 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, leading to the Sojourner rover 
that explored Mars in 1997 and the Spirit and Opportunity rovers 
that are still going strong on the Martian surface as of 2006.)
Besides its implications for space research, Breazeal’s work with 
Attila and Hannibal demonstrated the feasibility of building robots 
that were controlled by hundreds of small, interacting programs that 
MIT researcher Cynthia Breazeal 
contemplates the robot Kismet in 
a mirror. This is appropriate, since 
Kismet is intended to mirror the 
social interaction by which infants 
learn. (©2005 Peter Menzel/menzel-
photo.com)
SOCIABLE ROBOTS   117

118   Modern Robotics
detected and responded to specified conditions or “states.” It gave 
concrete reality to Brooks and Breazeal’s belief that robots, like liv-
ing organisms, grew by building more complex behaviors on top of 
simpler ones, rather than depending on a single top-down design.
From Cog to Kismet
Breazeal found working on insect-like mobile robots interesting, but 
her attention was really captured when Brooks announced that he 
was starting a new project: to make a robot that could interact with 
people in much the same way people encounter one another socially.
As Breazeal told a New York Times interviewer, she saw in 
Brooks’s new project the opportunity to “[bring] robots into human 
environments so that they can help people in ways that had not 
been possible before.” Possibly, people in turn could “accelerate 
and enrich the learning processes of machines.” Perhaps the robot, 
rather like a human child, could become “socialized” as it learned 
appropriate behavior.
The result of the efforts of Brooks and his colleagues (includ-
ing Breazeal, his new graduate assistant) was the creation of a 6 
foot 5 inch (1.96 m) tall robot called Cog. The name, suggested by 
Breazeal, was short for “cognition,” but also meaning a gear in a 
mechanism, Cog attempted to replicate the sense perceptions and 
reasoning skills of a human infant. Cog had eyes that focused like 
those of a person, and, like an infant, could pick up on what people 
nearby were doing and what they were focused on.
Breazeal had done much of the work in designing Cog’s stereo 
vision system. She and another graduate student also programmed 
many of the interacting feedback routines that allowed Cog to 
develop its often intriguing behavior. Cog could focus on and track 
moving objects and sound sources. Eventually, the robot gained the 
kind of hand-eye coordination that enabled it to throw and catch a 
ball and even play rhythms on a snare drum.
One day Breazeal picked up an eraser and waved it in front of 
Cog. The robot tracked the eraser with its eyes, then reached out and 
touched it. Breazeal waved the eraser again, and again, Cog reached 
for and touched it. It was as though Cog and Breazeal were taking 

turns playing with the eraser. Breazeal realized that there was noth-
ing in the robot’s programming that told it about taking turns. This 
behavior was apparently emerging out of the interaction between the 
increasingly sophisticated robot and its human partner.
For her doctoral research, Breazeal decided to explore further how 
a human and a robot might be able to interact using social behavior 
such as turn-taking. To do so, she again looked toward the human 
infant as a model. She decided to focus on the key ways in which par-
ents and babies communicate: attention, facial expressions, and vocal-
ization. She designed a smaller robot that would be more childlike and 
named it Kismet, from a Turkish word meaning fate or fortune.
Seeing, Hearing, “Speaking”
To many people, the phrase “humanoid robot” conjures up a 
Hollywood or Disney animatronic replication of a person, with real-
istic facial features. Kismet, though, looked a bit like the alien from 
the movie ET. The robot was essentially a head without arms or 
legs. With big eyes (including exaggerated eyebrows), pink ears that 
could twist, and bendable surgical tubing for lips, Kismet’s “body 
language” conveyed a kind of brush-stroked essence of response and 
emotion. Kismet had a variety of hardware and software features 
that supported its interaction with humans.
Like Cogs, Kismet’s camera “eyes” functioned much like the 
human eye. The vision system, though, was more sophisticated than 
that in the earlier robot. Kismet looked for colorful objects, which 
were considered to be toys for potential play activities. An even 
higher priority was given to potential playmates, who were recog-
nized by certain facial features (such as eyes) as well as the presence 
of flesh tones.
Although Kismet was essentially only a head, the head could tilt 
forward, conveying interest in a person or thing. To draw people 
to show interest in return, Breazeal covered Kismet’s camera lenses 
with humanlike artificial eyes, complete with false eyelashes. On the 
other hand, if a person got too close to the robot (which made vision 
difficult), Kismet would pull back, conveying body language similar 
to “you are invading my personal space.”
SOCIABLE ROBOTS   119

120   Modern Robotics
Kismet did not actually understand the words spoken to it. 
It perceived the intonation and rhythms of human speech and 
identified them as corresponding to emotional states. If a visitor 
addressed Kismet with tones of friendly praise (as perhaps one 
might a baby or a dog), the robot moved to a “happy” emotional 
Kismet had four main levels of behavior. The primitive level tightly coupled 
sensors and effectors, creating the equivalent of reflexes. The skills level could 
combine and coordinate motor skills to create more complex movements. The 
behavior level applied “drives” and other criteria to decide on an overall strat-
egy for behavior. Finally, the social level sought to determine how the robot’s 
human partner would respond.

ISSUES: WHAT MIGHT IT MEAN FOR ROBOTS TO “FEEL”?
While skeptics may admit readily to being impressed by the subtle 
interactions that arose between Kismet and a human visitor, they 
often raise the question: How can any machine possibly experience 
emotions in the same way humans, or even the more developed 
animals, do?
After all, people and other animals are the products of hundreds 
of millions of years of evolution. Our minds float on a sea of chem-
istry; animals are fundamentally analog, not digital. Machines, on 
the other hand, have behavior that is determined by explicit design, 
however intricate. Any analog behavior must be simulated digitally.
The skeptics’ objections can be addressed with another question: 
How does any person know that other people experience emotions 
in the same way he or she does? Humans do not have a shared ner-
vous system or (as far as we know) the ability to experience directly 
the thoughts of others. An individual can only know about another 
person’s state of mind by what is picked up through language, verbal 
or nonverbal.
There are at least two reasons why people normally grant other 
people the status of thinking, feeling beings like themselves. 
Intellectually, it stands to reason that if a being belongs to the same 
biological species and behaves in similar ways, he or she must have 
similar emotional states. The most compelling reason to accept that 
other human beings have real feelings is that we were nurtured by 
parents who responded to our feelings as though they understood 
them, while we learned how our feelings were bound up with those 
of caregivers, teachers, friends, and rivals.
As for robots, even when encountering the relatively simple 
Kismet, people soon forgot they were dealing with a machine that 
could be fully described by a series of state and circuit diagrams. 
As Kismet’s descendants become so complex and subtle that no 
one human can comprehend all of their dynamics, and as our 
interactions with such robots become increasingly satisfying and 
useful, we may acknowledge that the robot with whom we are 
living feels—perhaps not exactly as we do, but has feelings that we 
acknowledge because we want to.
SOCIABLE ROBOTS   121

122   Modern Robotics
Looking into Kismet’s face, it is hard not to become engaged with the sociable 
robot. (©2005 Peter Menzel/menzelphoto.com)
ISSUES: WHAT MIGHT IT MEAN FOR ROBOTS TO “FEEL”?
(continued)
 At some point then, a robot that combines cognition and 
“emotional intelligence” to a vastly greater degree than Kismet 
may receive an implicit acknowledgement of true feeling at least 
to the degree humans acknowledge the feelings of their canine or 
feline companions. At this point, any sense of the robot being a 
fully determined machine will retreat into the realm of abstract 
theory, just as few people truly believe that humans are com-
pletely determined by their genetic expression.
A little later, perhaps, certain robots may be accorded a more 
or less equivalent status to humanity, perhaps even seen as an 
intelligent species with whom humans live in symbiosis. And 
somewhere along this road, if robots become a sort of person, 
the question of what sort of rights they have will be inevitable.

state by smiling. On the other hand, a harsh, scolding tone moved 
Kismet toward an “unhappy” condition, eliciting a frown. In 
order to convey the language of facial expressions, Kismet’s red 
rubber “lips” could be controlled by a number of motors. The 
movements of the eyebrows and ears could also be orchestrated 
into a variety of expressions connoting such emotional states as 
Kismet’s facial expressions were also generated through a layered group of mod-
ules. Each of the “expression” routines sent movement commands to the motor 
server, which determined the order of movements. The requests then went to 
motor primitives that controlled the individual body parts. Finally, the precise 
movement commands were given to the individual actuators.
SOCIABLE ROBOTS   123

124   Modern Robotics
curiosity, excitement, or boredom. Getting the separate motor 
controls to work together smoothly proved to be a daunting pro-
gramming and engineering task.
Emotional States
Kismet’s “emotions” were not just simple indicators of what state 
the software decided the robot should be in, based on cues it picked 
up from humans. The robot was so carefully “tuned” in its feedback 
systems that it established a remarkably natural rhythm of vocaliza-
tion and visual interaction. Kismet reacted to the human, which in 
turn elicited further human responses.
PARALLELS: A ROBOTIC GARDEN
Breazeal has created “responsive” robots in new forms and for ven-
ues beyond the laboratory. In 2003, the Cooper-Hewitt National 
Design Museum in New York hosted a “cyberfloral installation” 
designed by Breazeal. It featured “flowers” of metal and silicone 
that exhibit behaviors such as swaying and glowing in bright colors 
when a person’s hand comes near. As Breazeal told New York Times 
interviewer Claudia Dreifus:
The installation communicates my future vision of robot design that 
is intellectually intriguing and remains true to its technological heritage, 
but is able to touch us emotionally in the quality of interaction and their 
responsiveness to us—more like a dance, rather than pushing buttons.
Such robots can intrigue people of all ages and from all back-
grounds. Installations such as the robotic garden suggest new possi-
bilities for a fusion of art and technology, as can also be found at the 
annual Burning Man Festival in the Nevada desert, where artists and 
technologists collaborate to create elaborate interactive sculptures 
and join in a communal celebration of creativity.

When Kismet did not have human contact for some time, it became 
lonely. If a visitor arrived, the robot began an attention-getting dis-
play. It tilted its head forward. Its ears swiveled a bit like those of an 
excited terrier, while its vocal babbling conveyed excitement.
The need for human company was one of Kismet’s three major 
motivational drives. Another was stimulation from seeing “interest-
ing” objects. Because Kismet had no arms, it conveyed its interest 
in an object to a person, who usually reacted by bringing the object 
closer to the robot. Like an infant, Kismet also got “tired” after 
prolonged interaction because of its fatigue drive.
In an interview with Douglas Whynott and Fenella Saunders of 
Discover magazine, Breazeal stressed that
The behavior [of Kismet] is not canned. It is being computed and is 
not a random thing. The interaction is rich enough so that you can’t 
tell what’s going to happen next. The overarching behavior is that the 
robot is seeking someone out, but the internal factors are changing 
all the time.
Perhaps the most remarkable thing was how fluidly Kismet’s 
behavior arose out of a system that has 15 separate computers run-
ning several different operating systems.
Leonardo
Seeing how much can be elicited in both robots and humans even 
by the relatively simple Kismet, Breazeal was eager to build on 
that experience. One important challenge she faced was to link the 
cognitive and learning processes to the emotional drives and social 
interactions. Thus, as she explained to Time reporter Adam Cohen 
in 2000, a future “sociable robot” would learn language much in the 
way an infant does. The words it would learn most quickly would 
therefore be those that are connected with emotional needs—being 
able to ask for a favorite toy, for example. In the article, Breazeal 
said she hopes that eventually a robot will be able to make the kinds 
of links that seem to be almost instinctive in toddlers: “When I’m in 
SOCIABLE ROBOTS   125

126   Modern Robotics
this state, I can take this action that leads to the person’s taking this 
behavior and getting my needs satiated.”
Breazeal’s latest robot creation is called Leonardo. Unlike 
Kismet, Leonardo has a full torso with arms and legs and looks 
like a furry little Star Wars alien. With the aid of artificial skin 
and an array of 32 separate motors, Leonardo’s facial expressions 
are much more humanlike than Kismet’s. Its body language now 
includes shrugs.
Leonardo’s learning capabilities are new and impressive. The 
robot can learn new concepts and tasks both by interacting with 
a human teacher and by imitating what it sees people do, starting 
with facial expressions and simple games.
In the movie A.I.: Artificial Intelligence (2001), director Steven 
Spielberg retold the fairy tale of Pinocchio through an artificially 
intelligent robot that looks like a little boy. This is a robot that 
can love—indeed, that needs to love. Although only partially 
successful, the film gave an idea of the promising but troubling 
relationships between emotional robots and humans in the not 
too distant future. The beginnings of that future can be seen in 
the laboratory today as people respond to Kismet, Leonardo, and 
their successors.
The Future of Sociable Robots
In 2002, Breazeal published Designing Sociable Robots as a guide 
to the many dynamic processes that interact in Kismet to produce 
its complex behavior. She also draws some important conclusions 
that can guide the future of this exciting new aspect of robotics. 
For example, her observations of interactions between Kismet and a 
variety of students and colleagues suggest that robots may advance 
much more quickly toward fully humanoid status if they can draw 
humans into interacting with them.
In recent years, a number of developments in robotics has 
brought closer the day when robots can help with many aspects 
of daily life. These advances include walking with agility, the 
ability to navigate sure-footedly in a chaotic world, and a better 
ability to recognize and manipulate objects in the environment. 

Thanks to the work begun by Cynthia Breazeal, researchers can 
add a new component: the ability to recognize and respond to 
human emotional language.
Recent writers have suggested that “emotional intelligence”—the 
ability to assess accurately and respond to one’s own emotions and 
those of others—may be as important as IQ. If advanced emotional 
intelligence combines with more traditional capabilities, a sociable 
robot may be able to help people in ways that are barely conceivable 
today, including the following:
SOCIAL IMPACT: WOMEN IN ROBOTICS
Robotics has traditionally been considered a form of engineering, a 
field with relatively low participation by women. When asked why 
there are so few women in robotics, Breazeal told Adam Cohen of Time 
that women do not get enough support: “Girls aren’t discouraged, 
but they aren’t encouraged either.” Breazeal also pointed to the lack 
of women engineers to serve as potential role models for girls. (She 
noted, however, that in her case her mathematician mother did serve 
as such a model.) In recent years, Breazeal has begun to intrigue and 
inspire young women who might be considering careers in robotics.
A more subtle and perhaps more significant impact of Breazeal’s 
work on women in science is how it offers a different vision of what 
engineers and physical scientists do. Most people see little relation-
ship between engineering and such fields as child psychology or 
sociology. Even robotics and artificial intelligence, while bringing 
biology, neurology, and cognitive science into the mix, have not 
really addressed how robots might relate to peoples’ social needs 
and expectations. By designing robots that engage in social interac-
tion and that learn from their encounters with people, Breazeal is giv-
ing technology a new face. This in turn may build a bridge between 
robotics and such fields as psychology and social science, which 
have generally appealed more to women. Finally, technologists of 
both genders may be challenged to think about technology not only 
in terms of how it might be used but also by how both people and 
increasingly sophisticated machines may be changing each other.
SOCIABLE ROBOTS   127

128   Modern Robotics
•  A babysitting robot could provide a toddler with a variety of 
enriching interactions while knowing when the baby is getting 
tired and should rest
•  Robotic teachers might help older children with hand-eye coordi-
nation and other manipulation skills, mixing in different activities 
if the child shows signs of boredom
•  Robotic caregivers for older people would be able to not only 
fetch items and give reminders about medication but also recog-
nize signs of depression or other distress
•  Alzheimer’s patients could receive memory reinforcement and 
cognitive enrichment activities, as well as orientation and emo-
tional reassurance
•  Specially adapted sociable robots might help stroke victims regain 
speech and motor skills
•  Robots could provide persons suffering from severe cognitive 
disorders such as autism with carefully monitored and graduated 
activities to make them better oriented to their environment and 
more responsive to other people
“A Robot That Can Be Your Friend”
Besides earning her a doctoral degree from MIT in 2000, 
Breazeal’s work has brought her considerable acclaim. She has 
been widely recognized as being a significant young inventor or 
innovator, such as by Time magazine and the Boston Business 
Forward. Breazeal was one of 100 “young innovators” featured 
in MIT’s Technology Review. She also served as a special con-
sultant for the Steven Spielberg/Stanley Kubrick movie, A.I.: 
Artificial Intelligence.
Today Breazeal is an assistant professor of media arts and sci-
ences at the MIT Media Lab, as well as being director of the lab’s 
Robotic Life Group. Whatever directions her work may take her 
in the future, Cynthia Breazeal has helped people to see robots not 
only as tools but also as potential partners. Or, as Breazeal puts it 

in the Discover interview: “The ultimate milestone is a robot that 
can be your friend.”
Breazeal likely misses one friend, though. Kismet first showed 
her that a robot could become more than a tool or a helper—a true 
companion. Kismet has since been “retired” and is in an exhibit at 
the MIT museum.
Chronology
1968 
 Cynthia Breazeal born in Albuquerque, New Mexico, but her 
family soon moves to Livermore, California
1976 
Breazeal sees Star Wars and is intrigued by R2D2 and C3PO
1989 
 Breazeal earns a B.S. in electrical and computer engineering 
from the University of California at Santa Barbara
1992 
 Breazeal develops program routines for the walking robots 
Attila and Hannibal
1993 
 Breazeal receives a master’s degree in electrical engineering 
and computer science from the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology
1997 
Breazeal begins to design Kismet, the ﬁ rst “sociable robot”
2000 
 Breazeal describes the operation of Kismet for her Ph.D. thesis 
and receives her doctorate in electrical engineering and com-
puter science from MIT
2002 
Breazeal publishes Designing Sociable Robots
2003 
 Breazeal installs a “cyberﬂ oral installation” of interactive 
ﬂ owers that respond to human presence in a New York art 
museum
2006 
 Breazeal heads the Robotic Life Group at the MIT Media Lab 
and continues development of the robot “Leonardo”
SOCIABLE ROBOTS   129

130   Modern Robotics
Further Reading
Books
Breazeal, Cynthia. Designing Sociable Robots. Cambridge, Mass.: 
MIT Press, 2002.
Focusing primarily on the famous robot Kismet, this accessible book 
explains the many design issues and parameters involved in building 
robots that can interact in humanlike ways, including sensory, motiva-
tional, emotional, behavioral, and facial expression systems.
Brooks, Rodney. Flesh and Machines: How Robots Will Change Us. 
New York: Pantheon Books, 2002.
Cynthia Breazeal’s mentor, Rodney Brooks, describes his research 
and how he came to develop the idea of “situated” and “embodied” 
robots with a layered architecture of behaviors.
Articles
Cohen, Adam. “The Machine Nurturer.” Time, 4 December 2000, 
pp. 110 ff.
Includes an interview with Cynthia Breazeal and good background 
on Kismet.
Dreifus, Claudia. “A Passion to Build a Better Robot, One with Social 
Skills and a Smile.” New York Times, 10 June 2003, p. F3.
Another interview with Cynthia Breazeal.
Whynott, Douglas, and Fenella Saunders. “The Robot That Loves 
People.” Discover, October 1999, p. 66.
Describes encounters with the robot Kismet.
Web Sites
Cynthia Breazeal. URL: http://web.media.mit.edu/~cynthiab. 
Accessed on September 3, 2005.
Home page at the MIT Media Lab Robotic Life Group; includes sum-
maries of research and downloadable movies of Kismet in action.
Robotic Life. URL: http://robotic.media.mit.edu. Accessed on 
September 3, 2005.
Home page for the Robotic Life Group at the MIT Media Lab; 
includes introduction to its mission and ongoing research projects, 
including the robot Leonardo (under “Sociable Robots”).

131
9
RADICAL ROBOTICIST
HANS MORAVEC AND THE FUTURE OF ROBOTICS
P
ersonal computer users can 
relate: Every couple years or 
so, it seems that new technologies 
necessitate a computer ugrade—
Windows or Mac, desktop or lap-
top. Each new PC costs a bit less 
than the supposedly obsolete model 
and always seems to have about 
twice the processor speed and stor-
age capacity.
Carnegie Mellon University robot-
ics researcher Hans Moravec has 
stated in numerous writings, start-
ing with his book Mind Children 
(1988), that the same thing is now 
happening to robots. Although the 
processing needed for robots to 
function in the real world is vastly 
more intensive than that found in 
most computer software, Moravec 
believes that robots are catching up 
with the exponential growth that 
has been characteristic of PCs. This 
may mean that the high school 
students of today may be served in 
Hans Moravec has made impor-
tant contributions to many aspects 
of robotics, including vision and 
navigation. Today, though, he 
is perhaps best known for his 
speculations on the future devel-
opment of robotics and the fate of 
humans in a world of intelligent 
machines. (Photo courtesy of Hans 
Moravec)

132   Modern Robotics
their retirement years by robotic assistants with nearly human-level 
intelligence. Beyond that, Moravec suggests that the most advanced 
robots may exceed human intelligence on the same scale that human 
intelligence surpasses that of chimpanzees.
At Home with Robots
Hans Moravec was born in the town of Kautzen, Austria, on 
November 30, 1948. His father was an electronics technician. In 
1953, the family moved to Montreal, Canada, where Moravec spent 
most of his childhood.
Moravec built his first robot when he was only 10 years old. It 
was built mainly of tin cans, but it was equipped with lights and an 
electric motor. In high school, Moravec won prizes for his science 
fair entries—including a mobile robot that could follow light sources 
and a programmable robot manipulator arm.
In his undergraduate work, Moravec focused on systems for 
programming and controlling robots. At the time, computers were 
still too large to put inside a robot, and robots had to be controlled 
by computer links. Moravec received his bachelor’s degree in math-
ematics from Acadia University in Nova Scotia in 1969.
For his master’s degree (awarded in 1971 by the University 
of Western Ontario), Moravec built a minicomputer-controlled 
robot that had light and other sensors for responding to the 
environment. Moravec’s master’s thesis proposed an extension of 
LISP (List Processor), the most widely used artificial intelligence 
programming language, which would be better suited for pro-
gramming robots.
Robots à la Carte
In 1971, Moravec moved from Canada to the United States, where 
he would spend the decade at Stanford University, one of the top 
centers of American robotics research. By 1973, Moravec was heav-
ily involved with the further development of the Stanford Cart, a 
remote controlled, wheeled mobile robot that resembled a small 

table with bicycle wheels. The robot 
sent images from a television cam-
era back to its controlling com-
puter. Mobile robotics had become 
an exciting and promising field, 
as shown by the funding of Cart 
research by the Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency (DARPA), 
the National Science Foundation, 
and the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration.
The Cart’s control program 
had several subroutines. One, 
called the interest operator, tried 
to identify “regions of interest” 
in one of a series of photographs 
taken by the Cart’s camera. (For 
example, these might be places 
where there were edges indicat-
ing objects and thus potential 
obstacles.) The correlator rou-
tine then looked for matching 
features in another picture. The 
camera-solver routine then triangulated the shifted positions 
between the two pictures in order to determine the distance to 
the objects of interest. (This is a process that human eyes can 
perform in a fraction of a second.)
Once the obstacles had been identified and located, the navigator 
routine planned a path to the destination that avoided the obstacles. 
The path was then translated into driving instructions that moved 
the Cart about three feet (1 m) along the path. Another set of pic-
tures was then taken, and the process would be repeated until the 
Cart reached its destination. The relative slowness of the available 
minicomputers at the time meant that the Cart drove in a jerky 
fashion, with 10 to 15 minutes between movements.
The Cart was the first autonomous mobile robot that could plot 
paths around obstacles, but if one could see the world as the robot 
saw it, there would be no objects as such, or even wireframe outlines. 
The Stanford Cart, photographed 
some time during the 1970s. The 
rather humble-looking robot was 
the test bed for pioneering work 
in mobile robot navigation. (Photo 
courtesy of Rodney Brooks)
RADICAL ROBOTICIST   133

134   Modern Robotics
Rather, there were clusters, or “clouds,” of features that corresponded 
in a rough way to the actual boundaries of the obstacles. While the 
Cart usually negotiated cluttered rooms successfully, it sometimes 
misread the orientation of an object or got stuck in repeated attempts 
to fit itself through a narrow space. The camera system could also fail 
to identify objects whose edges lacked sufficient contrast.
When taken outdoors, the Cart faced additional challenges. 
Moravec and his fellow researchers discovered that because the 
robot moved so slowly, the shadows of objects would move up to 
a foot and a half (half a meter) between snapshots. The shadows, 
which often had a higher contrast than the edges of objects them-
selves, would then be mistaken for object boundaries.
I WAS THERE: MORAVEC THE HACKER
Projects such as the Stanford Cart (as well as anything involving 
images or graphics) required large amounts of computer time. 
Unfortunately, the limited amount of computer power (much less 
than on a single desktop machine today) had to be shared by many 
researchers. Like their counterparts at MIT, the Stanford computer 
users would keep strange hours to take advantage of “slack time” on 
the machines. The term hacker came to be applied to such users who 
developed sophisticated tricks to wring the last byte of useful work 
out of the machines.
Moravec went further than even most hackers. By the late 1970s, 
he was spending so much time at the computer in the Stanford 
Artificial Intelligence Lab (SAIL) that he slept by day in a little cubby-
hole that he had constructed in the building’s rafters, emerging late 
at night when the computer system was idle.
When he was online, Moravec arranged to have friends bring him 
groceries so he did not have to leave the keyboard to eat. Moravec’s 
eccentric behavior was less impressive, though, than the storm of 
ideas with which he pelted his colleagues. According to Rodney 
Brooks, these included space elevators, huge parallel-processing 
computers, and even the transfer of human consciousness into 
machines.

Robotic Vehicles
Moravec moved to Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) in Pittsburgh 
in 1980 as a research scientist. He was promoted to senior research 
scientist in 1985 and principal research scientist in 1993. For his 
first project at CMU, Moravec began to develop a successor to the 
Stanford Cart: the CMU Rover. Unlike the Stanford Cart, the Rover 
carried a dozen or so computer processors on board, although the 
heavy-duty image processing was still handled by a minicomputer 
on a remote link. In addition to a TV camera, the Rover included 
infrared and sonar sensors. The robot was about three feet (1 m) 
tall and weighed 198 pounds (90 kg). New image-processing arrays 
made picture analysis about a hundred times faster than with the 
old Cart.
In 1984, Moravec and his team began a contract to develop 
a sonar navigation system for Denning Mobile Robotics. Since 
the sonar provided distance information but could not localize 
an object within its 30-degree-wide beam, Moravec and gradu-
ate student Alberto Elfes devised a different approach to avoiding 
obstacles. A three-dimensional grid around the robot was used to 
plot the possibility that an object may exist in a given cell. The 
result of successive “pings” generated a sort of probability map, 
which was later extended to combine sonar and visual data. Finally, 
an algorithm was developed by which the robot could improve its 
picture of the world by comparing it to a simulated map. Essentially, 
the result of all this processing was that the robot did not try to 
avoid obstacles, rather to determine a route that was safely free of 
them. By the early 1990s, the availability of new supercomputers 
such as the CM-5 “Connection Machine” improved the accuracy of 
this grid-based navigation system steadily, and progress continued 
through the decade.
Moravec’s Carnegie Mellon lab also worked on a series of self-
driving vehicles. The earliest version, the 1984 Terragator, could roll 
along jogging trails at about three feet (1 m) per second. Sometimes, 
however, the remote-control computer would confuse a tree trunk 
with the road and the Terragator would try to climb it!
Navlab, the first of a new series, begun in 1986, was a big blue 
truck full of bulky computer gear. It used algorithms to try to pick 
RADICAL ROBOTICIST   135

136   Modern Robotics
out the boundaries between the road and surrounding terrain. It 
gradually improved its ability to stay on the road at faster speeds, up 
to about 20 miles (32 km) per hour.
Navlab 2, built in 1990 and converted from a military Humvee, 
introduced a new navigation system. A neural net was “trained” to 
drive by being shown simulated scenes or video footage from human 
road trips.
In 1995, Navlab 5 drove across the country from Washington, 
D.C., to San Diego, California, at an average speed of over 62 
miles (100 km) per hour. By now all the computing power needed 
could be provided by an ordinary laptop computer. (The need for 
computation was also reduced by having an extensive library of 
road types and vectors representing angles and curves in the road.) 
The accompanying human driver had to take control less than 2 
percent of the time.
A tougher driving challenge for robots has been provided by the 
annual races sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency (DARPA). The 132-mile course is a twisting path through 
Mojave desert and mountain passes similar to the terrain that might 
be encountered by military vehicles in Afghanistan or Iraq.
In the 2004 race, none of the robotic contestants managed to 
finish the course, but in October 2005, five of the 23 autonomous 
vehicles reached the finish line. The winner, with a time of six hours 
and 53 minutes, was “Stanley,” a Volkswagen SUV modified by a 
Stanford University team with an array of lasers, cameras, and other 
sensors controlled by an onboard computer.
Moore’s Law and the Quest 
for Robot Intelligence
Moravec is not only a leading robotics researcher but also a writer 
whose popular books Mind Children: The Future of Robot and Human 
Intelligence (1988) and Robot: Mere Machine to Transcendent Mind 
(1999) offer a provocative look at the possible future of robotics. To 
understand Moravec’s predictions, it is first necessary to look at how 
computing power has increased over time—and when it may reach the 
point where robots transcend human capabilities.

Looking back from the perspective of 2003, Moravec, in his 
paper for the Association of Computing Machinery, “Robots, After 
All,” acknowledges that researchers in the 1970s and 1980s under-
estimated greatly the visual processing capacity of the human brain. 
During those two decades, even the seemingly powerful computers 
in the leading laboratories could only perform about 1 MIPS (mil-
lion instructions per second). Moravec notes that
SOLVING PROBLEMS: IN THE DRIVER’S SEAT
The work being done at Carnegie Mellon University and elsewhere 
on robot driving systems has many potential uses. Eventually, if 
systems can be made safe enough, self-driving cars could greatly 
improve the nation’s most popular form of transportation—the 
automobile. Special freeway lanes may be set aside for automatic 
driving, and the computers could optimize traffic into a smooth 
flow and maintain fuel-efficient speeds. The human driver could 
become a passenger, free to catch up with some work or just enjoy 
the scenery.
In the late 1990s, the National Automated Highway System 
Research Program, a consortium of government agencies and private 
corporations, demonstrated the feasibility of automated cars. A num-
ber of serious obstacles remain. For example, if the carrying capacity 
of highways is greatly increased by automation, what happens when 
all those extra cars exit from the highway to already congested 
surface streets? In general, the interaction between automatic and 
manual drivers remains a problem: Tests of recent Navlab vehicles 
showed that the computer could react to road conditions much 
faster than human drivers but was not as good at predicting what 
those crazy human drivers might do!
The most likely practical results of the automatic driving research 
will be technologies that assist but do not eliminate the human 
driver. For years to come, increasingly sophisticated “cruise controls” 
and systems that can warn inattentive human drivers that they are 
starting to veer out of their lane or are getting too close to other 
traffic will appear.
RADICAL ROBOTICIST   137

138   Modern Robotics
Though spectacular underachievers at the wacky new stunt of long-
hand calculation, we are veteran overachievers at perception and 
navigation. Our ancestors, across hundreds of millions of years, pre-
vailed by being frontrunners in the competition to find food, escape 
This chart shows how Hans Moravec suggests robotic capabilities have developed 
since the 1950s, and may develop during the coming decades. The animals in the 
right column are intended to show rough equivalents in biological brainpower.

RADICAL ROBOTICIST   139
ISSUES: MORAVEC V. BROOKS
Sheer processing power may not be the decisive factor in achieving 
humanlike robot intelligence. The way in which processing is organized 
within the robot may be just as important, as may be the possibility of 
using a group of cooperating robots instead of a single machine.
Both Rodney Brooks and Hans Moravec have made impressive 
achievements in developing sophisticated robots that can navi-
gate within and interact with a complex, changing environment. 
Moravec’s approach focuses on visual processing and the ability to 
create rich three-dimensional models. For example, Moravec sees 
his cleaning machines as being intelligent and able to analyze each 
room and plan efficient routes. Gradually, new attachments and 
capabilities would be added so the cleaning robot could pick up and 
put away objects (such as children’s toys), as well as scrub, mop, or 
polish as appropriate to the surface and type of dirt.
By comparison, Rodney Brooks’s “subsumption architecture,” as 
embodied in the Roomba robotic vacuum cleaner, is based on identify-
ing and implementing those behaviors that, in combination, will accom-
plish the desired task. A Roomba has no map of its surroundings; it does 
not calculate optimal paths. It combines long random sweeps and cer-
tain special modes (edge-following and spiraling) that when combined 
do a good job of covering the entire areas while focusing on the spots 
most in need of cleaning. Where Moravec sees a single, increasingly 
sophisticated cleaning robot, Brooks (and his colleagues Colin Angle 
and Helen Greiner) suggests in his book Flesh and Machines that “flocks” 
or entire “ecologies” of simpler, Roomba-like robots could each perform 
particular chores of mopping, scrubbing, and so on.
While these two approaches to robotics seem very different, they 
could well be complementary in many ways. Many simpler tasks may 
be suitable for the Roomba-style robots, while others might require 
a single, sophisticated robot more like what Moravec envisages. For 
example, suppose the army needs to secure and make safe an area 
that is likely to have mines or improvised explosive devices. A flock 
of simple robots might be able to find and identify the mines and 
bombs. A sophisticated robot could then go to each device, deter-
mine which type of tool or manipulator to use, and disarm it safely. 
As a practical matter, many robot designs use both top-down, cen-
tralized and bottom-up, distributed approaches.

140   Modern Robotics
danger and protect offspring. Existing robot-controlling computers 
are far too feeble to match this massive ultra-optimized perceptual 
inheritance.
The retina of the human eye packs together millions of cells that 
can detect the edges of objects and react to motion. Making a rough 
calculation, Moravec concludes that even the 1,000 MIPS (one bil-
lion calculations per second) capacity of a late 1990s supercomputer 
falls far short of the processing occurring in the retina and optic 
nerve, let alone the human brain itself, which may perform process-
ing equivalent to about 100 million MIPS (or 100 trillion instruc-
tions per second)! By comparison, Moravec estimates that a 2003 
model desktop computer has a processing power equivalent to the 
nervous system of an insect or perhaps the brain of a guppy.
Against this formidable processing gap between computer and 
brain must be placed Moore’s Law, the well-attested observation (by 
pioneer chip-builder Gordon Moore) that the processing power of 
the top-of-the-line computer chip roughly doubles every 18 months 
to two years. If this trend continues, Moravec believes that comput-
ers (and their associated robots) could reach humanlike processing 
capacity by 2040. And because this growth is driven by geometrical 
(doubling) functions, humans might be quickly surpassed after that 
time.
Robots: The Next Generations
Today’s robots can, at their best, do only a few things well. They 
are specialists. Moravec suggests that by around 2020 the first 
true “universal” robots may appear. Just as a computer is a uni-
versal machine in that it can perform any kind of calculation for 
which it has been given the appropriate instructions, a universal 
robot could be given programs enabling it to tidy or clean a house, 
wash dishes, mow lawns, take inventory in a warehouse, guard 
that warehouse, or even play games with children. Moravec sees 
this first generation of universal robots as having about a 10,000 
MIPS processing power and “minds” equivalent in complexity to 
that of a lizard.

The first generation of universal robots will work in rather con-
strained environments. They may learn more about their surround-
ings in terms of navigation, but it will essentially perform their tasks 
RADICAL ROBOTICIST   141
A swarm of antlike robots may one day be designed to cooperate to accomplish 
a task. In this schematic, the robots organize a search for “food” objects.

142   Modern Robotics
by rote. Moravec foresees a second generation of universal robots 
with a processing power of 30,000 MIPS (roughly equivalent to a 
mouse brain). These second-generation robots would be equipped 
with learning or “conditioning” modules that would reinforce those 
approaches to a task that work best. (“Best” might be defined as 
a combination of efficiency, low energy use, and lack of damage 
through mishaps.)
Moravec’s third generation of robots (10 million MIPS or a mon-
key equivalent) would have a big boost of cognitive power. They 
would have a database that includes physics and physical properties 
of objects, “knowing” how humans use and refer to objects, and 
some grasp of human psychology and behavior.
The fourth generation would reach humanlike processing levels 
(300 million MIPS), would be comfortable with abstractions, and 
could apply its reasoning to any domain in which it finds itself.
Meanwhile, Back at the Warehouse
By 2003, Moravec had a reputation as a way-out futurist. Together 
with inventor and artificial intelligence pioneer Ray Kurzweil, 
Moravec was associated with ideas such as robots that could 
produce anything desired or perform any service required, not to 
mention the possibility that humans could download their minds 
into humanoid robots and achieve virtual immortality. Such talk 
made for popular lectures and media interest, but Moravec then 
surprised a number of observers by taking on a more practical 
challenge.
Robots, after all, do not need to be as smart as people to be use-
ful to people. In a Scientific American article, Moravec said that he 
expects that self-navigating mobile robots, for example, will become 
increasingly prevalent during the next decade. Pursuing this vision, 
Moravec cofounded SEEGRID Corporation in 2003. (As he told 
Scientific American writer Chip Walter, “It was time. The comput-
ing power is here.”)
The roots for the new technology were in Moravec’s proposal 
for an advanced mobile robot vision system, which was funded in 

1998 by the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency for 
$970,000. By 2002, a successful demonstration system had been 
completed.
SOCIAL IMPACT: TRANSCENDENCE THROUGH TECHNOLOGY?
The ideas of the more radical robot theorists (including, to some extent, 
Hans Moravec and even Rodney Brooks) share elements of a new future-
oriented philosophy that has been called extropianism or transhuman-
ism. The basic elements of this philosophy include a belief that humans 
can increasingly master technologies that will lead to expanded mental 
capabilities, ultimate control over matter and energy, and even immor-
tality. Some followers of extropian philosophy see advanced robotics as 
the way to create new bodies into which human minds may someday 
be downloaded or transplanted. Others prefer to focus on genetics and 
the use of cloning or other techniques. Nanotechnology, or the ability 
to build materials atom-by-atom, is also seen as a way to get beyond 
existing limits on energy and natural resources.
Entropy can be thought of as the “running down” of the uni-
verse, leading to a gradual loss of useful energy or of information. 
Established physics states that entropy is the ultimate fate of the 
universe. Extropy, therefore, suggests an opposite trend: an open-
ended, potentially infinite increase in information, capacity, and con-
sciousness. Similarly, those who prefer the term transhumanism see 
it as a going beyond the physical and cognitive limits of the present 
human species.
Such philosophies are not new—they echo such thinkers as the 
German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche and his celebration of the 
“superman” and the political movement called technocracy that 
achieved some influence in the early to mid-20th century. The 
extropians, however, claim that the necessary technology for tran-
scendent humanity is nearly at hand. They argue that artificial intel-
ligence, advanced robots, and genetically enhanced humans will be 
here soon, like it or not, so people should figure out how to use these 
technologies intelligently—and indeed, use them to increase human 
intelligence so we can cope with them.
RADICAL ROBOTICIST   143

144   Modern Robotics
The basic idea for the SEEGRID Corporation’s first product 
was a delivery cart that the user “trained” by bringing it to 
required locations while it recorded three-dimensional images 
and calculated safe routes from one location to the next. The 
robot could then travel automatically between the locations and 
await loading or unloading by humans. Its sophisticated three-
dimensional stereo-vision mapping system automatically updated 
its internal maps and calculated new routes or detours if neces-
sary. In the Scientific American article, Moravec said that he 
sees other applications for such robots, including housecleaning. 
SEEGRID and E-P Equipment Inc. announced the first imple-
mentation of this system in a warehouse delivery vehicle called 
“Smarttruck” in January 2005.
Such vehicles have a large potential market. Currently, workers 
must laboriously use dollies or forklifts to move materials into or 
out of warehouses. Some existing automated systems (such as that 
used by the giant bookstore Amazon) use fixed conveyer belts or 
guideways. Such systems are prone to blockage from unexpected 
movements of materials, and they are not easy to reconfigure as the 
flow of work changes. Moravec’s robotic stevedores can find their 
way around most obstacles. If the layout of the warehouse or factory 
changes, the robots are simply “walked” along the new path and 
told about the new designated delivery points.
Looking Forward
Today Moravec continues as director of the Mobile Robot 
Laboratory at Carnegie Mellon University and directs innovative 
projects in robotic vision and other applications. He has also con-
sulted for a number of leading computer and robotics companies 
and the Office of Naval Research and lectured widely at universi-
ties and conferences.
When Chip Walter of Scientific American asked Moravec what 
he thought would happen when robots became more intelligent than 
people, he observed that “something like 99 percent of all species 
go extinct.” Would this be the fate of humanity as well? Maybe, but 
Moravec suggested a different possibility. Calling future robots our 

“mind children,” Moravec speculated that advanced robots might 
care for humanity out of a sense of affinity or obligation, perhaps as 
children try to provide for the needs of their aging parents. Perhaps 
all humans’ needs will be provided for, except the need to be useful. 
It is a sobering thought.
Chronology
1948 
Hans Moravec born November 30 in Kautzen, Austria
1953 
Moravec’s family emigrates to Canada
1958 
Moravec builds his ﬁ rst mobile robot at the age of 10
1965–67 
Moravec attends Loyola College
1969 
 Moravec receives his bachelor’s degree from Acadia University 
in Nova Scotia
1971 
 Moravec receives his master’s of science degree from the 
University of Western Ontario
Moravec moves to the United States and attends Stanford 
University, where he later works with the Stanford Cart
1980 
Moravec is awarded his Ph.D. by Stanford University
Moravec begins his career at Carnegie Mellon University 
(CMU) and organizes the Mobile Robot Lab
1980s 
 Moravec works on CMU Rover, a much-improved successor 
to the Stanford Cart
1984 
 Moravec and students begin working on sonar-based grid 
navigation systems
1988 
 Moravec’s book Mind Children predicts human-level robots 
in a generation or so
1990s 
 Navlabs demonstrate the ability of robot-controlled vehicles 
to drive on real roads
1998 
 Moravec revisits the future in Robot: Mere Machine to 
Transcendent Mind
RADICAL ROBOTICIST   145

146   Modern Robotics
2003 
 Moravec cofounds SEEGRID Corporation (with Scott Friedman) 
to develop commercial applications for mobile robots
2005 
 SEEGRID announces that the “Smarttruck” robot will be used 
for work in warehouses
Further Reading
Books
Brooks, Rodney. Flesh and Machines: How Robots Will Change Us. 
New York: Panethon Books, 2002.
This description of Brooks’s robotics theories and experiments nicely 
complements the accounts of Moravec’s work. The two researchers 
share many ideas but also have differences in approach and attitude.
Moravec, Hans. Mind Children: The Future of Robot and Human 
Intelligence. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1988.
Moravec predicts a radical increase in the power of artificial intelli-
gence and its overshadowing of humanity; however, reality during the 
following decade fell somewhat short of the predictions.
———. Robot: Mere Machine to Transcendent Mind. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1999.
Moravec updates and elaborates predictions of robotics advances; 
suggests robots will match human intelligence by 2040 and surpass it 
by 2050.
Articles
Moravec, Hans. “Robots, After All.” Communications of the ACM 
46 (October 2003): 90–97. Available online. URL: http://www.frc.
ri.cmu.edu/~hpm/project.archive/robot.papers/2003/CACM.2003.
html. Accessed on September 10, 2005.
Describes the slow but now accelerating progress of robotics in recent 
decades.
———. “The Stanford Cart and the CMU Rover.” Robotics Institute, 
Carnegie Mellon University. February 1983. Available online. 
URL: http://cart.frc.ri.cmu.edu/users/hpm/project.archive/robot.
papers/1983/ieee83.mss. Accessed on September 12, 2005.
Moravec describes his extensive involvement with developing two 
mobile robots in the 1970s and early 1980s.

“Stanford Team Wins Robot Race.” MSNBC.com. Available online. 
URL: http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/9621761. Accessed on 
October 19, 2005.
Describes the 2005 DARPA “Grand Challenge” in the Mojave des-
ert.
Walter, Chip. “You, Robot.” Scientific American 292 (January 
2005): 36–37A.
Describes SEEGRID, Moravec’s new robotics firm, and also Moravec’s 
predictions about future generations of robots.
Web Sites
Extropy Institute. URL: http://www.extropy.org. Accessed on October 
12, 2005.
An organization dedicated to transcending human limitations (and 
even mortality) through technology, including robotics.
Hans Moravec. URL: http://www.frc.ri.cmu.edu/~hpm. Accessed on 
October 10, 2005.
Home page at Carnegie Mellon University; includes an archive of 
Moravec’s past robot projects and speculation about the future of 
robots.
RADICAL ROBOTICIST   147

148
10
CYBORG ODYSSEY
KEVIN WARWICK EXTENDS THE HUMAN BODY
“We can rebuild him. We have the technology. We have the capability 
to make the world’s first Bionic man. Steve Austin will be that man. 
Better than he was before. Better . . . stronger . . . faster.”
I
n the 1970s TV series The Six Million Dollar Man, a test pilot 
who had been badly crippled in a crash is rebuilt with bionic limbs 
and implants, enabling him to become an intelligence agent with 
unique capabilities. Three decades later, there are still no people 
who can run 60 miles an hour or lift cars with their bare hands. The 
first steps toward extending the human nervous system and linking 
it to robots have already been taken, however, and they have much 
more interesting implications than just speed or brute strength. In 
2002, Kevin Warwick, a British cybernetics researcher, became the 
first human to use a neural implant to directly control a robot and 
to exchange nerve signals with another person.
Science, Soccer, and Motorcycles
Kevin Warwick was born on February 9, 1954, in Coventry, 
England. Although his father was a teacher, his grandfather had 
been a Welsh miner, and the family was only gradually working its 
way into the middle-class world of detached homes.
As a young boy, Warwick was curious, energetic, and particularly 
fond of soccer. (He would become a talented amateur player). When 

Warwick was eight, however, his father developed severe agorapho-
bia, or fear of open spaces. When rest and therapy did not seem to 
help, the doctors resorted to a neurological operation. (During this 
period, brain surgery for psychological problems was more prevalent 
than it is today.)
The surgeons opened small holes in Warwick’s father’s head and 
severed some nerve connections. The operation succeeded in remov-
ing the agoraphobia. In his autobiography, I, Cyborg, Warwick 
recalled that “It was father’s illness and subsequent cure that first 
prompted me to think objectively about how the human brain 
operates and what exactly our mental processes are all about.” 
Warwick’s fascination with neurology would eventually bear fruit 
in innovative research.
British robotics researcher Kevin Warwick holds up his cyborg arm. While the 
implant itself is not visible, Warwick had a friend design a cyberpunkish-looking 
gauntlet to contain the interface circuitry. (Photo ©iCube Solutions Inc.)
CYBORG ODYSSEY   149

150   Modern Robotics
In grammar school, Warwick became fascinated by science and 
technology. He enjoyed watching science programs on television and 
reading about how famous scientists such as Michael Faraday and 
Humphrey Davies had made their discoveries. By his early teenage 
years, that interest had expanded to science fiction, including the 
British television movie Doctor Who and the Daleks, where Earth 
is invaded by malevolent robots who look something like Art Deco 
salt shakers. Warwick did not fit the nerd stereotype, though—he 
was fond of activities more in keeping with working-class boys, such 
as rooting for the Coventry soccer team and earning enough money 
to buy his own motorcycle.
Working World and University
After graduating from high school, Warwick also followed more 
of a working-class path: Instead of going to university, he got a 
job as an apprentice telephone technician at British Telecom. The 
work proved to be a pleasing mixture of intellectual challenge and 
physical labor, such as digging holes and climbing poles. In his 
spare time, Warwick continued his varied reading. A science fiction 
novel called The Terminal Man by Michael Crichton particularly 
intrigued Warwick. In the novel, surgeons attempt to change a crim-
inal’s behavior through electronically controlled nerve implants. Of 
course, things go horribly wrong, but Warwick wondered if such 
technology could be safely developed and used.
Eventually, Warwick felt his telephone job had become a dead 
end. He obtained the necessary technical certificates, took entrance 
exams and some technical courses, and in 1976, he enrolled in 
Aston University in Birmingham, England. He found the three years 
there to be rewarding, although he had also married, and he and his 
wife, Sylvia, had to make considerable financial sacrifices. Warwick 
received his undergraduate degree in 1979 and continued on in the 
Ph.D. program at Imperial College, London. For his doctoral thesis, 
he studied ways to monitor and correct industrial production sys-
tems automatically.
After a few years as a lecturer at the University of Newcastle and 
as an Oxford Fellow, Warwick decided to look for a permanent 
position. When he discovered that a professorship in cybernetics 

was available at the University of Reading, England, Warwick was 
excited. By the 1980s, cybernetics, the science of communication and 
control pioneered by Norbert Wiener, was not commonly pursued as 
a single unified subject. Rather, research in computer systems and 
robotics was likely to be parceled out among computer science and 
various disciplines of electronic and mechanical engineering. But 
for Warwick, cybernetics evoked the very connections he was most 
interested in: systems, control, communication, computation, and 
even biology. In 1988, therefore, Warwick applied for and received 
the professorship in cybernetics at Reading that he holds today.
Boosting Productivity
As professor of cybernetics at the University of Reading, Warwick 
has directed or been involved with a variety of bread-and-butter 
robotics projects. Some of them drew upon Warwick’s past work in 
developing software that can detect and diagnose faults in automated 
manufacturing systems. Clearly, such systems are of great practical 
interest to manufacturers, since maximum throughput with mini-
mum breakdowns results in the highest possible productivity.
One of Warwick’s approaches was to use a neural network 
that can gradually recognize what combinations of factors or 
data values make a breakdown more likely. Or approaching the 
problem a different way, the network can look for (and reinforce) 
those conditions that result in efficient, uninterrupted produc-
tion. Consulting with some manufacturing companies, Warwick’s 
software was even able to help them pinpoint differences between 
shifts of human workers in terms of how well they supervised the 
automatic machinery.
Helping the Disabled
Warwick’s long-term interest in the mechanisms of the human body 
and their possible enhancement has naturally extended to the pos-
sibility of creating devices to help disabled people. He and other 
researchers at Reading developed, for example, a platform onto 
which an ordinary wheelchair can be placed. The platform can then 
CYBORG ODYSSEY   151

152   Modern Robotics
be driven with a joystick. It is equipped with ultrasonic sensors and 
can give warnings such as “Object to the left!”
One day the cybernetics researchers had brought the wheelchair 
platform to the Avenue School in Reading, a school for children with 
special needs. Warwick and the researchers who built the platform 
found it rather awkward to drive since it was not like the automobiles 
most people are used to. The researchers were worried that the dis-
abled children would have even more trouble with the device.
They were surprised when the first disabled child who tried it out, 
a boy with cerebral palsy, began zipping the chair around the room 
at breakneck speed, avoiding all obstacles confidently. The incident 
suggested to Warwick that disabled people may be better able to 
adapt to new technology than people who have never had to rely on 
assistive devices.
In the late 1990s, Warwick and his research team worked on 
everything from adapting networking and mapping technology to 
making it easier for disabled persons to function independently 
at home. In the “Intelligent Home System,” doors, windows, and 
devices such as lights, heaters, and television sets each had a control 
processor linked to a central processor. The resident could then give 
vocal or other commands to control all the features of the home.
Mobile robot technology could also enhance mobility for dis-
abled persons. A robot wheelchair could include an internal map 
with significant locations plus the usual collision-avoidance and 
path-finding software. The wheelchair user could simply say “take 
me to the bathroom” or “take me to the kitchen table,” and the 
chair would do the rest. A demonstration model of a “magic” robot 
chair was built and appeared regularly on the British television show 
Jim’ll Fix It. (Interestingly, the show’s producers requested that the 
unit’s high-quality synthesized speaking voice be replaced by some-
thing that sounded more like a robot!)
The Seven Dwarfs
Warwick and his fellow researchers at the University of Reading 
have developed robots with a more open-ended purpose of explor-
ing the architecture of robot intelligence. Some, like “Walter,” are 

insect-like walking robots. These robots generally follow the “sub-
sumption architecture” first developed by Rodney Brooks. That is, 
they are decentralized, with layers of behavior ranging from simple 
avoidance of obstacles to exploration and mapping the world. Each 
of Walter’s legs is separately operated and synchronized by a “heart-
beat” signal. If a leg is removed or disabled, the other legs compen-
sate, just as with an insect.
As with humans and other organisms, the brain or central pro-
cessor in a robot with distributed architecture needs only to send a 
master signal to start walking or undertake another activity. The 
lower-level “nervous system” takes care of the rest, allowing the 
SOLVING PROBLEMS: SAFER BATHS
One of the projects undertaken by Kevin Warwick’s team at the 
University of Reading illustrates how it is possible to come up with 
a simpler, lower tech solution to a problem that seems very compli-
cated at first.
The problem was how to enable epileptic persons to bathe alone 
safely. People with epilepsy usually prefer taking care of their daily 
needs instead of relying on a companion or attendant for assistance. 
Epileptic seizures are largely unpredictable, and if one occurs while 
a person is in the bathtub, it is possible he or she might drown. The 
Reading team sought a way to detect the onset of a seizure so the 
water could be quickly drained from the tub.
Epileptic seizures vary greatly in their severity and outward signs. 
In some cases limbs thrash wildly, while in others the only sign may 
be a flickering of the eyelids. Although there are characteristic brain 
waves associated with a seizure, wearing a cap full of sensors and 
electrodes is awkward—not to mention potentially dangerous in a 
wet environment.
Warwick devised a simpler solution. He took an ordinary pair of 
eyeglass frames (without lenses) and attached moisture sensors to 
them. If a person wearing the glasses has a seizure that causes his or 
her head to slump into the water, the sensor sends a signal to a relay 
that opens the drain and empties the bath.
CYBORG ODYSSEY   153

154   Modern Robotics
brain to engage in higher-level behavior such as planning. “Elma” 
is a sleeker, more sophisticated successor to Walter that includes 
tactile sensors to allow the legs to “feel” the terrain and adjust to it. 
As the project continued, researchers also added learning routines 
to help Elma master new skills.
Learning through feedback is the featured activity for a swarm 
of wheeled robots that also inhabits the lab at Reading. (Since there 
were originally seven of the robots, they were dubbed “The Seven 
Dwarfs.”) Each robot has two powered wheels and one front wheel 
that is like a caster. The sturdy little robots emphasized rapid activ-
ity rather than cautious exploration.
“Hello, Mr. Chip”
As interesting as the robotics research at the University of Reading 
was, by the late 1990s, Kevin Warwick had become increasingly 
preoccupied with a more daring possibility—that of connecting the 
human body directly to the cybernetic world of increasingly intel-
ligent machines. He would become his own research subject.
In August 1998, Warwick arranged to have a small silicon chip, 
about one inch (2.5 cm) long and a tenth of that wide implanted in 
his arm. The procedure, performed under a local anesthetic, took 
only about 15 minutes.
There was little remarkable about the chip itself—similar chips 
have been implanted in pets for years, where they serve to identify 
strays. What was significant was the way computers in Warwick’s 
building at the university had been programmed to recognize and 
respond to the chip. As Warwick walked, lights came on, doors 
opened, and computers displayed his home Web page. Warwick also 
heard the greeting “Hello, Mr. Warwick, you have mail.”
Warwick told PC World reporter Jana Sanchez-Klein that he was 
surprised how quickly he got used to being connected in this way:
I’m feeling more at one with the computer. It’s as though part of me 
is missing when I’m not in the building. In my house, I have to open 
doors and turn on lights. I don’t feel lonely, but I don’t feel complete.

Warwick’s first tentative step into the world of implants only whetted 
his appetite for a more profound connection. It would be one in which 
he would not only be “read” by machines but also would communicate 
with them directly via the signals in his nervous system. He would take 
the next big step toward becoming a new type of being—a cyborg.
From Humans to Cyborgs
The word cyborg is short for “cybernetic organism.” (A more or 
less equivalent term is bionic organism, meaning biological plus 
I WAS THERE: ROBOT BUMPER CARS
Early versions of the University of Reading’s “Seven Dwarfs” robots 
could be rather disconcerting and occasionally dangerous. As 
Warwick recounted in March of the Machines:
In the pre-Seven Dwarf era, however, even more powerful motors were 
used, coupled with open gear boxes. These first robots would hurtle 
around the laboratory at breakneck speed, crashing into walls and doors. 
They were, therefore, designed with metal bumpers at the front and with 
a sturdy frame.
Another early problem to overcome was that of stopping a robot once 
we had started it. Catching a rapid transit autonomous robot with an 
open gear box, in full flight, was quite dangerous, with a serious chance of 
injury. More often than not we simply had to wait until the robot’s battery 
had run flat and then reclaim it.
Perhaps the Reading experimenters might have learned from the 
modern sport of Robot Wars (or Battlebots), in which heavily armed 
and armored remote-controlled robots engage in the arena in gladi-
atorial combat. Besides remote controls, these robots are equipped 
with safety interlocks that can disable the machine without a person 
having to get too close.
CYBORG ODYSSEY   155

156   Modern Robotics
electronic.) A cyborg is a human whose nervous, musculoskeletal, 
or other systems are integrally enhanced or extended through links 
to electronic devices.
In a sense, every person who wears glasses, uses a hearing aid, or 
walks with the aid of a cane is a cyborg. All of these devices extend 
human physical capabilities in some way. To distinguish users 
of simple aids from true cyborgs, most theorists require that the 
devices be integral: that is, permanently attached, as well as linked 
through sophisticated interactions. For example, a cochlear implant 
ISSUES: CONVENIENCE V. PRIVACY
The ability to be continually connected to a network of helpful com-
puters and other devices is certainly convenient. It also provides a 
taste of “cyborg-ness” by making the technology a more seamless 
extension of the human mind and senses. In order to create this 
seamless environment, though, the computer has to know who you 
are—and if it knows, who else might know, and what might they 
find out?
The use of radio frequency identification (RFID) chips is becom-
ing more common in store merchandise and even in library books. 
Many privacy advocates are concerned that the technology will give 
government snoops and corporate marketers too much information 
about a person’s location, habits, and choices. Defenders of RFID say 
that the fear is overstated and that the data cannot be read from 
more than a few feet away.
Thus far there seems to be no rush for people to get their own 
RFID implants, although a few exclusive nightclubs have provided 
them to patrons who want to bypass a screening process. It is pos-
sible that more people would be interested in an implant if it sped 
them through usually onerous activities, such as checking in at air-
ports or medical offices. Paroled criminals (particularly sex offenders) 
might also be considered for the technology, as it could be used to 
enforce restrictions such as entering school property. The desirability 
and appropriate restrictions for such surveillance are likely to remain 
contentious issues for many years to come.

that allows some deaf people to hear is integrally connected to the 
ear. A prosthetic limb that responds directly to muscular movement 
or even neural signals could also be considered a step toward becom-
ing a cyborg. There have also been crude but promising experiments 
where light sensors have been directly connected to the optic nerve, 
enabling blind people to see low-resolution pictures of objects in 
their environment.
An ultimate cyborg is likely to have many such devices, intended 
not only to correct disabilities but also to enhance normal human 
capabilities greatly or add new abilities entirely. A cyborg potentially 
combines the best features of humans and robots.
Kevin Warwick has given several reasons why he has undertaken 
rather risky procedures in order to create the first cybernetic links 
between the human nervous system and machines. For one thing, 
Warwick shares with robotics pundits such as Hans Moravec and 
Rodney Brooks the belief that robots will inevitably surpass humans 
in intelligence, perhaps in the lifetime of today’s high school stu-
dents.
Warwick suggested in his 2000 letter to the British newspaper the 
Guardian that
One realistic alternative to the hand of evolution patting humans on 
the back in an “it’s been nice knowing you” way is for humans to 
themselves link up much more closely with the circuitry being created. 
We humans can evolve into cyborgs—part human, part machine.
This attempt to meet the challenge of a machine-dominated future 
was not the only reason Warwick wanted to pursue his cyborg quest. 
Being able to link the human nervous system directly to machines 
could make great inroads into understanding in detail exactly which 
nerve signals control which movements, as well as the relationship 
between thoughts and emotions and nervous activity.
Direct nerve links between persons might finally answer 
some age-old philosophical questions. As Warwick wrote to the 
Guardian, these include: “When you feel pain is it more or less 
than my pain? When I think of the color red, is it the same as when 
you think of it?”
CYBORG ODYSSEY   157

158   Modern Robotics
Warwick concluded his Guardian letter by saying that he was 
eager to see what a future as a cyborg might hold. A number of 
daunting obstacles would first have to be addressed.
Cyborg 2.0: The Neural Implant Project
The radio implant that Warwick called “Cyborg 1.0” involved 
a simple operation with no real risks except perhaps infection. 
“Cyborg 2.0,” however, would be a much more radical procedure. 
It involved exposing the central nerve in Warwick’s arm and driv-
ing into it an array containing 100 individual electrodes, each a few 
millimeters in diameter.
If it worked, Warwick and other researchers would be able to 
amplify and monitor up to 20 separate neural signals at a time. 
Electrical impulses could also be fired into the implant to create 
nerve signals that might, for example, flex Warwick’s thumb.
The proposed procedure had never been done before, and because 
the implant penetrated the nerve, it could cause damage—possibly 
permanent damage. Warwick therefore had to go through an elabo-
rate procedure to obtain approval from a hospital ethics board, as 
well as deal with issues of legal liability. On top of that, the elec-
trode array the researchers wanted to use was still in development. 
Warwick decided that he could not tell the manufacturer, Bionic 
Tech, what he wanted the array for, lest the company refuse to sell 
him one.
Finally, on March 14, 2002, Warwick went to the Radcliffe 
Infirmary at Oxford. The surgeon, Peter Teddy, made an incision 
about two inches (5 cm) up from Warwick’s left wrist. He then 
probed for the median nerve, accidentally sending a sensation like 
a large electric shock racing up Warwick’s arm. After finding the 
nerve, the surgeon made another incision and threaded a plastic 
tube called a bodger between the two incisions. (This would link 
the neural implant with the place where the wires would emerge 
from Warwick’s arm to a connector pad that Warwick called the 
“gauntlet.”) After some difficulty, this was completed. The nerve 
implant array was then fired . . . but it dropped rather than going 
into the nerve. It turned out the compressed air hoses to the firing 

device had been connected wrong. Finally, the array was successfully 
implanted. Warwick’s arm was sewed up.
Cyborg Experiments
Warwick had to wait nearly two weeks until they would know 
whether the implant was properly connected to the nerve. When 
the researchers checked each channel for nerve signals, they found 
to their relief that 20 of the electrodes were picking up Warwick’s 
nerve signals. During the following two weeks, they painstakingly 
had Warwick perform various finger movements in order to deter-
mine which muscles were associated with particular nerve signals. 
This work was difficult because often one muscle turned out to 
involve several overlapping signals. Warwick now had at least the 
capability to become a sort of cyborg. But what could he actually 
do? Meanwhile, the media had picked up the story, both in Britain 
and the United States, though reporters were not sure what the story 
was all about.
The next logical step was to see whether particular nerve signals 
from Warwick could be interfaced with devices in the external 
world. Researchers created an interface unit that translated nerve 
signals to data signals that could be interpreted by computerized 
devices. Warwick was eventually able to control computer displays 
with simple finger movements. More significantly, he demonstrated 
that he could drive and steer an electric wheelchair with tiny move-
ments, a feat that could have very practical implications for severely 
paralyzed persons.
Another interesting demonstration involved Warwick controlling 
an articulated robotic hand, built by Peter Kyberd, using only hand 
movements. When Warwick made a fist, the signals traveled over 
the Internet to the hand, which also made a fist. This direct neural 
remote control opened many exciting possibilities. For example, 
someday a surgeon might be able to perform operations remotely 
by connecting his or her hand to a robotic hand. Perhaps even more 
usefully, nerve signals arriving at an amputee’s stump could be 
directly related to a prosthetic robotic arm or leg, which would truly 
respond and feel like the real thing!
CYBORG ODYSSEY   159

160   Modern Robotics
Warwick and his colleagues performed a number of other inter-
esting experiments during the two months or so the implant was in 
place. Nerve signals were used to control the way a “swarm” of little 
robots interacted with each other. And after considerable experi-
mentation, they were able to verify that the connection between 
Warwick’s nervous system and the world was two-way. That is, he 
could receive electronically generated nerve signals that would cause 
his muscles to react.
The Human Connection
There was a final experiment Warwick eagerly wanted to perform. 
Time was running out: The doctors were afraid that if the implant 
was left in too long it would begin to fuse with the body and be 
difficult to remove safely. Also, the electrodes were, for unknown 
reasons, gradually failing, and only a few remained active.
Irena, Warwick’s second wife, wanted very much to share in his 
exploration of the world of cyborgs. Originally, they thought that 
she, too, could receive a full implant. Husband and wife would then 
be able to send nerve impulses directly to each other. The bureau-
cratic hurdles proved too insurmountable, so they had to settle for 
Irena having two simple needle electrodes inserted into her median 
nerve.
Finally, Warwick and Irena’s nervous systems were connected. As 
he recounted in I,Cyborg:
I waited. It seemed to take an age. But then I felt it, a shot of current, 
a charge, running down the inside of my left index finger. A beauti-
ful, sweet, deliciously sexy charge. I felt like I had never felt before. I 
jumped with surprise more than anything else and shouted, “Yes!”
An Open Future
In 2000, Warwick gave a series of five Royal Institution lectures 
under the title “Rise of the Robots.” (The lecture series had begun 
in 1825 by electrical pioneer Michael Faraday.) Warwick’s work 

in organizing school robotics activities was also recognized with 
the Millennium Award, from the British Engineering and Physical 
Sciences Research Council. He has also received the Future of 
Health Technology Award from the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology.
This diagram shows how a neural implant and an Internet connection could be 
used to control a robot anywhere in the world. No need for a keyboard or mouse!
CYBORG ODYSSEY   161

162   Modern Robotics
SOCIAL IMPACT: “ENHANCED” VS. “NORMAL”
There is little controversy about cyborg technology that gives 
disabled people fuller capabilities. For example, in a decade or 
two, implanted electronic devices may be able to route nerve 
signals around a damaged portion of the spinal cord, enabling a 
person to walk again. Deaf and visually handicapped people are 
also likely to be helped considerably by the new digital neural 
interface technology.
Suppose, though, that after another few decades direct neural 
implants enable people to tap into computer networks directly. 
Whether an image is generated via the optic nerve or the information 
is transferred directly into the brain, the result is that the person has 
virtually instant access to everything on the World Wide Web—and 
by then, the Web will probably be millions of times larger than it is 
today. Such a person could also tap into cameras around the world, 
extending his or her senses wherever the network can reach. Instant, 
silent communication would also be available, either through sub-
vocalization or through direct transfer of mental images—electronic 
telepathy.
This is the world of Cyberpunk, a type of science fiction first 
popularized by William Gibson in his 1984 novel, Neuromancer. As 
he and other writers depicted it, though, human enhancement is at 
best a mixed blessing. The biggest hitch is that the technology may 
be expensive and available to relatively few people, just as personal 
computers in the 1980s were mainly found in middle- and upper-
class homes.
In a world where some people are enhanced and others have 
only their natural mental abilities and senses, class distinctions may 
widen radically. In recent years, social critics have warned that a 
digital divide is separating people who have access to the Internet 
and other technology (and the knowledge of how to use it) and 
those who do not—disproportionately the poor and minorities. 
Could enhanced and normal humans coexist without exploitation 
or social conflict? Would the problem eventually be solved by the 
technology becoming affordable by all? Perhaps, though as with 
ordinary computers, effective use requires not only access but also 
training, and education systems must also deal with inequalities 
based on socioeconomic background.

Today Warwick continues as professor of cybernetics at the 
University of Reading. In addition to supervising robotics research 
programs, he is director of a program that obtains funding for uni-
versity research in cooperation with technology companies.
Warwick’s greatest continuing impact, though, is in his lectures 
and exploration of the promises and perils of cyborg technology. As 
Warwick said near the conclusion of I, Cyborg:
The big question now faced by humanity is how we deal with the 
possibility of [being] superhumans? . . . Should we try to stop it, 
something which I feel, in practical terms, is not possible? Should 
we simply go for it, perhaps allowing commercial concerns to drive 
things forward, and profit through new needs and desires? Or should 
developments be policed or marshaled by governments through inter-
national collaborative agreements?
Computers can already beat the best human chess players. Will robots beat 
humans at soccer someday? Here robot players compete in the 2004 RoboCup 
tournament in Lisbon, Portugal. (Photo ©RoboCup Federation)
CYBORG ODYSSEY   163

164   Modern Robotics
The chances are good that these issues will increasingly enter into 
our social and political consciousness in the coming years.
Chronology
1954 
Kevin Warwick born February 9 in Coventry, England
1960s 
 Kevin’s father’s operation sparks an interest in neurology and 
the brain
1970s 
Warwick works as a telephone technician
1974 
 The TV series The Six Million Dollar Man popularizes the 
idea of bionic organisms for cyborgs
1976 
Warwick enrolls in the University at Aston
1979 
 Warwick obtains his bachelor’s degree in electrical and elec-
tronic engineering
1982 
Warwick receives his Ph.D. at Imperial College, London
1983–85 
 Warwick becomes a lecturer at the University of Newcastle 
and receives an Oxford fellowship
1988 
 Warwick becomes professor of cybernetics at the University of 
Reading
1990s 
 Warwick and other researchers work on assistive technologies 
for the disabled
1991 
 Warwick begins work on the “Seven Dwarfs” cooperative 
learning robots
1998 
 Warwick receives a radio transponder implant in August; it 
communicates with computers and controls building doors 
and lights
2002 
 A neural array is implanted in Warwick’s arm on March 
14; experiments subsequently demonstrate the ability to 
send and receive nerve signals and control computers and 
robots

Further Reading
Books
Warwick, Kevin. I, Cyborg. Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 
2002.
Autobiographical account with a focus on Warwick’s implant experi-
ments.
———. March of the Machines: The Breakthrough in Artificial 
Intelligence. Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1997.
Warwick surveys developments in artificial intelligence and robotics 
(including his own work at the University of Reading) and argues that 
a new age of intelligent machines will radically challenge many of our 
assumptions about intelligence.
Articles
Sanchez-Klein, Jana. “Cyberfuturist Plants Chip in Arm to Test 
Human-Computer Interaction.” CNN.com (from PC World.com), 
August 28, 1998. Available online. URL: http://www.cnn.com/
TECH/computing/9808/28/armchip.idg/index.html. Accessed on 
September 2, 2005.
Describes Warwick’s experiment in which he implanted a silicon chip 
transponder in his arm, allowing him to communicate with computers 
without the use of a keyboard or other input device.
Warwick, Kevin. “I Want to Be a Cyborg.” Comment letter to the 
Guardian, January 26, 2000. Available online. URL: http://www.
guardian.co.uk/Archive/Article/0,4273,3954989,00.html.
Warwick explains why he is willing to take the risks involved in 
extending human capabilities.
Web Site
Professor Kevin Warwick. URL: http://www.kevinwarwick.com. 
Accessed on September 20, 2005.
Warwick’s home page at the University of Reading, including discus-
sion of his human cyborg (implant) projects.
CYBORG ODYSSEY   165


1921 
 The play Rossum’s Universal Robots by Karel Capek adapts 
a Czech word meaning serf, or “forced laborer,” to describe 
machines that can perform complex tasks
1940s 
 World War II spurs developments in computers, communica-
tion, and control devices
1942 
 Science fiction writer Isaac Asimov coins the term robotics 
and devises his “Three Laws” governing robot behavior
1944 
 Norbert Wiener calls for interdisciplinary conferences and 
research linking computing, control engineering, and biologi-
cal sciences
1948 
 Norbert Wiener publishes Cybernetics, a comprehensive analysis 
of communication and control in machines and living things
1950 
 Grey Walter’s robotic “tortoises” demonstrate how simple 
interactions can lead to complex behavior
1956 
 Joseph Engelberger and George Devol found Unimation and 
begin development of the first industrial robot
1961 
 The first Unimate robot begins work at a General Motors 
automobile factory
1963 
 The computer-controlled Rancho Arm demonstrates the util-
ity of robots for helping handicapped persons
1970 
 SRI International’s Shakey is the first robot to navigate auton-
omously using artificial intelligence
1979 
 The Stanford Cart, further developed by Hans Moravec, uses 
cameras and a computer to thread its way through a room 
filled with chairs
167
e
CHRONOLOGY

168   Modern Robotics
1982 
 Marc Raibert creates the first robot that can hop and keep its 
balance
1984 
 Joseph Engelberger founds HelpMate Robotics to develop 
service robots
1986 
 Marc Raibert establishes the Leg Laboratory at MIT and 
demonstrates bipedal robot acrobats
Early 
Rodney Brooks develops Cog, a robot with humanlike ways 
1990s  
of “paying attention”
Cynthia Breazeal extends the principles behind Cog to create 
Kismet, a “sociable” robot modeled after a human infant
1997 
NASA’s six-wheeled Sojourner robot explores Mars
1998 
 Hans Moravec predicts that robots will achieve human intel-
ligence by 2040
Kevin Warwick uses a radio chip in his arm to communicate 
with and customize his computerized environment
2000 
 Honda unveils Asimo, an agile humanoid robot that can 
walk, run, and even dance
Colin Angle, Helen Greiner, and Rodney Brooks of iRobot 
market a robot doll called “My Real Baby”
2002 
iRobots Roomba robot vacuum cleaner is introduced
Kevin Warwick demonstrates two-way connection between 
the human nervous system and a robot
2004 
 U.S. Defense Department finances the development of robotic 
dogs to carry supplies for soldiers
2005 
 iRobot introduces new versions of “packbot” military robot
A robot-controlled Volkswagen Touareg SUV designed by 
Stanford University wins a 132-mile race through the Nevada 
desert

169
e
GLOSSARY
algorithm  a set of specified steps that enable a computer or robot 
to accomplish a particular task
analog  continuously variable (as in the motion of the human body) 
rather than moving in discrete steps, as in digital computation, 
stepper motor motion, and so on. See also DIGITAL
android  a robot that has generally human features (such as a mov-
able head and grasping arms) and that can see and respond to the 
environment in humanlike ways. See also CYBORG
anthropomorphism  the tendency of people to treat animals or 
robots as though they were persons. Humanlike robots often 
evoke such responses
articulated geometry  the development of robotic arms or legs 
that involve segments connected by joints, allowing versatility of 
motion
artificial intelligence (AI)  the attempt to get computers or 
robots to behave in ways that resemble human intelligence. 
Examples include vision and image recognition, learning, 
problem-solving techniques, and the ability to understand 
natural language
artificial life (AL)  the effort to simulate living organisms or ecolo-
gies using computer software or robots. Features can include 
behaviors (feeding, mating, and so on) as well as genetic inheri-
tance and evolution
Asimo (Advanced Step in Mobility)  a humanoid demonstration 
robot manufactured by Honda Corporation in Japan
Asimov’s laws  conceived by science fiction writer Isaac Asimov, 
the three laws were to be built into the structure of a robot’s 
brain. They would require that robots prevent harm to humans, 
obey humans, and protect themselves—in that order

170   Modern Robotics
automated guided vehicle  a robot cart or truck that operates by 
itself but follows rails or a guide wire and has only limited navi-
gational capabilities
automaton  a mechanism that can automatically perform a series 
of actions under the control of cams, gears, and other devices. 
Unlike a true robot, an automaton does not change its behavior 
in response to the environment
autonomous robot  a robot that contains its own computer system, 
is mobile, and carries out its functions without direct human 
supervision
behavior  in robots, the determination of actions based upon sen-
sor data from the environment or internal states maintained in 
the robot’s memory. Simple behaviors are equivalent to reflexes 
in living things, while complex behaviors can emerge from the 
interaction of many programs
bipedal robot  a robot that walks on two legs like a human
bot  popular colloquial term for “robot”
Cog  robot built by Rodney Brooks at MIT in the early 1990s. 
Consisting only of a torso and head, the robot interacts mainly 
through eye movement, facial expressions, and vocalizations
cognitive science  the study of information processing or thought 
in humans, machines, or animals. It is an interdisciplinary field 
that draws upon computer science, neurology, psychology, and 
other fields
collision avoidance  systems designed to prevent a robot from 
bumping into obstacles such as furniture, rocks, or people. When 
a visual or sonar sensor detects a nearby object, robots of vary-
ing degrees of sophistication may go into reverse, turn, or plot a 
precise course around the object
cybernetics  term coined by mathematician Norbert Wiener for the 
science of machine control and regulation; from a Greek word 
meaning “steersman” or “governor”
cyborg  a “cybernetic organism” consisting of both artificial and 
biological components. In a sense, a person with a computer-
controlled artificial arm would be a sort of cyborg. See also 
ANDROID
degrees of freedom  the number of different ways in which some-
thing (such as a robot arm) can move. Robot arms normally have 

at least three degrees of freedom; human arms have seven (because 
of the separate pivots at the shoulder and elbow)
digital  coming in discrete “chunks” that can be represented by 
numbers, as in a modern computer. See also ANALOG
digitization  the process of turning incoming information into 
“chunks” having specific numerical values, as with pixels in a 
digital photograph.
distributed system  an architecture where processing is carried out 
by many separate cooperating units rather than being controlled 
centrally
dynamic walking  walking in which the center of balance is adjust-
ed by exerting opposing forces—in a sense, controlled falling. This 
is how people walk; the first walking robots maintained a static 
balance and moved only one or two legs at a time
edge detection  the ability of a robot or computer vision system 
to determine the boundaries of objects and thus their shape and 
nature. For example, a robot truck would need to be able to locate 
a road’s edges and lane markings
effector  something in a robot that manipulates the environment, 
such as by closing a hand. Roughly analogous to a muscle. A 
manipulator (hand) on the end of a robot arm is called an end 
effector
embodied robot  Rodney Brooks’s term for a robot that is capable 
of perceiving and reacting to the world through its body, as does 
an animal
exoskeleton  a powered framework of joints, segments, and effec-
tors that can be controlled by the user using normal muscle 
movements (and, in the latest developments, nerve impulses). The 
exoskeleton can thus serve as an artificial limb for a disabled per-
son or for working with hazardous materials. An exoskeleton can 
also be a powered framework that can be attached to the body 
and used to increase strength, add to carrying capacity, or provide 
protection
extropianism  (also called transhumanism) a philosophical move-
ment that advocates the transformation of humanity through 
advanced technologies such as robotics, genetics, and nanotech-
nology. Its goal is to transcend existing physical limitations, 
explore human potential, and perhaps achieve immortality
GLOSSARY   171

172   Modern Robotics
feedback  the adjustment of a mechanism (such as a thermostat) in 
response to changes in its environment. See also CYBERNETICS
fovea  a thickening of nerves near the center of the eye, enabling 
much higher image resolution than is available at the periphery
futurist  a researcher or writer who tries to identify possible future 
developments or trends. For example, some futurists believe that 
robots with human-level intelligence may arrive by the middle of 
the 21st century
gait  the way in which the legs of an animal or robot move during 
locomotion
hobby robot  (also called educational robot) a robot, usually part 
of a kit, designed for demonstrating principles of robotics or 
experimentation by students or hobbyists. An example is the 
popular Lego Mindstorms
industrial robot  a robot used in a factory to move materials or 
perform repetitive tasks such as assembly or painting. The robot 
moves on a fixed track and has only limited ability to adapt to 
changes in its environment
insect robot  a legged robot that mimics the relatively simple, dis-
tributed nervous system of an insect. See also ROBOT SWARM
Kismet  a robot created by Cynthia Breazeal to emulate the behav-
iors, learning processes, and emotions of an infant
lander  a space probe that can land on the surface of a planet but 
does not have independent movement capability. See also ROVER
mapping  in robotics, the process by which a robot combines and 
analyzes sensor data in order to build a representation of the 
world, including the shapes and locations of objects
MIP  a million instructions per second; a basic measure of comput-
er processing power. By the late 1990s computers were reaching 
1,000 MIPS, or a billion instructions per second
mobile robot  a robot capable of moving freely. It is usually 
equipped with systems for navigating around the environment
Moore’s Law  the observation that computer power roughly dou-
bles every 18 months to two years. This has held true since the 
1940s and has led some futurists to predict robots with human-
like intelligence will arrive around 2040
nanotechnology  building on a molecular or atomic scale. Such 
machines could include tiny self-replicating robots or vastly more 
powerful components for conventional robots and computers

navigation system  the facility in a mobile robot responsible for 
determining destinations and plotting safe paths to them
neural implant  an electronic device (such as a small chip with 
electrodes) that is directly connected to the nervous system. It can 
detect and relay nerve signals as well as introduce outside signals 
into the nervous system
neural network  a large array of processing nodes that can be 
“trained” to perform a task by reinforcing those that are success-
ful. Applications include facial recognition and image processing
occupancy grid  a navigation method where surrounding space is 
divided into numerous three-dimensional cells and sensor data are 
analyzed to determine a probability that a given cell is occupied by 
something. Paths can then be plotted to avoid possible obstructions
odometery  a relatively primitive form of navigation where a robot’s 
position is updated by recording direction and displacement (dis-
tance traveled)
prosthesis  an artificial limb intended to replace a lost leg or arm 
and to replicate as much of its natural function as possible. 
Advanced prostheses use much of the same technology as robot 
arms, along with sophisticated muscular or possibly neural con-
nections to the body
RFID  (radio frequency identification) an embetted chip that broad-
casts identifying information in response to a radio signal
robot  a machine that is capable of carrying out complex tasks and 
responding to its environment. From a Czech word meaning serf, 
or “forced laborer”
robotics  the discipline concerned with the design and operation 
of robots. It is actually an interdisciplinary pursuit drawing from 
computer science, electronic and mechanical engineering, and 
even biology
robot swarm  a group of relatively small and simple robots that can 
cooperate to carry out tasks such as finding mines
rover  a mobile robot that can explore hard-to-reach areas such as 
the surface of other planets. The robot receives remote commands 
but has some autonomous functions
saccade  a rapid movement of the eyes to lock onto an object of 
interest
sensor  anything that gathers data from the environment, such as a 
camera or a sonar. In biology, sensors are often called receptors
GLOSSARY   173

174   Modern Robotics
service robot  a mobile robot designed for nonindustrial work-
places for tasks such as delivering supplies
Shakey  an early mobile robot at Stanford University in the early 
1960s. It was named for its rather precarious camera attach-
ments
situated robot  Rodney Brooks’s term for a robot that responds 
directly to sensory input in a way similar to reflexes in animals
sociable robot  term coined by researcher Cynthia Breazeal for a 
robot that can appropriately understand and react to vocal into-
nation, facial expressions, body language, and other cues
Sojourner  the first mobile Mars rover, which was the fruit of many 
years of mobile robotics research. Named for the American aboli-
tionist Sojourner Truth, the rover landed on Mars in July 1997
space probe  a robotic, pilotless spacecraft that is controlled by 
instructions from controllers on Earth
Stanford Cart  a wheeled platform for mobile robot experiments 
used at the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory mainly in 
the 1970s
subsumption architecture  a form of robot design in which many 
separate components interact to create complex behaviors. More 
complex behaviors such as exploration and mapping are layered 
on top of simpler behaviors such as locomotion and collision 
avoidance
teleology  consideration of organisms or devices in terms of their 
ultimate purpose or goal. See also CYBERNETICS
vision system  the components such as cameras, image processors, 
and software that a robot uses to detect and characterize objects 
in its environment
zero momentum point (ZMP)  the point on a walking robot where 
the angular momentum (resulting from gravity and other accel-
erations acting on the robot) is zero. A dynamic walking robot 
can remain stable as long as the ZMP is within the area of sup-
port of the feet

175
e
Books
Aylett, Ruth. Robots: Bringing Intelligent Machines to Life? Hauppage, 
N.Y.: Barron’s Educational, 2002.
A well-illustrated guide to the functional problems and innovations in modern 
robotics.
Foerst, Anne. God in the Machine: What Robots Teach Us about Humanity 
and God. New York: Dutton, 2004.
The author, a theologian and artificial intelligence researcher, uses a new 
generation of robots (such as Cog and Kismet) to ask fundamental questions 
about the meaning and purpose of humanity.
Freedman, David H. Brainmakers: How Scientists Are Moving beyond 
Computers to Create a Rival to the Human Brain. New York: 
Touchstone, 1994.
Describes a number of interesting approaches to designing intelligent behavior 
in robots.
Garreau, Joel. Radical Evolution: The Promise and Peril of Enhancing 
Our Minds, Our Bodies—and What It Means to Be Human. New York: 
Doubleday, 2004.
The author includes robotics in a set of technologies (also including genetic 
engineering, information processing, and nanotechnology) that offer the 
possibility to transform human nature.
Gibilisco, Stan, ed. The McGraw-Hill Illustrated Encyclopedia of Robotics 
& Artificial Intelligence. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994.
Includes A-to-Z entries for concepts, technologies, and brief biographies.
Ichbiah, Daniel. Robots: From Science Fiction to Technological Revolution. 
New York: Henry Abrams, 2005.
A copiously illustrated “visual survey” of robots in practical applications and 
in popular culture.
Jones, David. Mighty Robots: Mechanical Marvels That Fascinate and 
Frighten. Toronto: Annick Press, 2005.
FURTHER RESOURCES

176   Modern Robotics
A fascinating overview of the development of robotics and the many uses of 
robots today, including exploration, factory work, medicine, toys, and enter-
tainment. For young adult readers.
Menzel, Peter, and Faith D’Aluisio. Robo Sapiens: Evolution of a New 
Species. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2000.
A lavishly illustrated gallery of innovative robots and interviews with their 
creators.
Moravec, Hans. Robot: Mere Machine to Transcendent Mind. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1999.
A prominent robotics researcher describes the developments in modern robot-
ics that point to a future in which robots overtake humans in intelligence.
Thro, Ellen. Robotics: Intelligent Machines for the New Century. New 
Edition. New York: Facts On File, 2003.
Describes the history and concepts behind robotics, including anatomy, func-
tions, intelligence, and applications.
Warwick, Kevin. March of the Machines: The Breakthrough in Artificial 
Intelligence. Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1997.
Warwick suggests that robotics and artificial intelligence have already accom-
plished far more than most people realize. More breakthroughs are coming, 
and people need to find creative ways to respond.
Wood, Gaby. Edison’s Eve: A Magical History of the Quest for Mechanical 
Life. New York: Knopf, 2002.
Describes the development of clever, intricate automatons through the centu-
ries, as well as the literature and folklore that celebrated them.
Internet Resources
A Brief History of Robotics. MSNBC. Available online. URL: http://www.
msnbc.com/modules/robot_history. Accessed on August 1, 2005.
A slide-show view of the development of robots, with emphasis on robots in 
popular culture and in a variety of applications.
Lego Mindstorms. Available online. URL: http://mindstorms.lego.com/
eng/default.asp?domainredir=www.legomindstorms.com. Accessed on 
September 25, 2005.
Presents products and activities based on the popular LEGO-based robotics 
kits.
Mars Exploration Rover Mission. Available online. URL: http://marsrovers.
jpl.nasa.gov/gallery/images.html. Accessed on August 5, 2005.
This Jet Propulsion Laboratory site contains news, activities, archives, and 
multimedia files relating to NASA’s Mars rovers.

RoboCup. Available online. URL: http://www.robocup.org. Accessed on 
September 15, 2005.
Site of a project to promote robotics research using soccer as a test bed for 
many mobile robot skills. Conducts annual contests and aims to build a world 
championship soccer team of autonomous robots by 2050.
“Robot.” Biography.ms. Available online. URL: http://robot.biography.ms. 
Accessed on September 26, 2005.
Extensive overview of the concepts and history of robotics, with links to 
related articles and sites.
Robotic Life. MIT Media Lab. Available online. URL: http://robotic.media.
mit.edu. Accessed on August 5, 2005.
Site of a project to develop cooperative robots that communicate in a variety 
of ways with one another and with humans.
Robotics in Japan. URL: http://transit-port.net/Lists/Robotics.Org.in.Japan.
html. Accessed on September 15, 2005.
Provides links to robotics organizations and projects in Japan; also has links 
to similar lists for Germany and Australia.
Robotics Links. URL: http://www.rdrop.com/~cary/html/robot_links.html. 
Accessed on September 15, 2005.
Personal site of David Cary, with many links to robots by type and function, 
descriptions of robot components, news articles, and specific robots, organiza-
tions, and projects.
Robots Alive! Guide & Resources. Available online. URL: http://www.pbs.
org/safarchive/4_class/45_pguides/pguide_705/4575_idx.html. Accessed 
on August 5, 2005.
Teachers’ guide for a Scientific American Frontiers television show about 
robotics. Includes some very interesting video downloads showing robots 
driving, walking, and interacting with people.
Periodicals
IEEE Transactions on Robotics
Published by the Institute for Electrical and Electronics Engineers
Online edition at URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/sesrvlet/opac?punumber-8860
The number one cited academic journal in robotics
Personal Robotics News
(Online newsletter)
URL: http://www3.sympatico.ca/donroy/aboutprn.html
Primarily for home robot builders and enthusiasts
FURTHER RESOURCES   177

178   Modern Robotics
Robotics Trends
(Online newsletter)
URL: http://www.roboticstrends.com/PersonalRobotics+main.html
Has news and features on personal robots, service robots, security and 
defense robots, and entertainment robots
Servo Magazine
Published by T&L Publications Inc.
URL: http://www.servomagazine.com
P.O. Box 15277
North Hollywood, CA 91615-5277
Telephone: (877) 525-2539
Magazine for amateur robotics enthusiasts; includes projects and feature 
articles about cutting-edge robotics
Societies and Organizations
American Society for Cybernetics (http://www.asc-cybernetics.org) 2115 
G Street NW, Suite 403, Washington, DC 20052 Telephone: (202) 994-
1681.
Association for Computing Machinery (www.acm.org) One Astor Plaza, 
1515 Broadway, 17th Floor, New York, NY 10036-5701 Telephone: 
(212) 869-7440
Carnegie-Mellon Robotics Institute. (http://www.ri.cmu.edu/) 5000 Forbes 
Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890 Telephone: (412) 268-3818
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory at the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology. (www.csail.mit.edu) The Stata Center, Building 
32, 32 Vassar Street, Cambridge, MA 02139 Telephone: (617) 253-
5851
Institute for Electrical and Electronic Engineering Robotics and Automation 
Society. (http://www.ncsu.edu/IEEE-RAS/) 445 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, 
NJ 08855 Telephone: (800) 678-IEEE
MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Technology) Media Lab (www.media.mit.
edu) Building E15, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139-
4307 Telephone: (617) 253-5960
Robotics Industry Association (www.roboticsonline.com) 900 Victors Way, 
Suite 140, P.O. Box 3724, Ann Arbor, MI 48106 Telephone: (734) 994-
6088

Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (http://ai.stanford.edu/) Gates 
Building 1A, 353 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305-9010 Telephone: 
(650) 723-9689
FURTHER RESOURCES   179


181
eINDEX
Note: Italic page numbers 
indicate illustrations.
A
Afghanistan  45
Age of Reason  xv–xvi
agoraphobia  149
AI. See artificial intelligence
A.I.: Artificial Intelligence 
(film)  126
Aibo (robot)  55, 108
Aiken, Howard  9
AL. See artificial life
Allen (robot)  88–91
Alzheimer’s therapy  128
Amazon.com  144
American Association for 
Artificial Intelligence  100
American Association 
for the Advancement of 
Science  100
amplifier  8
analog computer  6
Angle, Colin  xix, 50, 
51, 51, 55–57, 61, 92, 
97. See also iRobot 
Corporation
animation, motion simula-
tion in  44–45
antlike robots  141
Apollo 13 mission  81
Applica  60
arm  15–17, 24, 24–26, 
26, 92, 154–155
artificial intelligence (AI)  
57, 86–87, 90, 91, 98–
99, 112, 132
Artificial Intelligence 
Laboratory (MIT)  52, 
85
artificial life (AL)  91, 
98–99
Asada, Minoru  109
Asimo (Advanced Step 
in Innovative Mobility) 
(robot)  xix, 94, 103–
115, 105, 106, 107
Asimov, Isaac  xvi, 24, 
32, 52
assembly lines, robots in  
25–27
assistive devices  151–
152, 162
Aston University  150
ATM machines  28–29
Attila (robot)  117
augmented finite state 
machines  92
automated manufacturing 
systems, productivity of  
151
automatic controls. See 
servomechanisms
automatons  xv–xvi
automobile industry, 
robots used in  xviii, 
22, 25–27, 26
autonomous continuous 
movement, in Asimo  
110
autonomous vehicles. 
See self-driving vehicles
B
baby doll, robot-based  
53–55, 98
Baby IT (robot baby doll)  
53, 54
babysitter, robot as  
128
balance  38, 39–40, 
108–109
ballistics  6–8
banking, robots used in  
28–29
Bateson, Gregory  12
bathing, epileptic seizures 
during  153
batteries, in Asimo  110
Battlebots  155
behavior, modeling  99. See 
also layered behaviors
behavior-based robotics, 
practical applications of  
97–98
BigDog (robot)  44–46
biofeedback  16–17
biological communica-
tions processes, feedback 
in  12
biology  xx, 1, 6, 98, 
99, 109. See also living 
things
bionic organisms. See 
cyborgs
bipedal robots  40
bipolar disorder  3
BIT (robot baby doll)  53
body language, in Kismet  
119
bombers, tracking and 
aiming by  6–8
Bose, Amar  16
Boston arm  15–17
Boston Dynamics  42
Bradbury, Ray  71
brain, human  10, 88
Breazeal, Cynthia  xix, 97, 
116–130, 117
British Telecom  150

182   Modern Robotics
Brooks, Rodney  85–102, 
86, 96
Angle and  51
Breazeal and  117
on future of people and 
robots  xx
Greiner and  52
insect robots of  xix, 
92–93
in iRobot Corporation  
50
Moravec and  134, 139
Roomba developed 
by  xix
Brownian motion  5
Brownlee, Donald  70
Burning Man Festival  
124
Bush, Vannevar  6
C
Cambrian era  109
camera, in computer vision  
87
camera-solver routine, in 
Stanford Cart  133
Capek, Karel, Rossum’s 
Universal Robots  xvi
California, University of 
at Santa Barbara (UCSB)  
117
Carnegie Mellon University  
37, 135–136, 144
Cassini-Huygens mission  
68, 80
C-Flex (robot)  27
chess programs  99
child  95, 119
Clarke, Arthur C.  67, 
71
class distinctions, cyborg 
enhancement and  162
CMU Rover (robot)  135
Cog (robot)  xix, 96, 
96–97, 118–119
cognition, and emotion  
122, 125
cognitive enrichment, by 
robots  128
Columbia University  
22–23
communications and con-
trol  8, 10, 12. See also 
cybernetics
communications signal 
processors, computers as 
control for  8
communications theory, 
applied to biology  6
companionship, Kismet’s 
need for  125
computer  6, 8, 50, 87, 
131, 154–155, 157–160. 
See also Moore’s Law
computer operating sys-
tems, as distributed sys-
tems  99
computer programs, in 
Genghis  92–93
computer science, cyber-
netics’ influence on  16
computer vision  87–88
Consolidated Controls  23
control-and-switching sys-
tems  1
control systems  43, 53, 
58, 77, 105–106, 132, 
133
Conway, Flo  7
Conway, Jim  91
Cooper-Hewitt National 
Design Museum  124
coordination, of human 
body  3–4
Cornell University  4, 
111–113
correlator routine, in 
Stanford Cart  133
cost, in space probe design  
69
Crichton, Michael  150
criminals, RFID implants 
in  156
cruise controls  137
cyberfloral installation  
124
cybernetics  xvii, 1–21, 
151
Cybernetics (Wiener)  
13–14
“Cybernetics of 
Cybernetics” (Mead)  12
Cyberpunk  162
Cyborg 2.0  158–159
cyborgs  xx, 148–165, 163
D
Danbury Hospital 
(Connecticut)  29
dancing, by Asimo  110
DARPA (Defense 
Advanced Research 
Projects Agency)  136, 
143
Deep Blue  99
“Deep Question, The” 
(Brooks)  88, 98
Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency 
(DARPA)  136, 143
Delft University of 
Technology  111–113
Denning Mobile Robotics  
135
Designing Sociable Robots 
(Breazeal)  126
Devol, George  xviii, 23, 
25
digital computing design, 
in cybernetics  1
Di-Guy  42
dinosaur robot  55
disabled persons. See assis-
tive devices
distributed systems  99–
100
Doctor Who and the 
Daleks (film)  150
Doi, Toshinobu  109
Drake, Frank  70
duck, mechanical  xvi
E
ears, in Cog  96
effector, in feedback  8
elderly, robots in care of  
30–31, 61, 128
electronic circuits  6
electronics, cybernetics’ 
influence on  16
Elfes, Alberto  135
Elma (robot)  154
embodied robots  93

INDEX   183
emotion  32, 53, 109, 
121–122, 125
emotional intelligence  
122, 127
emotional states  120–123, 
124–125
energy, in walking  111–
113
Engelberger, Joseph  xviii, 
xix, 22–35, 23
engineers, scientists and  
69
entrepreneur, inventor 
as  54
entropy  143
environment  14–15, 87
epileptic seizures, while 
bathing  153
ethics, neural implants and  
158
evasive maneuvers, by 
bombers  6–8
evolution  43, 88, 157
exoskeletons, robotic  46
Ex-Prodigy (Weiner)  3
extropianism  143
extropy  143
eyes  3, 94–95, 95, 96, 
118, 119. See also vision
F
face recognition  109
facial expressions  123, 
123–124, 126
falling  109
family tree, of robots  xvii
Fast, Cheap, and Out of 
Control (film)  100
“Fast, Cheap, and Out 
of Control: A Robot 
Invasion of the Solar 
System” (Brooks)  93
fatigue drive, in Kismet  
125
feedback
in biological communi-
cation processes  12
development of con-
cept  8
in information storage  
12–13
in Kismet’s emotional 
states  124–125
learning through  154
movement governed by  
14–15
in nervous system  10
prostheses controlled by  
15–17
in social interactions  
12
in steam engine  9
Fermi paradox  70
Flesh and Machines 
(Brooks)  90–91, 139
floor reaction control, in 
walking robot  105
Foerst, Anne  112
foot-planting location con-
trol, in walking robots  
106
forward motion  41, 41–42
fuel-efficiency, of self-driv-
ing vehicles  137
G
Galileo mission  80
Game of Life  91
garden, robotic  124
General Motors, Unimate 
at  xviii, 22, 25–26, 26
genetic programming  91
Genghis (robot)  51, 92–93
Gibson, William  162
globalism, labor in  17
God, as creator  112
God in the Machine 
(Foerst)  112
Goldin, Daniel  75
golems  xv, 112
gravitational fields, used in 
space missions  71
gravity, in walking  111–
113
Greiner, Helen  xix, 50, 
52, 52, 61, 97. See also 
iRobot Corporation
H
hackers  134
HAL 9000 (fictional com-
puter)  86, 93
Hannibal (robot)  117
Hara, Yoshiko  109
Hardy, G. H., Wiener 
and  5
harmonic analysis  5
Harvard University  4–5
Hasbro, iRobot and  
53–54
Heinlein, Robert  46
helper robots  111
HelpMate Robotics, Inc.  
29
HelpMate robots  xix, 
29, 30
Hephaestus  xv
Herbert (robot)  92
hexapod  38
Hilbert, David  5
Hirose, Masato  xix, 103–
115, 104. See also Asimo
Hodgins, Jessica  45
Holland, Steve  22
Honda  xix, 103–115
horse, galloping  44
hospitals, robots used in  
29, 30
household robots  xix, 
30–31, 32, 50–65, 139
hubris  112
human beings. See also 
living things
as animation models  44
brain of  10, 88
Cog and, reaction to  
96–97
communication learned 
by  119
as creators  112
cyborg enhancement of  
157, 162
driving, v. automated 
driving  137
dynamic balance of  38
emotional states of  121
future as cyborgs  157
future with robots  xx, 
137–140, 144
intelligence in, rise of  
94, 98
interaction with robots  
96–97, 118, 126

184   Modern Robotics
human beings (continued)
minds of, downloaded  
142, 143
as model for robots  
31–32
physical coordination 
of  3–4
robotic extensions for  
46
robots as threat to  xvi, 
28
sense data assimilation 
in  88
in space exploration  
80–81
vision of  140
human labor  27, 28
humanoid robots  93–95, 
105, 112. See also Asimo
I
I, Cyborg (Warwick)  149, 
163
I, Robot (Asimov)  52
I Am a Mathematician 
(Wiener)  4
image processing  133–
134, 135. See also vision
immortality, virtual  142
Imperial College  150
implants  154–160
industrial automation  16, 
25
industrial robots  22–35, 
33. See also Unimate
infantry, carrying capacity 
of  44–46
information storage, feed-
back in  12–13
information theory, cyber-
netics’ influence on  16
insect robots  xix, 92–93
Institute for Advanced 
Study (Princeton), 
Teleological Society at  12
intelligence  94, 98, 
136–140
intelligent civilizations 
(extraterrestrial)  70
Intelligent Home System  
152
interest operator, in 
Stanford Cart  133
International Space Station  
80
inventor, as entrepreneur  
54
iRobot Corporation  50–
65, 97–98
IT (robot)  53
i-Walk  108–109
J
Japan, industrial robots 
used in  xviii
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
(MIT)  xix, 37, 51, 52, 
68, 71–72
Jetsons (television)  50
Jim’ll Fix It (television)  
152
joints, in QRIO  108
Joseph F. Engelberger 
Awards  31
Josiah Macy Jr. Foundation 
conferences  12
Jupiter, missions to  80
K
kangaroo robots  39, 
40–41
Kasparov, Gary  99
Kato, Hirokazu  94
Kawato, Mitsuo  xx
Kismet (robot)  xix, 97, 
119–125, 122, 123
knight, mechanical  xv
Kurzweil, Ray  142
Kyberd, Peter  159
L
Lab Mate (robot)  23
labor  27, 29
language  109, 125–126
launch dates  72, 74
law enforcement, robots 
used by  60, 61, 98
layered behaviors  89
in Allen  89–90
in Attila  117–118
Brooks’s work with  89, 
89–90
in Genghis  92–93
in Hannibal  117–118
in Kismet  120, 123, 
123–124
in Sojourner  93
in Walter  153
learning  53, 125, 126
“Legged Robots” (Raibert)  
43
Leg Laboratory (MIT)  
xviii, 37–38
legs. See walking
Leonardo (robot)  126
Leonardo da Vinci  xv
liability, neural implants 
and  158
libraries, robots used by  
27, 29
light sources, movement 
governed by  14–15
LISP (List Processor)  132
living things. See also 
human beings
behaviors of, model-
ing  99
communications and 
control in  10, 12
creation of  99
distributed systems in  
99–100
emotional states of  121
v. robots  98
robots modeled on  43
sense data assimilation 
in  88
love, robot need for  126
Lowell, Percival  71
Lud, Ned  28
Luddites  28
M
MacHack  99
magnetic recorder, motion 
controlled by  25
Managing Creativity 
(Shirley)  82
Managing Martians 
(Shirley)  66–67, 82
Mariner 9 mission  71–72
Mariner 10 mission  68, 
74–75

INDEX   185
Mars  xix, 71–72, 73, 75
Mars Observer  75
Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology (MIT)  
5–6, 7, 37–38, 51, 87, 
111–113, 117
mathematics  1, 4–5, 6, 10
McCarthy, John  86–87, 
90
McCulloch, Warren  10, 12
McDonald’s, robots used 
by  27
McDonnell Aircraft  68
McGhee, Robert  38
Mead, Margaret  12
Mercury  74
Metropolis (film)  xvi
military  42, 44–46, 60, 
98, 139
Mind Children: The Future 
of Robot and Human 
Intelligence (Moravec)  
131, 136
Minsky, Marvin  90
MIT. See Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology
Mobile Robotics 
Laboratory (Carnegie 
Mellon)  144
Mobile Robotics 
Laboratory (MIT)  51
mobile robots  xviii–xix, 
133–136, 152. See also 
walking robots
modeling, of living behav-
iors  99
momentum, in walking  
111–113
Moore, Gordon  140
Moore’s Law  29, 99, 
137–140, 138
Moravec, Hans  xviii, xx, 
87, 91, 131, 131–147
More, Grinnell  87, 92
Morris, Errol  100
Mosher, Robert  40
motion  41, 41–42, 44–45
motivational drives, in 
Kismet  125
movement  14–15, 25, 
36–37
mule robots  44–46
muscular action, eye in  3
museum guide, Asimo as  
110
Muybridge, Eadweard  44
My Real Baby  53–55, 98
mythology, robots in  xv
N
nanotechnology  143
National Automated 
Highway System 
Research Program  137
natural language  109, 
125–126
natural selection, in genetic 
programming  91
navigation systems  xviii, 
58, 59, 77, 133, 135, 
142–144
Navlab (robot)  135–136
Navlab 2 (robot)  136
Navlab 5 (robot)  136
negative feedback  8
nerve signals, prostheses 
controlled by  16–17
nervous system  6, 10, 
157–160
networks, as distributed 
systems  99
Neumann, John von  9
neural implants  158–160, 
161, 162
neural networks  10, 11, 
90–91, 151
neurology  16, 149
Neuromancer (Gibson)  
162
Newcastle, University of  
150
New York Stock Exchange, 
Asimo at  110
nightclubs, RFID implants 
for  156
Norman (robot)  86
nuclear power, servomech-
anisms used in  23
O
O’Connell, Sanjida, on 
Cog  97
Oklahoma, University 
of  67
Opportunity rover  80–81, 
117
Oreo cookies, manufacture 
of  27
ostrich, walking mecha-
nism of  104
outer space, environment 
of  68–69
Oxford University  150
P
P1 (robot)  106
P2 (robot)  94, 106–107, 
112
P3 (robot)  94, 107
PackBot (robot)  60
PackBot Explorer (robot)  
60
pendulum, balancing  
39–40
personal computers. See 
computer
philosophy of mathemat-
ics  5
philosophy, robots and  xx
Pinocchio  126
pitch motion  41
Pittau, Rev. Joseph  112
Pitts, Walter  10
planetary rovers  xix, 51, 
66–84, 76, 79, 93, 117
pogo stick robot  40
positive feedback  8
postural motion  41, 
41–42
posture control, in Asimo  
109
Princeton University, 
Teleological Society at  
12
Principia Mathematica 
(Russell and Whitehead)  
5
privacy, cyborg connec-
tions and  156
probabilities of intelligent 
civilizations  70
processing  139, 140–142
productivity  xviii, 151

186   Modern Robotics
project management, by 
Shirley  68, 72–75
Project Oxygen  98
prostheses  15–17, 104, 
157, 159
Proving Ground, Wiener 
at  5
psychology  16, 127
PUMA (robot)  26
Q
QRIO (Quest for cuRIOs-
ity) (robot)  108–109
quadrapedal robots  40, 
41
R
R2D2 (character)  52
radio frequency identifica-
tion (RFID)  156
Raibert, Marc  xviii, 36–
49, 37, 39
Reading, University of  
150–151
Rare Earth (Brownlee and 
Ward)  70
receptionist, Asimo as  110
redundancy, in space probe 
design  69
“Relationship between 
Matter and Life” 
(Brooks)  98
reliability  57, 69
religion, robots and  112
remote control, neural  
159
research robots, vs. toy 
robots  54
RHex (robot)  46
Ride, Sally  117
RiSE (robot)  46
“Rise of the Robots” 
(Warwick)  160
risk management, people 
in  72–75
Robinson, Kim Stanley  71
RoboCup  163
robot(s)
v. animals  98
as animation models  
44–45
capabilities of, v. 
humans  137–140
cooperation among  
139, 141
cost to build  55–57
as creation  112
embodied  93
emotional expression 
by  32
emotions experienced 
by  121–122
for entertainment  108
evolution of  xvii
exponential growth in  
131–132
“family tree” of  xvii
future of humans with  
xx, 137–140, 144
human as model for  
31–32
human interaction with  
96–97, 118, 126
humanity threatened 
by  xvi
humanoid status for  
126
insect-inspired  92–93
intelligence potential of  
136–140
living things as models 
for  43
love needed by  126
mass production of  
58–59
in mythology  xv
navigation systems for  
xviii
religion and  112
in science fiction  xvi
self-reproducing  70
situated  93
as social beings  xix
in space exploration  
80–81
term coined  xvi
toys  26–27
universal  140–142
robot arm  24, 24–26, 
26, 92
robotic garden  124
robotic laws (Asimov)  xvi
robotics  xx, 16, 32, 127
robotics industry, current 
state of  32, 33
Robotics in Practice 
(Engelberger)  28
Robotics in Service 
(Engelberger)  28
Robot: Mere Machine 
to Transcendent Mind 
(Moravec)  136
“Robots, After All” 
(Moravec)  137
Robot Wars  155
roll motion  41
Roomba (robot)  xix, 
55–57, 58, 58–60, 59, 
61, 98, 139
Roomba Discovery (robot)  
59–60
Rosenbleuth, Arturo  6, 10
“Rosie” (character)  50
Rossum’s Universal Robots 
(Capek)  xvi
running, by Asimo  109
Russell, Bertrand  5
S
SAIL (Stanford Artificial 
Intelligence Laboratory)  
87, 91, 134
Sands of Mars, The 
(Clarke)  67
Saturn, missions to  80
Schiaparelli, Giovanni  71
science fiction  xvi, 71
scientists, engineers and  
69
Scooba (robot)  59
Scott, David  93
SDR (Sony’s Dream 
Robot)  109
SEEGRID Corporation  
142–144
self-checkout machines  29
self-driving vehicles  135–
136, 137
self-navigating robots  
142–144
self-reproducing robots  70
sense data, assimilation 
of  88

INDEX   187
sensors  8, 104, 110, 135
service robots  28–29
servomechanisms, in World 
War II  23
SETI (Search for 
Extraterrestrial 
Intelligence)  70
Seven Dwarfs (robots)  
154, 155
shadows, navigation and  
134
Shakey (robot)  xviii, 56, 
87–88
shaking hands  110
Sharper Image  60
Shigami, Satoshi  109
Shirley, Donna  xix, 
66–84, 67
Siegelman, Jim  7
simulations, of walking  
42
situated robots  93
Six Million Dollar Man, 
The (television)  148
slave labor, mechanical 
labor as  17
Smap (pop group)  110
Smarttruck (robot)  144
soccer, robots playing  163
sociable robots  97, 116–
130. See also Kismet
social behavior  116, 119
social interactions  12, 125
social science, robotics and  
127
sociology, cybernetics’ 
influence on  16
soda cans, robotic collec-
tion of  92
Sojourner (planetary 
explorer)  66, 77–81, 78, 
93, 117
sonar  87, 135
Sony, Aibo developed by  
55
Southern California, 
University of  68
space exploration, humans 
v. robots in  80–81
space missions  71–72, 
74, 75
space probes  xix, 68–69, 
80
space shuttles  80
speech, emotional state 
response to  120–123
Spielberg, Steven  126
Spirit rover  80–81, 117
Stanford Artificial 
Intelligence Laboratory 
(SAIL)  87, 91, 134
Stanford Cart (robot)  
132–134, 133
Stanford Research 
Institute, Shakey at  xviii, 
56
Stanford University  86, 
132–134
Stanley (robot)  136
Stardust probe  80
Starship Troopers 
(Heinlein)  46
Star Wars (film)  52, 
116–117
“static crawlers”  38
steam engine, feedback 
in  9
subsumption architecture  
139
supermarkets, robots used 
in  29
Sutherland, Jeff  51
T
taking turns, by Cog  119
teacher, robot as  128
Teddy, Peter  158
Teleological Society  12–13
teleology  12
Terminal Man, The 
(Crichton)  150
Terragator (robot)  135–
136
terrain  45–46, 136, 154
therapy, by robots  128
tic-tac-toe machine  85
Titan, missions to  80
Tonight Show, The (televi-
sion), PUMA on  26
Tooth (planetary rover)  
51, 93
tortoise robots  14–15, 15
toy robots  26–27, 53–55
transcendence, robotics 
and  143
transhumanism  143
Transitions Research 
Corporation  28–29
Truth, Sojourner  78
Tufts College  4
Turin, Alan  90
Turing Test  90
2001: A Space Odyssey 
(film)  86, 93
U
Unimate (industrial robot)  
xviii, 22, 24, 25–26, 26
Unimation, Inc.  24, 28
universal robots  140–142
upward motion  41, 41–42
V
vacuum cleaner, robotic  
55–60, 98. See also 
Roomba (robot)
Vatican, on humanoid 
robots  112
Vaucanson, Jacques de  xvi
VECTORBOT (robot)  87
Venus, Mariner 10 mission 
to  74
Viking landers  xix, 75
vision  87–88, 96, 99, 
118, 119, 133–134, 140, 
142–144
visual stimulation, of 
Kismet  125
voice recognition  109
Vulcan (mythological fig-
ure)  xv
W
Wabot-1 (robot)  94
Wabot-2 (robot)  94
Wako Research Center  
104
walking
dynamic balance in  38
energy in  111–113
gravity in  111–113
human mechanism 
of  38

188   Modern Robotics
walking (continued)
by insects  92
key aspects of  104
momentum in  111–113
with prosthetic legs  
104
with robotic extensions  
46
simulating motion in  
42
v. wheels  36–37
Wiener on  4
“Wiener Walks”  7
walking robots  36–49
applications of  46
Brooks’s work on  
92–93
chronology  47–48
control systems of  
105–106
falling by  109
first generation of  38
Hirose’s work on  104
method of  107
prototypes of  106–107
by Sony  108–109
systems of  40–41
tasks performed by  
107
university research in  
111–113
Warwick’s work on  
152–154
Walter (robot)  152–153
Walter, Grey  14–15, 15, 
86
Ward, Peter  70
warfare  1. See also World 
War I; World War II
Warwick, Kevin  xx, 148–
165, 149
weight, in space probe 
design  69
wheelchair  151–152, 159
wheels, v. walking  36–37
Whitehead, Alfred North  
5
Wiener, Norbert  xvii, 
1–21, 2
“Wiener Walks”  7
women in robotics  127
World War I  5
World War II  6–8, 23
Y
yaw motion  41
Yoshino, Hiroyuki  112
Z
zero momentum point 
(ZMP) control  105–106, 
108–109
zoology, Wiener in  4

