 
Here were my earnings before I made these, these were from a month ago. 
 
 
 
 
I had put my current and most recent earnings at the bottom on the eBook. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hey everyone, this is BlueTigerSlayer here to show you this amazing PTC site, I have been personally 
using for a while and it pays big. This eBook will show you how to earn from this site easily by following 
the steps and tips I provide with this eBook. Here are the following things you need to get started: 
Thing you need: 
1. Paypal 
2. The site 
3. Put your real info in signup. 
4. And a brain and this eBook. 
Why you need your real info? 

The reason why you need your info is because they require you to first cashout by check to make sure its 
not a fake addresss. I recently aquired the check and now I can finally cashout by paypal. In the picture 
below, shows the check I got from the website, easy $10 right there. 
 
 
Any Proof that I received the Paypal Money? 
Yes, today I just received the money since they only allow Paypal cashouts on Mondays and Fridays. 
 
That was my most recent cashout, the reason I dont have more is because that check took forever to be 

sent to my house, at least a month. Well, usually you can probably make say $20 a day, sicne the surveys 
they have give you a shit ton of money. 
 
Yeah, thats how I was able to reach almost $50 in 3 days. Now enough said, lets get started! 
 
Getting Started 
To get started, you have to go to this site here: 
http://www.clixsense.com/?5892839 
From there you will sign up, note as I said before, you have to use your real info to sign up. Trust me, 
they want do shit to your address. I cant sign up again to show pics because I cant do it at all. But once 
you are done I believe you should be brought to this screen. 

 
This is your profile page that is basically your history of earnings. Now you see that daily checklist bonus, 
I recommend you to do it each day, I usually get at least $4 from it, but I wasnt active since I had exams. 
But I highly recommend you do it. Now to start earning a little, go to the view ads tab shown here: 
 
Now from there it is almost like probux, neobux, and bux stuff. It has a 30 second ad for 1 cent. Probux 

gives you like what .005 cents for a 15 second vid, PULEEZ. You can easily start earning by doing all the 
ads each day to maximize your earnings each day. Now time to go to where all the money making 
begins. 
Offers 
Offers basically shown above are like surveys, but they pay you high with money IF you quality for the 
survey. It happens, when you dont qualify for the survey, it gets frustrating, but dont give up, you can 
earn big from those 11 minutes to earn $4.00 from it. The ones that give you less time is kinda hard, it all 
depends on what the subject is about. Just enter random crap into them, then when you do finish, it 
should say Congratulations! Once you refresh, you get the money! 
There are other offers like the ones that varie. 
 
These ones you can easily farm off of, though they only give you one cent, but its daily so you can easily 
earn fast money from it. There are also things called tasks. ItsFluffy who introduced me into this 
method, says you can also farm off of these thing there are loads of them. 

 
Just one cent for a 30 second google search, how awesome is that. BUT they may have you look up 
certain links to fit the criteria. Lets say it tells you to look up Facebook Profile Obama. Ok, then you look 
around for the link, but there is only one correct answer. But I may sound a bit off because my english 
sucks, but there are other offers like "Classify Adult Images", "Provide contrustive feedback on website", 
and others like that. I also farm off them as well. 
The Grid 
Its called "ClixGrid" its basically the same as the Probux Grid or NeoBux Grid. But the amount earned it 
different as shown below. 

 
I personally havent gotten that ten, since its kinda hard, I usually get loads of chances but thats it. Pretty 
much lotterly you either win or lose. 
Here are my current earnings: 
 
I know its not much because like I said, I wasnt active as much on the site, but now that will change. 
My Current Paypal Balance: 
I currently have been earning from the site and now hosting a L33T upgrade contest on HF. I'm using a 
canadian paypal because some say its un-limitable. 
 

Here is my recent cashout from Clixsense: 
 
Yeah, that was the remaining money I had left after the check cashout. Well, I hope you enjoyed this 
eBook on the best PTC site out there, if you have any concerns or questions, PM me on HF and I will 
answer you as fast as I can. Also the reason, I had more cash in my balance was from products I am 
selling for $6 for eWhoring check it out.  
Good luck with earning on Clixsense! 
Thanks, 
BlueTigerSlayer 
 
My sales thread: 
http://www.hackforums.net/showthread.php?tid=3851739 
 
My L33T Contest: 
http://www.hackforums.net/showthread.php?tid=3864198 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

