
Moral Engines

Wyse Series in Social Anthropology
Editors: 
James Laidlaw, William Wyse Professor of Social Anthropology, University of 
Cambridge, and Fellow of King’s College, Cambridge
Maryon McDonald, Fellow in Social Anthropology, Robinson College, 
University of Cambridge 
Joel Robbins, Sigrid Rausing Professor of Social Anthropology, University of 
Cambridge, and Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge
Social Anthropology is a vibrant discipline of relevance to many areas – eco-
nomics, politics, business, humanities, health and public policy. This series, 
published in association with the Cambridge William Wyse Chair in Social 
Anthropology, focuses on key interventions in Social Anthropology, based on 
innovative theory and research of relevance to contemporary social issues and 
debates. Former holders of the William Wyse Chair have included Meyer 
Fortes, Jack Goody, Ernest Gellner and Marilyn Strathern, all of whom have 
advanced the frontiers of the discipline. This series intends to develop and 
foster that tradition.
Volume 1
Sociality: New Directions
Edited by Nicholas J. Long and Henrietta L. Moore
Volume 2
The Social Life of Achievement
Edited by Nicholas J. Long and Henrietta L. Moore
Volume 3
The State We’re In: Reflecting on Democracy’s Troubles
Edited by Joanna Cook, Nicholas J. Long and Henrietta L. Moore
Volume 4
The Patient Multiple: An Ethnography of Healthcare and Decision-Making in 
Bhutan
Jonathan Taee
Volume 5
Moral Engines: Exploring the Ethical Drives in Human Life
Edited by Cheryl Mattingly, Rasmus Dyring, Maria Louw and Thomas 
Schwarz Wentzer

Moral Engines
Exploring the Ethical Drives in Human Life
Edited by 
Cheryl Mattingly
Rasmus Dyring
Maria Louw
Thomas Schwarz Wentzer
 berghahn
N E W  Y O R K •  O X F O R D
www.berghahnbooks.com
 

Published in 2018 by
Berghahn Books
www.berghahnbooks.com
© 2018 Cheryl Mattingly
All rights reserved. Except for the quotation of short passages
for the purposes of criticism and review, no part of this book
may be reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information
storage and retrieval system now known or to be invented,
without written permission of the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A C.I.P. cataloging record is available from the Library of Congress
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 978-1-78533-693-5 hardback
ISBN 978-1-78533-694-2 ebook

Contents
Prologue	
1
Cheryl Mattingly
1. 	 The Question of ‘Moral Engines’: Introducing a Philosophical 
Anthropological Dialogue	
9
Rasmus Dyring, Cheryl Mattingly and Maria Louw
Part I. Moral Engines and Human Experience
2. 	 Ethics, Immanent Transcendence and the Experimental  
Narrative Self	
39
Cheryl Mattingly
3. 	 Being Otherwise: On Regret, Morality and Mood	
61
C. Jason Throop
4. 	 Haunting as Moral Engine: Ethical Striving and Moral Aporias  
among Sufis in Uzbekistan	
83
Maria Louw
5. 	 Every Day: Forgiving after War in Northern Uganda	
100
Lotte Meinert
6. 	 The Provocation of Freedom	
116
Rasmus Dyring
Part II. Moral Engines and ‘Moral Facts’
7. 	 On the Immanence of Ethics	
137
Michael Lambek
8. 	 Where in the World are Values? Exemplarity and Moral  
Motivation 	
155
Joel Robbins

vi	
Contents
9. 	 Fault Lines in the Anthropology of Ethics	
174
James Laidlaw
Part III. Moral Engines and the Human Condition
10. 	An Ethics of Dwelling and a Politics of Worldbuilding:  
Responding to the Demands of the Drug War	
197
Jarrett Zigon
11. 	Human, the Responding Being: Considerations Towards a  
Philosophical Anthropology of Responsiveness	
211
Thomas Schwarz Wentzer
12. 	The History of Responsibility	
230
François Raffoul
Index	
251

Prologue
Cheryl Mattingly
It is no accident that the editors of this volume are comprised of two anthro-
pologists and two philosophers. This book is the result of a history of conver-
sation between the two disciplines that is, on the one hand, quite local, an 
Aarhus centred dialogue that has developed over the last quarter-century. 
Even at its most local, it has never been a solely Danish conversation however. 
Rather, Aarhus has provided a nurturing space for a gradually developing 
international conversation. I’m sure there are many stories to tell about how 
and why this has happened or continues to build with increased momentum. 
The ones I will tell are, quite frankly, shaped by my own particular experience 
of what has been an extraordinarily rich personal history with Aarhus philoso-
phers and anthropologists.
I’m indulging in a markedly autobiographical foreword for two reasons. 
Some readers might find it interesting to catch a behind the scenes glimpse – 
from one participant’s perspective – of how this conversation has grown, 
where interdisciplinarity became challenging, how it provoked. It also allows 
me, as an American who has been invited repeatedly to think with Aarhus 
scholars, to acknowledge some of those who are not represented in this 
volume but who have been crucial in cultivating an interdisciplinary exchange 
between philosophy and anthropology that, I think, is truly groundbreaking. 
The provocations we anthropologists and philosophers have confronted in 
various Aarhus forums are surely not unique. I suspect that my stories will 
resonate with scholars in either discipline who have also embarked on collabo-
rative ventures. Unquestionably, there has been a recent rapprochement 
between the two fields, at least in some quarters. In anthropology, and in some 
corners of philosophy, there has been a reach across the aisle to see what kind 
of new thinking about things like morality, experience, and even philosophical 
anthropology a collaborative effort might yield. Our introductory chapter 
recounts some of this interdisciplinary work.
As an anthropologist, I can speak best to the anthropology side where this 
wider conversation is particularly evident – and pertinent – because of 

2	
Prologue
anthropology’s ethical turn. One of the interesting features of this current 
anthropological moment is that in giving such explicit attention to ethics, and 
debating what might properly constitute it, many anthropologists have turned 
to philosophy (especially moral philosophy and phenomenology) for inspira-
tion. Every anthropological piece in this collection reflects this philosophical 
engagement. While there have always been some anthropologists who have 
taken philosophy very seriously in their work, a new collective enthusiasm 
reflects another kind of turn in the discipline as a whole. It marks a contrast 
from earlier decades, which have often been characterized by suspicion of 
philosophy’s universalisms, abstractions and western egocentrism. As is well 
known, philosophy has served as a useful intellectual adversary against which 
one could pitch challenging claims about the moral (or social) diversity of 
human life, based most often upon close investigation of non-western com-
munities. For some of us, the contemporary rapprochement is evident not only 
in an ever more serious use of philosophical texts but also a far more ambi-
tious attempt to develop a new kind of anthropology, a ‘philosophical 
anthropology’.
On the philosophy side there are also some movements toward anthropol-
ogy where an ‘ethnographic turn’ has been developing. As Wentzer documents 
in his chapter in this volume, this philosophical reach outside the discipline is 
not altogether new. Wentzer retraces a specific history of German thought in 
the first half of the twentieth century which saw itself as offering a revived 
philosophical anthropology. The twentieth-century German tradition 
‘attempted to deal with the human in a way that avoids both naturalistic reduc-
tionisms and idealist shortcomings’ but defends a ‘philosophical take on the 
human’ (p. 211). It drew widely from a broad range of disciplines, including 
biology and anthropology, in order to develop a more adequate account of the 
human, recognizing that philosophy was not equipped to address this ques-
tion by itself. In this sense it was, Wentzer notes, a movement akin to 
Wittgenstein’s call to get ‘back to the rough ground’.
The Story of an Introduction: A Destabilizing Border Event
The introductory chapter of this volume involved a cooperative writing 
venture that, rather to our surprise, demanded an enormous amount of dis-
cussion, writing and rewriting of key sections. Our joint task has sometimes 
felt like navigating a minefield of potential misunderstandings. And it has 
been an ambitious project. Although the topic of this volume is ethics, and 
more specifically the question of ‘ethical drives’, it is also an entry into the still 
nascent creation of a reinvented philosophical anthropology. (Several of the 
chapters in this volume make explicit what is entailed in speaking of our col-
laborative work as a form of philosophical anthropology. Wentzer’s chapter is 
particularly helpful in this regard.) It took us a full year to complete our 

	
Prologue	
3
introduction, and not only for the usual reason that collaborations among 
busy people tend to create delays. It pushed me, and I think it pushed us all, to 
think beyond our familiar vocabularies and comfort zone of ideas.
This propulsion into the unfamiliar was generally precipitated by small 
hermeneutic difficulties that looked, initially, as though they should be easy to 
resolve. An example: how to translate terms like ‘fundamental’ or ‘essential’ 
from a phenomenological philosophical framework into a sociocultural 
anthropological one? Rasmus Dyring had used both these terms freely in one 
section of our draft. I objected. After some to-ing and fro-ing, we ultimately 
dropped the term ‘essential’ and used ‘fundamental’ sparingly so that we would 
not be read as embracing philosophy’s penchant for metaphysical essential-
isms that anthropology has so vociferously critiqued. But our discussions and 
confusions over word choice did not merely reflect the politics of addressing 
multiple disciplinary audiences. Something more was at stake, reminding me 
that there is a reason philosophers like Dilthey and especially Gadamer have 
viewed ‘understanding’ and its necessary corollary ‘misunderstanding’ as a 
basic mode of human experience.
I will try to convey a sense of this ‘at stakeness’ through one of Thomas 
Wentzer’s responses.1 In an email to the rest of us, he notes that we editors, in 
our oral discussions and in our communications with contributing authors, 
had sometimes used the term ‘fundamental’ to indicate the level of reflection 
we wanted them to engage in when writing their chapters: ‘to indicate that our 
take [in this book] urges all contributors to address explicitly what they other-
wise silently might presuppose’. But the tricky part, Thomas noted, was that 
because a word like ‘fundamental’ belongs to the conceptual family ‘funda-
ment’, readers (especially anthropologists) might mistake us for advancing 
something ‘foundationalist’ when reading so much about ‘fundamentals’. 
Thomas reflected upon how differently this vocabulary plays in Heideggerian 
phenomenology. ‘Being a Heideggerian, to me this word (fundamental) actu-
ally does not indicate metaphysical foundationalism (‘old fashioned concep-
tual armchair philosophy’), but a hermeneutical enterprise to settle some 
horizon of understanding of what we are talking about. In this sense, the word 
indicates the horizon within which the domain of the ethical can be located, 
the guiding thread that leads our understanding to begin with. Asking thusly 
means to pose “fundamental questions”’. However, Thomas doubted that ‘non-
Heideggerians (i.e., normal people) would join [his] connotations’, hence the 
danger of the term.
For me, one of Thomas’ ‘normal people’ whose grip on Heidegger is by no 
means assured, this minor dilemma over word phrasing began to seem like a 
gift. Could my engagement with Rasmus and Thomas help me to address a 
concern that has haunted me since I began to do anthropology? Namely, how 
could I be wedded to particulars, including intimate relationships and bio-
graphical selves (which my kind of ethnography insists upon), and at the same 
time lay claim to something like universals concerning ‘the human condition’? 

4	
Prologue
How could a deep engagement with singularities, including the humble events 
of everyday family life that have often been the focus of my attention, provide 
a privileged avenue to life’s big questions? How could I justify an intuition that 
the kind of human condition universals – or ‘fundamentals’ – I was after could 
be disclosed through textually representing irreducible particularities? 
Especially because my particulars so often concerned small matters and little 
histories invisible from the stage of world history? If, within phenomenology, 
a term like ‘fundamental’ could indicate something that was not substantive 
and fixed but operated as an ‘indicator’ of a ‘horizon of understanding’ within 
which a conversation might take place, could a concrete particular (for 
example, a description of a mother dropping her child off for a first day of 
school in a wheelchair) function in the same way? That is, could Thomas’ 
description of ‘fundamentals’ as ‘horizons of understanding’ speak to prob-
lems that are not necessarily his (or Heidegger’s) concern? Could they help me 
to articulate what ethnographic particulars might offer? If so, this could not be 
because I simply ‘applied’ a Heideggerian understanding of everydayness to 
my ethnographic depictions of some community’s small practices. (In fact, my 
fieldwork often seemed to challenge Heidegger’s ontological depiction of the 
everyday.)
What Thomas’ note suggested to me was a way to consider a more radical 
possibility that I have been entertaining for a long time without feeling 
equipped to justify or even articulate – that I was not merely using philosophy 
but doing philosophy. A Heideggerian understanding of fundamentals might 
provide a lens through which to consider how and why ethnographic particu-
lars could be transformed from mere ‘facts’ of the substantive kind into 
windows that open onto ‘horizons of understanding’, that is, vistas in which 
conversations might be had. Of course, my dogged concern with the philo-
sophical import of the ethnographic particular is not a new problem for philo-
sophically engaged anthropologists. (Geertz’s work quickly comes to mind, as 
does Michael Jackson’s for a more recent example.) But my little story of how 
I glimpsed an idea (or a potential idea)2 about how to address this via a small 
struggle over word choice illustrates how quickly we co-writers found our-
selves grappling with very big issues.
Undertaking this book has forced all of us, as editors, to consider what 
claims we could make about anthropology as a (kind of) philosophical enter-
prise and about philosophy – at least of a certain sort – as a (kind of) anthro-
pological enterprise. What has haunted me also pervaded our discussions in 
writing this introduction as we sought to outline and justify our claims. 
Annoyingly (for the anthropologists) it seemed much easier to justify what 
philosophy had to offer anthropology than the reverse. But all of us were quite 
clear that we were rejecting some familiar roles the two disciplines are often 
assigned. We were certainly repudiating the view that anthropology is, at best, 
some kind of applied philosophy that imports philosophical abstractions and 
cavalierly air drops them onto ethnographic scenes. Nor were we happy with 

	
Prologue	
5
the idea that anthropology plays a merely negative role of critique, providing 
‘exotic’ counter-examples to refute philosophical universals (however useful 
that may sometimes be). We also dismissed the more benign idea that anthro-
pology is good for fleshing out armchair philosophical examples. Nor, it should 
be said, did we want to confine philosophers to armchairs.
By contrast to all these recognizable roles, we have grandly claimed to be 
doing something more radical in our collaboration, using our dialogue 
between the two disciplines to sketch and defend a border inquiry that, we 
argue, is necessary for an adequate exploration of ethical drives. We try to 
articulate some features of this borderland inquiry between anthropology and 
philosophy. Our sketch is sometimes descriptive, elucidating in a thematic 
way the shape of the current dialogue (especially among anthropologists 
where it has developed in a far more pronounced way). But sometimes we take 
a bolder stand that has the ring of a kind of manifesto, a prescriptive challenge. 
Border inquiry should not merely enrich, we contend, but destabilize and call 
into question each discipline’s familiar ways of thinking about what propels us 
into ethical life in the first place. (Since we make this case extensively in the 
introduction, I won’t rehearse it further here.)
There was one heady moment in our writing process when we offered one 
of our more far-reaching claims. We stated that we were promoting a kind of 
disciplinary role reversal: anthropologists would ask questions and create con-
cepts of the philosophical sort (or were already doing so) and philosophers 
would create (or were already creating) anthropological style thick descrip-
tions in posing their questions. As I reviewed our exalted prose, I had a sober-
ing moment. Were we leading readers to anticipate chapters the likes of which 
they had never seen before? Were we promising some whole new type of prose 
and style of argument? Or, at the least, would they be unable to tell the phi-
losophers and the anthropologists apart, so role-reversing were we? Well, no. 
The anthropological contributors pretty much articulated their arguments 
through analyses of detailed ethnographic examples and the philosophers 
pretty much made their cases through discussions within the philosophical 
tradition. Despite this difficulty, none of us wanted to drop our most ambi-
tious assertions. Instead, we added a necessary caveat. We amended our prose 
to emphasize that we are indicating where we think this border inquiry might, 
even should, go. You could say we are gesturing toward a horizon of thought.
Quite appropriately, to my mind, we have placed this whole gesturing 
enterprise under the umbrella of a sheltering metaphor, the ‘moral engine’. 
Maria Louw must be credited with the book’s guiding image. She suggested it 
to me several years ago as a comment to a talk I had given and the trope struck 
a chord with us all. As we have struggled to see what claims we could make, 
and become inspired with the vistas this project has opened, it has made par-
ticular sense to call upon a metaphor to connote the hazy terrain in which we 
have ventured.

6	
Prologue
Local History: The Aarhus Story
The ‘engine’ that has propelled this particular volume can be traced not only 
to disciplinary wide shifts (especially in anthropology) but also to a more local 
history, quite specific to Aarhus. One beginning is the establishment, in 1990, 
of a unique interdisciplinary network at Aarhus University: Health, Humanity 
and Culture. This network, which continues to thrive, has involved philoso-
phers, ethnologists and psychologists. It was founded by an Aarhus philoso-
pher, Uffe Juul Jensen, and continues to have its home in philosophy, though 
involving a wide range of disciplines. The impetus behind this network was the 
very strong belief that philosophy could not, by itself, think through crucial 
issues like health (or suffering) without reaching out to create a cross-discipli-
nary conversation that not only spanned different disciplines but also involved 
health practitioners. This might sound familiar – just applied philosophy. But 
this was not how this network was conceived. Rather, the idea was that even to 
do philosophy well, it was necessary not only to know the history of key con-
cepts and thinkers (its scholastic feature), but also to know how these con-
cepts intersected with the ‘rough ground’ of everyday practices. Scholars 
working across a broad range of disciplines were often invited to participate in 
network seminars and workshops.
The existence of this volume can be partly traced back to one such invita-
tion, given to me back in 1991. This initial invitation led to a partnership with 
Uffe Jensen and the network that has been involved in co-organizing interna-
tional seminars of anthropologists and philosophers (and many other disci-
plines, especially psychology) to collectively think through topics related to 
health and ethics. While Moral Engines is not about health per se, it is not 
surprising that the connection of bodily suffering to ethics is foregrounded in 
several chapters. (Four of the eight contributors work in medical anthropol-
ogy, broadly conceived: Throop, Zigon, Meinert and Mattingly.) Ethics has 
become increasingly central to anthropology in part because so many anthro-
pologists have explored the ethical precarities engendered by health problems 
ranging from diagnosable conditions to the suffering that results from struc-
tural or societal level violence.
The Aarhus history of conversation can be traced to some other develop-
ments. In 2009, the anthropology and philosophy faculty at Aarhus organized a 
conference on Trust and Hope that attracted a large international as well as local 
audience. One result of that conference was an innovative set of dialogues 
between anthropology and philosophy (which included two editors of this 
volume, Wentzer and Mattingly), published as Anthropology and Philosophy: 
Dialogues on Trust and Hope (Berghahn Books 2015, Liisberg, Pedersen and 
Dalsgaard, editors). This 2009 conference also precipitated the inauguration of a 
discussion group of the anthropology and philosophy faculty, who met at irregu-
lar intervals and jokily referred to themselves as the ‘Philanthropes’. All four 
editors of this volume have been core members of this group.

	
Prologue	
7
More proximally, this volume has been inspired by a series of conferences 
that were organized under the auspices of Aarhus University’s Institute of 
Advanced Studies (AIAS) during the years that I had a senior fellowship there. 
AIAS, under the leadership of Morten Kyndrup, provided not only funding 
but also crucial organizational support for three conferences to which promi-
nent anthropologists and philosophers in ethics and phenomenology were 
invited. We four editors were co-organizers of all the conferences. The first 
conference, on moral experience, was held in the autumn of 2013. The second, 
much larger ‘Moral Engines’ conference took place in June 2014. A third con-
ference, on Philosophical Anthropology, held June 2015, involved a number of 
the same scholars invited to the ‘Moral Engines’ conference. The chapters 
gathered in this book are not, in any sense, conference papers. Every one has 
been extensively developed and revised; in fact, several bear little or no con-
nection to the paper originally delivered. However, it is worth mentioning 
these events because they have helped to generate a community of dialogue 
that is by no means finished. Already during the 2014 symposium, there was a 
sense among participating speakers that we were onto something, that we 
could find ways to talk across our disciplines in order to think better together. 
The interdisciplinarity so frequently touted by universities, and so frequently 
a disappointing and empty slogan, seemed to be actually possible. Out of this 
sense of possibility, and the commitment among us to continue our thinking 
together, this volume was born.
Cheryl Mattingly
May 2017
Los Angeles
Notes
  1.	 Although Thomas is not listed as an author of the introduction, he read and commented 
on several iterations of it.
  2.	 I try to articulate this insight in a manuscript, currently under review, entitled ‘Ordinary 
Possibility, Transcendent Immanence and Responsive Ethics: A Philosophical 
Anthropology of the Small Event’. It is being reviewed as part of a special issue of HAU 
entitled ‘Reinventing Philosophical Anthropology.’ Thomas Wentzer and I are co-edit-
ing. The special issue as a whole is also currently under review. 


1
The Question of ‘Moral Engines’
Introducing a Philosophical  
Anthropological Dialogue
Rasmus Dyring, Cheryl Mattingly and Maria Louw
In the last two decades there has been a virtual explosion of anthropological 
literature arguing that ethics or morality (we use the terms interchangeably)1 
should be considered a central dimension of human practice. Much important 
and genre-defining work has already been done on the topic of ethics, includ-
ing a number of original and complex analyses of ethical life and its predica-
ments. However, one question that has not always been made explicit is this: 
what actually commits and drives us to understand our lives in ethical terms? 
This question is both ethnographically underexplored and theoretically under-
developed. In other words, what remains to be adequately thematized is why, 
and on what grounds, human beings qualify certain experiences and registers 
of life as ethically important ones. With the trope of ‘moral engines’ as an ana-
lytical lodestar, this volume sets out to pose the fundamental question of the 
ethical drives in human life.
The attraction of approaching this question via a metaphor is that it high-
lights its mysterious character – an ethical drive may move us but where it 
comes from or why it carries such potency and force often eludes neat defini-
tion. Throughout this volume, this riddle is explored from various points of 
departure steeped in different vocabularies, including philosophical phenom-
enology and vocabularies rooted in the experiences of anthropologists’ diverse 
interlocutors. As anthropologists have frequently contended, attending to a 
range of voices, practices and experiences across a wide spectrum of societies 
may teach us something as fundamental about the human condition as the 
western philosophical tradition offers.
This introduction is devoted to the task of qualifying what is entailed in the 
proposed exploration of ‘moral engines’. This task will be approached as 

10	
Rasmus Dyring, Cheryl Mattingly and Maria Louw
follows. Section One makes the case for why a consideration of ethical drives 
seems to demand a borderland inquiry that crosses anthropology and philoso-
phy. Section Two situates the question of ethical drives within a brief overview 
of how ethics and morality have been explored in anthropology and makes the 
case for why, despite a wealth of current scholarship, this question still needs 
to be asked. It also identifies certain organizing themes that have emerged in 
the current theoretical debates in anthropology that are especially pertinent to 
addressing it.
Section Three broadly outlines a framework consisting of three quite differ-
ent approaches that can be taken in considering what might constitute moral 
engines. We return to these approaches later in the chapter but briefly intro-
duce them here. One approach, to put it a bit crudely, stresses ‘moral facts’. 
While opposing reductionist and social deterministic understandings of 
‘moral facts’ in order to clear a space for undetermined ethical action, this 
approach foregrounds some notion of sociocultural dynamics and structures 
as important catalysts of the ethical drive. A second approach emphasizes 
‘moral experience’ and finds in the first-person perspective certain irreducible 
ethical dynamics. This approach tends to stress the excessiveness of experi-
ence, the way that ethical experience can elude attempts to capture it through 
a society’s normative structures, dynamics or concepts. A third approach 
argues that an inquiry into the drives or impulses that prompt ethical life 
needs to be connected to an ontological inquiry into the existential roots of 
the ethical and into the human condition as such. Relying widely on existential 
phenomenology and the German tradition of philosophical anthropology, this 
latter approach insists that the question of moral engines must be posed as a 
radical anthropological question. The chapters in this volume variously elabo-
rate each of these approaches, sometimes combining more than one. Like any 
schematic, our tripartite division is necessarily simplified and intended for 
heuristic purposes. Notably, these approaches are not mutually exclusive. In 
fact, we will argue that there is an essential complementarity among the three 
foci and that this complementarity offers a powerful analytic lens through 
which to explore ethical drives.
Section One: Moral Engines as a Borderland Inquiry
This volume is the result of the editors’ insistence on the need for a close inter-
disciplinary collaboration between anthropology and philosophy when explor-
ing the domain of ethics. This is not a new position, especially on the part of 
anthropologists. However strained this disciplinary relationship might at 
times be, many of the protagonists in the bourgeoning anthropology of ethics 
have pointed out that the anthropological investigation of the ethical requires 
a special dialogue with the philosophical tradition, if not a heightened philo-
sophical sensitivity (notably Laidlaw 2014, Lambek 2010a, Mattingly 2014, 

	
The Question of ‘Moral Engines’	
11
Zigon 2009). Some of the authors contributing to this volume even stress this 
interdisciplinary affinity to the extent that the anthropology of ethics and 
morality is only truly possible as a new kind of philosophical anthropology.2
The philosophical incitement at the heart of the anthropological turn to 
ethics shows itself most obviously when core terms like ‘ethics’ or ‘morality’ 
are put into play because these invariably invoke a plethora of related con-
cepts. That is, core concepts not only serve central as analytical ‘tools’ for the 
anthropologist but, put in the terminology of hermeneutics, they establish 
conceptual horizons that include other central concepts and analytical frame-
works. These conceptual horizons point toward an ontological level of inquiry, 
though this is not always made explicit. To briefly illustrate, we call on four of 
these ‘grounding’ conceptual connections to suggest the ontological profun-
dity of the problematics inherent in the question of moral engines: virtue, 
possibility, the ordinary (or immanence) and freedom. All of these are fre-
quently invoked in the current anthropological literature or have been force-
fully put forward as central to anthropology’s investigations of ethical life.
The notion of virtue, which plays a central role in the anthropologies of 
morality taking their cues from virtue ethics (be they Aristotelian or Foucauldian 
in orientation), implies, on the one hand, some notion of selfhood (a psychē or 
subjectivity) as the seat of ethical character and the agentive locus of ethical 
orientation, and, on the other hand, some understanding of the place and status 
of the human self in relation to the (sociocultural) world. What is important in 
the present context is to acknowledge that once the question of ‘moral engines’ 
is thematized, this basic relationship between selfhood and world quickly shows 
itself to be highly charged theoretically. In other words, the understanding, and 
the allocation, of ethical drive, of ethical teleology if you will, is brought to bear 
on how the ontological relationship between self and world is construed.
From an ancient Aristotelian perspective, ethical teleology is part and 
parcel of a cosmological teleology, which means that the individual human 
being, as a zoon logon echon that has its place within a ‘logically’ ordered 
cosmos, is naturally endowed with a drive toward a higher degree of comple-
tion and in this sense a natural drive toward the good and a catalogue of 
virtues in and through which human excellence is actualized.3 Beyond the 
ancient world such a ‘metaphysical biology’, as MacIntyre argues in After 
Virtue, becomes untenable4 (MacIntyre 1985: 162). Both in MacIntyre’s neo-
Aristotelian account of virtue ethics and in Foucault’s account of ethics, which 
is not exactly a moral philosophical doctrine, but conceived rather in terms of 
a history of ethical thought, the self is expressly cleared of an innate teleology. 
For the former, ethical selfhood is narratively constructed and infused with 
ethical orientation by the reigning historical traditions. For the latter, the 
ethical subject ‘is not a substance. It is a form…’ (1997: 290), which means that 
the concrete ethical subject emerges from a generative relationship with the 
ethical norms and rules that are imposed on the subject ‘by his culture, his 
society, and his social group’ (Foucault 1997: 290–91, cf. 1992: 26–27).

12	
Rasmus Dyring, Cheryl Mattingly and Maria Louw
Emptying the individual human self of a naturally constituted ethical drive 
thus entails that the original impetus of the ethical, the ‘moral engine’, must 
now be located elsewhere; in the world, in social dynamics or structures, in a 
tradition or in a culture that impress on the individual self a certain type of 
ethical teleology. But where the impetus of the ethical is located immediately 
has profound consequences for the understanding of the range and limits of 
ethical possibility and for the understanding of the relationship of such modal 
categories as possibility, reality and necessity. If it is indeed tradition, as 
MacIntyre holds (in After Virtue), or culture, as Foucault holds, that harbors 
ethical teleology, will ethical possibility be fundamentally constrained by a 
given moral reality? Or is ethical striving, despite its origin within a given 
historical context, nonetheless capable of striving beyond, i.e. transcending, a 
given moral reality?
Such questions have prompted contemporary anthropologists writing 
about ethics to explore possibility at individual, interpersonal and societal 
levels. These questions also immediately bear upon the question of the imma-
nence of ethics to human agency – on ordinary ethics. This has proved a lively 
topic in continuing anthropological discussions as anthropologists have wres-
tled with questions like: is there something transcendent about ethics or is it 
fully embedded in the everyday? If it is fully embedded, does this doom it to 
being reducible to a particular society’s normative structures and practices? 
(Because this issue has been so crucial in anthropological debates, we return 
to it in more detail in Section Two.)
This line of thinking leads to another vexed concept and domain of inquiry: 
freedom. Although many anthropologists have eschewed this term in their 
formulations (with notable exceptions), most do insist that there is an indeter-
minacy to ethical life and that the ethical cannot be subsumed unproblemati-
cally within an already demarcated social structure in the manner of a 
straightforward socialization process. But this advocacy of indeterminacy 
does raise the question of ethical freedom. Put most strongly, the very notion 
of ethics itself, some would argue, presupposes freedom, or at least a kindred 
notion of non-determined potentiality, not merely as impetus but as its condi-
tion of possibility. As James Faubion writes – without, however, pursuing this 
lead – there seems to be a mutual implication between ethics and freedom 
from which he sees ‘no escape’ (2011: 37–38; for an extensive exploration of 
this mutual implication, see Dyring, chapter 6 in this volume and Dyring, 
under review). This implication is perhaps most pointedly stressed by James 
Laidlaw, when he famously proclaimed that ‘an anthropology of ethics will 
only be possible – will only be prevented from constantly collapsing into 
general questions of social regularity and social control – if we take seriously, 
as something requiring ethnographic description, the possibilities of human 
freedom’ (Laidlaw 2002: 315). This raises the methodological and epistemo-
logical question: how is ethnographic description of ‘the possibilities of human 
freedom’ possible? But given the contested ontological status and the highly 

	
The Question of ‘Moral Engines’	
13
elusive – perhaps even illusive – character of ‘human freedom’, this question is 
impossible to separate from the equally fundamental question: what is human 
freedom? In other words, the methodological and epistemological question 
seems to be inseparably tied in with an ontological question. Hence, taking 
seriously ‘the possibilities of human freedom’ would seem to require also 
taking seriously the implicated philosophical problematics.
This exceedingly brief discussion of four recurring concepts in the anthro-
pology of ethics is intended to illustrate that once the question of moral 
engines is thematized, it registers an accompanying conceptual horizon that, 
as it unfurls, goes beyond what can be addressed epistemologically or meth-
odologically. It presses inquiry into very basic ontological considerations 
about the human condition as such. This might seem merely to suggest that 
anthropologists need to rely upon philosophers (as professional experts in 
ontology) to guide them in their inquiry into the ethical. But this is not our 
point. Rather, we are suggesting the necessity of a more mutually interdepend-
ent sphere of inquiry at the level of ontology – a borderland inquiry.
Destabilizing the Terrain
But what do we mean by a borderland inquiry? And what don’t we mean? 
Certainly, we are resisting a disciplinary role delineation in which the anthro-
pologists’ task in the conversation is to provide thick descriptions and/or 
strange ‘facts’ to philosophy. Historically, this role division has marked one 
predominant way in which the dialogue between the two disciplines has 
unfolded. Each discipline uses the other, in rather eclectic fashion, to establish 
more authority (Clifford 1988). Anthropology has turned to philosophy in 
order to be able to say something more authoritatively about the human con-
dition, and philosophy has turned to anthropology in the search of empirical 
authority. This mutual borrowing and authority building (however useful at 
times) falls short of a proper dialogue that destabilizes knowledge.
It is certainly true that few contemporary philosophers engage seriously 
with the wealth of ethnographic descriptions and theoretical explications to 
discover the potential they harbour for a more complex, but also more subver-
sive and critical conceptual development. Despite this philosophical reluc-
tance, there are some notable instances in the history of western philosophy, 
where it is exactly the insistence on taking seriously alterity and cultural diver-
sity that brings about new philosophical orientations. In some respects this 
was already the impetus of Herder’s objection to the philosophical obsession 
with reason as a universal, transcendental faculty and his turn toward the his-
torical, cultural, linguistic development of the human being (Herder 2004). In 
early twentieth-century philosophy, Wittgenstein’s preoccupation with 
Frazer’s Golden Bough is worth mentioning and along the same lines also 
Winch and MacIntyre’s debates on the status of rationality vis-à-vis, for 

14	
Rasmus Dyring, Cheryl Mattingly and Maria Louw
instance, magical practices (Winch 1964; Wittgenstein 1993). Bernard 
Williams has written of the ‘ethnographic stance’ and the possibilities of inter-
cultural understanding (1986: 203) and most recently Jonathan Lear (2006) 
has founded an exploration of possibilities of ethics in times of cultural devas-
tation on anthropological accounts of the traditional Crow way of life.
By calling on these examples, we might seem to suggest something more 
modest than we intend. These cases most clearly illustrate how a borderland 
conversation may occur when philosophers take up anthropological depic-
tions of exotic alterities, including alternative forms of epistemology or ontol-
ogy, not simply to bolster empirical authority but to challenge or expand 
philosophical positions. Without discounting the value of this, we are suggest-
ing something even more radical: a combined effort to bring our disciplinary 
resources to bear so that we can pursue, empirically as well as theoretically, a 
decentring kind of dialogue.
We aim to contribute to a more genuine dialogue that promotes this crea-
tive, destabilizing potential. This borderland inquiry urges us, in varying 
degrees, to take up ‘roles’ generally associated with the other discipline, chal-
lenging the usual idea that there are some people who are anthropologists and 
can provide the ethnography and other people who are philosophers and can 
do the ontological analysis. Our excursion into ‘moral engines’ propels us into 
a position in which not only human indeterminacy but also non-essentialism 
in general is recognized. We, each in our own discipline, are pushed to break 
with the disciplinary essentialisms that all too often become an obstacle in our 
interdisciplinary discussions; the disciplinary essentialisms that urge us to 
assume the roles of gatekeepers whenever someone from another discipline 
dares step onto our turf.
This role reversing, or role expanding, border inquiry is very much a work 
in progress and may not always be apparent in the chapters that follow. Readers 
will find that the anthropological chapters contained here are, by and large, 
steeped in culturally specific particulars and anthropology’s trademark thick 
description. The philosophical contributions, by and large, are not. Because 
anthropological contributors draw so heavily upon the vocabularies and tradi-
tions of philosophy in doing so, the interdisciplinary nature of thought may be 
more apparent in their chapters than in the philosophical ones. These philo-
sophically infused contributions reflect a precedent in the discipline, espe-
cially as anthropologists try to explore cultural and personal possibility as 
ontological matters.
Several authors in anthropology have already noted the necessity of ventur-
ing into this borderland with philosophy in questions pertaining to possibility 
and the practical transcendence of prevailing social structures. Michael 
Jackson, for example, describes his project of existential anthropology as an 
endeavour toward an ethnographically grounded philosophical anthropology, 
that ‘abandon[s] the substantive idea of the universal’ (in casu a human sub-
stance with a fixed essence) and ‘focus[es] on the universalizing impulse that 

	
The Question of ‘Moral Engines’	
15
inspires us to transgress parochial boundaries, push ourselves to the limit, and 
open ourselves up to new horizons through strategies that take us beyond 
ourselves’ (2013: 20, see also Jackson and Piette 2015). Vincent Crapanzano, to 
offer another example, sees an impetus for his project of a literary-philosoph-
ical anthropology in the ‘problem of cultural creativity’ and the fact that socio-
cultural anthropological research has tended to ignore individual ‘imaginative 
processes’ – in fact, ‘[t]he individual has always been something of an embar-
rassment in anthropology’ (2004: 1). Criticizing the social sciences for sacrific-
ing the singular to the general and for an ‘implicit if not explicit emphasis on 
determinism’, Crapanzano’s philosophical anthropology is intended instead to 
address ‘human creativity, transgressive possibility, and imaginative play’, and 
ultimately ‘to address the question of human freedom, however delusional that 
freedom may be’ (2004: 6; for another important, literarily and philosophically 
inspired defence of singularity and anti-determinism from an anthropological 
perspective, see also Rapport 1997).
The edited book Anthropology and Philosophy: Dialogues on Trust and 
Hope (Liisberg et al. 2015) offers a recent example of creative acts of dialogue 
and even co-writing between philosophers and anthropologists.5 And there 
are also a few earlier examples of this kind of collaborative effort. Despite 
these creative forays, what anthropology might offer philosophy in a destabi-
lizing kind of way is far less well articulated. In the context of this volume, one 
kind of answer arises: because we emphasize what might be called the sources 
or conditions for morality (rather than simply morality’s cultural content or 
practice), anthropological contributions reveal how concrete instantiations of 
ethical life speak to ontological matters. Generally speaking, from an anthro-
pological perspective, ontology and ethics are not to be addressed merely 
abstractly or only via consultation with the western philosophical canon. 
Approaching ethical drives empirically opens up the whole conceptual horizon 
of inquiry because it illuminates the diversity of human responses that can 
serve as answers or responses to the call of the ethical. As Karen Sykes put it, 
cultural phenomena can be understood as answers to questions we might 
think of as philosophical – for her, the ‘big questions’ are ontological, that is, 
‘What is life?’ questions. She argues that anthropologists ought to see their 
studies of culture as ‘answers’ or ‘responses’ to such ontological questions 
(2010: 169, see also Leistle 2016 for further elaboration of this line of think-
ing). Mattingly (under review) argues that in an analogous way the anthropo-
logical contribution to ethical matters, when put in conversation with 
phenomenological philosophy, reveals how culturally shaped ‘moral facts’ and 
‘moral experiences’ are socially situated responses to existential or ontological 
ethical questions.
Anthropological approaches that highlight the ‘experiential excesses’ of 
ethical life are especially suitable for exposing the ontological indeterminacy 
of the ethical domain. Many anthropologists would claim that investigations 
into the ‘actual’ or empirical are also investigations into the possible. This 

16	
Rasmus Dyring, Cheryl Mattingly and Maria Louw
claim can be contrasted with the distinction between anthropology and phi-
losophy that, for example, Lear makes in his beautiful book, Radical Hope 
(2006; see also Dyring in this volume). In this well-known work, Lear distin-
guishes his inquiry into possibility from anthropological considerations of 
what actually happened – in his case to the Crow peoples when the buffalo 
(and their traditional way of life) disappeared. However, for anthropologists, 
at least after the hermeneutical turn, there has been a profound doubt about 
our ability to get at ‘what really happened’ which stems exactly from the expe-
riential excesses of the anthropological encounter: the direct and disturbing 
experience of the limits of our familiar concepts.
These excesses arise not only in the confrontation with radically different 
worlds and ontologies, but also, and more importantly, in the confrontation 
with situations in which interlocutors themselves find that their own words and 
familiar concepts fail to adequately capture their experiences. Or, put more 
positively, there is a richness of ethical experience that seems to speak to what 
cannot be said, what might or might not have happened, what might or might 
not happen, in ways that simply exceed and elude structures of meaning. While 
we claim that this excessiveness at the empirical level is a gift for philosophy, it 
must be acknowledged that it has rarely been received as such. It is perhaps just 
these elusive disturbances, these ‘alien moons of reason’ (cf. Därmann 2005) that 
ethnography introduces that have so often sidelined it from philosophy. How is 
all this alterity and excess to be accounted for conceptually, even formally?
But the challenge of conceptual disturbance afflicts anthropology as well. 
Anthropology, as already noted, continues to lean heavily upon western schol-
arly traditions, including philosophy.6 Anthropologists cannot be congratu-
lated for being, somehow, more conceptually imaginative than philosophers. 
Both disciplines suffer from difficulty in getting past received assumptions. 
Despite the discipline’s longstanding insistence on contesting western styles of 
thought, anthropologists still find themselves confronted with the problem of 
how to listen. How can one attend to the voices and world views of interlocu-
tors so that these voices press insistently enough to disrupt one’s own received 
ways of thinking? How can one’s field experiences, styles of representation and 
theory building prompt a reconsideration of ‘our’ (philosophy’s or anthropol-
ogy’s) most basic assumptions and starting points? Certainly, these are not 
new questions or troubles for anthropology.
Our ambition here, which can by no means be fully realized, is to use this 
borderland inquiry to aid in creative destabilization. A conversation between 
the two is mutually beneficial when it can address this inevitable limitation. A 
useful recent example is anthropologist Veena Das’ discussion of Wittgenstein’s 
interpretation of Frazer’s The Golden Bough:
Wittgenstein’s great insight into Frazer’s The Golden Bough was that Frazer is 
unable to see that the feeling of dread that he attributes to the past dark crimes com-
mitted by savages is related to his own constricted imagination of the life of the 
other … Wittgenstein’s remarks of Frazer … are oriented to make us consider 

	
The Question of ‘Moral Engines’	
17
existence as always being capable of being more, or other, than its present realiza-
tions. (2015: 79–80) 
Here we have an anthropologist (Das) drawing upon a philosopher (Wittgenstein) 
to contest the imaginative failure of an earlier anthropologist (Frazer). Das finds 
that it is the philosopher who is able to see potentiality in the lives of Frazer’s 
‘savages’ in ways that Frazer, himself, is apparently blind to.
One example from the philosophy side, especially pertinent for this volume, 
is the way that Heidegger’s phenomenological terminology might be reconsid-
ered in light of ethnographic accounts of the everyday across a wide diversity of 
cultural contexts. Ethnography has the potential to provide thick descriptions 
(interpretations of other people’s interpretations, as Geertz [1973] formulated 
it)7 that render the concrete, ontic scene of the phenomenological, ontological 
investigation infinitely more profound than the conflated, average everydayness 
described in Being and Time. For phenomenology, an ethnographic vantage 
point that emphasizes the excessiveness of ordinary lived life entails an origi-
nary decentring of philosophical analysis. Ethnographic analysis may further 
disturb long-standing distinctions between reflection and everyday practical 
immersion or the ‘natural attitude’ by exploring how reflection can occur pre-
cisely through immersion in practical life (Mattingly [under review]; Mattingly 
and Jensen 2015; Mattingly 2014). Broadly speaking, ethnographic analysis 
reveals the inability of philosophical analysis to grasp everything in clear and 
distinct concepts and thus dethrones logical analysis as a ‘first science’.
While Heidegger’s critique of the western metaphysical tradition to a large 
extent remains a movement internal to this tradition, notably as an explora-
tion of its origins and the estranged resources of these origins, later continen-
tal philosophers – such as Levinas, Foucault, Derrida, Nancy – while not 
exactly drawing on ethnography, would be more open to the importance of 
instances of radical alterity that are irreducible to any intellectual tradition, yet 
constitutively at work at the core of human life (see Raffoul in this volume). In 
contemporary phenomenology, however, Bernhard Waldenfels seems to be 
the most open to the importance of engaging directly with the anthropological 
tradition in order to get a deeper understanding of the role of unassumable 
alterity or alienness in the very constitution of homely and familiar orders and 
in the very constitution of the ethical subject (Waldenfels 1999). We will 
return to Waldenfels’s responsive phenomenology of the alien later in this 
introduction.
Section Two: Moral Engines and Anthropology’s Ethical Turn – A 
Brief History of Core Themes and Debates
Around the turn of the millennium, several prominent anthropologists, quite 
independently of each other, started criticizing the discipline for having been 
reluctant to deal with morality and ethics other than as epiphenomena which 

18	
Rasmus Dyring, Cheryl Mattingly and Maria Louw
should be explained by reference to something else and presumably something 
more profound (e.g. social structure or economic and political interests) or, 
alternatively, as norms and values which dictate peoples’ behaviour, and called 
for situating moral experience, practice, reasoning and judgment at the centre 
of what anthropology should be concerned with and for refining our theoreti-
cal tools for doing so (Faubion 2001; Heintz 2009; Howell 1997; Kleinman 
1999; Lambek 2008, 2010a; Sykes 2009; Zigon 2007, 2008). Furthermore, a 
number of anthropological monographs were published which had morality 
and ethics as their central theme (see for example Basso 1996; Hirschkind 
2006; Mahmood 2005; Rasanayagam 2011; Robbins 2007; Rogers 2009).
An early landmark was James Laidlaw’s Malinowski Memorial Lecture in 
2001 (Laidlaw 2002), which programmatically called for an anthropology of 
ethics and freedom. As touched upon above, Laidlaw argued that in order for 
anthropology to develop a more informed theoretical reflection on the nature 
of ethics, it would be necessary to break with the Durkheimian understanding 
of morality which had so thoroughly permeated anthropological thought on 
the issue, leading anthropologists to equate the moral and the social, and find 
a way to describe the possibilities of human freedom. Most anthropologists 
who have since contributed to the anthropology of ethics and morality have 
agreed to some extent with this idea that we need to move beyond the 
Durkheimian legacy and similar theories of morality with strongly collectivist 
underpinnings (Lambek 2010a, 2010b, this volume; Zigon 2007, 2008; 
Mattingly 2012, 2014; for a notable exception, see Yan 2011). However, there 
has been less agreement about what this movement beyond the Durkheimian 
‘moral facts’ would imply and which alternative concepts of ethics and moral-
ity should inform it.
While the body of literature is growing rapidly, which makes it a somewhat 
difficult task to give a clear outline of the field and distinguish unequivocally 
the various trends within it, there are certain themes and positions that have 
played central and structuring roles since the beginning of the ethical turn. 
One central theoretical influence is Foucault, whose thinking has been enor-
mously influential on anthropology’s ethical turn. Foucauldian inspired 
approaches have been at the forefront of its theoretical development from the 
very beginning (notably Faubion 2001, 2011; Laidlaw 2002, 2014, this volume; 
Mahmood 2005).
At the same time, a second inspiration has been an orientation toward 
Aristotelian ethical thought, both in dialogue with and, sometimes, in clear 
opposition to the aforementioned Foucauldian take on ethics (for an influen-
tial example of the latter, see Mattingly 2012). Philosophy of language has 
provided a third major theoretical source of inspiration, especially among the 
proponents of the influential ‘ordinary ethics’ approach. Here Wittgenstein’s 
and Austin’s thoughts on the self-structuring capacity of language have played 
an important role, not least in dialogue with Cavell’s interpretations and 
further developments of these ideas (notably Das 2007, 2012; Lambek 2010a, 

	
The Question of ‘Moral Engines’	
19
2010b, this volume). A fourth recurring source of inspiration has been phe-
nomenological and hermeneutic philosophy (Mattingly 2010, this volume; 
Throop 2010, 2012, 2014, this volume; Zigon 2007, this volume).
In addition to this plethora of sources of inspiration, some key debates have 
begun to crystallize. Laidlaw (this volume: 175) suggests that the current debate 
in the anthropology of ethics should be seen as organized along the ‘fault lines’ 
emerging around a number of questions frequently recurring in the literature: 
who (or what) acts as an ethical subject? Is ethics immanent or not? Is freedom 
a necessary component of ethical life, and if so, what kind of freedom? The 
question of immanence that Laidlaw points to has been an especially conten-
tious one, and Laidlaw’s aforementioned chapter usefully reviews some of the 
crucial claims that have been made on various sides of this. On the ordinary 
side are those who argue for the pervasiveness of ethical life because ‘human 
action is always subject to criteria of evaluation’, and is part of practical reason-
ing, as Lambek contends (Laidlaw this volume: 182) or because it runs through 
the ‘un-dramatic actions’ of ‘apparently unremarkable people in modest cir-
cumstances’ and is largely tacit, as Das argues (ibid.). For others, ethics proper 
cannot be linked to the habitual or everyday but should be reserved for 
moments of disturbance, or even societal level break-down, when norms can 
no longer be unproblematically followed, provoking conscious, and reflective 
consideration of those norms. Zigon’s (2007) early work is a notable example of 
this position. A third position, in which Laidlaw places his own work, sees the 
ethical as a kind of range, a gradation that moves between the tacitness of in-
the-midst action and relatively more explicit moments, often characterized by 
a ‘standing back’ from action posture. According to Laidlaw, this variation can 
also be extended to collective entities, including an entire society’s ethical life. 
He argues that ‘ethical reflection is more concerted in some settings and insti-
tutions … and is subject at times to intensification’ (ibid: 184).
A related point of contention concerns whether or not ethics needs to be 
distinguished from morality. For example, in their highly influential work, 
Keane (2016) and Laidlaw (2014, this volume) both invoke Bernard Williams’ 
distinction between the ethical (involving the question ‘how should one live’) 
and morality, which refers ‘to a subset of answers to that general ethical ques-
tion’ that have been developed in particular historical times and places. These 
scholars find this distinction extremely useful in supporting a comparative 
analysis of different historically produced moral systems. Ethics may be an 
existential matter but how it is shaped – through morality systems – is a his-
torical and even classically anthropology matter. For other reasons, a number 
of scholars have resisted this division. Lambek, for instance, finds this vocabu-
lary problematic because those advocating it tend to remove ethics from every-
day life. He calls upon Aristotle’s claim that ‘wise judgment entails reflection 
and feeling’, ‘can occur before, during, and after the act’ (this volume: 141) and 
is thoroughly ordinary. It does not make sense, from Lambek’s perspective, to 
make a strong demarcation between habitual convention (glossed as ‘morality’) 

20	
Rasmus Dyring, Cheryl Mattingly and Maria Louw
and a stepping out of action kind of evaluation (glossed as ‘ethics’). Along dif-
ferent lines, Mattingly has identified the most notable division in the difference 
between authors who proceed from a poststructuralist or Foucauldian analyti-
cal framework, focusing on how moral selves are shaped within particular dis-
cursive regimes, and authors who, like herself, proceed from a first-person 
perspective, emphasizing moral life in more experiential and interpersonal 
terms as a struggle often characterized by doubt and ambiguity (Mattingly 2012 
and 2014).
Section Three: The Question of ‘Moral Engines’ as a Radical 
Anthropological Project – Three Approaches to ‘Moral Engines’
Although the sources of inspiration and thematic debates within anthropology 
are readily visible in the anthropological contributions to the book, our par-
ticular point of departure, and the borderland nature of our inquiry, leads us 
to identify some rather different ‘fault lines’ than those Laidlaw (this volume) 
considers. By asking the authors to engage the question of what the moral 
drives in human life are, where they are located and how they present them-
selves to us, we have asked them to make explicit the most basic dimensions 
of their respective approaches to the ethical.
As noted earlier, we have identified three categories or kinds of answers to 
the question of what constitutes an ethical drive: 1) some authors focus pri-
marily on the concrete instantiation and social shape of the moral in such 
phenomena as values, criteria and standards; 2) some authors stress the fea-
tures of moral experience and the experiential dimensions of being ethically 
committed or confronted by an ethical demand; and 3) finally, some authors 
explore the existential roots of morality as a way to investigate what it is to be 
human. In distinguishing these three analytic strategies, one of our objectives 
is to help to clarify certain theoretical and ontological assumptions about the 
ethical that often remain unthematized in current anthropological debates. A 
related aim is to examine how apparently diverging approaches to the most 
foundational registers of ethical life may reveal complementary, and thus 
ontologically enmeshed, aspects of the same phenomena.
As can easily be recognized, each of these strategies addresses the question 
of ethical drives from a somewhat different angle. Naturally, this entails a pri-
oritization of the aspects of the phenomenon under consideration, and 
perhaps even certain analytical blind spots. Hence, a cautionary point to stress 
is that none of the approaches can stand alone in providing an exhaustive 
account of the ‘moral engines’ in practical life. Rather, a sufficiently rich explo-
ration of something as complex and multifarious as moral life, and the 
impulses and drives that charge it, demands multiple viewpoints, however 
uneasily they may sometimes sit with one another. Bringing multiple frame-
works to bear, as we do here, is intended to allow those aspects of ethical life 

	
The Question of ‘Moral Engines’	
21
naturally foregrounded within one given framework to complement and even 
cross-pollinate with the others. Indeed, such complementarity and cross-
pollination can be seen in several of the individual chapters. Each of them, 
even when largely showcasing one approach, is intent on rendering the moral 
scene in complex ways and thus none of them fall exclusively and without 
residue within one of the three categories. Despite this overlap, we have, for 
reasons of theoretical clarity, chosen to group the chapters under the heading 
of that general approach which an individual chapter most illuminates.
We describe them below in an order that begins with the most well-known 
anthropological approach (emphasizing what we have called ‘moral fact’) 
because this is the one most obviously situated in the discipline’s long history 
of concern with the structures of social communities. However, we should 
note that this is not the order of the chapters in the volume itself. Here, we 
open with the chapters that contribute most directly to a ‘moral experience’ 
approach. These speak most obviously to the kind of borderland inquiry that 
this book, as a whole, takes up, which is situated between phenomenological 
philosophy and anthropology.
First Approach: Moral Engines and ‘Moral Facts’
One way of approaching the question of moral engines, very familiar to anthro-
pologists, considers the concrete instantiations of the moral or ethical in such 
phenomena as values, criteria and ethical standards. Despite the aforemen-
tioned break with the Durkheimian understanding of morality that in many 
respects inaugurated the anthropology of ethics and morality, this first 
approach retains some degree of affinity with the Durkheimian focus inasmuch 
as it seeks to preserve some version of the category of ‘moral facts’, of cultural, 
historical, discursive schematics that grant certain practical possibilities. At the 
same time, it infuses this focus with a sensitivity to the ethical and practical 
dynamics that participate in establishing obligations and commitments, estab-
lishing certain forms of subjectivity and in preventing or furthering cultural 
change. Hence, we should not, as Joel Robbins warns us, ‘throw out the 
Durkheimian baby with the bathwater of too rigid models of cultural reproduc-
tion’ (Robbins 2007: 295). Rather, as Michael Lambek points out in one of the 
already ‘canonical’ texts in the anthropology of ethics, once the emphasis in the 
investigation of social phenomena is shifted from a focus on rules and regula-
tions in the classical, positivist Durkheimian sense to an Aristotelian focus on 
action and practical judgment, there is ‘no great methodological danger in dis-
solving the ethical into the social…’ (Lambek 2010a: 28).
Three chapters foreground such overall approaches to the question of 
moral engines. Lambek’s chapter focuses on the performative constitution of 
ethical criteria as that which sets up the standards whence practical, moral 
obligation arises and according to which concrete acts and, moreover, 

22	
Rasmus Dyring, Cheryl Mattingly and Maria Louw
practical life on the whole can be judged. In arguing for ethics as immanent, 
he recognizes an affinity with Durkheim, but with important differences. 
‘Where Durkheim saw morality as a function of rules or structure’, Lambek 
proposes seeing it as a matter of ‘action and criteria’, believing that this offers 
a ‘less static, less determined, and less mechanical’ picture than the one so 
often associated with Durkheim (this volume: 139). Lambek calls upon 
Aristotle to propose what he calls a ‘middle path’ between a view of ethics that 
treats it as correct rule following and another view that treats is a courageous 
willingness to ‘ignore, subvert, or transcend rules’ (ibid.). He finds in Aristotle’s 
theory of practice judgment a ‘middle path’ that recognizes that circumstances 
demand judgments about what actions to take where the correctness of judg-
ments cannot be ascertained in any straightforward sense but are open to 
debate and challenge. As Aristotle points out, ‘the good or right thing to do in 
a given set of circumstances, or how to do it, is not always obvious’ (ibid.: 140). 
He finds Aristotle’s notion of ‘balance’ useful in considering what is demanded 
by good judgment; one must find the right balance (among various claims to 
our attention, desire, interests, etc.) to fit the circumstances.
Robbins undertakes an exploration of cultural values and, more specifically, 
of where in our practical everyday worlds they can be said to reside. Robbins 
finds Durkheim a useful thinker for exploring the role of values, recalling 
Durkheim’s suggestion that moral facts are ‘ones that awaken in people a com-
bined sense of both duty and desire’ (Robbins this volume: 155). He notes that 
anthropologists have often relied on Durkheim’s emphasis on the moral as a 
generator of duty and obligation but he suggests that we might take up a less 
explored Durkheimian-inspired path by investigating the connection of the 
moral to desire – ‘the desire we have to do what is good’ (ibid.). Thus Robbins 
aims to offer us a rough sketch of moral social psychology.
Both Lambek and Robbins address the question of ‘moral engines’ by focus-
ing on how the concrete instantiations of the moral or the ethical can be said 
to harbour some kind of binding and hence obligatory force; i.e. how criteria 
come to commit, how values make their claim. Laidlaw’s work can also be seen 
as retaining some of the concerns addressed by Durkheim, although strongly 
disputing the sociologist’s neglect of the role of freedom in morality. Laidlaw 
wants to be able to continue to carry out some version of the comparative 
ethnographic project that was inspired by Durkheim’s social vision while 
avoiding social determinism. Laidlaw’s invocation of Williams’ distinction 
between ethics and morality allows him to preserve a place for continued and 
deepened comparative exploration of the social contours of moral life. Laidlaw 
also calls upon recent work by Jonathan Lear to shore up this comparative 
ambition in a way that moves beyond the traditional Durkheimian project, 
proposing a research programme in comparative analysis that foregrounds not 
merely morality systems but ethical capacities (treated as conscious evaluative 
reflection). Laidlaw poses the following question: ‘When – under what social 
and political conditions – might people’s capacity for reflection be encouraged 

	
The Question of ‘Moral Engines’	
23
and when might it be discouraged?’ He suggests an ethnographic inquiry that 
would consider ‘the forms, constraints, and possibilities of ethical life under 
diverse political regimes and circumstances … the possibilities of ethical life 
they respectively promote and inhibit’ (Laidlaw this volume: 190).
Webb Keane’s recent and already influential work, Ethical Life (2016), 
addresses at least part of Laidlaw’s proposed agenda for comparative inquiry 
into the constraints and possibilities of ethical reflection under various social 
and political conditions. Although Keane is not a contributor to this collec-
tion, he is worth some discussion because he offers a significant articulation of 
how such a comparative project might be carried out. His ethical framework 
bears some important resemblances to Laidlaw’s; it also highlights the capac-
ity for ethical evaluation, or as he puts it ‘accountability’. He argues that ethical 
reflexivity, in the form of evaluation and accountability, is pervasive. He 
focuses on the minute social exchanges that comprise everyday life to reveal 
this. The central reflexive property of social interaction he examines is the 
ability to take an outsider (or third-person) perspective on oneself. Such per-
spective taking, he contends, is ubiquitous in ordinary social interaction and 
it is essential to ethics, it is part of the very ordinary call to be accountable for 
ourselves and our actions. He explores the kinds of social conditions that 
‘induce reflexivity’ (2016: 25) by introducing the felicitous concept of ethical 
affordance.
The very term ‘affordance’ draws attention to the way that social situations 
and cultural semiotics need not be thought of as deterministic but rather as 
offering a set of potentialities embedded in everyday action (‘A chair may 
invite you to sit but it does not determine that you will sit’ [2016: 28]). Ethical 
affordances, according to Keane, are ‘the opportunities that any experiences 
might offer as people evaluate themselves, other persons, and their circum-
stances’ (2016: 31). For example, he notes the presence of multiple ethical 
worlds that characterize many (if not all) people’s lives, whatever the commu-
nity. He argues that the co-existence and clashes of ‘historically constituted 
ethical worlds’ provide ‘crucial stimuli to moral reflection’ (2016: 124). In 
proposing his notion of ethical affordances, Keane takes up the ‘Durkheim 
problem’ by treating ‘moral facts’ not as straightforward causes of ethical 
behaviour but rather as resources that are, in different times and places, 
socially available.
Second Approach: Moral Engines and Human Experience
A second way to approach the question of ‘moral engines’ is to focus on the 
very experience of being the sort of creatures for whom not only biological 
and economic necessity, but also the practical necessity of ethical demands, 
make claims. The main analytical unit of this kind of approach is thus what is 
often called moral experience (see Kleinman 1999, 2006; Zigon and Throop 

24	
Rasmus Dyring, Cheryl Mattingly and Maria Louw
2014). In this approach the ethical is investigated by examining closely the 
experiential and often affective registers of ethical praxis. As Zigon and 
Throop have recently put it,
[a] focus on experience foregrounds the fact that our existence as humans is framed 
by our particular perspectives, vantage points, and embodied emplacements within 
a given social world. The aspectual, partial, perspectival, situated, horizon-defined, 
and horizon-defining modes of being that characterize our existence as humans, as 
well as the particular forms of revealing and concealing associated with them, is thus 
necessarily implicated in a turn to examine the experience of morality. (Zigon and 
Throop 2014: 6)
Whereas the first approach to the question of moral engines sketched above 
engages critically with the ‘moral facts’ of ethical standards, criteria and values 
and the dynamics in which they are established, this second, experiential 
approach to the ethical is to a greater extent directed towards what in phe-
nomenology has been termed the facticity of human existence; that is, towards 
the very ‘fact’ that we are always already, as Zigon and Throop describe it 
above, thrown into a world, and towards the ethical ramifications of the bur-
densome or boring, anxious or joyous, or regrettable, despairing or perhaps 
disappointed experience of this, the ‘thrownness’ of our being.
One important characteristic of the ethicality of human life foregrounded 
in this perspective is a poignant sense of being committed ethically; a sense of 
commitment that oftentimes is neither easily accounted for nor necessarily 
transparent and meaningful to those undergoing it, nor easily answered, let 
alone, satisfied, however viscerally one feels one ought to adhere to it. In all 
such cases it becomes manifest that it is experience itself, as Kleinman puts it, 
that is moral because experience here ‘is the medium of engagement in every-
day life in which things are at stake and in which ordinary people are deeply 
engaged stake-holders who have important things to lose, to gain, and to pre-
serve’ (Kleinman 1999: 8).
This experiential approach provides another register for exploring how the 
ethical infiltrates everyday life, one that also takes us some distance from 
unconscious rule-following. Throop’s chapter, for example, concerns regret as 
a ‘mooded’ response to our life situations and to our past. Like many other 
contributors, he depicts the ethical in relation to some kind of striving toward 
the ‘best possible’ life, in other words, some orientation to the good. This is a 
matter of ‘thinking well of oneself’ (or striving to) but it should not be treated 
as a kind of thinking so much as a form of affectivity. He introduces ‘regret’ as 
a way to consider this. In offering regret as a mood that is also a form of attune-
ment to the worlds we inhabit, he suggests that the ethical is a pervasive aspect 
of everyday life. However, in drawing upon Husserl and Heidegger’s phenom-
enology, Throop introduces a quite different vocabulary and perspective for 
thinking about the ordinariness of ethical life than we find among some of the 
other anthropological contributors in this volume. (See Lambek, in this volume, 

	
The Question of ‘Moral Engines’	
25
for an illuminating contrast.) If moods like regret represent something disposi-
tional, even immanent, the immanence they reveal has a highly subjunctive 
quality. Regret, Throop argues, is linked to a desire for a different world (Troop 
this volume: 68). If a mood tells us about dominant, socially shared, modes of 
practical life, it does so through an indirect path because it foregrounds how 
people situate themselves in relation to possible lives – ones that they did not 
live and perhaps even ones that are no longer culturally available. In the vocab-
ulary of Wentzer (in this volume), it speaks of an ‘immanent transcendence’.
Louw’s chapter also suggests this quality of ‘immanent transcendence’ that 
belongs to everyday life, offering an extended meditation on the complexity of 
moral emotions among Uzbek Sufis. She paints a deeply, even tragically, para-
doxical ethical scene in which the Uzbeks have come to try to re-embrace their 
Muslim religious heritage after seventy years of Soviet rule and its suppres-
sion. For them, the embracing also reveals the depth of loss in which they no 
longer know how to be ‘real Sufis’. Louw insists from the beginning that in 
speaking about their religious experience, she is not locating it in some trans-
cendent realm beyond ordinary life but in terms of a this worldly virtue ethics. 
She asks such questions as: how is religion lived in ordinary life? How is it 
interlaced with other ethical concerns and commitments? How does it help to 
shape moral emotions? For the Uzbeks she has come to know, the ethical 
shows up in everyday life through paradoxes.
Remorse, as the visceral emotional presence of paths not taken and lives 
not lived, is the central theme of Louw’s chapter. She takes up Derrida’s 
concept of the ghostly presence of something that has disappeared and yet still 
haunts the present: ‘Haunting describes the seething presence of what appears 
not to be there, the ghost or apparition being a form through which something 
barely visible or lost makes itself known’ (Louw this volume: 90). Louw draws 
from this to develop the notion of a haunted ethics: ‘the moral choices one did 
not make, but could have made; the moral acts one did not engage in, but 
could have engaged in; and the moral person one did not become but could 
have become – in short, by the moral potential in all that which is discarded in 
the search for moral perfection’ (ibid.). Her investigation into ethical remorse 
underscores that the status of everyday ethics is precarious because the moral 
foundations are shaky (ibid.: 84).
Meinert offers yet another portrait of an everyday ethics that is neither 
mundane nor unconsciously habitual. Rather, in her ethnographic case, ordi-
nary activities become the vehicle for extraordinary moral acts. Meinert takes 
us to postwar Northern Uganda, where the everyday serves as a moral and 
cultural resource for this task of creating a space for living; crucially, in her 
account, this demands acts of forgiveness. She argues that forgiveness has 
become an essential task for Northern Ugandans as they try to resettle into 
their old social communities. The everydayness of these actions, and the 
mundane cultural resources that they rely upon, reveal the everyday as a pre-
carious venture and as posing a certain relentless ethical demand: it is an Every 

26	
Rasmus Dyring, Cheryl Mattingly and Maria Louw
Day (Meinert this volume: 100). While in this postwar period there have been 
highly public and extraordinary measures aimed at forgiveness, most notably 
extensive rituals and criminal trials which have been highly publicized by the 
media, these are not practices that people seem to trust very much to achieve 
anything. Rather, it is through more humble, less visible acts that the rebuild-
ing of community relies. Meinert insists that in this ethnographic situation, 
morality is not a taken for granted matter, some kind of ‘unconscious cultural 
compulsion’ (ibid.: 101). She finds it more useful to adopt Robbins’ discussion 
of the ethical as a field of values which may attract but certainly do not compel 
people to act in light of them. She also argues that in this situation, these 
Ugandans have a heightened awareness of the morality of every single action 
that is taken. This situation of heightened attention also creates potentiality; 
new possibilities for community making arise.
Some proponents of neo-Aristotian ethical approaches who foreground 
moral experience bring in narratological theory to examine the emplotment of 
moral experience and the particular temporal organization that ethical teleol-
ogy grants human experience. This has been much more common in philoso-
phy than anthropology. In her chapter, Mattingly argues that in promoting a 
narrative version of the self, virtue ethics philosophers have tended to offer an 
overly coherent picture of self-becoming. In taking up this narrative self, 
Mattingly sets out to confront the limitations of its usual formulation. Drawing 
upon an ethnographic of one mother facing the death of her young child, she 
argues that if we are to attend to the excessiveness of the ethical demand, as 
phenomenologists insist, and if we call upon narrative to consider this, then 
narrative must be able to offer something more complex and more ambiguous 
than self as sameness over time or as mere linear progression (in a novice to 
expert fashion). The narrative self that Mattingly proposes is more like an 
experimental self, someone who, in response to ethical demands, engages in 
narrative experiments, actively living out ‘imaginative variations that destabi-
lize narrative identity’ (Ricoeur 1988: 249).
Because the chapters in this section give prominence to an experiential 
approach to the question of moral engines, they also emphasize (ethnographi-
cally and philosophically) a first-person perspective. A conceptual figure that 
recurs in several of them, where the authors attempt to capture the practical 
experience of being drawn into moral matters or ethical quandaries, is the 
figure of responsiveness. Accordingly, ethical phenomena might be described 
in terms of acts and stories or moods, even dreams and hauntings, that are 
performed, told or that arise in response to some ethical demand that 
encroaches in all registers of existence to make its claim. Bernhard Waldenfels, 
the German phenomenologist who more than any other philosopher has 
pursued the dynamics of human responsiveness, writes of the logic of such 
responsive phenomena, that when struck by an ethical or existential demand, 
‘I cannot not respond … even so, it is still I who engage with or evade it’ 
(Waldenfels 2006: 109, our translation).

	
The Question of ‘Moral Engines’	
27
This responsive logic entails several important aspects. First, such demands 
in a sense single out their addressees, strike them in their singularity; the 
ethical situation arises here and now and demands of exactly me or us that we 
engage with or evade it. Secondly, they institute a sphere of practical necessity; 
whether I attempt to meet the demand or evade it, I still respond to it. Thirdly, 
such demands can never be mastered and assimilated to one’s own being or 
practical agenda, and hence they can never be adequately satisfied and ulti-
mately quenched. Any response can at best be an approximating attempt to 
meet the demand. Several chapters in this volume point to instances of moral 
experience in which ethical demands faced by informants exceed the latter’s 
capacities or the practical acts that may be taken to respond to them. Not 
surprisingly, such moral experiences are often heavily laden with pathos and 
manifest in affects like nostalgia and regret, as examined by Jason Throop 
(2014 and this volume), in the disappointment with or despair in the face of 
improbable or failed moral experiments, as found in Cheryl Mattingly’s work 
(2014, this volume), in the precarious experience of a call for forgiveness that 
makes a relentless demand but never really fulfils its promise of restoring 
trust, as explored in Lotte Meinert’s chapter (this volume), or in the spectral 
experience of ethical inadequacy which Maria Louw explores in her chapter 
on the hauntology of discarded ethical possibilities (this volume).
Finally, as a fourth aspect of the responsive logic we find responsive 
freedom, which is explicitly addressed in Rasmus Dyring’s chapter (this 
volume). The idea here is that although I cannot ‘not’ respond when struck by 
ethical or existential demands, it is nonetheless ‘I’ who have to respond in my 
own name. As Waldenfels points out, this procedure of finding a proper 
answer is always, potentially at least, erfinderisch; that is to say, a creative, 
experimental, inventive process that supersedes the limits of the given order 
of things and opens new horizons (Waldenfels 2006: 118). With originary 
creativity lodged in the responsive dynamic, a notion of freedom enters into 
the exploration of moral experience, which, contrary to highly contested 
Enlightenment notions of freedom as pure, unaffected, willing, of independ-
ent, autonomous individuality, is a kind of freedom that is found to begin 
elsewhere than in the individual, a freedom that inheres in the very process of 
responding to something beyond one’s command and power.
Dyring addresses responsive freedom by calling attention to the role of pos-
sibility and its relation to the ethical in both philosophy and anthropology. He 
sees some convergences but also some differences. He identifies four ways in 
which freedom and underdetermined possibility, whether explicitly invoked or 
implicitly presumed, play a role in the anthropology of ethics: (1) as an exercise 
or practice rather than an a priori fact of nature or transcendental reason; (2) 
as an activity that ‘takes place within a range of culturally granted possibilities’; 
(3) as an aspect of character formation; and (4) as something that entails a 
degree of reflectivity and consciousness (Dyring this volume: 120). While 
agreeing with the anthropology of ethics in this emphasis on possibility, Dyring 

28	
Rasmus Dyring, Cheryl Mattingly and Maria Louw
argues that it should be supplemented with more radical considerations of the 
ontological relationship between such modal categories as the real and the pos-
sible and the existential conditions of possibility of the concrete ethical possi-
bilities that afford themselves in a given situation. Dyring has to proceed 
carefully here. He does not want to appear to align with a notion of conditions 
of possibility in the Kantian sense – that is, the ‘a priori conditions that make 
possible empirical experience’ – conditions unavailable to experience. Rather, 
as a phenomenologist, Dyring argues that the conditions of possibility are 
experientially available.
He calls upon both Jonathan Lear and Kierkegaard to make his case. He 
notes that possibility in Lear’s well-known case of the Crows is not directed to 
‘intentional, deliberative action’ but to another register characterized by a 
‘pathos of anxiety’ and a ‘posture of hope’ (ibid.: 122). This register is better 
explored in a Kierkegaardian sense in which freedom becomes actual in 
anxiety. Anxiety is a special term here that does important analytic work. 
Unlike fear, which is about something, freedom – made actual in anxiety – 
‘has no object, it is an experience that experiences no definite thing … and as 
such it harbours an experiential disclosure of possibility as such’ (ibid.: 123). 
Focusing on an unsettling experience prompted by a peculiar artwork, Dyring 
explores this anxiety and its relation to the dynamics of responsive freedom. 
(For further discussion of the notion of responsive freedom, but as related to 
the ethical concept of responsibility, see Raffoul in this volume.)
The notion of ethical responsiveness that comes to the fore between the 
various authors who, with more or less theoretical explication, describe the 
ethical as procedures of responding has a wider span than is captured by an 
ethics that focuses only on reflective and intentional responses. Ethical 
responsiveness in this experiential sense resonates immediately with all regis-
ters of human existence. This is why pathos, sentiments, moods also play such 
prominent roles in this perspective. The frequent use of the idiom of respon-
siveness, hence, explicitly or implicitly, holds a potential for the development 
of notions of freedom that emphasize other experiential dimensions than the 
more intellectualist dimensions of reflectivity.
Third Approach: Moral Engines and the Human Condition
A third approach to the question of moral engines emerges when exploring the 
relationship between ethics – and the ethical broadly speaking – and what is 
held to be the specifically human. The strategy here is to explore whether, and 
if so, how, ethical drive and the urgency of ethical demands can be traced to 
the very conditions of human existence as such. This third path has a strong 
affinity with the second in the sense that it builds upon the exploration of 
ethical phenomena through experience-near ethnographic and phenomeno-
logical means, but posing it as a distinctive third strategy suggests another way 

	
The Question of ‘Moral Engines’	
29
that anthropology and philosophy can be in fruitful conversation. It is not 
surprising that the ethical turn in anthropology has also been a turn (and 
sometimes a return) to philosophy. This volume highlights anthropological 
engagements with ordinary language philosophy, philosophy of action, virtue 
ethics, political philosophy, and existential and phenomenological traditions. 
But what becomes clear in putting anthropological considerations of the 
ethical alongside philosophical ones is how much this recent anthropological 
work has the potential to reinvigorate the radical philosophical anthropologi-
cal questions: what is the human being? What characterizes human existence 
as such?
Not surprisingly, the three contributing phenomenological philosophers 
(Wentzer, Raffoul and Dyring) are most concerned to articulate what is at 
stake in this ambition to address the question of the human from the perspec-
tive of responsive phenomenology. However, the anthropological contributors 
to this volume who highlight the importance of experience for ethical life also 
draw inspiration from the existential phenomenological tradition. They illus-
trate the phenomenological point that the being-committed that arises with 
the factical experience of the lived human life is established neither on the 
collective level as a collection of facts, rules and regulations, nor in a causal 
sequence as the necessary consequence of a given cause. Rather, this being-
committed channels, at its core, an irreducible demand that emanates from 
finite, singular human existence as such. This radical existential dimension 
that resides just below the surface of the experiential focus indicates strongly 
what these anthropological investigations might fruitfully contribute to a phil-
osophical anthropology of the human condition.
Zigon’s chapter is an anthropological contribution that explicitly connects 
this experiential focus to claims about the human condition, and as such raises 
questions addressed most thoroughly by the two philosophical chapters in 
Section Three. Though grounded within his ethnographic material, Zigon 
directly argues the importance of considering the question of ‘the human’ in 
relation to any project to articulate ethics. However, he expresses this ambi-
tion in a particularly cautionary way and as a challenge to any version of meta-
physical humanism that might creep into a consideration of ethical life. He 
contrasts ‘an ethical imperative for human existence’ with the ‘metaphysical 
humanism’ that he believes characterizes not only much of moral philosophy 
but also, increasingly, anthropology’s studies of ethics. He recognizes that 
both the notion of dwelling and the vocabulary of dignity ‘make claims about 
the essential “nature” of being human’ (Zigon this volume: 203) but the status 
of these claims is very different, he argues. Metaphysical humanists assert the 
notion of a ‘predefined human with very specific characteristics and capaci-
ties’ while the sort of ethical imperative he proposes does not do so. He pro-
poses ‘dwelling’ as a useful way to understand human life because it involves a 
simpler and less normatively freighted ‘claim that to be human is to be inti-
mately intertwined with a world for which one is concerned and which is 

30	
Rasmus Dyring, Cheryl Mattingly and Maria Louw
concerned, in turn, for it’ (ibid.: 204). Zigon’s concern is to create or borrow 
from vocabularies that help us to see human existence as a space of possibility, 
including in ways that do not tie us to moral vocabularies that seem to presup-
pose too much about what it means to be human or to be an ethical being.
Wentzer’s chapter is particularly useful as an entry into a philosophical 
discussion of a responsive ethics that directly addresses the question of what 
it means to be human. He takes on the task of noting points of convergence 
but also some crucial differences between his responsive approach and some 
dominant positions within anthropology. He outlines three primary claims 
that characterize a responsive approach: 1) that life is characterized by an 
essential human indeterminacy; 2) that the ethical claims we face exceed our 
ability to respond or even to account for them through our normative catego-
ries; and 3) most centrally that exploring the ethical demands a first-person 
phenomenology in order to illuminate these first two conditions, namely 
‘being in a state of ontological indeterminacy and ethical overload’ (Wentzer 
this volume: 215).
As he explores these three claims, Wentzer comes to some important con-
clusions that distinguish his phenomenological approach from some of the 
frameworks taken up within the anthropology of ethics, and can be seen in 
some of the other chapters in this volume. While he recognizes that the notion 
of the human as undetermined developed in German philosophical anthropol-
ogy does entail some ‘elements about human agency and freedom’ (ibid.: 218), 
the issue of freedom as connected to ‘reason, consciousness or language’ are 
not presupposed in it. Rather, human freedom is linked to this existential con-
dition of indeterminacy as an ontological condition coupled with the burden 
of action – ‘we have to lead a life instead of just living it’ (ibid.: 219). Humans 
are ‘world-open creatures that are not bound to an environment but released 
to the world’ (ibid.: 218). This release carries with it the burden that responsiv-
ity entails. ‘Responsiveness is the name for a way to cope with one’s fragile and 
finite existence that captures our being called upon to act anyway’ (ibid.: 222).
There are certainly some key differences between the way that many 
anthropologists have been considering matters like the role of freedom and 
normativity in ethical life and what Wentzer proposes here. However, as he 
develops his thesis, Wentzer does not emphasize difference so much as points 
of convergence or resonance. He finds the ethnographic insistence of anthro-
pology, especially when it is taken up as a kind of ‘existential anthropology’, 
particularly important. As he puts it: ‘Maybe one may say that existential 
anthropology actually indicates the intersection between philosophical 
anthropology and ethnography, approachable from both ends, with the first-
person-perspective and a sensitivity for the universal relevance of lived experi-
ence with its ethical quandaries as its vantage point’ (ibid.: 219).
Francois Raffoul’s chapter sharpens our understanding of what a phenom-
enological portrait of ethics can contribute to an investigation of what it 
means to be human as a responsive being. Among all the chapters, his is most 

	
The Question of ‘Moral Engines’	
31
explicit in setting up a contrast between the kind of philosophical anthropol-
ogy that builds upon an existential picture of human life and one that draws 
upon Kant’s seminal formulations. Raffoul contrasts two notions of responsi-
bility (as a foundational ethical concept) and the distinct ethical scenes that 
surround them. Both treat responsibility as the heart of ethics but in very dif-
ferent, perhaps even irreconcilable, ways. The traditional version links respon-
sibility to accountability. It is credited primarily to Kant, though with a reach 
that goes back to Aristotle and Plato. The other, which Raffoul favours, arises 
from post-Nietzschean phenomenological philosophy. Here, responsibility is 
linked to responsiveness: the ‘motif of the call’.
Several motifs characterize the phenomenological picture of responsibility 
that Raffoul draws. Notably, all of these portray responsibility in terms of the 
experience of responding, as befits a phenomenological approach. First, it is, 
in the first instance, passive. We are responsible not because we are able to 
begin something but because of a prior something that initiates – we are 
exposed ‘to an event that does not come from us and yet calls us’ (Raffoul this 
volume: 236). Second, responsibility is not, primarily (or at all), directed to the 
self. It certainly cannot be characterized by an effort of self-mastery of some 
sovereign subject. Rather, it involves a response to an other, an alterity that 
makes its demands. Third, the demands made upon us exceed our capacity. 
Responding – or responding adequately – is, in an important sense, impossi-
ble. Thus the call for care is also a burden that exposes our own finitude (ibid.: 
236). If we are free, Sartre tells us, we are ‘condemned to be free’ (ibid.: 238). 
Our vulnerability to our own finitude, in the face of impossible or excessive 
demands, reveals why the whole notion of responsibility as accountability is 
utterly flawed. It does not make sense to presume that we can use our reason 
to respond adequately in ways that could be justified after the fact. This picture 
simply fails to understand the deeper, ontological nature of how responsibility 
engages us. Finally, we are responsible for a future – for what is to come – but 
this future has an openness we can never fully envision or control. Rather, it is 
characterized by an unforeseeability; it is unapproachable even as we approach 
it (ibid.: 240). We can think about the future in an immediate eventful sense, 
the way we are ‘respondents, not absolute beginners’ in any situation, or we 
can consider this in a more long-term sense as when we consider the future of 
our children and the next generations, or the fate of the planet. Whatever the 
horizon, our vulnerability and finitude is exposed.
Conclusion
To sum up and state things in their boldest terms, the trope of moral engines 
suggests that inquiry into the ethical has its natural home neither in anthro-
pology nor philosophy alone but in a borderland between them. The point of 
entering this borderland is not to provide a general overview of philosophical 

32	
Rasmus Dyring, Cheryl Mattingly and Maria Louw
and anthropological theories of morality and ethics. Rather, by exploring the 
question of what drives or propels ethical life, this volume aims to generate 
scholarly, interdisciplinary debate on a topic that has not yet been given the 
theoretical attention that its importance warrants.
Our suggestion has been that a preliminary way of addressing the question 
of moral engines opens if we follow the intuition that this inquiry into the 
‘engine’ in ethical and moral matters is an inquiry into their drives or impulses, 
including the ontological or existential roots of the ethical as such. Hence, this 
kind of inquiry entails an effort to shed light on the urgency, the imperative 
quality or the practical necessity with which such matters present themselves 
to us, and to place analytical emphasis on the questions of the constitution of 
this urgency, of the status of such imperative qualities, of whence comes this 
practical necessity or commitment so poignantly felt in ethical dilemmas.
This kind of inquiry provides a vantage point for critically questioning the 
most commonly deployed ethical concepts. In fact, there is a thread of critique 
about received ethical concepts running through many of the contributing 
chapters. For anthropologists, this is often spurred on by the experiential 
excesses of the ethnographic encounter itself. Implicitly or explicitly, authors 
ask: do dominant vocabularies of morality do justice to the particular ethical 
demands people face? Are these vocabularies capable of grasping the properly 
ethical drive unfolding in human practice? The commitment to experience-
nearness, so central to anthropological research, is thus not abandoned with 
the turn toward the fundamental question of moral engines and the venture 
into the borderlands between anthropology and philosophy. Even the more 
philosophical contributions in this volume remain true to this commitment by 
stressing phenomenological analysis as opposed to logical deductions and 
simplistic thought experiments. Hence, contributors – both anthropologists 
and philosophers – draw upon complicating ethnographic or aesthetic cases, 
suggesting potential paths for a conceptual development that might be better 
equipped to address the ethical dimensions and moral engines of human life.
Cheryl Mattingly, Ph.D. is Professor of Anthropology in the Department 
of Anthropology at the University of Southern California. She was a Dale T. 
Mortensen Fellow at Aarhus University’s Institute of Advanced Studies (2013–
2015) and is a 2017 recipient of a John Simon Guggenheim fellowship. She has 
been the PI and Co-PI on federally funded grants from National Institutes of 
Health, Maternal and Child Health and the Department of Education. She has 
received numerous awards from the American Anthropological Association, 
including the Victor Turner Book Prize for Healing Dramas and Clinical Plots 
(Cambridge 1998), the Stirling Book Prize for The Paradox of Hope: Journeys 
Through a Clinical Borderland (2010, University of California Press), the New 
Millennium Book Prize for Moral Laboratories: Family Peril and the Struggle for 
a Good Life (2014, University of California Press), and the Polgar Essay Prize for 
‘In Search of the Good: Narrative Reasoning in Clinical Practice’ (1998).

	
The Question of ‘Moral Engines’	
33
Rasmus Dyring is Assistant Professor at the Department of Philosophy and 
History of Ideas, Aarhus University. In dialogue with the anthropology of 
ethics, Dyring’s research aims at foregrounding the existential dimensions of 
ethical life. He has published several articles on this subject, for instance, ‘A 
Spectacle of Disappearance’ (Tropos, 2015).
Maria Louw is Associate Professor at the Department of Anthropology, 
Aarhus University. She is the author of ‘Everyday Islam in Post-Soviet Central 
Asia’ (Routledge, 2007) and a number of other publications focusing on reli-
gion, secularism, atheism and morality in Central Asia.
Notes
  1.	 In this introductory chapter, while we do not distinguish ‘morality’ from ‘ethics’ as con-
cepts, we recognize that several of the contributing authors, for various theoretical 
reasons, do make such a distinction. We briefly discuss some of these reasons in a later 
section of the introduction.
  2.	 Several of the authors contributing to this volume will feature in the special issue ‘The 
Human Condition: Reinventing Philosophical Anthropology’ (edited by Cheryl Mattingly 
and Thomas S. Wentzer), forthcoming in HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory.
  3.	 Aristotle’s doctrine of ethical teleology is not mechanistic. Ethical striving is natural, but 
excellence does not happen merely by nature (physei) or by chance for that matter. 
Ethical virtue requires continuous habituation and cultivation of a disposition of the soul 
(hexis proairetikē) that enables the virtuous person to conceive rightly a given moment 
of action and choose the act appropriate to it.
  4.	 Notably, in his later work Dependent Rational Animals (1999), MacIntyre revises his 
position, reverting to one closer to Aristotle’s original thinking, by founding his ethics in 
the animal condition of the human being. It is worth pointing this out because it shows 
how MacIntyre’s reconsideration speaks to the whole question of what constitutes an 
ethical drive. Acknowledging that tradition and social roles can only provide ethical 
orientation, but not an ethical drive as such, MacIntyre now looks to nature and natural 
vulnerability for an account of what we are here calling a moral engine of ethical cultiva-
tion and comportment. He admits that ‘no account of the goods, rules and virtues that 
are definitive of our moral life can be adequate that does not explain … how that form of 
life is possible for beings who are biologically constituted as we are’ (1999: x).
  5.	 It is notable that two of the editors of Moral Engines, Mattingly and Wentzer, have chap-
ters in the Anthropology and Philosophy collection. In one sense, it provided inspiration 
for this edited collection despite the difference in topic and tone. (See the prologue for 
further discussion of this.)
  6.	 Here we leave aside the longer history of the philosophical roots of the discipline of 
anthropology, cf. Adams 1998.
  7.	 Of course, it should not be forgotten that Geertz’ articulation of ethnography as thick 
description is deeply indebted to philosopher Gilbert Ryle, exemplifying yet again the 
dizzying interpenetration of philosophy and anthropology.

34	
Rasmus Dyring, Cheryl Mattingly and Maria Louw
References
Adams, William Y. 1998. The Philosophical Roots of Anthropology. Stanford: CSLI 
Publications.
Basso, Keith. 1996. Wisdom Sits in Places: Landscape and Language among the 
Western Apache. Albuquerque: University of Mexico Press.
Clifford, James. 1988. ‘On Ethnographic Authority’, in The Predicament of Culture: 
Twentieth-Century Ethnography, Literature and Art. London: Harvard University 
Press, pp. 21–55.
Crapanzano, Vincent. 2004. Imaginative Horizons: An Essay in Literary-Philosophical 
Anthropology. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Das, Veena. 2007. Life and Words: Violence and the Descent into the Ordinary. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
 . 2012. ‘Ordinary Ethics’, in Didier Fassin (ed.), A Companion to Moral 
Anthropology. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 133–49.
 . 2015. ‘What does Ordinary Ethics Look Like?’, in M. Lambek, V. Das, D. Fassin 
and W. Keane (eds), Four Lectures on Ethics. Chicago: Hau Press.
Därmann, Iris. 2005. Fremde Monde der Vernunft: Die ethnologische Provokation der 
Philosophie. Munich: Wilhelm Fink Verlag.
Dyring, Rasmus. (under review). ‘From Moral Facts to Ethical Facticity: On the 
Problem of Freedom in the Anthropology of Ethics’, HAU: Journal of Ethnographic 
Theory. Special Issue: ‘The Human Condition: Reinventing Philosophical 
Anthropology’, ed. Cheryl Mattingly and Thomas Schwarz Wentzer.
Faubion, James. 2001. ‘Toward an Anthropology of Ethics: Foucault and the 
Pedagogies of Autopoiesis’, Representations 74: 83–104.
 . 2011. An Anthropology of Ethics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Foucault, Michel. 1992. The Use of Pleasure: The History of Sexuality II, transl. Robert 
Hurley. London: Penguin Books.
 . 1997. ‘The Ethics of the Concern for Self as a Practice of Freedom’, in Paul 
Rabinow (ed.), Ethics, Subjectivity, and Truth: Essential Works of Foucault 1954–
1984. Volume 1. New York: New Press, pp. 281–301.
Geertz, Clifford. 1973. The Interpretation of Cultures. New York: Basic Books.
Heintz, Monica. 2009. The Anthropology of Moralities. New York: Berghahn Books.
Herder, Johann G. 2004. ‘Treatise on the Origin of Language’, in Philosophical 
Writings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hirschkind, Charles. 2006. The Ethical Soundscape: Casette Sermons and Islamic 
Counter-Publics. New York: Columbia University Press.
Howell, Signe. 1997. The Ethnography of Moralities. London: Routledge.
Jackson, Michael D. 2013. Lifeworlds: Essays in Existential Anthropology. Chicago: The 
University of Chicago Press.
Jackson, Michael D. and Albert Piette. 2015. What is Existential Anthropology? New 
York: Berghahn Books.
Keane, Webb. 2016. Ethical Life: Its Natural and Social Histories. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
Kleinman, Arthur. 1999. The Tanner Lectures on Human Values, Vol. 20, ed. G.B. 
Peterson. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.
 . 2006, What Really Matters: Living a Moral Life amidst Uncertainty and 
Danger. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Laidlaw, James. 2002. ‘For an Anthropology of Ethics and Freedom’, Journal of the 
Royal Anthropological Institute 8: 311–32.

	
The Question of ‘Moral Engines’	
35
 . 2014. The Subject of Virtue. An Anthropology of Ethics and Freedom. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lambek, Michael. 2008. ‘Value and Virtue’, Anthropological Theory 8: 133–57.
 . 2010a. ‘Introduction’, in Michael Lambek (ed.), Ordinary Ethics: Anthropology, 
Language and Action. New York: Fordham University Press, pp. 1–38.
 . 2010b. ‘Toward an Ethics of the Act’, in Michael Lambek, Ordinary Ethics: 
Anthropology, Language and Action. New York: Fordham University Press,  
pp. 39–63.
Lear, Jonathan. 2006. Radical Hope: Ethics in the Face of Cultural Devastation. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Leistle, Bernhard. 2016. ‘Responsivity and (some) other Approaches to Alterity’, 
Anthropological Theory 16(1): 48–74.
Liisberg, Sune, E. Pedersen and A.L. Dalsgaard. 2015. Anthropology and Philosophy: 
Dialogues on Trust and Hope. New York: Berghahn Books.
MacIntyre, Alasdair. 1985. After Virtue, 2nd corrected edition with postscript. 
London: Duckworth.
 . 1999. Dependent Rational Animals. Chicago: Open Court.
Mahmood, Saba. 2005. Politics of Piety: The Islamic Revival and the Feminist Subject. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Mattingly, Cheryl. 2010. The Paradox of Hope: Journeys through a Clinical Borderland. 
Berkeley: University of California Press
 . 2012. ‘Two Virtue Ethics and the Anthropology of Morality’, Anthropological 
Theory 12(2): 161–84.
 . 2014. Moral Laboratories: Family Peril and the Struggle for a Good Life. 
Oakland, CA: University of California Press.
 . (under review). ‘Ordinary Possibility and Responsive Ethics: A Philosophical 
Anthropology of the Small Event’, in The Human Condition: Reinventing 
Philosophical Anthropology. Guest co-editors, Cheryl Mattingly and Thomas 
Wentzer. HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory.
Mattingly, Cheryl and Uffe Juul Jensen. 2015. ‘What Can We Hope For? An 
Exploration in Cosmopolitan Philosophical Anthropology’, in S. Liisberg, E. 
Pedersen and A. Dalsgaard (eds), Anthropology and Philosophy: Dialogues on Trust 
and Hope. New York: Berghahn Books, pp. 21–56.
Nussbaum, Martha. 1986. The Fragility of Goodness: Luck and Ethics in Greek Tragedy 
and Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rapport, Nigel. 1997. Transcendent Individual: Towards a Literary and Liberal 
Anthropology. New York and London: Routledge.
Rasanayagam, Johan. 2011. Islam in Post-Soviet Uzbekistan: The Morality of 
Experience. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ricoeur, Paul. 1988. Time and Narrative, vol. 3, trans. Kathleen Blamey and David 
Pellauer. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Robbins, Joel. 2004. Becoming Sinners: Christianity and Moral Torment in a Papua 
New Guinea Society. Berkeley: University of California Press.
 . 2007. ‘Between Reproduction and Freedom: Morality, Value, and Radical 
Cultural Change’, Ethnos 72: 293–314.
Rogers, Douglas. 2009. The Old Faith and the Russian Land: A Historical Ethnography 
of Ethics in the Urals. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Sykes, Karen. 2009. Ethnographies of Moral Reasoning: Living Paradoxes of a Global 
Age. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

36	
Rasmus Dyring, Cheryl Mattingly and Maria Louw
Skykes, Karen 2010. ‘“Ontology Is Just Another Word for Culture”: Motion Tabled at 
the 2008 Meeting of the Group for Debates in Anthropological Theory, University 
of Manchester.’ S. Venkatesan (ed). Critique of Anthropology 30: 152–200.
Throop, C. Jason. 2010. Suffering and Sentiment: Exploring the Vicissitudes of 
Experience and Pain in Yap. Berkeley: University of California Press.
 . 2012. ‘Moral Sentiments’, in Didier Fassin (ed.), A Companion to Moral 
Anthropology. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 150–68.
 . 2014. ‘Moral Moods’, Ethos 42(1): 65–83.
Waldenfels, Bernhard. 1999. Vielstimmigkeit der Rede. Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp Verlag.
 . 2006. Schattenrisse der Moral. Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp Verlag.
Williams, Bernard. 1986. ‘Reply to Simon Blackburn’, Philosophical Books 27(4): 
203–208.
Winch, Peter. 1964. ‘Understanding a Primitive Society’, American Philosophical 
Quarterly 1(4): 307–324.
Wittgenstein, Ludvig. 1993. ‘Remarks on Frazer’s Golder Bough’, in Philosophical 
Occasions: 1912–1951. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company.
Yan, Yunxiang. 2011. ‘How Far Away can we Move from Durkheim? – Reflections 
on the New Anthropology of Morality’, Anthropology of this Century 2. Available 
online at http://aotcpress.com/articles/move-durkheim-reflections-anthropology-
morality/.
Zigon, Jarrett. 2007. ‘Moral Breakdown and Ethical Demand: A Theoretical 
Framework for an Anthropology of Moralities’, Anthropological Theory 7: 131–50.
 . 2008. Morality: An Anthropological Perspective. Oxford: Berg.
 . 2009. ‘Within a Range of Possibilities: Morality and Ethics in Social Life’, 
Ethnos: Journal of Anthropology 74(2): 251–76.
Zigon, Jarrett and Jason Throop. 2014. ‘Moral Experience: Introduction’, Ethos 42(1): 
1–15.
 

Part I
Moral Engines and Human Experience


2
Ethics, Immanent Transcendence and  
the Experimental Narrative Self
Cheryl Mattingly
Introduction
The framing question of this volume is: how should we think about the moral 
engines of ethical life? It might be argued that an engine is a highly problem-
atic metaphor to capture moral life and its exigencies. An engine suggests 
something powerful, Lambek (this volume) protests, and it seems to privilege 
one version of ethics, a driving, striving sort of effort. Admittedly, its kinship 
with all things mechanical resonates uncomfortably with the host of industrial 
tropes that have infiltrated western modernity’s considerations of just about 
everything. Yet I find this ungainly figure alluring precisely because it conjures 
something that pushes, propels with a force that is easy to lose control of, a 
force with its own mysterious energy. I too think of an engine as something 
powerful, even dangerous, excessive. Placed in the right kind of machine, it 
can run you over. While other contributors to this volume sometimes prefer 
other figures, ‘tracks’ for Michael Lambek, ‘roots’ for Thomas Wentzer, I will 
see what I can say about what it means when your most deeply cherished com-
mitments propel you, as if from the outside, toward destinations you may not 
have imagined or ever wanted to go.
In taking up this question, I will bring three intellectual traditions into con-
versation. Two of them are central to the chapters in this volume.1 One tradition 
has roots in anthropology’s longstanding concern with the sociocultural fea-
tures of ethical life and their more recent problematization in anthropology’s 
‘ethical turn’. (For many anthropologists, this problematization has also involved 
a serious engagement with moral philosophy.) The other is rooted in phenom-
enological philosophy, in particular the tradition that foregrounds human 

40	
Cheryl Mattingly
responsiveness to what is often called the ‘ethical demand’. My chapter considers 
what a responsive phenomenology can offer to an ethical framework that takes 
the social ‘facticity’ of ethical life seriously, including the norms and values it so 
deeply shapes, while at the same time registering the existential excess of an 
ethical demand that cannot be adequately captured by reference to pre-existing 
social norms. The third tradition I consider is philosophy’s virtue ethics, with its 
focus on the singularity, individuality and the socially embedded qualities of 
moral experience. More specifically, this chapter considers how we might 
rethink the ‘narrative self’, including ethical self-formation as a narrative activity, 
by bringing insights from all three of these traditions to bear.
But first, some difficulties. Both sociocultural anthropology and phenom-
enology raise challenges for a notion of a ‘narrative self’ along the lines that 
virtue ethics philosophers have frequently proposed. Anthropologists and 
phenomenologists typically insist that any individual human is, in an impor-
tant sense, ‘derivative’, as Raffoul (this volume) puts it, an ‘I’ who ‘always comes 
after’ (Raffoul, p. 246). Anthropology takes this derivative feature from the 
primacy of a sociocultural world that precedes any individual, a world into 
which she is born. Phenomenological philosophers propose their derivative ‘I’ 
against a Kantian ‘I’ – the autonomous and responsible subject ‘who is the 
cause of his or her actions through the freedom of the will’ (Raffoul, p. 233). 
Rather than an agent being a ‘cause’, in the sense that Kant presumes, the phe-
nomenological self is ‘in the first instance, passive’ (Raffoul, p. 237) because it 
is always a response to a prior something that initiates. We are exposed ‘to an 
event that does not come from us and yet calls us’ (Raffoul, p. 236).
Both anthropological and phenomenological traditions have tended to 
downplay not just the Kantian autonomous individual but the individual alto-
gether. There is an obvious logic to this. If the individual self is derivative, it 
makes sense to give analytic primacy to the sociocultural conditions that 
precede and shape an individual’s ethical life (in the anthropological picture) 
or the experiential features of this ‘call to respond’ (in the phenomenological 
one). Despite this persuasive logic, I have found it worrisome. In my own pre-
vious work, I have argued that even if it is correct to treat the individual as 
analytically secondary, there is a cost to diminishing the individual self as a site 
of ethical experience and a causal agent. Isn’t it possible to reject an autono-
mous, self-mastering, freely choosing ‘I’, while still preserving a self who acts 
and bears a historical singularity?
I have found moral philosophy’s virtue ethics a more hospitable home for 
developing insights about ethical self-formation characterized by the singular-
ity of selves and circumstances. Narrative has played an important role in 
depicting this. Virtue ethics also challenges this Kantian self but continues to 
follow Aristotle in foregrounding an ‘I’ – even a narrative self – as a central site 
of ethical work. Narrative singularity represents what I believe to be crucial 
both for an existential picture of ethical responsiveness and a sociocultural 
picture that resists reduction to mere socialization. Attending to the narrative 

	
Ethics, Immanent Transcendence and the Experimental Narrative Self	
41
singularities of self and circumstance can help to challenge the hegemony of 
social norms as well as deepen the phenomenological insistence on the fragile, 
precarious and finite character of ethical responsiveness.
My primary concern in this chapter is to rethink the kind of narrative self 
so often presumed by virtue ethics philosophers, one that – to my mind – lays 
too much stress on coherence. Any coherence portrait of the self is too sim-
plistic. If we are to attend to the excessiveness of the ethical demand and if we 
call upon narrative to do so, then a narrative self must be conceived as some-
thing more complex and ambiguous than self as sameness over time or as 
mere linear development suggests.2 The narrative self I will propose is more 
like an experimental self, one who, in response to ethical demands, engages in 
narrative experiments with her own becoming. She actively lives out ‘imagina-
tive variations that destablize narrative identity’ (Ricoeur 1988: 249).
This chapter is divided into several parts. The first section situates my own 
claims within recent anthropological discussions of ethics. I am particularly 
interested in the way that ethical intentionality has been conceived, how 
anthropologists have attempted to put forward some version of intentional 
and reflective agents while trying to avoid committing themselves (in any 
strong sense) to the idea of the individual ethical actor. I propose a robust 
personal and narrative self as a contrast figure, foregrounding ‘longer term 
intentions’ and the small histories (personal and interpersonal) that are its 
temporal home. The second section locates this narrative self in philosophy’s 
virtue ethics, where it has been espoused most explicitly. The third section 
addresses the difficulties with a narrative self that is tied too closely to self-
coherence. I offer, instead, an experimental and responsive self – a self charac-
terized by immanent transcendence. Here, I bring together both 
phenomenology and Ricoeur’s discussion of literary narratives as laboratories 
for ethical experiment in ways of living. The fourth section turns, more spe-
cifically, to the question of moral engine(s). My proposal for one such moral 
engine is ‘care of the intimate other’, a project that is self-defining, that calls for 
intentional commitments that last over time, and that is frequently ethically 
fraught. I draw upon one case example where I take up my claims about the 
experimental narrative self in ethnographic context. I consider the way in 
which one mother, faced with the death of her young daughter, experiments 
with how to respond to the existential – and excessive – demands this poses 
to her and the kind of self this situation seems to call for.3
The Problem of Ethical Intentions:  
An Anthropological Conversation
The question of what prompts ethical life or ethical intentionality would likely 
have been far easier for anthropologists to answer just a few decades ago. For 
most anthropologists, the overall answer could be stated with relative ease: 

42	
Cheryl Mattingly
society and its normative demands. Of course, ascertaining the ethnographic 
specifics of what those demands were and how they exerted their moral force 
was not at all a straightforward matter in light of the sheer diversity of human 
communities. In recent decades, reference to widely shared and communally 
distinct normative moral orders has been problematized by the demise of 
holistic notions of culture, rising attention to globalization, and the incorpora-
tion of analyses of political and economic factors as key shapers of societal 
norms. But still, the role of social convention (however it came to exist and be 
shored up), or what some anthropologists sometimes call the morality system 
(Fassin 2015; Laidlaw 2002), tended to be held responsible for the ethical life 
of its community.
Perhaps the first thing to notice about recent anthropological discussions of 
ethics is how much this has changed. Morality systems still play a crucial role 
but these are no longer considered sufficient to explain things. Many anthro-
pologists working within the ethical turn are attempting to put two pictures of 
ethical life together: the version that focuses on the ‘social constraints of moral-
ity, the norms imposed by society’, and ‘the individual dimensions of ethics, the 
freedom each person has to deliberate and to decide, and the inner experience 
through which ethical subjects are formed’ (Fassin 2015: 176). Rather than treat-
ing them as antithetical, the ambition is to see how these two understandings of 
ethical life can help to inform one another. For many scholars, this has meant an 
increased emphasis not only on the classic (Durkheimian) problem of how 
humans, through society’s primary influence, acquire a kind of ‘second nature’ 
that ‘can even overcome “first nature”’ but also (unlike Durkheim) on the human 
‘capacity to reflect on and evaluate one’s actions as part of this second nature’ 
(Das et al. 2014: 16, also citing McDowell 1994).
However, once one tries to incorporate Fassin’s ‘individual dimensions’ 
(which include notions of freedom and inner experience), a whole new set of 
problems arises. A key concern has to do with intentionality and how it figures 
into ethics. For most anthropologists, it is a simple fact that much of our life, 
including our moral life, depends upon ordinary, tacit actions that do not 
require any conscious deliberation. And yet, within recent writings on ethics, 
even those anthropologists most enthusiastic about acknowledging this 
unconscious feature of ordinary morality resist placing the ethical fully within 
the tacit. To do so risks returning to dominant anthropological views of ethical 
life, again reducing ethics to mere social conformity.
Laidlaw (2014), whose earlier writings (especially 2002) have helped to foster 
such widespread interest in ethics, has insisted that if we accept that the ethical 
is tied to the capacity to reflectively evaluate our circumstances in a conscious 
way, this demands that we have some account of human freedom. For Laidlaw 
(2014, this volume), the ethical sphere includes the capacity to engage in some 
sort of second order reflection on the norms themselves, a reflective act that 
requires one be able step out of the scene of action. While many anthropologists 
have expressed uneasiness with his adoption of freedom as a key term because 

	
Ethics, Immanent Transcendence and the Experimental Narrative Self	
43
of its particularly western (and Kantian) associations (Lambek 2015; Das et al. 
2014; Keane 2014, 2016), or think the dichotomy between freedom and conven-
tion is too overdrawn, most would acknowledge that there needs to be some 
room for conscious reflection in any ethical framework.
This line of thinking raises an immediate question: how is it possible to 
defend an account of ethics that is both broadly shared in a relatively untrou-
bled way and yet calls upon some notion of reflexivity? Many anthropologists 
have claimed to be investigating ‘ordinary ethics’, to borrow Lambek’s (2010, 
2015) vocabulary. For those who contend that ethical life is pervasive and 
ordinary, it has been especially important to address the puzzle of how ethics 
can be reflective (or at least have an unremarkable potentiality for reflexivity), 
and yet not typically be in conscious awareness. A corollary problem is how to 
address the obvious fact that people may be self-deceiving. Keane puts the 
challenge as follows: ‘If people do not have the consistency of character they 
think they have, and if their acts are not due to the reasons they give for them, 
but character and action are shaped by processes that lie beyond their aware-
ness, then what role does awareness play in ethical life?’ (2016: 244).
Anthropologists have tackled this difficult question in several distinct, 
though not always mutually exclusive, ways. One approach stresses the impor-
tant notion that ethics are, in some sense, public (Lambek 2015, this volume). 
Thus, even if ethical stances are out of the conscious awareness of a particular 
person at the individual level, they are nevertheless available because they are 
shared and known within a community. They show up in the form of ‘judg-
ments that circulate across a community, or act descriptions that endure from 
one generation to the next’ (Keane 2016: 244). As Keane puts it, even if people 
are not necessarily consciously acting, they could, if necessary, back up their 
‘ethical intuitions’ with ethical descriptions that others within their commu-
nity will be expected to also condone, understand, agree with, or at least rec-
ognize as ethical positions.
A second approach demarcates a sphere of ethics proper that emerges only 
in rare circumstances. Anthropologists adopting this line of thinking are espe-
cially keen to differentiate morality (as a societal structure of norms that oper-
ates more or less unconsciously) from a conscious domain of ethics. Zigon’s 
(2008, 2011) influential notion of the ‘moral breakdown’ is a very good example 
of this. Life moves along more or less unproblematically, Zigon argues, except 
under very special conditions in which there is such an impasse in how to go 
on, how to act. Under such conditions what is ordinarily merely habitual and 
out of view suddenly comes into conscious awareness. Taken for granted 
norms suddenly become problematized, demanding explicit attention and 
review. A third (and often related) strategy has allowed anthropologists to 
make a significant place for conscious reflection by shifting attention from 
everyday routine activity to a much grander temporal arc, to social history, in 
which visible and consequential ethical instabilities or even transformations 
occur at a societal level (Zigon 2011; Keane 2016).

44	
Cheryl Mattingly
Longer-Term Intentions and Virtue Ethics: History with a small ‘h’
My own strategy has been to consider the reflective properties of ethical life 
not as tied to immediate decisions or even crisis points (though these may 
arise), but to another pervasive feature of ordinary life – the fact that people 
make long-term, even life-long commitments to projects and significant 
others and these bring with them ethical entailments that carry a great deal of 
force (Mattingly 2014a, b, c). A focus on longer-term intentions in ethical life 
is congruent with philosophy’s virtue ethics.
Although this tradition of moral philosophy is increasingly familiar for an 
anthropological audience, I will briefly sketch a few points which are particu-
larly salient for my argument. Virtue ethics, the moral philosophy most associ-
ated with Greek and Roman antiquity (especially Aristotle), has enjoyed a 
revival in philosophy since the mid-twentieth century. Much of the impetus 
behind this revival can be credited to Anglo-American moral philosophers 
who wanted to challenge the psychologically ‘thin’ moral selves presupposed 
in utilitarian and deontological schemes. Its focus on the good, or the good 
life, concerns more than mere human survival and certainly more than hedon-
istic pleasure. Rather, it speaks to what we could call human flourishing. 
Happiness or flourishing cannot be equated with a mere subjective feeling of 
pleasure or contentment but is better understood as a ‘life worth living’, a life 
that is practiced within a social community. Lear’s discussion of ‘thoughtful 
desire’ illuminates the motivational complexity of this ethical scheme. Lear 
shows us how, for Aristotle, desire – unlike mere ‘appetites’ – is part and 
parcel of deliberative decision-making (1988: 165). One attraction of virtue 
ethics for anthropologists is that it emphasizes the role of social practices in 
cultivating the moral self. This is appealing for a discipline that takes the cul-
tural to be more fundamental and primary than the individual.4
Despite this rootedness in social practice, philosophical virtue ethics (of 
various stripes) has placed a certain analytic premium on the individual self. I 
find this an indispensable addition even for an anthropological ethics rooted 
primarily in the social. From my perspective, it is also one which is seriously 
undertheorized,5 even among anthropologists drawing from virtue ethics phi-
losophers. To bring the individual into the picture in a more adequate way, we 
need to attend not only to large-scale histories or to micro-level interactions 
(though these are certainly important) but also to another unit of analysis. 
This is history on a smaller scale, the history of intentionality that comprises a 
personal life or a small unit (like a household) who share life over time. From 
this vantage point it is possible to explore the more conscious side of ethical 
intentionality as well as attempts at ethical innovation.
Stating this in even stronger terms, and as I have argued elsewhere 
(Mattingly 2012, 2014a), I do not see how to adopt a virtue ethics approach 
without some robust portrait of a personal self who is entwined in intimate, 
personal, self-defining relationships. Several moral philosophers who 

	
Ethics, Immanent Transcendence and the Experimental Narrative Self	
45
currently play an important role in informing anthropologists (e.g. Bernard 
Williams, Charles Taylor, Hannah Arendt, Aristotle) have been particularly 
eloquent in stressing the personal as a crucial site of ethics, not as an optional 
addition, but as fundamental to ethical life (Williams 1981; Taylor 1989). For a 
number of contemporary moral philosophers, Aristotle inspires a more useful 
portrait of ethics than its primary alternatives – utilitarianism and Kantianism 
– because Aristotle’s ethics are grounded both in the particularities of self and 
the particularities of situation. Cavell puts it this way: as compared to utilitari-
anism ‘Aristotle emphasizes myself, this individual, this development of my 
character, as the touchstone of goodness and rightness – so forcefully and 
continuously that some have found his theory to be an ethics of selfishness, 
not a morality at all’ (Cavell 2004: 357). In contrast to Kant’s a priori, universal 
principle, Aristotle focuses on ‘individual circumstances … here it is the exer-
cise of my perception of a situation – not an intellectual grasp of necessity, but 
an empirical judgment … of practical intelligence … that determines the 
course I shall take’ (Cavell 2004: 357).
This attention to the individual can also be felt in the influential work of 
Bernard Williams who argues that the self is ethically constituted by commit-
ments that are not just personal but irreducibly individual. He uses friendship 
as an example. Our friends are not merely interchangeable with one another, 
Williams points out, but are quite specific individuals with whom we share 
histories. This is a significant point since friendship has been taken in some 
moral philosophies (e.g. Aristotle’s) as essential for an ethically flourishing life.
Obviously, I am not the first anthropologist to notice this attention to indi-
viduals. So, why have anthropologists skirted (theoretically if not ethnograph-
ically) the individual and the small histories of personal lives? This is evidence 
of a kind of internal conflict about whether it is really analytically necessary 
for an anthropological virtue ethics to posit a singular individual in any strong 
or ‘thick’ sense. On the one hand, this promotes a focus on ethical experience, 
reflection and responsibility, presumably a good thing. But it also raises the 
spectre of an individualist humanism that many anthropologists have been 
keen to distance themselves from (Mahmood 2005; Faubion 2001). And some 
fear such a focus will weaken the kind of moral investigation that has been a 
traditional anthropological strength, indeed a contribution, to moral philoso-
phy, namely the comparative investigation of cultural norms, morality systems 
and prescribed subject positions across a widely diverse range of societies.
It is quite usual even for anthropologists proposing some version of virtue 
ethics (that is an ethics that places a premium on the self-cultivation of virtues 
over time) to distance themselves from the individual as a key site of ethical 
projects (Keane 2016; Mahmood 2005; Faubion 2001). It is certainly important 
to rid ourselves of the highly problematic and improbable autonomous ‘I’, but 
there is a real cost in removing individuals altogether as sites of ethical action 
and experience. The straw man of the ‘autonomous I’ has made it difficult to 
explore the first-person ‘I’ as a relational being or to attend to the small 

46	
Cheryl Mattingly
histories that, in my own ethnographic work at any rate, are of crucial analytic 
importance for ethics.
Making conceptual room for individuals who are not coterminous with the 
social roles they inhabit or the mere product of normative ethical practices 
offers an important dividend in our exploration of ethical life cross-culturally. 
Introducing morally complex and nuanced agents into our schemes can also 
illuminate situations of ethical awareness and reflection that show up in inti-
mate spaces even when they are not visible on a world stage. Equally impor-
tant, following lives through their particular histories and shadowy ambiguities 
can reveal sources of ethical vulnerability that accompany fragile projects of 
becoming.
The Enduring Narrative Self
Many virtue ethics philosophers have advocated a narrative version of the self, 
one who endures over time. In philosophy, proposals for a coherent or endur-
ing self, as well as a narrative self, were the subject of much debate a few 
decades ago (especially between the mid-1980s and mid-1990s) which con-
tinue to this day. It seems to me that some notion of a narrative self – who has 
a historical singularity – is also analytically indispensable for any virtue ethics. 
That is, a strong or ‘thick’ version of a narrative self is indispensable for an 
ethics that can do justice to the complexity of the ethics of practical action as 
well as the cultivation of character.
Indeed, moral philosophers advocating a ‘thick moral self’, whether directly 
inspired by Aristotle or not, portray that self as a biographical and diachronic 
moral agent. So, for Williams, ‘ground projects’ are self-constituting because 
who we are as particular persons is formed by an at-stakeness in the world that 
lasts over time and serves as a morally self-defining compass. Along analogous 
lines, Charles Taylor declares that our self-interpretations are bound up with 
‘what is of significance’ to us (1989: 34). For Taylor, as for Williams, ‘signifi-
cance’ assumes a moral cast because it depends upon what Taylor calls an 
‘orientation to the good’ (1989: 34). Thus, the good life, the committed life, and 
a person’s self-understanding of who he or she is, are all bound up together.
One might ask why the individual, treated as a narrative self, shows up so 
prominently in philosophy’s virtue ethics. The simplest answer is that it is an 
analytical necessity. Virtue ethics cannot do without the notion of the arc of a 
life and some kind of biographical integrity. The whole notion of cultivating 
one’s character depends upon it. An individual agent is a historical being, one 
who persists over time and is imbued with a complex internal life. This is what 
philosophers have called a ‘thick’ (that is, socially embedded, historically sin-
gular, enduring and emotionally complex) self rather than a ‘thin’ or ‘fractured’ 
one. Such a self is analytically demanded if ethics is concerned with ‘the culti-
vation of character, the training of moral emotions, the centrality of intention, 

	
Ethics, Immanent Transcendence and the Experimental Narrative Self	
47
motive and the inner life’, and a focus ‘not only on isolated acts of choice, but 
also, and more importantly, on the whole course of an agent’s moral life, its 
patterns of commitment, conduct, and also passion’ (Hursthouse 1999: 170).
There is a temporality to our ethical projects, in other words, that leads many 
scholars to insist that there is an inherent narrativity to ethical practice and its 
self-constituting nature. A narrative sense of self is not an ‘optional extra’, Taylor 
contends. Drawing on Heidegger’s construal of the temporal structure of being, 
he states: ‘In order to have a sense of who we are, we have to have a notion of 
how we have become, and of where we are going’ (Taylor 1989: 47). We cannot 
operate without this minimal narrative understanding of our lives. Iris Murdoch 
calls us ‘moral pilgrims’, a conceit that speaks to the quest-like narrative struc-
ture of this moral self that is always in the process of becoming. Commitments 
and projects have a history and, in taking them up or responding to them, we 
become part of a history. Cultivating virtues as part of these commitments and 
projects belongs to a task of moral becoming and this, too, implies the narrativ-
ity of moral life. MacIntyre, especially in After Virtue, offers perhaps the most 
well-known version of the narrative, historically embedded self (1981).6
However, one cannot speak unproblematically about something like a nar-
rative self. Anthropologists have often, and for good reason, been wary of it. 
One primary objection is that a narrative portrait of the self implies too much 
coherence, as though life unfolded in the orderly manner of a temporally 
unified whole, complete with beginning, middle and end. Even as anthropolo-
gists turn to this revived virtue ethics within moral philosophy, they often 
tend to distance themselves from this coherence portrait and offer a more 
pluralistic or fractured conception. They have also distanced themselves from 
an individualist self that the notion of the biographical life story may seem to 
imply. I propose a version of a narrative self that I believe addresses at least 
some of the critiques directed against it, while strengthening what is truly 
important and valuable about it.
The Responsive and Experimental Narrative Self
I emphasize narrative not in order to espouse a coherent life but to expose a 
responsive one, a life where one is sometimes compelled to confront the exces-
siveness of the ethical demand. What I want to suggest is that such a demand 
seems to call for self-making as a kind of moral experiment in perceiving and 
attempting to realize any ‘best good’. Responsive phenomenology highlights an 
imperative to act in an asymmetrical relationship between the ethical demands 
that face us (paradigmatically stated as ‘how should one live?’) and our ability 
to answer them, as Wentzer (this volume) explains. The ethical demand is in 
this way excessive; it ‘exceeds the limits of norms and values’ (Wentzer, p. 213). 
We may try our best, but this best is not the same thing as doing what is good, 
even by our own lights. Thus, the presence of the ethical demand can be felt as 

48	
Cheryl Mattingly
an ‘immanent urge to transcend any given option towards its presumably 
better state or alternative’; it can be characterized by an immanent transcend-
ence (Wentzer, p. 213). The ethical demand is also inescapable, it ‘is not a 
perspective that an agent is free to choose or to dismiss’ (Wentzer, p. 215).
What is it about narrative that makes it so useful in capturing a self who 
confronts the excessiveness of the ethical demand? Stories have the power to 
foreground this very asymmetry. Narratives, in the form of literary works and 
everyday speech acts, teach us about the suspenseful and the subjunctive. 
Ricoeur’s extended consideration of the literary narrative and its relation to 
lived experience highlights this capability. Narrative identity, as lived experi-
ence, is neither stable nor seamless: ‘it is always possible to weave different, 
even opposed, plots of our lives’ (1988: 248). This instability is exposed in nar-
rative texts which can render life unfamiliar: ‘the practice of narrative lies in a 
thought experiment by means of which we try to inhabit worlds foreign to us’ 
(1988: 249). Paradoxically, as I will try to illustrate ethnographically, this for-
eignness may include aspects or versions of ourselves that we would, in more 
direct or explicit espousals, reject as moral possibilities. Such narrative 
thought experiments may be engendered through stories we read or hear, 
which is Ricoeur’s point, or by dramatic events we experience and even help to 
create, which is my point.
The kinds of narrative that Ricoeur has in mind are artistic or historical 
achievements to be found especially in works of art rather than in life as lived. 
However, we should not consider narrative texts and the narratives qualities of 
self experience to be antithetical. Rather, I would say (although putting it in 
different, or at least stronger, terms than Ricoeur might agree with) that nar-
rative is needed to consider the temporality of the self because our lived expe-
rience is already narratively prefigured in ways that narrative discourse can 
distil. Literature can bring into stark relief the radical contingency that is 
already present in lived experience.7 The realization of our fragile and finite 
place in the world, and of our paradoxical character as a being who changes 
and yet remains, in some ways, the same, is precisely what I think a narrative 
understanding of the self emphasizes.
Narratives offer a picture of identity that is a ‘discordant concordance’. 
From a narrative perspective, as developed by Ricoeur, rather than depicting a 
self whose coherence is the result of sameness over time (what Ricoeur calls 
‘concordance’), coherence speaks to a complex synthesis, even a tension, 
between the concordant elements of life and its discordant ones (paradigmati-
cally ‘reversals of fortune’). A narrative identity is characterized by this dis-
cordant concordance. Narrative reveals this aspect of identity because a story 
offers, at once, a ‘manifold of events’, which can be discordant, but also ‘the 
temporal unity of the plot’. The plot is, in fact, a configuring feature which 
includes both this episodic dispersion and also a unification over time – of 
time. As Ricoeur puts it: ‘configuration’ to this art of composition which medi-
ates between concordance and discordance’ (1992: 141).

	
Ethics, Immanent Transcendence and the Experimental Narrative Self	
49
Ricoeur argues persuasively for the advantage of thinking about the unity 
of a life not in terms of commitments to ‘life-plans’, as MacIntyre does, but 
through narrative. As Ricoeur points out: ‘Life plan emphasizes the agentive, 
even the voluntary and willful aspect of action’ (1992: 178). But narrative 
‘places its accent on the organization of intention, causes and chance that we 
find in all stories’. By bringing ‘chance’ and reversals of fortune into the picture, 
it allows us to recognize suffering as well as action. Ethically, it calls attention 
to what Nussbaum has described as the ‘fragility of the goodness of human 
action’ (cited in Ricoeur 1992: 178).
Narrative Selves and Moral Engines: Care of the Intimate Other
How might this narrative self, characterized as a discordant and fluid con-
cordance, formed by chance as well as by intentional acts, be helpful in 
framing the question of moral engines? How might this portrait also reveal 
the asymmetry of the ethical demand? To answer these questions, I offer one 
particular ‘moral engine’: care of intimate others. What kind of forward 
movement does this moral engine engender? Family love can be a highly 
troubled moral practice that makes strenuous demands upon the self and 
requires the cultivation of virtues that can seem (or actually be) unattainable. 
While I can’t take up the prolific literature around family love and care that 
has recently emerged in feminist studies and the rethinking of classic anthro-
pological work on kinship, it is worth noting that this literature emphasizes 
the ethical complexity surrounding practices of relatedness (Borneman 2001; 
Rapp and Ginsburg 2001, 2011; Horton 2009; Edwards in Venkatesan et al. 
2011; Zigon 2013; Mattingly 2014b.8 In feminist literature, ‘care ethics’ 
stresses responsibilities, relationships, intersubjectivity, the circumstantiality 
of ethics and activity rather than rights, rules and abstract reasoning (Tronto 
1993). It also ethically privileges a ‘connected self’ rather than an ‘autono-
mous self’.
Projects of intimate care are certainly only one kind moral engine that may 
exert force upon us. And such projects obviously do not hold universally with 
equal strength. But it is difficult to imagine any human society (and perhaps 
even some non-human ones) where this task of care of significant others is not 
central and does not raise deeply felt ethical concerns, demands to respond, to 
be responsible. Such care also foregrounds the kind of ethical work that lasts 
over time, enduring for years at a stretch, if not a whole lifetime. Thus, it 
speaks especially well to intentions that cannot be reduced to momentary 
choice but rather to longer term and even lifelong projects.
In my own work following African American families raising children with 
significant disabilities and chronic illnesses, family care is revealed through a 
multitude of small ‘moral experiments’ in everyday life which are only recog-
nizable as part of larger ethical projects (Mattingly 2014a). The parents (or 

50	
Cheryl Mattingly
grandparents) in these families often find themselves propelled to imagine and 
try to transform their lives because of these projects of care. In exploring the 
moral complexity of projects of care that parents undertake in circumstances 
that are fraught and uncertain, what becomes apparent is that it often seems 
impossible to find any ‘best good’ that is worth acting upon, but where, none-
theless, people continue to care about and struggle to obtain some version of 
a good life. The work of care can engender moral demands to cultivate virtues 
to be, for example, a ‘good enough’ parent, provoking critical self-examination 
and attempts to transform the practical engagements and commitments of 
oneself, one’s family, even one’s community. When placed within small histo-
ries (the lives of individuals and families, for example), the experimental quali-
ties of these projects of care, and of self-making in light of them, can be 
brought to light. I do not mean for this talk of experiments to imply an overly 
goal directed, agentive self. Rather, my point will be to stress self-experience as 
both indeterminate and excessive.
Cultivating an Experimental Narrative Self: Andrena Faces Death
To illustrate some of these points ethnographically, I turn to Andrena. Her 
actions and experiences do not reveal a narratively coherent self so much as 
a narratively paradoxical and even experimental one. When I first met 
Andrena, it was in the hospital room of a large Los Angeles hospital in the 
spring of 1997.9 She was seated next to her four-year old daughter, Belinda, 
who was recovering from surgery, a still small form in the hospital bed. It was 
just one month after Andrena had heard the news that Belinda not only had 
cancer, but cancer of the ‘worst kind’. Upon finding that her daughter has this 
‘worst kind’ of brain cancer, Andrena cried out in disbelief, ‘I’m dreaming, I’m 
dreaming, I’m dreaming!’ Life reversed itself in an instant. What should be a 
nightmare is what is real. Her nightmare set the stage for an earlier book 
(Mattingly 2010b).
With Belinda’s illness, Andrena faced not only her own fears, but also a 
sense of her family’s betrayal. Life had changed dramatically for everyone. As 
a result of the surgery, Belinda was suddenly altered. She had to wear a large 
helmet to protect her head. She was confined to a wheelchair. She lost a sub-
stantial amount of her hearing. When she spoke at all, it was in short, halting 
sentences, or in the sharply tempered commands of a two-year-old. Often she 
seemed lost in a world all of her own. Suddenly, the family was faced with a 
severely disabled little girl. Even in the best scenarios, it was not clear how 
severe or long-lasting these impairments would be. The dramatic alteration of 
a bright and talkative child caused unbearable pain for the family. And, as 
families sometimes do under the press of misery, they fell apart.
Before Belinda’s illness, she had lived in a home of six. There were her 
parents, her adult older sister and her husband, and her nephew – who was a 

	
Ethics, Immanent Transcendence and the Experimental Narrative Self	
51
year older than her and as close as any brother. Within months after the diag-
nosis, their home dissolved. In Andrena’s mind, the rest of the family had all 
‘run away’, and she found herself in a small apartment with just Belinda.
In an early interview she put it this way:
We were just kinda like sad about my little girl and it seemed like I was the only one 
willing to accept it. Because now it’s only the two of us, my little girl and myself. The 
other ones, they kind of moved out on me … It just seemed like they couldn’t take it. 
Which I couldn’t take it either. But, you know, she’s my daughter and I thought I was 
responsible for her. And there was times when I wanted to go in different directions 
too, but I couldn’t. Because I said, ‘I want to see this thing through with her’.
Andrena cannot ‘go in different directions’ but commits to ‘see[ing] this thing 
through’. And yet, what will she do if her daughter dies? How will she be able 
to bear it? ‘When I first found out about my daughter I wanted to kill myself. I 
didn’t want to be here if my daughter, if she wasn’t going to make it, you know? 
And I just – and I just kept saying “I don’t want to be here”’. 
From her moral perspective, which is deeply informed by her evangelical 
Christian background, suicide is not an option for an ethical life. Thus, she is 
confronted by the ethical imperative to become a different sort of person, not 
only because suicide is morally repugnant for her but because she feels 
impelled to re-envision her own life so that she can see her daughter differ-
ently. She was horrified that she was not seeing her daughter in the right way. 
‘I was looking at her, I was already making her gone, you know? Talking like 
that, I was, just already making her gone’.
When Andrena faces the situation with her daughter, it is in this sense that 
she is thrown headlong into a moral struggle to cultivate a new kind of good 
life, a life worth living even under these most blighted of circumstances. As 
James Laidlaw, Joel Robbins and others have recently pointed out, a focus on 
the good does not presume that people are necessarily motivated to be good 
(rather than, say malicious or cruel) or that they are never misled by violent or 
callous ideologies. Rather, the cultural point is that moral striving seems to 
matter to people in all sorts of societies and making evaluative interpretations 
about what is good is a pervasive feature of social life. What constitutes the 
good life may vary widely from society to society, but it is difficult to imagine 
any community where this does not matter or where, if it has ceased to be 
important, this does not seem problematic for its members (Mattingly 2014a). 
But the notion of evaluation does not fully encompass the Aristotelian inspired 
version of one’s ethical situation that I call upon here.
In response to the despair Andrena faces upon hearing her daughter’s 
diagnosis, she tries to create a good life for them and avert the threat of 
moral tragedy which is posed to her by her own desire to commit suicide. 
Through a series of experiments, Andrena simultaneously nurtures multiple 
and mutually exclusive life plots. She actively cultivates uncertainty. She acts 
in such a way that several plotlines are promoted which are, in fact, 

52	
Cheryl Mattingly
contradictory. She shapes moments with Belinda that further the most 
hopeful story, the one in which the chemotherapy and radiation and surgery 
work, the tumour does not grow back, and Belinda gets a chance to grow up. 
But Andrena and Belinda also participate in other activities that force them 
to experience the dreaded story, one where Belinda will not live to see 
another birthday.
Emplotting A Hopeful Narrative
Andrena cultivates many moments that figure as episodes in an arduous yet 
promising healing journey. There is the terrifying diagnosis, Andrena’s shock 
and depression and the disintegration of the family. But then there is an 
answer from Andrena: her determination to re-envision her life and her future 
in a narrative of hope, of possibility. Whatever else, she declares, her daughter 
was not ‘already gone’, and she seems to have refused to allow herself that 
future story. She prays for strength to reimagine her future in this more 
hopeful way, to be with her child on this journey, wherever it may take them.
And she takes practical steps. She rids her small living and dining room 
space of furniture, except a couch she pushes to one side in order to create 
(with Kmart purchases) a kind of combination rehabilitation room/indoor 
play area in order to carry out the home therapy programmes as directed by 
her daughter’s occupational and physical therapists. Her daughter gets 
stronger, even relearning how to walk again several months after the surgery 
that saved her life but confined her to a wheelchair.
Andrena’s determination to live out a narrative of hope becomes a central 
mission of her life. One Halloween illustrates Andrena’s efforts to cultivate a 
rich life with Belinda wherever she can. On this Halloween I had promised to 
come for a visit. She had dressed Belinda in a favourite bunny costume and I 
brought a plastic pumpkin filled with candy so we could have an indoor cele-
bration since Belinda was too sick to trick or treat with other children. I made 
a videotape of that Halloween and gave a copy to Andrena that she and her 
daughter watched and rewatched. The part they both liked best was my 
recording of Belinda’s grumpiness at being urged by her mother to climb the 
stairs to her slide set and show me how she can slide. This was a hard task for 
her since she had lost much of her balance and strength. She didn’t want to do 
it and sat forlornly picking through her candy. But when her mother provoked 
her repeatedly, ‘You can’t get up all those stairs Belinda, I know you can’t!’ 
Belinda finally rejoined with frustration: ‘Yes, I can. I can do it’. And she did, 
wobbling but determined. Her annoyance turned to glee when she made it to 
the top and sailed down the slide, grinning madly in her bunny costume. Every 
time they watched this part of the video, Andrena laughed and laughed. This 
was a moment both ordinary (a usual child’s activity) and extraordinary 
because it was increasingly rare.

	
Ethics, Immanent Transcendence and the Experimental Narrative Self	
53
Embracing Despair: Befriending Drea
In the midst of the cultivation of these little experiments in normalcy, Andrena 
does something I found very puzzling. She befriends Drea, another mother in 
the study. The surprise is that Drea’s child is near death. The even greater sur-
prise is that this child’s diagnosis and even her oncologist are the same as 
Belinda’s. But most puzzling for someone like Andrena is that Drea is vocal 
about giving up on herself as well as on her child’s recovery. Drea is drowning 
in her own sorrow and despair. Andrena repeatedly told me she had refused to 
see some of her friends who thought she should ‘just let Belinda go’. Though it 
might seem that Andrena insists upon a simple optimism, this is belied by her 
simultaneous efforts to face an opposing future story, creating experiences 
and taking actions that compel her to recognize a much darker possibility.
When Sashi, Drea’s daughter, fell into a coma at home, Andrena not only 
visited her, but took Belinda on one of her visits. Andrena recounted how 
Belinda had climbed into the bed with Sashi, put her arms around her, and just 
lay down beside her. Together, Andrena and Belinda pre-experience Belinda’s 
probable death. Less than a year later, Belinda will be the little girl lying at 
home on a bed in a coma. One way of seeing this relationship is that Drea 
confronts Andrena, not so much through what she says, but through her own 
stance of unrelenting rage. Andrena actively rejects the company of close 
family and friends who urge her to begin ‘letting go’ of her daughter but she 
actively pursues a friendship with a mother who has begun to let go of her 
dying daughter, not gracefully, under God’s guidance, but in fury.
Experimenting with Life and Death
Though Andrena hoped for a cure, ultimately healing came to mean some-
thing very different. It marked, instead, another episode in a narrative where 
she herself was transformed from a distraught, even suicidal mother to 
someone who came to volunteer at the hospital where her daughter was 
treated, helping other parents whose children were critically ill. She became a 
guide through an unbearable journey.
Andrena did a number of things while Belinda was alive that helped her to 
construct ‘hope in the crossroads’, so to speak. This crossroads marked three 
paths with their accompanying hopes: hope her child would live; hope she 
could find a reason to live even if her child died; and hope that if her child died 
this could be a ‘good death’ after a ‘good life’, however brief. These paths are 
not only divergent but, in the case of the first two, are mutually contradictory. 
Furthermore, the cultivation of each of these paths feeds the task of narrative 
re-envisioning that Andrena set for herself soon after she confronted Belinda’s 
diagnosis. There are two paths that Andrena feels morally impelled to avoid, 
and both of these ‘tempt’ her when she begins the journey through suffering 

54	
Cheryl Mattingly
engendered by Belinda’s illness. One is to ‘run away’ rather than stay by 
Belinda’s side through the illness. This is the unthinkable abandonment, 
behaviour she laments in other family members – most notably her husband. 
She would never physically leave her daughter. But for Andrena, abandonment 
is also seeing her daughter through despairing eyes, as though she were 
‘already gone’. The other path, she fears, will tempt her too much, that she will 
kill herself if her daughter does not live. Her determination to find some way 
to hope reveals her belief that hope is the only path that might lead her away 
from what she finds ethically untenable, her own self-destruction. However, 
hope that rests on the happy ending of cure is too flimsy. This will not do.
The task of narrative re-envisioning she undertakes propelled her to move 
towards death in order to embrace life. She ‘practiced’ becoming intimate with 
death when she befriended Sashi and Drea. And she brought Belinda into this 
practice as well. In a telling exchange that painfully highlights this movement, 
Drea and Andrena once joked about how much of Drea’s chicken Belinda ate 
on one of their visits. Andrena rejoiced at this rare moment when Belinda took 
pleasure in food, a greedy childish moment in the kitchen while another child 
lay in a coma in the next room. If this is to be a narrative of hope, hope itself 
must come to mean something different.
Four Years Later
In the months and years after Belinda’s death Andrena struggled to make a 
new life for herself. She vowed never to return to her old job as a receptionist 
in a car dealership. That life was over. She did part-time work caring for the 
children of two well to-do families, chauffeuring them to various after-school 
events and, in general, mothering them in the absence of their very busy pro-
fessional parents. She had to move from the apartment where she had lived 
since Belinda’s sickness, because once her daughter died, she no longer 
received benefits that allowed her to pay the rent. Because Section 8 housing 
(housing for the poor) has become increasingly defunded in Los Angeles 
during recent years, she decided to move to a town about an hour’s drive from 
central LA where she was born and raised, and where her older daughter and 
other members of her family still lived. There she managed to find a decent 
apartment that she could afford.
What she defined as her main job didn’t pay her anything at all. She was a 
relentless volunteer for the hospital where her child was treated, working with a 
family cancer group which raised money for the hospital and to support cancer 
treatment. She became a central figure in this advocacy group, and she hoped 
that they would consider bringing her on as a paid liaison to work with other 
families. They had one funded position, but instead the family advocacy group 
hired another mother, a wealthy white woman whose child had also recently 
died. Andrena spoke to me several times about her disappointment. She felt 

	
Ethics, Immanent Transcendence and the Experimental Narrative Self	
55
there was something unfair about this decision; she put in more hours than 
anyone and worked with more families (crossing race and ethnic lines) provid-
ing support and advice. Indeed, whenever I visited her, there were always fami-
lies whose children were in the hospital on the phone with her. Although she 
was careful not to couch her disappointment in openly racial terms, she clearly 
wondered whether this was in part a racial decision. ‘You know there aren’t so 
many blacks who go to this hospital anymore’, she told me. ‘The area’s changed 
too. Now it’s much more Hispanic’. She left unspoken, though hinted at, the 
growing tension that has arisen between Latinos and blacks in South Central 
Los Angeles in the past decade as Latinos have gradually moved into neighbour-
hoods that were once African American strongholds.
Andrena’s economic situation grew much worse when the primary family 
who had been paying her to care for their children suddenly moved to Hawaii. 
She was searching for other families who might hire her, but the bills were 
piling up. Early one morning in November 2003, three weeks after I had been 
to her fiftieth birthday party, I got a call from her twenty-eight-year-old daugh-
ter. ‘My mom’s died’, her daughter told me. ‘We just found her last night. The 
funeral will be this Friday’. I simply couldn’t believe it. ‘What?’, I asked. ‘How 
can this be? How can she be dead? I just saw her’. ‘I know’, her daughter replied. 
But she said it quietly, I realized after I hung up. She didn’t even sound very 
surprised. Andrena’s blood pressure had been very high, dangerously high, 
since Belinda’s illness. She kept joking to me that she really needed to start 
dieting, but she couldn’t seem to find the energy. Could she have had a sudden 
stroke? A heart attack? Or had she done something more deliberate?
Andrena’s funeral was packed. Every seat was taken, and people stood in the 
back and around the seats of the church located in the heart of the South Central 
neighbourhood where Andrena had grown up. There were Latino families, black 
families, and even a few whites as well. The speeches were charged not only with 
sadness and fondness but also with anger. There were funny and touching stories 
from childhood friends, family members, some of the parents Andrena had 
befriended at the hospital. There were a few frustrated and even bitter stories as 
well. A niece asked with angry tears: ‘Why did she just have to help everyone 
else and not ask for help herself? Why didn’t she lean on us? Why didn’t she take 
better care of herself?’ Several people nodded as she spoke.
Conclusion: The Excessive Ethical Demand and  
the Discordant Narrative Self
If we speak of the evaluation of moral goods or deliberation in regard to what 
Andrena does, this may suggest that her own reasoning and deliberated 
actions are adequate to meet the moral challenges her child’s illness presents. 
But this language has too much in it of a rational agent and the sufficiency of 
guiding norms. Instead, there is every evidence of an existential situation of 

56	
Cheryl Mattingly
ethical excess. If we speak in the normative vocabulary that governs notions of 
the good life in Andrena’s moral communities, language of the good mother, 
or the good Christian, this doesn’t catch the radical way in which her situation 
puts her out of bounds. It is, as she sometimes said to me, ‘too much’. ‘Too 
much’ must be responded to anyway, and so she does, resourcefully, persis-
tently, in the face of ‘reversals of fortune’ that are even more relentless. To 
speak in the vocabulary of the ancients, she is plagued by bad luck. And still, 
as the phenomenologists say, she must not only live her life but lead it. She is 
responsible to respond.
In Andrena’s case, responsiveness does not merely include single acts in the 
face of particular situations but, in an even more fundamental way, her attempt 
to reshape her very character, to refashion her longer term intentions, so that 
‘too much’ can not only be bearable, but the source of a new ethical possibility, 
an immanent transcendence that signals not merely a promise or potentiality 
but also a demand. A narrative portrait of the self that conceives of self-coher-
ence or unity as a ‘discordant concordance’ privileges the temporal complexity 
of this responsive project. She does not merely live out one life story; she finds 
herself in the unsure position of being situated among several possible plots 
and all at once. Her unfolding life does not merely embody discordance – 
things do keep falling apart – but she actively cultivates it through destabiliz-
ing actions that intensify the uncertainty she faces. That is, strikingly, she 
creates uncertainty, seeking out experiences and events that speak to multiple 
futures and multiple possible selves. As her life shows us, lived time has its 
lines and measures, it marches forward, but these lines are often hazy, roads 
marked by signposts seen through a fog. Haziness may even be cultivated, as 
Andrena seems to do, not in order to avoid seeing what is ahead, but in order 
to face it.
Even her death is marked by a haziness, a striking inconclusiveness. The 
bare facts, as I came to know them, strongly suggest suicide. But what kind of 
narrative ending does this turn out to be? Is it a moral failure, as she initially 
saw it and as most of her community regarded it? Or did her project of moral 
becoming include the cultivation of a new potentiality, a God whose mercy 
might include forgiveness for taking her own life after her long years of strug-
gle, who might allow her to reunite with her beloved lost daughter? Did facing 
her daughter’s death come to include this as a possible ethical response? I have 
puzzled over my last encounters with her, especially those just weeks before 
her death and I continue to wonder about this. My final speculations here are 
obviously inconclusive, even suspiciously ‘redemptive’ in tone. I introduce 
them not to save Andrena from a verdict of moral failure and self-condemna-
tion but to underscore how a life may be haunted by a discordance that defies 
any attempt to resolve it into a simple meaningful unity. Illuminating a sus-
penseful self, rather than a consistent one, is perhaps the primary configuring 
gift a narrative portrait can offer.

	
Ethics, Immanent Transcendence and the Experimental Narrative Self	
57
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank the Aarhus Institute of Advanced Studies, at Aarhus 
University, for its generous support during my period as a Dale T. Mortensen 
fellow. I also want to thank my long-term research collaborator, Mary Lawlor, 
who knew Andrena well. Finally, I gratefully acknowledge extensive funding 
from the National Institutes of Health (HD38878) that allowed my collabora-
tors and I to carry out the ethnographic research that informs the empirical 
material for this chapter.
Cheryl Mattingly, Ph.D. is Professor of Anthropology at the University of 
Southern California. She was a Dale T. Mortensen Fellow at Aarhus University’s 
Institute of Advanced Studies (2013–2015) and is a 2017 recipient of a John 
Simon Guggenheim fellowship. She has been the PI and Co-PI on federally 
funded grants from National Institutes of Health, Maternal and Child Health 
and the Department of Education. She has received numerous awards from the 
American Anthropological Association, including the Victor Turner Book Prize 
for Healing Dramas and Clinical Plots (Cambridge 1998), the Stirling Book Prize 
for The Paradox of Hope: Journeys Through a Clinical Borderland (University 
of California 2010), the New Millennium Book Prize for Moral Laboratories: 
Family Peril and the Struggle for a Good Life (University of California 2014), 
and the Polgar Essay Prize for ‘In Search of the Good: Narrative Reasoning 
in Clinical Practice’ (1998). Her other books include: Clinical Reasoning in a 
Therapeutic Practice (1994); Narrative and the Cultural Construction of Illness 
and Healing (2000), co-edited with Linda Garro, and Narrative, Self and Social 
Practice (2009), co-edited with Uffe Juul Jensen.
Notes
  1.	 In the introduction and prologue to this volume, we describe some of the historical 
antecedents of this conversation between these two traditions, including the way in 
which it has been taken up in Aarhus.
  2.	 While I can’t take it up in this chapter, elsewhere (2012, 2014) I have argued that the 
‘pedagogical self ‘proposed by anthropologists, especially those following Foucault’s 
virtue ethics of ‘care of the self’, also faces this coherence problem. 
  3.	 A more extended version of this case is published elsewhere (Mattingly 2014a), although 
in this chapter I subject the same ethnographic material to a rather different analysis, 
drawing upon the phenomenology of responsivity.
  4.	 For Aristotle, a flourishing ethical life was only possible for people who had some 
freedom over their choices and their actions, were capable of acting on their assessments 
of the good, and had sufficient economic security so that life’s necessities were secure.
  5.	 An important exception is Nigel Rapport’s extended and original considerations of the 
individual (cf. Rapport 1997, 2003). 
  6.	 While MacIntyre makes a persuasive case for a narrative self, his stress on traditions and 
the various histories to which an individual belong make it possible to read his individual 
as someone completely pre-formed by these traditions. Although this is not my 

58	
Cheryl Mattingly
interpretation of MacIntyre’s claims, Laidlaw (2014) may be correct in complaining that 
MacIntyre’s influence in anthropology has prompted a version of the moral self that is 
thoroughly acculturated. See also the introductory chapter, this volume, for a discussion 
of this problem in relation to both MacIntyre and Foucault.
  7.	 Ricoeur would probably find that I have put things too strongly, drawing too close a 
parallel between lived experience and narrated experience. His magisterial meditation 
on time (the three-volume Time and Narrative series) can be understood as an attempt 
to respond to what he considers the inadequacy of phenomenology in its conceptualiza-
tion of human temporality. He argues both that it is impossible to consider human time 
without narrative – ‘there can be no thought about time without narrated time’ – and 
that thinking requires the mediated discourse of narrative: ‘temporality cannot be 
spoken in the direct discourse of phenomenology, but rather requires the mediation of 
the indirect discourse of narration’ (1988: 241). A considerable amount of his analysis 
critiques what he sees as the best phenomenological attempts to describe temporal lived 
experience in all its immediacy. The semantic innovation that especially literary narra-
tives afford is important to his argument. 
  8.	 Feminists scholars across a broad range of disciplines have added impetus to the devel-
opment of an ethics of intimate care through their long-standing contention that care 
has been neglected within Western moral theory. They have argued for an ethics of care 
distinct from dominant moral theory’s ethics of impartial justice (Gilligan 1982; Tronto 
1993). But notice that this does not presume an autonomous self – in fact, such a ground 
project highlights a self that is deeply relational. 
  9.	 The case story I tell here is an amended version, truncated in some places and elaborated 
in others, of writing about Andrena that has been published elsewhere (2010, 2014a). 
Extensive passages of this case are quoted verbatim from this earlier published material. 
References
Arendt, H. 1958. The Human Condition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Borneman, J. 2001. ‘Caring and to Be Cared For: Displacing Marriage, Kinship, 
Gender, and Sexuality’, in James Faubion (ed.), The Ethics of Kinship. New Jersey: 
Rowland and Littlefield, pp. 29–46.
Butler, J.P. 2005. Giving an Account of Oneself. New York: Fordham University Press.
Carr, D. 1991. Time, Narrative, and History. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Cavell, S. 2004. Cities of Words: Pedagogical Letters on a Register of the Moral Life. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Das, V., M. Jackson, A. Kleinman and B. Singh. 2014. ‘Experiments Between 
Anthropology and Philosophy: Affinities and Antagonisms’, in V. Das, M. Jackson, 
A. Kleinman and B. Singh (eds), The Ground Between. Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, pp.1–26.
Edwards, Jeanette. 2009. In Venkatesan, Soumhya, Jeanette Edwards, Rane Willerslev, 
Elizabeth Povinelli and Perveez Mody 2011. ‘The Anthropological Fixation with 
Reciprocity Leaves No Room for Love: 2009 Meeting of the Group for Debates in 
Anthropological Theory’. Critique of Anthropology 31 (3): 210–250. 
 Fassin, D. 2014. ‘True Life, Real Lives: Revisiting the Boundaries Between 
Ethnography and Fiction’, American Ethnologist 41(1): 40–45.
 . 2015. ‘Troubled Waters: At the Confluence of Ethics and Politics.’ in M. 
Lambek, V. Das, D. Fassin and W. Keane. Four Lectures on Ethics: Anthropological 
Perspectives. Chicago: Hau Books, pp 175–210.

	
Ethics, Immanent Transcendence and the Experimental Narrative Self	
59
Faubion, J. 2001. The Ethics of Kinship: Ethnographic Inquiries. Lanham: Rowman and 
Littlefield.
Forster, E.M. 1927. Aspects of the Novel. New York: Mariner Books.
Foucault, Michel. 1997. Ethics: Subjectivity, and Truth: Essential Works of Foucault 
1954–1984, Vol. 1, ed. Paul Rabinow, trans. Robert J. Hurley. New York: New 
Press.
Gilligan, Carol. 1982. In a Different Voice. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Heidegger, M. 1977. ‘Letter on Humanism’, Basic Writings 204: 39.
Horton, Sarah 2009. ‘A Mother’s Heart is Weighed Down with Stones: A 
Phenomenological Approach to the Experience of Transnational Motherhood’. 
Culture Medical Psychiatry 33: 21–40. 
Hursthouse, Rosalind. 1999. On Virtue Ethics. New York: Oxford University Press.
Keane, W. 2014. ‘Freedom, Reflexivity, and the Sheer Everydayness of Ethics’. 
Comment on: ‘Laidlaw, James. 2014. The Subject of Virtue: An Anthropology of 
Ethics and Freedom. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press’. HAU: Journal of 
Ethnographic Theory 4(1): 443–57.
 . 2016. Ethical Life: Its Natural and Social Histories. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Laidlaw, James. 2002. ‘For an Anthropology of Ethics and Freedom’, Journal of the 
Royal Anthropological Institute 8(2): 311–32.
 . 2014. The Subject of Virtue: An Anthropology of Ethics and Freedom. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lambek, M. 2010. ‘Toward an Ethics of the Act’, in Michael Lambek (ed.), Ordinary 
Ethics: Anthropology, Language, and Action. New York: Fordham University Press, 
pp. 39–63.
 . 2015. The Ethical Condition: Essays on Action, Person, and Value. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Lambek, M., V. Das, D. Fassin and W. Keane. 2015. Four Lectures on Ethics: 
Anthropological Perspectives. Chicago: Hau Books. 
Lear, Jonathan. 1988. Aristotle: The Desire to Understand. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
MacIntyre, A. 1981. After Virtue. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press.
Mahmood, Saba. 2005. Politics of Piety: The Islamic Revival and the Feminist Subject. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Mattingly, C.F. 2010. The Paradox of Hope: Journeys Through a Clinical Borderland. 
Berkley: University of California Press.
 . 2014a. Moral Laboratories: Family Peril and the Struggle for a Good Life. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
 . 2014b. ‘Love’s Imperfection: Moral Becoming, Friendship and Family Life’, 
ed. Jason Throop and Valerio Simoni, Special Issue: Friendship, Morality and 
Experience: Suomen Antropologi: Journal of the Finnish Anthropology Society 39(1): 
53–67.
 . 2014c. ‘The Moral Perils of a Superstrong Black Mother’, Ethos: Journal of the 
Society of Psychological Anthropology 42(1): 119–38.
 . 2017. ‘Autism and the Ethics of Care: A Phenomenological Investigation into 
the Contagion of Nothing’ Ethos.
McDowell, John 1994. Mind and World. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Nussbaum, M. and Amartya Sen (eds). 1993. The Quality of Life. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Rapp, R. and F. Ginsburg. 2001. ‘Enabling Disability: Rewriting Kinship, Reimagining 
Citizenship’, Public Culture 13(3): 533–56.

60	
Cheryl Mattingly
 . 2011. ‘Reverberations: Disability and the New Kinship Imaginary’, 
Anthropological Quarterly 84(2): 379–410.
Rapport, Nigel 1997. Transcendent Individual: Towards a Literary and Liberal 
Anthropology. London and New York: Routledge.
 . 2003. I am Dynamite: An Alternative Anthropology of Power. London and New 
York: Routledge Ricoeur, Paul. 1988. Time and Narrative, vol. 3, trans. Kathleen 
Blamey and David Pellauer. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Ricoeur, Paul. 1992. Oneself as Another. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Taylor, Charles. 1989. Sources of the Self: The Making of the Modern Identity. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Tronto, J.C. 1993. Moral Boundaries: A Political Argument for an Ethic of Care. 
London: Routledge.
Williams, B. 1981. Moral Luck: Philosophical Papers. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Zigon, J. 2008. Morality: An Anthropological Perspective. New York: Berg.
 . 2011. HIV is God’s Blessing: Rehabilitating Morality in Neoliteral Russia. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
 . 2013. ‘Human Rights as Moral Progress? A Critique’, Cultural Anthropology 
28(4): 716–36.

3
Being Otherwise
On Regret, Morality and Mood
C. Jason Throop
An Endless Struggle to Think well of Oneself
In her recent book Resonance (2013), Unni Wikan argues, paraphrasing T.S. 
Elliot, that moral experience is existentially defined by an ‘endless struggle to 
think well of oneself’. Arising from an interplay between compelling concerns 
and concrete social conditions, such struggles give shape, Wikan maintains, to 
the shifting trajectories of our lives as lived. A ‘struggle to think well of oneself’ 
is thus, she argues, a significant aspect of what moral experience is and entails. 
And yet, Wikan critically asks, is it ever truly accurate to say that moral experi-
ence is simply a struggle to ‘think’? Is moral life not also characterized by an 
affective struggle as well? When, in other words, is a struggle to think also a 
struggle to feel? How do emotions give rise to, or shape, the sense of struggle 
itself? In short, how is such a sense of struggle affected by those various feel-
ings, sentiments, and moods that are intimately tied up with our efforts to 
morally inhabit the existential conditions into which we find ourselves thrown?
Building upon my recent theorizing of mood and morality, this chapter will 
focus upon the moral and mooded dimensions of experiences of regret. While 
regret is a complex phenomenon that is certainly not limited to a manifesta-
tion in mood, mooded aspects of regret illuminate an expanse of moral 
concern that significantly texture our struggles to ‘think well of ourselves’ in a 
modality of being otherwise. In this regard, I will engage the question of how 
the mooded dimensions of regret are implicated in shaping our orientation to, 
what Edmund Husserl termed in the context of his phenomenological ethics, 
a striving toward ‘the best possible’ (das Bestmögliche) (Husserl 1989:33; see 
also Steinbock 1995: 202–203). That such possibilities for being are not only 

62	
C. Jason Throop
oriented to the future in the context of an anticipation of becoming otherwise1 
but may also arise in an opening up and re-inhabiting of the past to engage 
with possibilities that might have been, is a particular aspect of the ethics of 
the ‘best possible’ that I will foreground in my discussion of regretful moods 
below. Like other moods of possibility (e.g. despair, anxiety, boredom, hope, 
etc.), such regretful moods are, I argue, particular forms of attunement to the 
specific worlds we inhabit and the shifting moral currents that are always pal-
pably coursing through them (see Throop 2012, 2014, 2015a). A central claim 
of this chapter is thus that morally inflected moods of possibility like regret 
should be understood as core moral engines driving the variegated texture of 
ethical life.
‘A Horrible Disease’
I think that diabetes is a horrible disease. I think it is the worst kind. I don’t know 
maybe there are worse, maybe the ones who have cancer will say that cancer is the 
worst, but diabetes, it controls you. Everything you do, everything you eat, all of it, 
everything. If my sugar is high then I tend to be very forgetful, I can’t think well at 
all. I don’t like that. And for a while … I felt really horrible. I used to think that I had 
a really sharp mind, but now when my sugar goes high I become forgetful. I say to 
myself ‘I think I might be going crazy’. Maybe I’m slowly … ah, what … slowly 
becoming mentally ill or cr…crazy? I don’t know.
These words were uttered to me by a forty-eight year-old Yapese woman 
named Thiil in the context of an interview I conducted with her in the summer 
of 2009, focusing on her ongoing struggles to manage the degenerative physi-
cal and psychological effects of Type 2 diabetes. An extremely smart, witty and 
confident woman who had at one time worked for the Yap State Department 
of Public Health, Thiil first found out that she was afflicted with the disease in 
her late thirties, although she believes now in retrospect that she had been 
suffering with the illness for quite some time before that.
When she first received her diagnosis, Thiil was shocked. As she put it, ‘I 
was in denial’.
When I went to see the doctor and he confirmed that I was diabetic I didn’t take 
medicine. I didn’t take medicine. I guess I could not believe that I was diabetic. I 
keep thinking that something is wrong. It can’t be true. I have never been fat in 
anytime of my life. I’m not the kind of person who drinks [alcohol] or who smokes. 
I thought I was healthy and that I had taken care of my life and my health. I thought, 
it can’t be true because I don’t drink, … and I take care of my health, so something 
is wrong somewhere. It can’t be true that I am diabetic.
Refusing to take her medication, her physical condition gradually worsened. As 
she continued to deteriorate, feeling increasingly weak, dizzy, and tired, she 

	
Being Otherwise: On Regret, Morality and Mood	
63
began to acknowledge that the doctor might be right after all. Her first response 
to accepting her diagnosis was not compliance, however; she still refused to take 
the medication that had been prescribed for her. Instead she shifted from denial 
to anger as she began blaming her family for her suffering. As she explained, ‘On 
my mother’s side there are a lot of my uncles who are diabetic’. In fact, three of 
her four maternal uncles were afflicted with the disease. Audibly and visibly 
embodying her anger as she spoke, voiced raised and face flushed, Thiil recalled, 
‘I would go home, at that time I was staying with my mother and helping her, 
and I was mad, mad. “I’m sick and it’s all your fault, you and your brothers, and 
your family, there is diabetes on that side!”’ Thiil was not alone in her suffering, 
however. Six of her nine siblings were also diabetic.
A Dire Situation
The fact that Thiil’s family had been so deeply affected by Type 2 diabetes, with 
so many of its members living with the diminished possibilities for flourishing 
brought on by the disease, reflects a worldly condition that resonates with the 
experience of many other families living in Yap. A small volcanic island located 
in the Western Caroline Islands with a population of 7,391 inhabitants (Yap 
Branch Statistics Office 2002), Yap is currently the site of the administrative 
capital of Yap State, one of four States that comprise the Federated States of 
Micronesia. According to records of hospital admission reporting for 2003, 
endocrine, metabolic and nutritional diseases (of which Type 2 diabetes com-
prised the overwhelming majority of cases) were deemed responsible for 1208 
hospital admissions in all of the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM). This 
number had almost doubled in only three years after the first time that figures 
were collected in 2000.2 In a more recent study examining available aggregate 
data on ‘non-communicable disease’ in Yap State between 2000 and 2010, 
Type 2 diabetes was found to be the third leading cause of death on the island 
(Ichiho et al. 2013). Unfortunately, it may not be long before such mortality 
rates increase still higher, given that prevalence rates are still on the rise. 
According to the IDF Atlas of Diabetes (6th edition), the Federated States of 
Micronesia currently ranks second out of 219 countries for the highest diabe-
tes prevalence rates in the world.3 Clearly, Type 2 diabetes in particular, and 
endocrine, metabolic and nutritional diseases broadly configured, are a very 
serious problem in the FSM, as they have been recognized to be throughout 
the Pacific region (McLennan and Ulijaszek 2015).
The increasingly dire situation in the FSM is by all accounts also evident in 
other communities in the so-called ‘developing world’, as well as in economi-
cally marginalized communities in so-called ‘first-world nations’, where epide-
miological rates of diabetes and metabolic disorders have grown exponentially 
(Popkin 2015). Currently morbidity and mortality rates associated with diabe-
tes (both Type 1 and Type 2), as well as various other metabolic diseases, are 

64	
C. Jason Throop
viewed by numerous medical specialists to be of epidemic global proportions 
(ibid; see also Garro 1995, 1996; Joe and Young 1993). For many Pacific Island 
communities, however, the epidemic of metabolic disorders like diabetes has 
been made all the worse by limited access to adequate health care facilities, 
an increased reliance upon foreign foodstuffs (often in the form of canned 
goods, rice, Ramen noodles, and high-fat content and low-quality meats such 
as turkey tail), and limited information about available nutritional and medical 
treatment options (see Gewertz and Errington 2010). Notably, within Yapese 
communities themselves, individuals explicitly recognize that a shift from 
local to non-local foods is one of the key causes underlying the rising rates of 
mar nib beech (‘new illnesses’) on the island, of which diabetes and cancer are 
deemed to be the most prevalent and most harmful (cf. Garro 1995, 1996). 
Such a shift is also considered by many to be a deeply troubling ethical issue 
given the extent to which these transformations have unsettled longstanding 
traditional moral concerns associated with the cultivation, harvesting, prepa-
ration and ingestion of local foods (see also Throop 2010).
Traditionally, fundamental moral dimensions of personhood were inti-
mately linked with a complicated set of ritualized productive, consumptive 
and ascetic practices. In this context, food was understood as a tangible mani-
festation of intergenerational histories of effortful work upon the land (see 
Egan 1998; Labby 1976; Throop 2010). Embodied efforts to cultivate the land 
permeated the status and relative ‘purity’ of both the land and the food that it 
produced. Conversely, persons who worked upon the land and ingested the 
foods grown upon it were imbued with the political and moral qualities of 
previous generations, which significantly included the spirits of ancestors who 
needed to be continually consulted, propitiated and appeased. The ebb and 
flow of everyday life, one’s personal status and identity, as well as one’s moral 
standing within the community, were thus mediated through attempts at con-
trolling, through ritual and other means, the necessary and inevitable interac-
tions between spirits, people, food and lands that were differentially distributed 
along a continuum of ‘purity’ (Lingenfelter 1979). In this capacity, food was a 
vital vehicle for expressing and defining relationships according to a dynamic 
continuum of forces that range between ‘pure’ (tabugul) and ‘impure’ (taqay) 
poles. Whether understood in terms of power differentials between chiefs and 
their servants, status-based distinctions between age-grades and genders, the 
various life historical and developmental stages marking the temporal expanse 
extending between birth and death, or the intergenerational circulation of 
personal names which give individuals rights to speak for and use particular 
parcels of land, Yapese social life was understood as a reflection of attempts at 
carefully controlling the politically and ethically consequential interplay of 
these oppositional forces.
Today, for many in the community, the rise of ‘new illnesses’ like diabetes is 
viewed as a salient indication of the extent to which access to foreign foods has 
disrupted histories of possibility for moral flourishing as sedimented in the 

	
Being Otherwise: On Regret, Morality and Mood	
65
land and the food grown upon it. Historical transformations, as much as per-
sonal inclinations, have thus often been explicitly deemed responsible for 
bringing about conditions in which possibilities for health, viability, and flour-
ishing  have been significantly diminished in contemporary Yap.
‘I keep thinking, ‘I had no chance!’
As the months wore on and the intensity of Thiil’s anger eventually subsided, 
she found herself subjected to a hard to described feeling. She did not feel well 
physically, it was true. However, she was also feeling affectively unsettled and 
uncertain. ‘What did I do to deserve this?’ was a constant refrain running 
through her mind. The more she reflected upon her past and the more she 
learned about the disease, the more it gradually dawned on Thiil that her 
mother and her family were not solely to blame for the onset of her illness. As 
she explained,
it is not her fault. Its … I was predisposed to becoming a diabetic, but I chose an 
unhealthy lifestyle, junk food, food from the store that I ate that’s why it came quick. 
But my brothers and sisters who are older they ate local food more than processed 
food. Even my two alcoholic brothers they like taro and if you give them rice they don’t 
really like it. Even though they drink almost every day, they probably have a bad liver, 
but they don’t have diabetes. And today there are nine of us, six of us are diabetic, my 
sister who lives off island and my two alcoholic brothers are not diabetic … I think that 
being raised, being the youngest, I [always] got what I wanted. ‘You eat some taro’. ‘I 
don’t want taro’. ‘Then what are you going to eat?’ So up until now that is why, I had 
my way [I was stubborn] and it is [why it was] easy [for me] to become diabetic.
Acknowledging that her desire for soda, ramen noodles, rice, spam and canned 
meat was a significant trigger for the onset of the disease, Thiil often found 
herself regretfully dwelling on thoughts about how things might have turned 
out differently if she had not been so willful and had instead listened to her 
caregivers and eaten more local food as a child. She was also very upset with 
herself for not initially accepting her diagnosis, for refusing to take her medi-
cine for so long, and overall for not taking better care of herself when she was 
younger. She was especially troubled by the fact that even during the time she 
worked at the Department of Public Health, where she had actually helped to 
run some informational programmes on diabetes, she did not pay closer atten-
tion to the way she was living her own life.
I keep thinking, ‘I had no chance!’ I ate a lot of rice and drank cola every day. I should 
have, at the time when I was working at Public Health, taken time to learn about the 
different diseases instead of just, ah … just making sure that they were administering 
the program and making sure that services we were providing were good … but I 
didn’t take time for that. So, what would have happened at that time [if I would have 
done that]? It might have helped me, but maybe not…

66	
C. Jason Throop
Even though she believed that she had no chance, Thiil was still haunted by the 
possibility that things could have gone differently for her if she had only paid 
better attention at work and been able to better manage her cravings for store 
bought foods. And indeed, Thiil often referred to her illness as a ‘lifestyle 
disease’, a biomedically-based framing that stems directly from those same 
local public health efforts to raise awareness about the disease that she initially 
ignored. Such a framing of her illness, at least at first glance, foregrounds what 
Linda Garro has characterized to be a biomedically configured choice-based 
account of ‘individual responsibility for health’ (1995: 38) that is often inherent 
in medicalized responses to so-called ‘lifestyle diseases’ like Type 2 diabetes. 
To the extent that these framings highlighted the optative dimensions of her 
affliction and its treatment, and hence also her own self-responsibility for 
those putative ‘choices’, Thiil’s regret was arguably at least partially configured 
and/or amplified by such biomedical framings of her illness. Regardless of 
what or who is to blame for the onset and trajectory of her illness, however, 
Thiil found herself recurrently facing on a daily basis the existential fact that 
her struggle (cham ko laem) with diabetes continues. As a result, she recur-
rently finds herself in a battle against her own desires and yearnings and she 
expends great effort to be ‘disciplined’ enough to eat better, exercise, and take 
care of her body. As she lamented to me,
Right now my diet is not very good … With this illness you have to be very disci-
plined … [4 sec] … to ah … [5 sec] … to be on top of it and manage it really well and 
control it. Sometimes I feel like I’m fighting with my sickness to see who will control 
who. Will I control diabetes or will diabetes control me? It’s always a struggle, every 
day. Sometimes, if I win and I feel good and I feel … but other days like when 
someone brings ice cream into the house, if there is ice cream, I love chocolate, if 
vanilla ice cream, sometimes I can resist it, [but] if it is chocolate, I cannot. Sometime 
I can do it, but sometimes I think I will just have a little, I have been good all this 
time, maybe … I deserve to have a little bit of chocolate ice cream. But sometimes 
it’s not just a little bit. I eat it and I really like the taste and it has been a long time 
since I’ve had any [laughs] … maybe later … maybe later I’ll have a little bit … but 
then I will feel lethargic and my head feels heavy. But then I think I will just have a 
little bit and after I’ll grab a machete and go out and clean around the path so I will 
burn it off. But it doesn’t happen that way.
Intertwined with her anticipated, ongoing and recollected struggles to ‘control’ 
her desires, ‘manage’ her illness, and lead a ‘healthy life’ – each of which are 
orientations to self-responsibility for illness that have a clearly recognizable 
biomedical signature and provenience – was a discernable affective stance that 
took the form of an indistinct and yet at times still quite palpable mood that 
recurrently oriented her to what could have been, and might yet still be, pos-
sibilities for her being and becoming otherwise. Far from a simple reproduc-
tion of a biomedical choice-based account of ‘individual responsibility for 
illness’ (Garro 1995), however, her mood disclosed an attunement to broader 
social, historical and interpersonal conditions shaping the overall course of 

	
Being Otherwise: On Regret, Morality and Mood	
67
her life and the trajectory of her illness. While never using the Yapese term 
that comes closest to the English ‘regret’ – kal’ngaen, literally a ‘misfortunate 
happening in the mind’ – Thiil’s mooded attunement to the trajectory and 
conditions of her life as lived evoked strong resonances with what I will argue 
today are the mooded and moral dimensions of experiences of regret.
The Persistence of the Possible
Given the extensive anthropological work devoted to exploring such moral 
sentiments as guilt, shame, anger, resentment, care, compassion, sympathy 
and pity, it is surprising that very little attention has been paid to the topic of 
regret in the discipline (see Fassin 2013; Humphrey and Hürelbaatar 2005; 
Scheper-Hughes 2005; Wilce 2005; Wool under review).4 This omission is 
especially striking in light of the recent ethical turn in anthropology, which 
has sought to critically rethink ethical and moral dimensions of human exist-
ence (see Fassin 2012; Faubian 2011; Laidlaw 2013; Lambek 2010; Mattingly 
2014; Robbins 2004; Zigon 2007, 2011; Zigon and Throop 2014). And yet, as 
the psychologist Janet Landerman notes in her now landmark study, Regret: 
The Persistence of the Possible (1993), anthropologists are not alone in failing 
to explicitly and systematically examine the experience of regret. As she put in 
1993, ‘Unlike related matters, such as depression, guilt, and shame, regret has 
only recently received scholarly attention’.
In an article published almost fifteen years after Landerman’s book, the 
philosopher Jeanne Peijnenburg (2007) argues that while there have been an 
increasing number of philosophical and psychological studies of regret since 
the mid- to late 1980s, the majority of these have been ‘decision-theoretic’ in 
nature. Such studies take regret to be a form of counter-factual thinking, often 
focusing in particular on so-called ‘regret aversion’, which refers to ways that 
‘people try to avoid future regrets by anticipating their possible occurrence’ 
(2007: 296). In comparison to the growing number of such decision-theoretic 
accounts, there are very few analyses of the experience of regret in either dis-
cipline, Peijnenburg argues. And yet, in her estimation, the existing
meager phenomenological analyses of regret have a predominantly ethical flavor; 
and, in the wake of Bernard Williams (1976), many philosophers see regret as a 
‘moral remainder,’ an unfortunate but unavoidable byproduct of moral dilemmas or 
other situations in which we are forced to choose between displeasing alternatives. 
(Peijnenburg 2007: 296)
Of the spattering of work on regret in anthropology, two notable contributions 
include Nancy Scheper-Hughes’ reflections on racialized articulations of 
regret and ‘political remorse’ amongst perpetrators and victims of violence in 
post-Apartheid South Africa (2005) and Zoe Wool’s (under review) yet to be 
published research on ambivalent orientations toward the ‘unthinkability’ of 

68	
C. Jason Throop
regret as perceptibly present at the ‘edges’ of narratives voiced by American 
veterans undergoing rehabilitation after traumatic injury in the Iraq war. 
Perhaps the most extensive anthropological account of regret, however, is 
advanced in Caroline Humphrey and Ujeed Hürelbaatar’s work on so-called 
‘agent regret’ as evidenced in thirteenth-century historical documents dis-
cussing the rise of the Mongolian empire at the time of Chinggis Khan.
Building upon the philosophical insights of Bernard Williams, Amelie 
Oksenberg Rorty, and Martha Nussbaum, Humphrey and Hürelbaatar focus 
on detailing the contours of so-called ‘agent regret’, that is the ‘declarations of 
regret by a particular subject about action he or she has taken’ (2005: 3). Agent 
regret as a form of ‘painful reflection on action’ is for these authors an inher-
ently moral and ethical phenomenon, for it concerns the ‘interpenetration of 
singular reflection on “what is done” with moral judgments prevailing in his-
torically and culturally specific contexts’ (2005: 4). To put it succinctly, ‘agent 
regret’ is thus taken to be a painfully reflexive moral emotion focused on the 
actions of a subject who reflects on ‘how much better if it would have been 
otherwise’. Remaining agnostic to the types, qualities or character of acts that 
may be deemed regrettable, as well as the situations and contexts within which 
such acts arise, Humphrey and Hürelbaatar suggest that regret is more than 
simply a ‘moral remainder’. In contrast, it is an ‘anterior capacity’ that potenti-
ates ‘ethical reflection on one’s actions’ (2005: 18).5
As an ‘anterior capacity for ethical reflection’ that articulates with various 
acts, events, conditions and experiences, regret is therefore taken by these, 
and other scholars, to be a moral engine that is inherently multiplex in nature. 
As Landerman phrases it, ‘regret is a many-faceted thing. Bridging past and 
present, interior and exterior, actual and possible, the cognitive and the emo-
tional, the individual and the collective’ (1993: xviii). Often understood as 
related to a range of moral sentiments that span from guilt to remorse to 
repentance, regret may often also intertwine with, and take on the tonalities of 
other affects, emotions and moods, such as anger, bitterness, anxiety, depres-
sion or despair. Moreover, regret not only arises in the wake of orientations to 
acts taken or not taken, decisions made or not made, and opportunities 
pursued, passed over or missed, but is also, as Peijnenburg argues, accompa-
nied by a particular underlying desire, namely the desire ‘for a world different 
from the actual one’ we are currently inhabiting (2007: 296). To this extent, at 
least, regret may at times extend anticipatory tendrils to experiences of nostal-
gia, fantasy, hope and utopian reverie.
The multifaceted nature of regret is further illuminated by its etymology. 
The English ‘regret’ stems from the Middle English regretten, from Old French 
regreter, ‘to lament’. Both are perhaps derived from combining the intensifier 
re-, ‘again’, with either the Old Norse (grata), Old English (graetan), or Proto-
Germanic (*gretan) stems, which each signified ‘to moan, weep, groan, sob’ 
(American Heritage Dictionary, Online Etymology Dictionary). According to 
the American Heritage Dictionary, regret can thus be variously defined as:

	
Being Otherwise: On Regret, Morality and Mood	
69
tr.v. 1. To feel sorry, disappointed or distressed about. 2. To feel sorrow or grief over; 
mourn. – n. 1. A sense of loss and longing for someone gone. 2. Distress over a desire 
unfulfilled or an action performed or not performed. 3. An expression of grief or 
disappointment. 4. Plural. A courteous declining to accept an invitation.
When compared to other nouns of so-called ‘mental distress’ that are taken to 
be its synonyms, such as ‘sorrow, grief, anguish, woe, heartache’, the American 
Heritage Dictionary suggests that ‘regret has the broader range of meanings, 
from mere disappointment in not being able to do something to painful sense 
of loss, bitterness, or longing for something lost or done or left undone’ (ibid.).
The broad range of meanings and intensities of feeling associated with the 
concept, alongside its etymological ties to loss, mourning and lament, sug-
gests that regret, while a many-faceted, ethically salient, and at times highly 
reflexive phenomenon, still bears within its range of experiential potentialities 
significant qualities of affect, sentiment and mood. And yet, it seems when 
looking at recent work on regret in philosophy and psychology, as well as the 
notably sparse reflections on regret in anthropology, that there has been a 
covering over of regret’s mooded dimensions. In my estimation, this covering 
over has in part followed in the wake of regret being taken up most focally by 
scholars working to advance normative, communicative and/or decision theo-
retic ethical accounts. In the context of a phenomenological anthropological 
analysis of morality, however, it is imperative that the affective and mooded 
dimensions of regret be rendered more clearly visible.
Mood, Attunement, Morality
In an article recently published in a special issue of the journal Ethos focused 
on the topic of ‘moral experience’ that Jarrett Zigon and I co-edited, I set out 
to highlight what I take to be the unique moral space claimed by moods such 
as regret (Throop 2014; see also Throop 2017). As Martin Heidegger observed, 
‘a mood assails us. It comes neither from the “outside” nor the “inside”, but 
arises out of being-in-the-world, as a way of such being’ (Heidegger 1927/1962: 
176). Neither precisely of the self nor of the world, as a form of intermediary 
experience (Throop 2009a), moods are seldom the end point of our reflection. 
They are instead, more often, the existential medium through which our 
reflections take shape. As the anthropologist Valentine Daniel suggests, moods 
connote ‘a state of feeling – usually vague, diffuse, and enduring, a disposition 
toward the world at any particular time yet with a timeless quality to it’ (2000: 
333). As a vague, yet enduring ‘disposition toward the world’, a mood provides 
the existential expanse within which reflection is deployed (Throop 2014; see 
also Ram 2015). Reflection is inflected in moods. And moods, I argue, are 
often (though not always) implicated in our moral concerns.
Inhabiting a dispersed temporal and conscious expanse that lies some-
where between unrecognized sedimented habits and more ephemeral and 

70	
C. Jason Throop
accessible thoughts and feelings, moods traffic in zones of indeterminacy that 
may, given the right context, still yet coalesce into more or less marked objects 
of our attention (cf. Geertz 1973; Throop 2009b). The persisting and yet unset-
tled quality of moods is morally significant. Resisting easy articulation, moods 
may allow us to hold ambivalent, unresolved or contradictory assessments of 
our moral life in a semi-reflective expanse that may or may not result in per-
manent transformations of our being. As such, moods implicate moral con-
cerns that are linked to residues of past experience and yet are still open to 
subjunctive possibilities for future transformation.6 A mood is not moral 
transformation achieved, however. Nor is it the past as fait accompli. In a 
mood, past moral concerns are in the process of being worked through and are 
still potentially open to change. And yet, a mood persists. Importantly, moods 
are existential modes of engaging with moral problems in such a way that they 
remain viscerally bound to our being. In short, mood is our being, being 
affected and attuned.
As Sara Ahmed argues, ‘if we are always in some way or another moody, 
then what we will receive as an impression will depend on our affective situa-
tion’ (2010: 40; see also Ahmed 2014). That is, what we attend to, and how we 
attend it, will be organized, at least in part, by our moods. Moreover, as Zigon 
suggests in his own contribution to our recent Ethos volume, the forms of 
attunement giving rise to such ‘affective situations’ are in fact fundamental 
aspects of the ‘ontological conditions’ that make moral life itself possible. 
Drawing from Heidegger, Zigon explains,
attunement manifests itself as the potentiality to become engaged with and become 
entangled in diverse and particular relationships that makes possible the vast diver-
sity of ways of living we find in the social world. This engagement and entanglement 
is best conceived as having-fallen-upon Da-sein as a nexus rather than actively 
sought. Attunement, in this sense, is not done by an individual who psychologically 
adjusts; rather, attunement in the ontological sense is that foundational capacity 
that allows relationships to assemble … attunement is what allows Da-sein to be a 
being that is initially and always a being-in-relationships. (2014: 22)
As Heidegger himself argues, one of the foundational ways that attunement 
manifests itself experientially is in the context of moods. In disclosing our 
attunement to the world, moods thus reveal the various and shifting ways that 
we register our conditioned existence. Significantly, such a mooded form of 
attunement is one that Edmund Husserl characterized as an ‘unclear inten-
tionality’ (Lee 1998): unclear, because moods are not tethered to specific 
things or circumstances that are evident in the immediate situations or con-
texts we find ourselves in. They articulate instead with more encompassing 
and indistinct conditions of reality that exceed whatever particular aspect of 
the world a given subject may be focused upon in a given moment. According 
to Husserl, moods, therefore, have ‘the function of illuminating the world and, 
for this reason, he compares mood to light’ (Lee 1998: 115). The horizon that 

	
Being Otherwise: On Regret, Morality and Mood	
71
is disclosed in a mood is the horizon within which any given object, act, event, 
subject or situation arises – this mood-illuminated horizon is what Husserl 
termed the ‘world-horizon’ (Lee 1998: 115). Indeed, as the phenomenologist 
Matthew Ratcliffe explains, we ‘can only have objects of experience insofar as 
we already find ourselves in a world, and we would not find ourselves in a 
world at all without mood’ (2013: 159; see also Ratcliffe 2015). Moods thus 
reveal the ongoing, more and less conscious, ways in which we are always 
already responsive to the worldly situations within which we find ourselves 
thrown. And crucially for the argument that I am advancing in the context of 
this chapter, moods may also, as Ratcliffe observes, ‘determine the kinds of 
possibility we are open to’ (2015: 57).
The various moods that may arise from our ongoing attunement to the 
ways we find ourselves-in-the-world are forms of affection that transect, 
organize and potentiate our more reflexive forms of engagement. According to 
the existential psychoanalyst Medard Boss, the forms of attunement disclosed 
in the context of a particular mood are thus ‘at any given time the condition of 
our openness for perceiving and dealing with what we encounter; the pitch at 
which our existence, as a set of relationships to objects, ourselves, and other 
people, is vibrating’ (Boss 1979; cited in Ahmed 2014). In Husserl’s terms, 
such forms of vibrational affection arise from those constitutive processes of 
passive synthesis that he characterizes as a pre-predicative form of ‘becoming 
that makes being [itself] possible’ (Steinbock 1995: 34; Husserl 2001).
For instance, regretful moods arising from an attunement to the painful 
potentialities of being that are taken up in a modality of orienting to what 
could have been otherwise, diffusely permeate and potentiate more reflexive 
orientations to specific regrets. In finding ourselves attuned to a mooded ori-
entation to the painful possibility that things could have been different, we 
may thus thematically foreground particular situations, historical conditions 
and life events as regrettable. Such regretful moods then play important roles 
in organizing our attention as it variously shifts to focus upon differing aspects 
of the situations, events, happenings, actions and relationships we find our-
selves always already inhabiting (see Throop 2003, 2009a, 2010, 2015b; Throop 
and Duranti 2015).
As a mood, therefore, regret flows through situations, becoming variously 
prominent in one’s experience by recurrently orienting in more and less con-
scious ways our attention to a painful assessment of events, actions and situa-
tions that could have gone differently and could been otherwise. This is not, as 
the philosopher Anthony Steinbock points out, a remorseful holding on to the 
past (2014: 143). Instead, regret entails an opening up again of possibilities 
that were once in the world – in this case a world already lived but revisited 
and lived again, now through a rather different vantage point and affective 
tonality.7 Significantly, such mooded dimensions of regret are intimately tied, 
I argue, to what Husserl termed in the context of his phenomenological ethics 
an orientation to the optimality of ‘the best possible’ (das Bestmögliche).

72	
C. Jason Throop
The Best Possible
Husserl’s phenomenological analysis of an ethics of the ‘best possible’ was first 
articulated in his early writings on ethical transformation and renewal, which 
were written at the invitation of the Japanese periodical The Kaizo between the 
years of 1922 and 1924 (see Husserl 1989; Steinbock 1995: 200). Particularly 
significant for the connection I wish to make here between mooded dimen-
sions of regret and our moral lives as lived, are traces in these manuscripts of 
what Anthony Steinbock has characterized to be Husserl’s initial efforts to 
outline a so-called ‘generative’ ethics.
Arising in the life worlds of beings who are embedded in an ongoing flow 
of overlapping and shifting generations of predecessors, contemporaries and 
successors, ethical generativity is founded upon the dynamic intertwining of 
habituality, historicity, normativity and optimality that together may potenti-
ate an orientation to the ‘best possible’ in any given situation. It is, Husserl 
suggests, such an ongoing optimal orientation to the ‘best possible’ that founds 
the potentiality of continually ‘renewing our life’ (Steinbock 1995: 203).
For Husserl, the ‘best possible’ is not to be mistaken for an orientation to a 
singular outcome to be realized, a fixed goal to be achieved, or a concrete end 
to be pursued. Its optimality is always oriented instead to an openness to pos-
sibility for renewing one’s life. Such possibilities for renewal are not solely of 
relevance for the individuals living through them, however. As Steinbock 
explains, ‘Ethically, I am responsible not only for my own becoming but for the 
generation of an ethical context that I take up and in which I am inextricably 
involved’ (1995: 204).
In engaging in possibilities of renewing my life, I am thus also opening up 
possibilities to re-enliven, to re-inhabit, and perhaps in so doing to transform, 
even if only slightly, the inherited standards, norms and values that in part 
shape the lived dimensions of what Husserl termed a given community’s 
‘homeworld’. What is thus considered to be optimal here for Husserl is an 
ongoing process of opening the most ‘richness and diversity’ possible in the 
context of those traditions, situations and contexts that we find ourselves 
immersed in, living through, and that we inherit as historical beings. ‘[R]eal-
izing the optimal in the ethical life’ for Husserl, as Steinbock explains, there-
fore ‘means renewing the cultural community in its historical 
self-transformation, its institutions, organizations, and cultural goods of every 
kind: In short, the best possible of the homeworld is the renewal of its genera-
tive force’ (1995: 204–205, emphasis in original).
Taking up, living through, renewing, making our own, and thus necessarily 
in part transfiguring systems of values, norms and goals is not, in Husserl’s 
analysis, only evident in explicitly marked moments in which our taken for 
granted orientation to the world is somehow unsettled by a problem, ethical 
or otherwise. Renewal also arises, he observes, precisely in our efforts to carry 
on ‘the sedimented system of values and goals as taken for granted … [in the 

	
Being Otherwise: On Regret, Morality and Mood	
73
process] reawakening a generative community’ (Steinbock 1995: 205). This is 
thus not only, in Zigon’s terms, a reclaiming of a ‘comfortable’ orientation to 
the world that follows in the wake of a moment of moral breakdown and 
ensuing ethical reflection. It is also very much an ongoing transformational 
potentiality of ethical generativity that takes shape by means of our unthema-
tized attunements to the familiar ‘styles of life’ embedded in our homeworld.
It is quite significant to note here then, that such a generative take on ethics 
is situated at the nexus of a dynamic tension between the dead weight of rep-
etition, the ongoing flow of recurrent everyday practices, and the opening up 
of existential possibilities and new horizons of being. That possibilities for 
being are not only oriented to ongoing present concerns, or the future in 
anticipation of becoming otherwise, but also arise in an opening up and re-
inhabiting of the past, even if painfully so, to engage with the possibilities that 
might have been, is a particular aspect of the ethics of the ‘best possible’ that 
mooded dimensions of regret disclose.
‘Going Into a Darkness’
I … never thought to make it a big deal that I have this disease and [that] I have to 
take care of myself [as a result], because I don’t know much about it. Just, just that it 
was something that I thought would come and go. So after a while I lost weight and 
I developed some … sometimes I get so lazy, I want to sleep, and I don’t feel like … 
ahh … doing this and this you know. Sometimes I’m so weak and I, I, sometimes I … 
shake and stuff like that. So I kept on doing what I’ve been doing, what I’m usually 
doing, I used to drink a lot of alcohol, and eat whatever I want to eat without really 
being careful about what is good for me or what is not. I just [kept doing what I 
always did], and, and, the disease keep on, it’s getting, getting worse, and after a 
while my early, my early, around 30 or 32 or 30 I began to feel that I, that the … that 
my eyes are getting so blurred you know, when I look at things, I think that there is 
something wrong with my vision the way I look at things, and ah, and ah I’m getting 
so skinny. And something I also noticed that I, that when there is a blister or when 
there is a small cut it takes a while to get healed so, so, so I keep on asking people … 
what is really going on with me? That is when I learned that, learned a little bit more 
about the disease … diabetes. People told me you have to be careful because it is a 
dangerous disease and it will just kill you right there and ah, it ah, it ah, it … it 
doesn’t just come and then you know kill you right away, it just slowly, little by little, 
it damages your, all your senses and the way you perform and the walking and 
everything.
The once assertive, self-assured, and at times intimidating young man who I 
often used to see stumbling around town in a half drunken stupor, always 
sporting his ubiquitous sun glasses and baseball cap, had been reduced at the 
time that he uttered these words to a skinny, glassy eyed, feeble man now 
facing the very real possibility of his own death. As he spoke these words to 
me, lying there on his hospital bed the day before he was to leave for Guam for 

74	
C. Jason Throop
treatment for his failing kidneys (Yap State Memorial Hospital has no dialysis 
machines), all of Chep’s previous bravado and intensity seemed to have been 
drained from his being. As he explained to me, his diabetes had progressed to 
the point where his right leg had been amputated above the knee, his eyesight 
was steadily deteriorating, and his kidneys were failing. He also had a ‘bad 
heart’ and there were problems with his ‘veins’, which were not, as he put it, 
‘letting enough blood through’. As a result, he was suffering from shortness of 
breath. He could barely sit up in bed without feeling dizzy and faint. Standing 
up was simply out of the question.
As we spoke together in the poorly lit space of his hospital room, Chep 
knew that he did not have long to live, and tragically, he was right – he died a 
few months later in a much better lit hospital room in Guam (the better light-
ing and medical equipment unable to counter the damage already done to his 
frail and failing body).
This disease is terrible … it is just a terrible disease … it doesn’t … the one thing I 
don’t like about it is that it doesn’t just kill you right there. It slowly, you know … 
kills you little by little. One body part goes, then this, this, this, this … same … same 
… and that is worse … that is the pain … painful part of it. First they cut your leg and 
then they cut another leg and then they cut your hand and then your eyes, you lose 
your teeth, all those things, and then the last thing you die. But uh, I don’t know, I 
don’t know … just … I am going into a darkness. I don’t know what is there … what 
is going to happen there. When I think about it maybe I have … I have ah … one of 
these days I know I am going to die but I don’t know when. Sometimes when I get so 
… sick, you know I have to sleep all the time it doesn’t really worry me … because I 
think … ah … I don’t have to spend time worrying about myself or … so … that is the 
way it is … just the way it is. [I’m] Diabetic, that is that is just what it does to you.
Largely immobile, weak, at times disoriented, in constant pain and unsure of 
his future, Chep spent much of his last days contemplating the events and 
circumstances that led up to the onset of his illness. Unable to leave his hospi-
tal bed, his eyesight now too poor for him to read, he found himself regularly 
thinking through the various things he could have done differently to avoid his 
current fate. As it manifested most explicitly in the context of our interview 
together that day, Chep remarked,
My diabetes I think it is definitely the … the lifestyle the way I used to have to uh … 
do things … I think … ah … alcohol is the one thing that is not good for that … and 
I had so much alcohol when I was growing up … and … like twenty years or the last 
twenty years when I started drinking before I stopped … it didn’t bother me at the 
time. I didn’t even feel anything. And I kept on doing it and people kept telling me 
hey you have to slow down your sick … ‘Who said?’ … um … I really, I really, I really 
don’t know when … until I knew that I could not do it … I was so sick, I couldn’t do 
it … so [it is only then that] I stopped.
His ongoing painful mooded attunement to the possibility that things could 
have been otherwise in his life was not, however, only disclosed in the context 

	
Being Otherwise: On Regret, Morality and Mood	
75
of his explicit reflections on regrets he had voiced over his own choices and 
decisions. They also extended to his critical evaluation of local orientations to 
illness that motivate deep-seated resistances to seeking out diagnosis and 
treatment. These orientations, as he came to realize only much too late, also 
played an important role in shaping his own actions (see Throop 2010). As he 
put it, sticking to a third-person description of such orientations,
[Yapese people] don’t want to know that they have this disease … if they have it they 
don’t want to know … they don’t want the doctor to tell them, ‘Oh you have diabetes 
or you have already cancer or…’ because that makes them so scared and worried 
about themselves. So they just … you know … if it happens it happens they don’t 
want to be proven by the doctor that you have this, you are diabetic … you are … 
most of them are … So that is why I think, that is why most of the people don’t really 
go to the hospital … it is no big deal … I mean everybody wants to … to take care of 
their body but they, nobody wants to be told your sick … you can’t eat that, you can’t 
do that, you can’t … you have to stop doing that … you are going to limit them from 
what they want to do.
Chep’s mooded reflections thus not only opened opportunities for re-inhabit-
ing past possibilities that were never at the time pursued but also enabled him 
to critically engage his own culturally instilled dispositions. This extended as 
well to his critical recognition of the many historical transformations that have 
led to a contemporary reliance upon foreign foods. In his estimation,
the food that we are eating now days are not really good for our body. Sometimes, 
some of the food are good but we have to, you know, exercise and make your body 
work and you know get rid of the bad things but people in Yap are not doing that so, 
they don’t really go to the taro patch or go fishing, you know … in Yap … in the old 
days ah … going fishing is … ah … is a … is an exercise … you go fishing, you catch 
fish to eat while at the same time you are exercising … and even going to the taro 
patch … so that is how we … so that is how people live on Yap … uh … in the past, 
they … every morning, everyday they exercise because they have to go to the taro 
patch, to the garden, work, you know … plant taro … then they have to go fishing 
and catch fish while they are moving around … so it, so it’s a two-way street, you get 
the right kind food and you get exercise at the same time. But now days it like you … 
you know … you just go to work go to the store buy yourself a sack of rice and a 
couple of canned beefs and that is it.
For Chep, the ‘best possible’, as revealed in his mood inflected attunement to 
various dimensions of a life that could have been lived differently, was a mode 
of possibility that unfortunately could only be reclaimed from the past. Facing 
a future in which his own death was pressing on the most immediate of hori-
zons, and a present in which his day-to-day existence was increasingly con-
stricted by a painful deterioration of his existential viability, the space of his 
own ethical possibilities was only realizable in his ongoing re-inhabiting of 
what could have been otherwise in a mood of regret. Significantly, his abiding 
regretful mood also opened, and in so doing in part renewed, a critical 

76	
C. Jason Throop
engagement with those existential conditions into which he (and others in his 
community) have been thrown – namely a growing reliance on low-quality 
and overpriced foreign foods, a less active lifestyle, and an adherence to long-
standing cultural orientations to the moral worth of enduring illness without 
complaint, each of which contribute to the conditions defining the dire situa-
tion that Yapese communities find themselves in. The extent to which this 
form of ethical generativity managed to impact the perspective of others in his 
community is admittedly, however, quite hard to say.
An Unfolding
While regret tethers us to the past, it is also potentially a mood that keeps that 
past alive – it opens and re-opens possibilities that did not transpire, the 
choices and consequences that were not realized, or the contexts that were 
avoided. It is in this respect, as the psychologist Landerman aptly phrases it, 
that regret can be understood to potentiate the very ‘persistence of possibility’. 
Regret re-inhabits the past, literally re-enlivens a past to make it present again, 
and again, with the sense that we could have, and perhaps should have, done 
otherwise.8 It is in this sense a repetition of the past. It is not however repeti-
tion as a dead weight. It is repetition as a singularized revisiting and re-opening 
of possibilities that were not in that moment pursued. In this capacity, regret 
sustains an engagement with a moral dilemma, situation, or failing in the mode 
of ‘I could have acted otherwise’, ‘Things could have gone differently’, ‘What if 
we had or had not done this’. Regret, in this respect, is a mood that evokes not 
only the ‘past perfect’ in reference to the specific things I did or not did not do 
but also the imperfect past as a ‘past’ that is still potentially unfolding, with a 
renewed richness and diversity of aspects and dimensions, moral and other-
wise, I may still yet uncover (see Schutz 1967; see also Wentzer 2014).
While such past possibilities were not pursued, and are never pursuable in 
precisely the same way again (that is, they are singular articulations arising in 
the midst of the ongoing flux of becoming that generates our being), as pos-
sibilities they open us up to an orientation to what might have been. The might 
have been, like the could yet still be, opens the past to modes of living through, 
living with, living again and living differently. In its retrospective modality at 
least, a regretful mood, as Steinbock argues for acts of memory more gener-
ally, ‘“liberates” the past from its otherwise fixed place; … [reaching] back to 
the past already accomplished, which is affectively significant in some way 
now, and accepting its pastness makes it present in a new way, emboldening it 
as a past in the present’ (Steinbock 2014: 140). As such, what makes regret a 
distinctive type of moral mood is not only the fact that something specific 
went wrong or that we transgressed particular normative standards, our own 
or others, but instead that we find ourselves already presently dwelling in an 
attunement to the past that continually opens up the possibility, quite painful 

	
Being Otherwise: On Regret, Morality and Mood	
77
at times, that we could have done it differently, there might have been another 
way, that our history or fate could have been otherwise, that there could have 
been an alternative outcome to the trajectory and tonality of lives.
It is not only the past that is enlivened with such rays of possibility, however, 
for past possibilities feed constantly forward into ongoing and future con-
cerns. Indeed, we might very well act differently if a similar situation happens 
to come about again. As attuned through a regretful mood to the horizon of 
our future actions, we hope that we will not react, feel, or do the same thing 
again. Next time, we would say something else, we would ‘bite our tongue’, we 
would wait and reflect more carefully before responding. We would not get 
upset or angered or act rashly. We would not miss another opportunity by 
hesitating or delaying. In this way, the opening up of possibilities of the past 
reconfigures our present concerns and our future goals, aspirations and hopes. 
To think of regretful moods in this way is to consider what it could it mean to 
live again, to have another chance, to get things right this time around, or to 
see anew the possibilities that were perhaps present in a now past moment 
that were either not then recognized as such or in the end never lived through. 
In the process we engage not only the ongoing flux of becoming that makes 
our particular modes of moral being possible, but also possibilities for the 
generative enlivening of the historical conditions we inhabit, and in so doing, 
may potentially transform.
While for Thiil the ‘best possible’ opened by such regretful mooded attune-
ments may yet still indeed be possible for her, her family and the surrounding 
community, the singular possibilities opened by Chep’s mooded attunements 
have now faded in the wake of his passing, although it is always still possible 
that they may yet generatively be taken up by others close enough to be 
touched by what was once disclosed by them.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Cheryl Mattingly, Maria Louw, Thomas Schwarz Wentzer 
and Rasmus Dyring for their editorial efforts and for their gracious invitation 
to participate in the Aarhus Institute of Advanced Studies conference ‘Moral 
Engines: Exploring the Moral Drives of Human Life’. Their invitation to par-
ticipate in the conference was the driving force that brought the possibility of 
this chapter into being. Thanks also to all the participants at the conference 
whose reflections, critiques and responses helped me to significantly refine 
and enhance my thinking on regret as a particular type of moral mood. 
Versions of this chapter were also presented at the Being, Presence, Ontology 
Colloquium Series, Department of Anthropology, Princeton University; the 
Departmental Colloquium Series, Department of Anthropology, UCSD; the 
Philosophy, Poetry and Religion Seminar Series, Mahindra Humanities Center, 
Harvard University; and the Worlds of Being Workshop on Culture and the 

78	
C. Jason Throop
Self, Department of Psychology, Duquesne University. I would like to express 
my thanks to all of the organizers and participants for also greatly enhancing 
my engagement with the experience of regret. Finally, I would like to extend a 
heartfelt thanks to Zöe Wool who so generously shared a draft of her unpub-
lished manuscript, a brilliant piece that provided an early and important 
pathway for me to better formulate my own thinking about the topic.
C. Jason Throop is Professor and Chair at the Department of Anthropology at 
UCLA. His books include Suffering and Sentiment: Exploring the Vicissitudes 
of Experience and Pain in Yap (University of California Press, 2010); The 
Anthropology of Empathy: Experiencing the Lives of Others in Pacific Societies 
(Berghahn, 2011, co-edited with Douglas Hollan); and Toward an Anthropology 
of the Will (Stanford University Press, 2010, co-edited with Keith M. Murphy).
Notes
  1.	 More modestly, this would also include our efforts to simply keep going (Zigon 2007, 
2011; cf. Badiou 2001).
  2.	 These figures are taken from FSM Department of Health, Education and Social Affairs 
memo: 
http://www.epidemiology.pitt.edu/documents/internships/opps/
DiabetesResearchinFSM07.pdf
  3.	 According to 2013 figures on diabetes prevalence rates, the ten countries with the 
highest prevalence rates are: Tokelau (37.5%), Federated States of Micronesia (35%), 
Marshall Islands (34.9%), Kiribati (28.8%), Cook Islands (25.7%), Vanuatu (24%), Saudi 
Arabia (23.9%), Nauru (23.3%), Kuwait (23.1%) and Qatar (22.9%).
4. 	 It is quite unfortunate that I only became aware of Teresa Kuan’s article ‘The Problem of 
Moral Luck, Anthropological Speaking’ (2017) a few weeks prior to looking over the final 
page proofs for this chapter. Her discussion of ‘agent-regret’ and her resonate observa-
tion that anthropologist have paid scant attention to the topic, are of clear significance 
to the argument advanced here. I deeply regret (!) that a more thorough engagement 
with her work is not possible in the context of this chapter and will have to wait for 
another time and venue. 
  5.	 While my position is that regret – as a painful orientation to past possibilities that is 
attuned to how things could have been otherwise – is a core existential capacity (or in 
the language of this present volume a moral engine) that both patterns and drives moral 
experience. I am also very well aware of, and interested in, further thinking through the 
ways in which regret may be distinctively articulated in specific contexts (historical, 
cultural or otherwise) in which orientations to the fated unfolding of personal or histori-
cal trajectories are taken for granted. In such cases, experiences of regret would neces-
sarily be inflected by assumptions that past actions, events and happenings are not open 
to any possibility of an ‘otherwise’, as the lives we have lived, the choices we have made, 
and the situations we have lived through, were always already fated to unfold the way 
that they did. And yet, whether our lives are deemed to be fated or not, I would still 
maintain that experiences of regret arise and are attuned to what Michael Jackson has 
characterized to be an underlying ‘mystery of existential discontent – the question as to 
why human beings, regardless of the external circumstances, are haunted by a sense of 
insufficiency and loss’ (2011: xi). Where Jackson works to further illuminate this mystery 
through his focus upon ‘hope’ as ‘that sense that one may become other or more than 
one presently is or was fated to be’ (ibid.), this present chapter thus looks instead to 

	
Being Otherwise: On Regret, Morality and Mood	
79
regret as a mood that is responsive to the ways in which one could have ‘become other 
or more’ than one became or was ‘fated to be’. 
  6.	 In this way, moral moods, while dispositional, should be distinguished from more deter-
ministic renderings of moral dispositions found in some contemporary articulations of 
so-called ‘third-person’ virtue ethical theories (see Mattingly 2012, 2014). This is because 
a moral mood’s indeterminacy may potentiate openings for change.
  7.	 While I draw much inspiration from Steinbock’s work on moral emotions (see Steinbock 
2014), and in particular his distillation of Husserl’s ethics of the “best possible’ (see 
Steinbock 1995), I should note that I differ from his position in substantial ways in terms 
of my analysis of regret. For Steinbock, regret is deemed an all-too ‘thin’ and norm-
bound orientation to have much existential weight morally speaking. Accordingly, he 
argues, it can be contrasted with the much ‘deeper’ and ethically salient emotions of 
remorse and repentance. Closely associated with a discernment of ‘who I am’ as a moral 
being, Steinbock argues that ‘repentance is that [non-punctual] act, re-action that modi-
fies the meaning of that past event or present self as it orients toward the future. It does 
so in relation to who I am now and to who I can become; it liberates me from the other-
wise determining or motivating power of the past and the present’ (2014: 140). In the 
case of remorse, Steinbock holds that ‘While there is no positive orientation in remorse, 
it is nonetheless more affectively significant, “deeper”, than, say being sorry [regretful]. 
In remorse, however, one dwells on or with the past, holds on to it, like a tenacious 
retention which is not restorative’ (2014: 143). A key problem that I see with Steinbock’s 
rather quick dismal of regret is that it again covers over the complex affective, emotional 
and mooded dimensions of the experience. As a result, Steinbock’s rendering fails to 
disclose the significant ethical implications of regret.
  8. 	In interesting to note in this respect that the temporal unfolding of regret seem to bear 
a family resemblance to Freud’s classic account of melancholic moods (see Freud 1989). 
As David Eng and David Kazanjian maintain, ‘we find in Freud’s conception of melan-
cholia’s persistent struggle with its lost object not simply a “grasping” and “holding” on 
to a fixed notion of the past but rather a continuous engagement with loss and its 
remains. This engagement generates sites for memory and history, for the rewriting of 
the past as well as the reimagining of the future. While mourning abandons lost objects 
by laying their histories to rest, melancholia’s continued and open relation to the past 
finally allows us to gain new perspectives and new understandings of lost objects’ (2003: 
4; cf. Garcia 2010: 74–76).
References
Ahmed, Sara. 2010. The Promise of Happiness. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
 . 2014. ‘Not in the Mood’, New Formations: A Journal of Culture/Theory/Politics 
82: 13–28.
Badiou, Alain. 2001. Ethics: An Essay on the Understanding of Evil. London: Verso.
Boss, Medard. 1979. Existential Foundations of Medicine and Psychology. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Daniel, Valentine. 2000. ‘Mood, Moment, and Mind’, in Veena Das, Arthur Kleinman, 
Mamphela Ramphele and Pamela Reynolds (eds), Violence and Subjectivity. Berkeley: 
University of California Press, pp. 333–66.
Egan, James A. 1998. ‘Taro, Fish, and Funerals: Transformations in the Yapese Cultural 
Topography of Wealth’. Ph.D. Thesis, University of California Irvine.
Eng, David L. and David Kazanjian. 2003. ‘Introduction: Mourning Remains’, in David L. 
Eng and David Kazanjian (eds.), Loss: The Politics of Mourning. Berkeley: University of 
California Press, pp. 1–28.

80	
C. Jason Throop
Fassin, Didier. 2012. Moral Anthropology. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
 . 2013. ‘On Resentment and Ressentiment: The Politics and Ethics of Moral 
Emotions’, Current Anthropology 54(3): 249–67.
Faubion, James. 2011. An Anthropology of Ethics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Freud, Sigmund. 1989. Mourning and Melancholia, in Peter Gay, (ed.), The Freud Reader. 
New York: W.W. Norton. 
Garcia, Angela. 2010. The Pastoral Clinic: Addiction and Dispossession along the Rio 
Grande. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Garro, Linda. 1995. ‘Individual or Societal Responsibility? Explanations of Diabetes in an 
Anishinaabe (Ojibway) Community’, Social Science and Medicine 40: 37–46.
 . 1996. ‘Intracultural Variation in Causal Accounts of Diabetes: A Comparison 
of Three Canadian Anishinaabe (Ojibway) Communities’, Culture, Medicine, and 
Psychiatry 20(4): 381–420.
Geertz, Clifford. 1973. The Interpretation of Cultures. New York: Basic Books.
Gewertz, Deborah and Frederick Errington. 2010. Cheap Meat: Flap Food Nations in 
the Pacific Islands. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Guarigata, Leonor, et al. (eds). 2013. IDF Diabetes Atlas, Sixth Edition. Brussels: 
International Diabetes Federation.
Heidegger, Martin. 1962. Being and Time, trans. E. Macquarie and J. Robinson. 
Oxford. Blackwell Publishing.
Humphrey, Caroline and Altanhuu Hürelbaatar. 2005. ‘Regret as a Political 
Intervention: An Essay in the Historical Anthropology of the Early Mongols’, Past 
and Present: A Journal of Historical Studies 186(1): 3–45.
Husserl, Edmund. 1989. ‘Fünf Aufsätze und Vorträge (1922–1937)’, in Thomas Nenon 
and Hans Rainer Sepp (eds), Husserliana. Boston: Kluwer, vol. 27.
 . 2001. Analyses Concerning Passive and Active Synthesis. Dordrecht: Kluwer 
Academic Press.
Ichiho, Henry, et al. 2013. ‘An Assessment of Non-Communicable Diseases, Diabetes, 
and Related Risk Factors in the Federated States of Micronesia, State of Yap: A 
Systems Perspective’, Hawai’i Journal of Medicine & Public Health 72(5 Suppl 1): 
57–67.
Jackson, Michael. 2011. Life Within Limits: Well-Being in a World of Want. Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press.
Joe, Jennie R. and Robert S. Young (eds). 1993. Diabetes as a Disease of Civilization: 
The Impact of Culture Change on Indigenous People. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Kuan, Teresa. 2017. ‘The Problem of Moral Luck, Anthropologically Speaking’, 
Anthropological Theory 17(1): 30–59.
Labby, David. 1976. The Demystification of Yap: Dialectics of Culture on a Micronesian 
Island. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Laidlaw, James. 2013. The Subject of Virtue. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lambek, Michael. 2010. Ordinary Ethics: Anthropology, Language, and Action. New 
York: Fordham University Press.
Landerman, Janet. 1993. Regret: The Persistence of the Possible. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Lee, Nam-In. 1998. ‘Edmund Husserl’s Phenomenology of Mood’, in Natalie Depraz 
and Dan Zahavi (eds), Alterity and Facticity: New Perspectives on Husserl. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 103–122.
Lingenfelter, Sherwood. 1979. ‘Yap Eating Classes: A Study of Structure and 
Communitas’, Journal of the Polynesian Society 88(4): 415–32.
Mattingly, Cheryl. 2012. ‘Two Virtue Ethics and the Anthropology of Morality’, 
Anthropological Theory 12(2): 161–84.

	
Being Otherwise: On Regret, Morality and Mood	
81
 . 2014. Moral Laboratories: Family Peril and the Struggle for a Good Life. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
McLennan, Amy and Stanley J. Ulijaszek. 2015. ‘An Anthropological Insight into the 
Pacific Island Diabetes Crisis and its Clinical Implications’, Diabetes Management 
5(3): 143–45.
Peijnenburg, Jeanne. 2007. ‘Regret and Retroaction’, Homo Oeconomicus 24(2): 295–313.
Popkin, Barry M. 2015. ‘Nutrition Transition and the Global Diabetes Epidemic’, 
Current Diabetes Reports 15: 64.
Ram, Kalpana. 2015. ‘Moods and Method: Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty on Emotion 
and Understanding’, in Phenomenology in Anthropology: A Sense of Perspective. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, pp. 29–49.
Ratcliffe, Matthew. 2013. ‘Why Mood Matters’, in Mark A. Wrathall (ed.), The 
Cambridge Companion to Being and Time. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, pp. 157–176.
 . 2015. Experiences of Depression: A Study in Phenomenology. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Robbins, Joel. 2004. Becoming Sinners. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Scheper-Hughes, Nancy. 2005. ‘The Politics of Remorse’, in Conerly Casey and Robert 
Edgerton (eds), A Companion to Psychological Anthropology: Modernity and 
Psychocultural Change. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 469–94.
Schutz, Alfred. 1967. The Phenomenology of the Social World. Evanston, IL: 
Northwestern University Press.
Steinbock, Anthony J. 1995. Home and Beyond: Generative Phenomenology after 
Husserl. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
 . 2014. Moral Emotions: Reclaiming the Evidence of the Heart. Evanston, IL: 
Northwestern University Press.
Throop, C. Jason. 2003. ‘Articulating Experience’, Anthropological Theory 3(2): 219–41.
 . 2009a. ‘Interpretation and the Limits of Interpretability: On Rethinking 
Clifford Geertz’ Semiotics of Religious Experience’, Journal of North African 
Studies 14(3/4): 369–84.
 . 2009b. ‘Intermediary Varieties of Experience’, Ethnos 74(4): 535–58.
 . 2010. Suffering and Sentiment: Exploring the Vicissitudes of Experience and 
Pain in Yap. Berkeley: University of California Press.
 . 2012. ‘Moral Sentiments’, in Didier Fassin (ed.), A Companion to Moral 
Anthropology. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 150–68.
 . 2014. ‘Moral Moods’, Ethos 42(1): 65–83.
 . 2015a. ‘Ambivalent Happiness and Virtuous Suffering’, HAU: Journal of 
Ethnographic Theory 5(3): 45–68.
 . 2015b. ‘Sacred Suffering: A Phenomenological Anthropological Perspective’, in 
Chris Houston and Kalpana Ram (eds), Phenomenology in Anthropology: A Sense of 
Perspective. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, pp. 68–89.
 . 2017. ‘Despairing Moods: Worldly Attunements and Permeable Personhood in 
Yap’, Ethos 45(2): 199–215.
Throop, C. Jason and Alessandro Duranti. 2015. ‘Attention, Ritual Glitches, and 
Attentional Pull: The President and the Queen’, Phenomenology and Cognitive 
Sciences 14(4): 1055–1082.
Wentzer, Thomas Schwarz. 2014. ‘“I have seen Königsberg burning”: Philosophical 
Anthropology and the Responsiveness of Historical Experience’, Anthropological 
Theory 14(1): 27–48.
Wikan, Unni. 2013. Resonance: Beyond Words. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

82	
C. Jason Throop
Wilce, Jim. 2005. ‘Traditional Laments and Postmodern Regrets: The Circulation of 
Discourse in a Metacultural Context’, Journal of Linguistic Anthropology 15(1): 
60–71.
Wool, Zöe. Under Review. ‘War, Work, and the Edges of Regret: The American Moral 
Economy of Sacrifice and the Worthiness of Injured Soldiers’.
Zigon, Jarrett. 2007. ‘Moral Breakdown and the Ethical Demand: A Theoretical 
Framework for the Anthropology of Moralities’, Anthropological Theory 7(2): 
131–50.
 . 2011. ‘HIV is God’s Blessing’: Rehabilitating Morality in Neoliberal Russia. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
 . 2014. ‘Attunement and Fidelity: Two Ontological Conditions for Morally 
Being-in-the-World’, Ethos 42(1): 16–30.
Zigon, Jarrett and C. Jason Throop. 2014. ‘Moral Experience: Introduction’, Ethos 
42(1): 1–15.

4
Haunting as Moral Engine
Ethical Striving and Moral Aporias among 
Sufis in Uzbekistan
Maria Louw
Do Not Think of a Polar Bear
I know a story: someone asked a tabib [traditional healer] if he could explain how to 
make a certain medicine for a certain disease. The tabib answered him, ‘Take these 
things and cook them, and when you cook them you must not think of a polar bear!’ 
The man could not make the medicine, because if you are told not to think of a polar 
bear you will think of it all the time. This is what Sufis experience. The Sufi knows 
that he should not do this or that. Before he did not know. Evil things were habits for 
him. When he thinks of them, evil things give him orders all the time.
This quote stems from an interview I conducted with Rustam,1 a young Sufi in 
Bukhara, an ancient Silk Road oasis and centre for Islamic learning and mysti-
cism, which is now part of Uzbekistan. Rustam was talking about his paradoxical 
experiences upon entering the Sufi path, feeling ‘evil things’ (Uzbek: yomon 
narsalar) as even stronger forces in his life the more he attempted to avoid them. 
Previously, for example, the fact that he enjoyed eyeing up some of the girls in the 
classes he took at university did not really bother him, but the fact that he was 
now more conscious of the morally reprehensible aspect of having improper 
thoughts about girls made these thoughts take up even more space in his mind, 
sometimes to the point where he could hardly concentrate on the lectures.
Rustam’s reflections point to what is indeed often an inherent irony of 
moral experience: the more a person strives for ethical clarity and self-consist-
ency, the more opaque and challenging the moral landscape may often seem 
(cf. Laidlaw 2014: 173). Rustam talked about the haunting of ‘evil things’. Very 

84	
Maria Louw
often, however, as I will show in this chapter, when people find themselves 
amidst the multiple concerns characterizing everyday life, and are not, like 
Rustam, in an interview situation, trying to make sense of it all to an anthro-
pologist interested in Sufism, they are less categorical in their judgments 
about good and evil (cf. Zigon and Throop 2014: 2). Still, the image of the polar 
bear which keeps haunting one exactly because one tries to ignore it is good as 
a starting point for what I have in mind here. In the following, I take as an 
ethnographic point of departure a group of Uzbeks who are formally initiated 
into the Naqshbandiyya Sufi way or merely following (some of) its principles, 
and who, through continuous work on the self, seek to approach God as well 
as to realize Sufism as this-worldly ethics, letting it guide their relations with 
others.2 Drawing inspiration from thinkers who have highlighted what is often 
the ambiguous and undetermined character of moral life, and with the concept 
of haunting as my central analytical lens, I focus on the way in which Sufis, in 
their search for moral perfection, are frequently haunted by the moral choices 
they could have made, the moral acts they could have engaged in, the moral 
persons they could have become. This haunting, I argue, makes moral reflec-
tion and questioning a lingering presence in the background of everyday exist-
ence; a disturbing reminder of how the (moral) foundations on which a life is 
based may be shaky, and how every intersubjective encounter may be a moral 
‘engine’ in the sense of having the potential to redirect one’s care and concern, 
sometimes in unplanned and surprising ways. In Central Asia, among Sufis, 
but also among the population more generally, a certain degree of openness 
– the willingness and ability to (temporarily) stray away from one’s chosen 
moral path, however right this path may, or merely to give emotional space to 
what one had to leave behind on the path, acknowledging life’s insurmounta-
ble value conflicts – tends to be seen as essential for the virtuous human being.
Let me now turn to an example, which may also introduce the context.
Muazzam
Muazzam was a middle-aged woman who lived together with her parents in a 
small flat in Bukhara where I visited her for the first time back in 1999. Telling 
me about her growing engagement in ‘spiritual’ matters, she recounted how 
she had started to develop an interest in Islam already in 1983: back then, as 
she told it, she was sick and unable to do anything. Then she had a dream in 
which an old man came to her and scolded her for sitting passively at home. 
He said that she had to become Muslim and start healing people, using the 
techniques of her ancestors – which she did, although in a discreet way: this 
was back in the Soviet days when the practice of religion was strongly discour-
aged.3 Then Gorbachev came to power, and things started to change.
The years surrounding the break-up of the Soviet Union and the independ-
ence of Uzbekistan were unsettling ones for the people who lived there: it was 

	
Ethical Striving and Moral Aporias among Sufis in Uzbekistan	
85
a time when the world as they knew it was replaced by something yet to come 
into being, and when all sorts of hopes and fears for the future proliferated. 
Many of these hopes and fears had to do with religion. There was a sense 
among large parts of the population that the seventy years of Soviet rule and 
attempts to do away with religion had made people forget what it meant to be 
Muslim and, correspondingly, there was widespread hope that people would 
soon be able to recover that lost knowledge, filling up what was perceived to 
be an ideological and moral vacuum and a cynical atmosphere in society. But 
people equally feared that the perceived ideological and moral vacuum would 
make a fertile soil for blind religious extremism. Religion, in short, was – and 
is still now – ambiguously conceived of as both a major source of morality, 
hope and sense of direction and, in its extreme or excessive forms, as a danger-
ous opium which brainwashes people with ready-made answers to life’s ques-
tions, bereaving them of their normal sense of moral judgment (Louw 2007, 
2013; Rasanayagam 2011).
Muazzam, like many others, found herself exploring what it meant to be 
Muslim around this time. She felt that there was something missing from her 
life, and that she needed a deeper understanding of the forces that made her 
able to heal others. She did many things wrong at that time, she recalled, and 
felt the need to improve her character. And in 1998, after having been intro-
duced to it by a friend, she decided to become a follower of the Naqshbandiyya 
Sufi tariqa: one of the world’s most widespread Sufi orders, which has strong 
historical roots in Central Asia,4 and which – partly because its teaching has 
been promoted by governments there5 – enjoys immense popularity in the 
region today, also among many ‘ordinary’ Muslims who may not have been 
formally initiated into it but still find inspiration in at least aspects of its teach-
ing (Louw 2007).
Naqshbandiyya and Moral Perfectionism
When Muazzam told me about her engagement in Sufism, like other Bukhara 
Naqshbandis she emphasized the constant work on the self as its central 
feature. She strove to cultivate herself, and more particularly her senses, in 
order to perceive other, and deeper or more spiritual aspects of the world 
around her than the untrained senses are able to perceive, and thus to become 
able to live a life characterized by a religiously grounded ethics in a predomi-
nantly secular society.
Talking about the moral and spiritual constitution of a human being, 
Bukhara Naqshbandis take as a point of departure the classical concepts of 
qalb (heart or soul), ruh (spirit), aql (intellect) and nafs (desire, ego or base 
instincts) which have provided the foundation for the development of theories 
of human psychology throughout the history of Sufism (cf. Schimmel 1975: 
112, 191–93). In classical Sufi psychology the nafs is considered as the moral 

86	
Maria Louw
person’s greatest enemy: not only does it encourage a person to act amorally, 
it also seeks to legitimize amoral acts. A Naqshbandi is encouraged to act 
contrary to the demands of the nafs in order to tame it and gain control of it. 
More extreme forms of nafs-jihad are rare in the Naqshbandiyya, which tends 
to consider excessive asceticism risky and incompatible with the modern 
world. Classical means for taming and training the nafs like fasting and sleep-
lessness, however, are practiced. Most importantly, however, the Sufi seeks to 
tame the nafs through the dhikr, i.e. the remembrance of recollection of God 
in the form of repetitive invocations of his names and various religious 
formulas.
The Naqshbandiyya is known for its inner or unspoken (khufiyya) dhikr. 
This dhikr is also referred to as the dhikr of the heart (Uzbek: dhikr qalbi). 
When the dhikr is focused in the heart – i.e. in the centre for the battle between 
good and evil in a human being – it is argued, the body will be cleansed, physi-
cally and spiritually, and the nafs will be tamed. Taming the nafs, a person will 
experience the opening of the ‘eye of the heart’ and the ‘ear of the heart’ 
(Uzbek: qalb ko’zi, qalb quloqi): a person whose heart’s senses have been 
opened will start becoming more sensitive to God’s demands as well as the 
demands of people around him or her, more able to feel people’s inner lives, 
become more attuned to the ethical demands of the Other.
The ultimate goal is to make the dhikr a habit for the heart and in this way 
to dissolve the distinction between the worldly and the transcendent, to fill 
each act with the presence of God and make an ordinary life into a travel 
towards God. Central to the Naqshbandiyya is the idea that one should not 
turn one’s back to the world, but combine spiritual development with a this-
worldly engagement: ‘The heart with God; the hand at work’, as a saying goes 
which is attributed to Bahouddin Naqshband, patron saint of Bukhara and a 
central figure in the development of the teachings of the Naqshbandiyya. This 
idea has been interpreted in various ways through the history of the 
Naqshbandiyya: as a call for adaptation to society, as a call for jihad against 
society, and everything in between.6 For the Naqshbandis I met in Bukhara it 
was a continuous source of reflection, and their very engagement in Sufism 
seemed to be characterized by a continuous effort to strike a balance between 
this-worldliness and transcendence; between attention to God’s demands and 
the demands of people around them. Sometimes they criticized and tried to 
steer away from the evils they encountered in the surrounding society – the 
cynicism, greediness and materialism they found characteristic of it – and 
sometimes they emphasized the need to engage in it all and make a living, 
pointing out that entrepreneurial spirit and responsibility are central virtues 
in Islam, and in the Naqshbandiyya more particularly (Louw 2007). In short, 
rather than providing them with easy answers to questions about how they 
should lead their lives and a ready-made template for virtuous subject forma-
tion, their engagement in the Naqshbandiyya prompted them to continuously 
ask themselves such questions.

	
Ethical Striving and Moral Aporias among Sufis in Uzbekistan	
87
Virtuous Subject Formation: Saba Mahmood and her Critics
Recently, there have been quite a few studies focusing on self-cultivation 
through religious practice in Islam (see, for example, Hirschkind 2006; 
Mahmood 2005; Marsden 2005; Rasanayagam 2011), many of these taking as 
their point of departure virtue ethics in one variety or the other. Saba 
Mahmood (2005), notably, has been groundbreaking in her study of how 
women engaging in piety movements in Egypt cultivate virtuous dispositions 
through specific sets of techniques, providing important critiques of liberal 
assumptions about agency and correctives to the common idea that Muslim 
piety equals radicalism in the political sense and should by definition be seen 
as a threat to the secular order.
In a more general theoretical critique of what she terms a ‘poststructuralist’ 
virtue ethics in anthropology, Cheryl Mattingly has pointed out that a study 
like Mahmood’s, focusing on how ethical subjectivity is formed by pre-existing 
moral codes and practices, tends to downplay the doubt, ambiguities and chal-
lenges people face in their everyday lives where they may move between dif-
ferent moral worlds with competing moral claims, and where it may quite 
often be difficult to discern what constitutes the most appropriate action and 
what kind of self one ought to become – and that they tend to overlook how 
the moral ordinary may offer resources for critique and transformation 
(Mattingly 2012, 2013 and 2014).
Based on his fieldwork among young Muslims in Egypt, Samuli Schielke, 
similarly, has formulated a general critique against the recent focus on self-
cultivation in anthropology, which, he argues, has a tendency to assume that 
ethical subjects have consistent and clear dispositions, that they know what 
they want and what has the greatest value for them. Thus, they are often blind 
to the complexities and ambiguities which characterize everyday ethical prac-
tice, to the ways in which subjects most often have to navigate various and 
sometimes contradictory ideas about the good person, the good life and the 
good society (Schielke 2009; see also Deeb and Harb 2013: 16; and Laidlaw 
2014: 167–73). Among the young Muslims Schielke focuses on, values related 
to the Islamic piety movements they engage in exist in a complex relationship 
with other values and ideals related to, for example, romantic love, family ties, 
success and self-realization – values and ideals which are often quite hard to 
balance. ‘Moral reasoning’, Schielke writes, therefore often becomes a matter 
of ‘deciding, in a moment, who you want to be … these are always painful deci-
sions, and they leave people remorseful in different ways’ (ibid: 171). In a 
public climate strongly influenced by Salafi revivalist notions of piety, morality 
and religion, where value conflicts tend to be perceived as merely personal 
problems to be overcome, such remorse resulting from value conflicts is hard 
to articulate.
I sympathize greatly with these critics. Indeed, when one does not merely 
focus on what Sufis have to say about Sufism as it ought to be, but on how they 

88	
Maria Louw
actually live it, a picture emerges in which frustrations, remorse and pain – 
but also, occasionally, a humorous reconciliation with life’s insurmountable 
value conflicts or a defiant determination to act in spite of them – takes centre 
stage. Contrary to the Salafis Schielke writes about, however, the value con-
flicts, the remorse, the pain, the defiance, the humour as well as other emo-
tions, moods and attitudes involved in making difficult decisions of a moral 
nature, so it seems, should be articulated or brought forward in some other 
way if one wants to prove oneself as a good or morally mature person. Let us 
again return to Muazzam.
Haunting
‘We are Sufis’, Muazzam said, referring to the group of Naqshbandi women she 
met with regularly, ‘but we are not like Sufis in the past. In Bahouddin 
Naqshband’s time, they were very pure, very close to God. Their devotion to 
Islam was so big that they would not interrupt their prayers, even if a fire 
broke loose around them, or an invading army stood next to them. Today we 
have forgotten what real Sufism is’.
If there was a theme which permeated the way Naqshbandis in Bukhara 
talked about Sufism in the late 1990s and the beginning of the new millen-
nium, it was oblivion and the loss of knowledge. People repeatedly empha-
sized that what they practiced was not real Sufism; it did not even come close. 
This idea – that ‘real’ Sufism is a past phenomenon – actually has a long 
history in Sufism7 but was perhaps accentuated in a context like that of post-
Soviet Uzbekistan which was characterized by a general ethos of post-colonial 
loss, where ‘the 70 Soviet years’ were regularly blamed for everything from 
economic chaos and political corruption to religious and moral ignorance and 
confusion (Louw 2007).
In her own self-understanding, then, Muazzam was not a real Sufi. 
However, since starting to practice Sufism, she had experienced some positive 
changes to her character: previously, she tended to fight and quarrel with her 
neighbours and to spread gossip, but now she had become more humble and 
calm. This newfound strength in her character, however, was accompanied by 
what she experienced as an increasing sensitivity or porousness, in particular 
in relation to things which are haram, i.e. forbidden according to Islam. She 
first experienced this when her brother got married. As it is common practice 
among relatives she had offered her help, but on the day of the wedding she fell 
ill, and no doctors were able to help her. She knew that it was because of the 
vodka and the pork sausages that were served at the wedding feast and the 
drunkenness, gossiping and improper behaviour of the people who attended 
it. The next time she experienced it was also on the occasion of a wedding, this 
time her sister’s: she wanted to help, but she fell ill. Then she realized that she 
could no longer participate in such events.

	
Ethical Striving and Moral Aporias among Sufis in Uzbekistan	
89
When Muazzam started telling her story, it was meant to illustrate how her 
character had changed for the better, how she had become able to stay away 
from things, acts and events which are considered forbidden or inappropriate 
according to Islam, what it meant to have one’s heart’s eye and ears opened. 
But as she told me the story she increasingly seemed to be filled with sadness: 
she recounted how she cried because she was no longer able to help, in spite 
of the fact that she knew that she was not responsible – it was God who would 
not let her help – and how, one night, she had a very vivid dream in which her 
sister came to her, asking her for a cup of water. Muazzam did not grant her 
wish, but shut the door in her face.
Denying water to a person who asks for it is virtually unthinkable in Central 
Asia. Muazzam was not sure about the dream: she knew that it might be her 
nafs trying to trick her into indulging in what was haram – the nafs does indeed 
sometimes play tricks with a person’s dreams, trying to make them seem like 
visionary dreams. But the very vividness of the dream and the way it kept haunt-
ing her after she woke up, although she wanted to shake it off – something 
which often distinguishes visionary dreams of divine origin from ‘ordinary’ 
dreams (which are seen as meaningless or stemming from unconscious desires) 
(Louw 2010, 2015) – made her doubt that what she was doing was right; it 
blurred the distinction between what was right and what was wrong, between 
which demands she should respond to and which she should ignore.
When Muazzam was not able to participate in the weddings of her brother 
and sister, she did not merely create distance between herself and beloved family 
members – who were all the more important to her as she had never married 
and started a family on her own – but also between herself and central local 
ideas about what it means to be Muslim. Events which mark important moments 
in the life of a Muslim – circumcision, marriage and death – involve the 
exchange of gifts and hospitality and are important contexts for the establish-
ment and maintenance of social networks (cf. Werner 1999). Religious authori-
ties often criticize them, pointing out that they are not sanctioned by scripture, 
and that the great expenses involved in throwing them is an unnecessary burden 
for many families to bear. Nonetheless, it is widely considered essential for a 
Muslim to participate in them, thus showing oneself to be a person who contrib-
utes to the cohesion of the community (cf. Borbieva 2012; Rasanayagam 2011). 
This ‘participation’, as it is called, is a central activity of Central Asian families, 
and in particular women: an activity, which creates important social networks, 
and which become increasingly important in times of stress and hardship. In 
other words, for Muazzam this was no simple conflict between ‘religious’ piety 
and ‘social’ norms, as living up to one’s social obligations, in local understand-
ings, is considered absolutely central to Muslimness. By avoiding what was 
haram, she acted in ways which were rather inappropriate in local understand-
ings of what it means to be a good Muslim.
Muazzam switched back and forth between celebrating the person her 
engagement in Naqshbandiyya had helped her to become, and lamenting the 

90	
Maria Louw
other persons which were lost in the process. As psychoanalyst Adam Phillips 
writes in Missing Out: In Praise of the Unlived Life, large parts of our mental 
life are about the lives we are not living, the lives we could be leading but for 
some reason are not (Phillips 2012: xi).8 Unlived lives also seemed to lurk in 
the background of Muazzam’s experience. They were pushed to the back-
ground of experience and lived a ghostly life there, haunting her.
Haunting describes the seething presence of what appears not to be there, 
the ghost or apparition being a form through which something barely visible 
or lost makes itself known (Gordon 2008: 8; Frederiksen 2014; Navaro-Yashin 
2012). Jacques Derrida used the concept in his book ‘Specters of Marx’, reflect-
ing on the persistence of the concept of (utopian) revolution despite its appar-
ent eradication from the scene of politics and history: the concept, he argued, 
had taken on a ghostly aspect, being present and yet not present at the same 
time (Derrida 1994). It has since been taken up by a number of anthropolo-
gists in order to elucidate how ghostly presences of various sorts – spectres of 
people, ideas and things which have disappeared – haunt the present (see, for 
example, Aretxaga 2005; Carsten 2007; Frederiksen 2014; Kwon 2006; Navaro-
Yashin 2012). Here I use it to refer to the moral choices one did not make but 
could have made, the moral acts one did not engage in but could have engaged 
in, and the moral persons one did not become but could have become – in 
short, by the moral potential in all that which is discarded in the search for 
moral perfection and which continues to linger in the background of experi-
ence. What haunted Muazzam was not experienced as ‘evil things’ ‘giving 
orders’ as in Rustam’s story about the polar bear. Rather, the ‘lost persons’, so 
to speak, who let themselves be heard in ghostly, if also quite visceral, ways, 
created fundamental doubt in her about who she was, what she had been, and 
what she should strive to become. At stake was her very existence as a moral 
being (cf. Throop 2014: 69).
The Fragility of Goodness
An important inspiration for me in trying to get at an understanding of situa-
tions such as Muazzam’s – and the central significance of emotions and moods 
such as frustration, doubt and remorse in the moral lives of Sufis like her – has 
been Martha Nussbaum’s reading of the Greek tragedy in The Fragility of 
Goodness (Nussbaum 2001 [1986]), and her discussion of the tension in moral 
life between what is within a person’s control, and what is outside it; between 
what we strive for and what merely happens to us; and what is often the moral 
tragedy involved in trying to lead a good life. The tragic poets show us situa-
tions in which good people are ruined because of things that just happen to 
them; they show us situations where good people do bad things because of 
circumstances outside their control; and, most relevant here, they show us 
situations of tragic conflict where two central commitments come into 

	
Ethical Striving and Moral Aporias among Sufis in Uzbekistan	
91
conflict, where the character knows what he or she does, but where there is 
nothing he or she can do without doing wrong. In such situations, tragedy 
shows us, the solution is not merely to rank one’s obligations, to use reason to 
decide what is to have most value. Although one attempts to do so, and 
although one is quite sure that one has made the right choice, a good person 
at least will nonetheless feel pain and regret: ‘the only thing remotely like a 
solution here’, Nussbaum writes, ‘is in fact, to describe and see the conflict 
clearly and to acknowledge that there is no way out’ (ibid.: 49–50).
Tragedy dwells upon such situations, exploring what goodness means in 
these cases. Aeschylus, for example, tells the story about Agamemnon, the 
great king, who is leading his troops against Troy, but who incurs the wrath of 
Artemis who prevents the army from setting off. Calchas, the prophet, declares 
that the only way he can appease Artemis is by sacrificing his daughter 
Iphigenia. If Agamemnon does not fulfil Artemis’ condition, everyone, includ-
ing Iphigenia, will die. Agamemnon does eventually sacrifice Iphigenia; her 
death appeases Artemis, and the Greek army sets out for Troy. This decision is 
probably the best one he could have made, but the chorus accuses him of 
being evil, not because of his decision as such, but because of his change of 
thought and passion, which accompanies the killing: Agamemnon shows no 
sign of remorse – he is able to dissociate himself from his commitment as 
father – and precisely because of this change in his emotions he proves himself 
less good (ibid.: 34–55).
The Moral Force of Emotions
The example of Muazzam, of course, is less dramatic and grandiose; it does 
not involve any killings and is not about the lives of heroes and kings, but it 
nonetheless exhibits the same kind of conflict as tragedies are made of. It 
shows that when a person cares deeply about more than one thing – which 
most people certainly do – the very course of life will lead that person to situ-
ations where he or she cannot honour all of their commitments. And it shows 
how a person’s emotional responses to complicated moral dilemmas may be 
absolutely central to how his or her moral character is perceived.
While we sit there in Muazzam’s home and talk about the pain and regret 
she felt when she was not able to attend her sister’s wedding, the same sister 
who lives nearby with her family happens to arrive. They embrace, chat, and 
Muazzam introduces me and tells her about my work in Uzbekistan and my 
interest in Sufism more particularly. Her sister then tells me how proud they 
are of Muazzam, as she is such a source of moral inspiration for them all, that 
people in the neighbourhood always whisper ‘look, there is a Naqshbandi’ 
when she passes by, although she has not told them that she is a follower of the 
Naqshbandi way: there is just something in the way she talks and her character 
which stands out. Muazzam laughs, seeming a bit embarrassed and again 

92	
Maria Louw
emphasizes that she is not a ‘real’ Sufi, that she is still learning. ‘How can you 
be a Sufi with a sister like me!’, the sister says, and they both laugh.
Precisely because she ‘fails’ in her transformation, because she is not, and 
does not consider herself, a ‘real’ Sufi, I would argue, others consider her a 
good person and a good Muslim. What makes Muazzam virtuous in the eyes 
of others is exactly her doubt and remorse – the fact that following the right 
way does not feel wholly right for her, and that she is haunted by other moral 
persons she could have become but who were sacrificed along the way. Had 
she shown no remorse, she would have been perceived as emotionally, morally 
and intellectually immature in the eyes of others.
Acting in the ‘right way’ is less a matter of adhering to (more or less strictly 
defined) principles than it is a matter of coming to terms with conflicts of 
commitments and values, of finding some kind of (temporary) balance 
between them when it is possible, bending principles when it is possible, and 
of accepting and living with what may be the suffering that results when it is 
not possible (Deeb and Harb 2013: 18; Laidlaw 2014: 127–28). One of the most 
loathed characters in the imaginations of people in Central Asia is the person 
– the ‘extremist’ – who is so completely brainwashed by a set of ideas – 
however true these ideas may be – that any risk of conflict and tension is 
closed off. Most have stories to tell about people who turn their backs on their 
families and communities in their devotion to Islam because they are unable 
to combine their engagement in Islam with an ordinary life among family and 
community members who do not live up to their ideals, and who, in doing this, 
forget that love, loyalty and respect to those to whom one owes one’s existence 
is indeed central to what Islam is all about.
The example of Muazzam, her ethical striving and remorse, also shows how 
emotions are morally charged and may affect relations with others no less than 
acts and explicit moral reflections do. It shows that when the possibilities for 
being a moral person, which are rejected but continue to haunt one, are per-
formed through the expression of emotions – such as in Muazzam’s remorse, 
for example, or in the humorous reconciliation with life’s insurmountable 
moral challenges that found expression in her meeting with her sister – one 
may, in a sense, be more than one (moral) person at the same time; the ghostly 
is acknowledged and revealed.
While there has been a recent boom in studies of emotions and affect in 
anthropology and related disciplines (see, for example, Ahmed 2004; Beatty 
2010, 2015; Brennan 2004; Frederiksen 2014; Martin 2013; Navaro-Yashin 
2012; Svasek 2005; Thrift 2004), very few of these studies have touched upon 
the moral force of emotions. Likewise, the recent moral turn in anthropology 
has seen relatively little attention paid to emotions; just like in the history of 
philosophy, the emotions have most often been considered relatively irrele-
vant in accounts of ethical judgment (Nussbaum 2001). One of the few anthro-
pologists who have paid particular attention to how sentiments, emotions, 
feelings and moods are made ethically significant is Jason Throop (see Throop 

	
Ethical Striving and Moral Aporias among Sufis in Uzbekistan	
93
2010, 2012, 2014, and this volume). In his article ‘Moral Moods’ (2014), Throop 
focuses on the concept of ‘mood’, exploring how moods may carry moral con-
cerns. Moods, he argues, are somewhere halfway between moments of explicit 
ethical reflection and habitual embodied forms of morality. The complex tem-
poral expanse of moods, he contends, provides a way for moral problems to 
remain viscerally bound to one’s being, ‘while extending moments of trans-
gression, worry, and/or concern into both past and possible future horizons of 
experience that stretch well beyond the confines of the present or even the 
particularities of an ongoing interaction or narrative’ (ibid: 68). Furthermore, 
Throop argues, when we are ‘in’ a mood, the line between our subjective expe-
rience and the intersubjective world that surrounds us is often blurred, leaving 
undefined precisely who or what is to blame for a particular moral failing, 
concern or predicament. Moods therefore reveal moral concerns in flux and 
often inhabit an ambivalent existential expanse where the possible, the ideal 
and the actual coalesce in rather complicated ways, and where moods may 
allow us to hold ambivalent, unresolved or contradictory assessments of our 
moral life in a semi-reflective expanse that may or may not result in perma-
nent transformations of our being (ibid.: 70–71).
The haunting experienced by Muazzam and others often took the form of 
shifting moods and emotions that seemed to have a life of their own, over-
whelming them in ways that were beyond their control and understanding, 
complicating moral principles and decisions, and revealing moral concerns in 
flux. Furthermore, their example shows that the performance of such moods, 
or emotions, may play a larger role in moral life than has usually been 
acknowledged.
Let me provide another concrete example to further illustrate this point.
Feruza
We are sitting at Feruza’s balcony,9 enjoying a cup of tea and the cool evening, 
chatting about this and that. She keeps returning to the tugh, the pole, which 
marks the tombs of avliyo, Muslim ‘saints’: persons who, by the grace of God 
and because of their exemplary lives, hold a special relationship with God and 
possess baraka, blessing power. Placed on the top of the pole is an image of a 
hand. While some people say that the hand symbolizes the five pillars of Islam, 
in this part of the world it is much more common to link it to Alexander 
Makedonskiy, Alexander the Great, who is a great legendary figure in Central 
Asia, as in other parts of the world. The story goes that Alexander, when he 
sensed that his death was near, told people around him to bury him with an 
empty hand on his grave as a symbol that although he had conquered the 
world, he left it empty-handed, carrying nothing with him to the next life.
People forget about that, Feruza said. They forget that all that stays with 
them is their deeds in this world, whether these have been good or bad. Feruza 

94	
Maria Louw
was worried about her son, Tohir, who was recently sacked from his job in the 
state administration. According to Feruza, the reason was that Tohir had had 
a conflict with his boss due to the fact that he did not share his colleagues’ 
taste for nightly visits to restaurants, bars and discotheques, and participating 
in various shady affairs, including the acceptance of bribes.
Losing his job was no small issue for Tohir. He was in his mid-twenties and 
expected to marry and start his own family soon, but his parents refused to 
arrange his marriage before he had found himself a job that would enable him to 
support his own family. Until then, he would remain dependent on his parents 
like a child. Thus, the stakes were his honour, status and identity as man and 
future family head. When people in the neighbourhood asked Tohir if he would 
soon start working, and if his wedding party would soon be held, he would 
answer in the affirmative, boasting that his wedding would be so spectacular 
that they had never seen the like. But as time went by, he became more and 
more apathetic and started barricading himself inside the family’s apartment, 
spending most of the day sleeping and watching television and expressing bitter-
ness towards his surroundings. Sometimes he blamed the whole society, the 
corruption of which made it impossible to reach any goals in life without being 
rich or knowing the right people. At other times he blamed his father for not 
being able to help him. Mahmud, his father, had also been unemployed for a 
while. In 1999, the family spent all their savings to send him to Vladivostok, 
where Feruza’s brother lived, because they heard that it was fairly easy to get a 
job there. Mahmud went together with a friend, who quickly got a job. Mahmud, 
however, had to give up after two months, having spent all the money.
Feruza had not been formally initiated in the Naqshbandiyya Sufi order, but 
like many others she strove to live by at least some of its principles and engage 
in some of its practices, such as the silent dhikr which, as she pointed out, was 
quite practical for a hardworking person like her because it could be practiced 
at any time, in almost any context, while she commuted to and from work, for 
example (she was an engineer), or when she did her housework. This recollec-
tion of God, she pointed out, helped her to stay clear of the evils she felt sur-
rounding her. Now sitting there at the balcony and pondering Tohir’s situation, 
she kept returning to the tugh, pointing out that people nowadays were selfish 
and obsessed with money, that they forgot about each other and the life here-
after. The employees at her son’s former place of work had been involved in the 
trafficking of women to Dubai; she was grateful that he had left the place in 
time, without getting involved in things like that. But it was also immensely 
painful for her to see her son – who had previously been cheerful and full of 
self-confidence – languishing on the sofa. ‘This is no life for a young man’, she 
repeatedly said, and also referred to the Bahouddin Naqshband ‘motto’ I 
quoted previously – ‘The heart with God, the hand at work’ – pointing out 
how important it was for a man to make his own living.
A couple of days after that evening on the balcony I learned that Feruza had 
persuaded Tohir to contact his former boss’s superiors – people who worked 

	
Ethical Striving and Moral Aporias among Sufis in Uzbekistan	
95
abroad now and whom he used to consider as his patrons – for help. ‘I have to 
help my son’, she said. ‘This is no life for a young man. What kind of mother 
would I be if I just let him lie there without doing anything?’ In a desperate 
attempt to change the minds of Tohir’s former bosses the family bought a 
fancy and very expensive cake and sent him off to his former place of work in 
his finest clothes. When Tohir returned home, he was still carrying the cake 
under his arm. His former superiors had refused to accept it. For a while it 
stood on the kitchen table – formerly a representation of hope, now one of 
humiliation – until Feruza cut through the thick atmosphere of shame and 
humiliation by declaring that if these crap-eating donkeys would not eat the 
cake, they would eat it themselves, and started cutting it into big pieces. Later 
that evening I found her immersed in the practice of the dhikr.
These glimpses of Feruza’s life bring us even further from Rustam’s polar 
bear story and the idea that ‘evil things’ give you orders when you try to ignore 
them. For Feruza there was no clear-cut answer to what was good and what 
was evil. The Naqshbandiyya’s teachings – and the exemplary lives of avliyo, 
Muslim ‘saints’ – provided her with different moral models or exemplars (cf. 
Robbins, this volume; Laidlaw 2014: 82–87) that she emphasized at various 
times – the virtue of forsaking the striving for power and richness in this 
world, but also the virtue of acting, working hard to make a living, contribut-
ing to the prosperity of society. The moral person she was one day was always 
accompanied by another moral person she could have been; the concern that 
was at the forefront one day went into the background the next, in a constant 
attempt to reconcile being a good mother and being a good Muslim. These 
concerns sometimes seemed to overlap and sometimes seemed to drag her in 
separate directions; sometimes they made their appearance even when she 
seemed to ignore them, not only in the ways in which she chose to act and her 
explicit moral reflections, but also in the subtle shifts of emotion which 
accompanied the acts and the reflections. These emotions included the anger 
and frustration which seemed to accompany the point she repeatedly made 
about her gratitude for the fact that her son had left a place characterized by 
amoral and shady affairs, and what may perhaps best be described as the defi-
ance which marked her efforts to nonetheless secure her son a job at this 
morally dubious place, a determination to act and find a way out of the misery 
that characterized the family’s life.
Conclusion: Haunting and the Moral Nerve of the Everyday
The Naqshbandiyya’s teaching rarely brings any definite answers to the Sufis I 
have come to know in Uzbekistan and their questions about how to lead their 
lives, but is, rather, a source of shifting and sometimes paradoxical moral 
reflections. But perhaps in this – fundamentally impossible – striving for the 
realization of the transcendent ideals of Sufism there was a moral drive which, 

96	
Maria Louw
in spite of all the frustrations, made the engagement in Sufism so meaningful: 
a conatus or will to be moral, which thrives by never really succeeding.
Some of this may be more or less specific to Sufism which – although one 
should be careful not to create a caricature of a historically very complex tra-
dition – has always had a tendency to scepticism towards stiffened social and 
moral norms and pointed at the limits of intentional action, emphasizing that 
(moral) inspiration which may come out of the blue – in visions or inspira-
tional dreams, for example – and change a person’s life in a second, reminding 
one of the unpredictability of divine interventions and the contingency of life 
itself (cf. Mittermaier 2012) and the weight it has given to the paradoxical, 
providing epistemologies of uncertainty which, rather than bringing meaning 
and certainty to its practitioners, tend to shake the ground beneath their feet 
and reverse standard orientations.
But the example may also point at something more general: the more we 
seek ‘closure’ by ranking some concerns as more important than others, the 
more those concerns which are discarded tend to haunt us. This haunting 
makes the moral persons we could have become, but did not become, follow 
us like shadows in the stories we like to tell about ourselves and in the emo-
tional depths of our being and gives everyday existence a moral ‘nerve’. It 
makes the moral a seething presence in everyday life, continuously reminding 
us that the (moral) foundations on which a life is based may be shaky, and that 
every intersubjective encounter – whether it is a face-to-face encounter with 
another human being (say, one’s son lying passively on the sofa or one’s sister 
asking one to help on the occasion of her wedding) or, say, an encounter in 
what may be a visionary dream – may be a moral ‘engine’ in the sense of 
having the potential to redirect one’s care and concern in directions which do 
not necessarily follow a larger masterplan.
Maria Louw is Associate Professor at the Department of Anthropology, 
Aarhus University. She is the author of Everyday Islam in Post-Soviet Central 
Asia (Routledge 2007) and a number of other publications focusing on reli-
gion, secularism, atheism and morality in Central Asia.
Notes
  1.	 All names cited in this chapter are pseudonyms.
  2.	 The chapter is based on thirteen months of fieldwork conducted in Bukhara, Uzbekistan 
in 1998–1999 and 2000, and two weeks of fieldwork conducted in 2011.
  3.	 Religion was seen in Marxist terms as a form of false consciousness which inhibited 
people from acting on the real material world and realizing their true humanity; the 
Soviet period saw the dismantling of religious institutions and the placing of those which 
remained under strict control. The struggle against religion took many forms, ranging 
from the outright destruction of religious institutions and the liquidation or arrest of 
religious authorities to anti-religious propaganda and the more subtle mimicking of 

	
Ethical Striving and Moral Aporias among Sufis in Uzbekistan	
97
‘religious’ forms in the creation of ‘secular’ rituals that acted as substitutes for religious 
ones (cf. Anderson 1994; Binns 1979; Ramet 1987).
  4.	 On the history of the Naqshbandiyya Sufi tariqa in Central Asia, see Algar 1990a and 
1990b.
  5.	 In Uzbekistan, more particularly, Sufism and in particular the Naqshbandi tradition has 
been coopted by the post-Soviet government as a kind of Islam which is the bearer of the 
nation’s humanist traditions and, moreover, is compatible with a modern, secular state 
and a counterweight to political Islam (Louw 2007; Paul 2002; Rasanayagam 2011; 
Peshkova 2014; Schubel 1999). This is quite ironic as Naqshbandiyya through history has 
been distinguished by its strong involvement in worldly affairs – including political 
affairs (Algar 1990b; Zarcone 1996: 64; Zelkina 2000: 81).
  6.	 In Central Asia, more often than not, there has been a close relationship between the 
Naqshbandiyya and the ruling classes (Algar 1990a: 16; Algar 1990b: 126–27; Levin 1996: 
106; Rashid 2002; Schubel 1999; Zelkina 2000: 81–3). However, the Naqshbandiyya has 
also provided organization and leadership for many conflicts, including jihad against 
Russian colonists in North Caucaus in 1830–1859, against Russians and Soviets in parts 
of Turkestan in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries as well as rebellions against 
Chinese rule in Xinjiang (Bennigsen and Wimbush 1985: 3; Manz 1987; Olcott 1995: 35; 
Voll 1994: 65; Zarcone 1996; Zelkina 2000).
  7.	 As reflected, for example, in the often quoted saying of Abu’l-Hasan Bushandi (d. 960): 
‘Sufism today is a name without reality, whereas once it was a reality without a name’.
  8.	 I am grateful to Joel Robbins for bringing Phillips’ book to my attention.
  9.	 This story is a modified version of a case I previously addressed in Louw 2007.
References
Ahmed, S. 2004. The Cultural Politics of Emotion. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Algar, Hamid. 1990a. ‘A Brief History of the Naqshbandi Order’, in M. Gaborieau, A. 
Popovic and T. Zarcone (eds), Naqshbandis: cheminements et situation actuelle 
d’un ordre mystique musulman. Istanbul/Paris: ISIS.
 . 1990b. ‘Political Aspects of Naqshbandi History’, in M. Gaborieau, A. Popovic 
and T. Zarcone (eds), Naqshbandis: cheminements et situation actuelle d’un ordre 
mystique musulman. Istanbul/Paris: ISIS.
Anderson, John. 1994. Religion, State and Politics in the Soviet Union and Successor 
States. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Aretxaga, Begoña. 2005. States of Terror: Begoña Aretxaga’s Essays, ed. Joseba Zulaika. 
Reno: Center for Basque Studies.
Beatty, A. 2010. ‘How Did It Feel for You? Emotion, Narrative, and the Limits of 
Ethnography’, American Anthropologist 112(3): 430–43.
 . 2015. Anthropology and Emotion, Journal of the Royal Anthropological 
Institute (N.S.) 20: 545–63.
Bennigsen, A. and S.E. Wimbush. 1985. Mystics and Commissars: Sufism in the Soviet 
Union. London: Hurst and Company.
Binns, Christopher A.P. 1979. ‘The Changing Face of Power: Revolution and 
Accommodation in the Development of the Soviet Ceremonial System: Part I’, 
Man 14: 585–606.
Borbieva, Noor O’Neill. 2012. ‘Empowering Muslim Women: Independent Religious 
Fellowships in the Kyrgyz Republic’, Slavic Review 71: 2.
Brennan, Theresa. 2004. The Transmission of Affect. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

98	
Maria Louw
Carsten, Janet (ed.). 2007. Ghosts of Memory: Essays on Remembrance and Relatedness. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Deeb, Lara and Mona Harb. 2013. Leisurely Islam: Negotiating Geography and 
Morality in Shi’ite South Beirut. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Derrida, Jacques. 2004. Specters of Marx: The State of Debt, the Work of Mourning, and 
the New International. New York and London: Routledge.
Frederiksen, Martin D. 2014. Young Men, Time, and Boredom in the Republic of 
Georgia. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Gordon, Avery F. 2008. Ghostly Matters: Haunting and the Sociological Imagination. 
Minneapolis and London: University of Minnesota Press.
Hirschkind, Charles. 2006. The Ethical Soundscape: Cassette Sermons and Islamic 
Counter-Publics in Egypt. New York: Columbia University Press.
Kwon, Heonik. 2006. After the Massacre: Commemoration and Consolation in Ha My 
and My Lai. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Laidlaw, James. 2014. The Subject of Virtue: An Anthropology of Ethics and Freedom. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Levin, T. 1996. The Hundred Thousand Fools of God: Musical Travels in Central Asia. 
Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.
Louw, Maria. 2007. Everyday Islam in Post-Soviet Central Asia. London and New 
York: Routledge.
 . 2010. ‘Dreaming up Futures: Dream Omens and Magic in Bishkek’, History and 
Anthropology 21(3): 277–92.
 . 2013. ‘Even Honey May Become Bitter When There is Too Much of It: Islam as 
Threat and Source of Well-Being in Post- Soviet Kyrgyzstan’, Central Asian Survey 
32(4): 514–26.
 . 2015. ‘The Art of Dealing with Things You Do Not Believe In: Dream Omens 
and Their Meanings in Post-Soviet Kyrgyzstan’, in Vibeke Steffen, Kirsten Marie 
Raahauge and Steffen Jøhncke (eds), On the Limits of Reason – New Perspectives 
in Anthropological Studies of Magic, Social Technology, and Uncertainty. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Manz, B.F. 1987. ‘Central Asian Uprisings in the Nineteenth Century’: Ferghana under 
the Russians’, The Russian Review 46: 267–81.
Marsden, Magnus. 2005. Living Islam: Muslim Religious Experience in Pakistan’s 
North-West Frontier. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Martin, E. 2013. ‘The Potentiality of Ethnography and the Limits of Affect Theory’, 
Current Anthropology 54(S7): 149–58.
Mattingly, Cheryl. 2012. ‘Two Virtue Ethics and the Anthropology of Morality’, 
Anthropological Theory 12(2) 161–84.
 . 2013. ‘Moral Selves and Moral Scenes: Narrative Experiments in Everyday 
Life’, Ethnos 78(3): 301–27.
 . 2014. Moral Laboratories – Family Peril and the Struggle for a Good Life. 
Oakland, CA: University of California Press.
Mahmood, Saba. 2005. Politics of Piety: The Islamic Revival and the Feminist Subject. 
Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Mittermaier, Amira. 2012. ‘Dreams from Elsewhere: Muslim Subjectivities Beyond 
the Trope of Self-cultivation’, Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 18: 
247–65.
Navaro-Yashin, Yael. 2012. The Make-Believe Space: Affective Geography in a Postwar 
Polity. Durham and London: Duke University Press.
Nussbaum, Martha. (2001 (1986). The Fragility of Goodness: Luck and Ethics in Greek 
Tragedy and Philosophy, revised edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

	
Ethical Striving and Moral Aporias among Sufis in Uzbekistan	
99
 . 2001. Upheavals of Thought: The Intelligence of Emotions. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Olcott, M.B. 1995. ‘Islam and Fundamentalism in Independent Central Asia’, in Y. 
Ro’I (ed.), Muslim Eurasia: Conflicting Legacies. London: Frank Cass: 21–40.
Paul, Jürgen. 2002. ‘Contemporary Uzbek Hagiography and its Sources’, Hallsche 
Beiträge zur Orientwissenschaft 32: 631–38.
Peshkova, Svetlana. 2014. Women, Islam, and Identity: Public Life in Private Spaces in 
Uzbekistan. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press.
Phillips, Adam. 2012. Missing Out: In Praise of the Unlived Life. London: Penguin Books.
Ramet, Pedro. 1987. Cross and Commissar: The Politics of Religion in Eastern Europe 
and the USSR. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Rasanayagam, Johan. 2011. Islam in Post-Soviet Uzbekistan: The Morality of 
Experience. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rashid, Ahmed. 2002. Jihad: The Rise of Militant Islam in Central Asia. New Haven 
and London: Yale University Press.
Schielke, Samuli. 2009. ‘Ambivalent Commitments: Troubles of Morality, Religiosity 
and Aspiration among Young Egyptians’, Journal of Religion in Africa 39: 158–85.
Schimmel, A. 1975. Mystical Dimensions of Islam. Chapel Hill: The University of 
North Carolina Press.
Schubel, V. 1999. ‘Post-Soviet Hagiography and the Reconstruction of the Naqshbandi 
Tradition in Contemporary Uzbekistan’, in E. Özdalga (ed.), Naqshbandis in 
Western and Central Asia: Change and Continuity. Istanbul: Swedish Research 
Centre in Istanbul.
Svasek, Maruska. 2005. ‘Introduction: Emotions in Anthropology’, in Kay Milton and 
Maruska Svasek (eds), Mixed Emotions, Anthropological Studies of Feeling. Oxford: 
Berg: pp. 1–23.
Thrift, Nigel. 2004. ‘Intensities of Feeling: Towards a Spatial Politics of Affect’, 
Geografiska Annaler 86 B (1): 57–78.
Throop, Jason. 2010. Suffering and Sentiment: Exploring the Vicissitudes of Experience 
and Pain in Yap. Berkeley: University of California Press.
 . 2012. ‘Moral Sentiments’, in Didier Fassin (ed.), A Companion to Moral 
Anthropology. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 150–68.
 . 2014. ‘Moral Moods’, Ethos 42(1): 65–83.
Voll, J.O. 1994. ‘Central Asia as Part of the Modern Islamic World’, in B.F. Manz (ed.), 
Central Asia in Historical Perspective. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, pp. 62–81.
Werner, C.A. 1999. ‘The Dynamics of Feasting and Gift Exchange in Rural Kazakstan’, 
in I. Svanberg (ed.), Contemporary Kazaks: Cultural and Social Perspectives. New 
York: St Martin’s Press, pp. 47–72.
Zarcone, Thierry. 1996. ‘Sufi Movements: Search for Identity and Islamic Resurgence’, 
in K. Warikoo (ed.), Central Asia. New Delhi: Har-anand Publications, pp. 63–79.
Zelkina, Anna. 2000. In Quest for God and Freedom: The Sufi Response to the Russian 
Advance in the North Caucasus. London: Hurst and Company.
Zigon, Jarrett and Jason Throop. 2014. ‘Moral Experience: Introduction’, Ethos 42(1): 
1–15.

5
Every Day
Forgiving after War in Northern Uganda
Lotte Meinert
Introduction
The profoundness of every single day actions and words as moral engines of 
forgiveness and promise is remarkable after the war in northern Uganda. I have 
split the word everyday into the two parts ‘every’ and ‘day’, to emphasize the 
moral significance and possibility of single routine actions.1 This is not the idea 
of morality as unreflective and embedded in the habitual in a Maussian sense. 
What I want is to highlight the importance of the ordinary, as others have done 
(Lambek 2010; Mattingly 2014), and give attention to every day actions and 
words rather than the extraordinary reconciliation rituals and trials that often 
draw the focus of the media in post-conflict situations in Africa. Trials and 
rituals are important parts of public and collective moral work after conflicts, 
but my focus in this chapter is on the renewed moral sense of every day actions 
that may normally, or under other circumstances, seem banal and ordinary, such 
as grinding your sesame seeds on your neighbours’ grinding stone, cooking and 
sharing food with all family members, letting a friend look after your child, 
taking turns when fetching water, and having a casual conversation. These ordi-
nary actions come to carry enormous moral weight in situations where ‘wrongs’ 
and forgiveness are being questioned. They become windows, so to speak, 
through which people continuously monitor how social processes are going.
A War of Social Torture
The ‘wrongs’ committed during the war in northern Uganda may be regarded 
as a form of moral breakdown (Zigon 2007) because many of the atrocities 

	
Every Day: Forgiving after War in Northern Uganda	 101
were carried out within intimate relationships where family members, and 
others who could usually trust each other, were forced to kill or harm each 
other. Yet, in the context of a twenty-year long war that constantly shakes 
people’s moral standards through ongoing forms of what Chris Dolan has 
described as ‘social torture’, sustained by the government army and the donors 
who provided humanitarian aid (2009), practices, reflections and responses 
are so prolonged that they may extend beyond any definition of momentary 
breakdown. What I am particularly interested in here are local considerations 
and practices of responding to ‘wrongs’, and what a situation of apparently 
constant breakdown and repair may teach us about the moral domain – what 
is it to be picking up pieces of sociality that have fallen apart, when everyday 
relationships – such as parent-child relations, commonly taken for granted as 
good and caring in nature – fall apart, and what might be considered part of 
what Heidegger described as being-in-the-world (1996 [1953]). These rela-
tionships become present-at-hand when they fall apart, as Heidegger’s famous 
hammer example taught us. When family members hurt, betray and some-
times even kill each other, the nature of family relations emerges as something 
problematic to reflect upon, and afterwards appears as something to practice 
more consciously and carefully in order to respond to and repair the break-
down. This is a continuous process that creates a heightened awareness of the 
fragility of social relations and there is very little, if any, sense of ‘taken for 
granted morality’. It may not even make sense to think of morality as some-
thing that can be taken for granted in the first place. As Joel Robbins points 
out, referring to Fabion (2001): ‘The ethical is a field of values, that actors are 
less obliged than encouraged to realize. Actors must feel the directive force of 
values, must recognize themselves as encouraged by them to be moral. The 
ethical field cannot be one governed by unconscious cultural compulsion’ 
(2004: 315). And neither, obviously, is morality a phenomenon which is simply 
open to choice, as underlined by James Laidlaw (2002: 323). The dynamics of 
moral breakdown and repair in northern Uganda happen in the realm of the 
ordinary, yet this does not imply a descent into an ordinary unconscious state. 
What is going on appears more akin to a kind of societal-wide moral break-
down and repair awareness, as we see in Jonathan Lear’s description of the 
Crow society (2006). This involves a renewed awareness of the morality of 
every single action; something gets strengthened in this process, and with it 
emerges a sense of the possibility of a new beginning.
Beginnings in the Aftermath
After peace was settled in northern Uganda in 2008 people began returning to 
their original homes from Internally Displaced Persons (IDP) camps. For more 
than twenty years the Ugandan military (UNDP) and the Lord’s Resistance 
Army (LRA), the rebel group led by Joseph Kony, had locked the population in 

102	
Lotte Meinert
a brutal armed conflict that saw tens of thousands of people killed, around 2 
million people displaced, and thousands abducted to join the rebel army. 
During the war both the rebels and the government forces committed atroci-
ties against the population, which included making people commit crimes 
against each other (Finnström 2008; Dolan 2009). Those who were abducted 
were often forced to denounce, harm or even kill members of their families 
and communities, to prevent the abducted from escaping back home (Dolan 
2009). This distorting of the line between victims and perpetrators obviously 
made homecoming complex. Many abductees escaped from the rebels during 
the war, sometimes because they had heard messages on the radio that they 
would be welcomed back home no matter what they had done to their fami-
lies, no matter what the rebel leaders told them, and that they would be for-
given for the crimes they had been forced to commit. Yet returning home still 
presented not only political problems, but complicated social and personal 
challenges as well (Verma 2012). Relations between family members, neigh-
bours and friends were made tense by feelings of mistrust and betrayal, and 
often people felt that they lived together as ‘intimate enemies’ (Baines 2010). 
Experiences of betrayal at interpersonal and political levels strongly marked 
the social atmosphere as one of ‘tricky trust’; people emphasized that ‘you 
could never know what is in another person’s heart’ (Meinert 2014).
During and after the war an abundance of NGOs, traditional and religious 
institutions got involved in reconciliation work, including the facilitation of 
traditional cleansing ceremonies, reconciliation rituals and reparation work-
shops (Akuni 2011; Finnegan 2010). Cleansing rituals for those who had com-
mitted crimes or been in contact with the dead and were affected by vengeful 
spirits of cen included the ceremony of stepping on eggs, nyono tonggweno and 
ryemo cen cleansing an area of evil spirits (Finnegan 2010; Harlacher et al. 
2006) and the more elaborate mat oput ritual of ‘drinking the bitter root’, 
which involves material compensation. Some of these rituals were funded by 
international donors, such as the USAID (United States Agency for 
International Development)-funded Northern Uganda Transition Initiative 
which organized cleansing rituals before people moved back into their rural 
homes and started farming the land so that they would not be affected if they 
came upon the remains of unburied dead. Most initiatives aimed at collective 
and political levels and many promoted Christian and/or ‘traditional Acholi’ 
ethics of forgiveness as the ‘good’ and right way to overcome problems. Critical 
voices have pointed out how these endeavours tend to reify Acholi tradition 
(Allen 2006), with a ‘turn to culture’ (Branch 2011) as a way of fixing disorder, 
which takes the focus away from the problem as a national and international 
one. There have been debates among involved parties, as well as researchers, 
about what forms of retributive and restorative justice were appropriate in the 
aftermath of war: ‘trial justice’ through the International Criminal Court (ICC) 
and national courts or ‘traditional justice’ such as reconciliation rituals (Allen 
2006; Finnegan 2010). When Dominique Ongwen, the second-in-command in 

	
Every Day: Forgiving after War in Northern Uganda	 103
the LRA, gave himself up in the Central African Republic in the beginning of 
2015 and was taken to the ICC, the debate about justice was evoked again: 
should he be cleansed ritually and face ‘traditional justice’ and /or face ‘trial 
justice’ and be taken to national or international court? The justice question is 
an important political debate that also has ramifications for how people reflect 
upon wrongs they experience in their lives. Yet when listening to men and 
women’s accounts of forgiveness it was striking that no one talked about for-
giving the LRA rebels or the government army soldiers (UNDP). The emphasis 
in their accounts was on the personal and interpersonal processes of dealing 
with ‘wrongs’ and social ‘invisible wounds’ in everyday life (Whyte et al. 2015).
The Forgiveness Project
The accounts described here were part of a study of forgiveness in Acholi 
carried out as a collaboration between researchers at Gulu University in 
Uganda and Danish universities.2 In this study we experimented with a com-
bination of artistic and anthropological approaches to understand processes 
of forgiveness. Tove Nyholm, a Danish installation artist, came to work with 
researchers in Gulu district to collect oral accounts of forgiveness, and con-
struct a sound installation where others could come and listen ‘to voices from 
within’, and record their own account if they wished to. The Danish artist had 
previously collected accounts and made installations on the themes of forgive-
ness and the sense of judgement in Denmark and in doing this she had been 
inspired by Hannah Arendt’s writings. The intention of Nyholm’s projects was 
to encourage reflection on forgiveness. The experiment was whether this 
would generate positive effects among those who heard it and whether they 
would be interested in forgiving others or asking for forgiveness. This moral 
potential in the project resonated well with Christian messages of forgiveness 
that are common in Acholi where the Roman Catholic and Anglican churches 
have been prominent for more than a century. The project also fit well with 
many of the ongoing political initiatives to promote reconciliation after the 
war. Yet when exploring the accounts further, we came to see how they were 
also about something more: they were windows onto the untangling of every-
day wrongs in the shadow of much larger atrocities (Whyte et al. 2015).
Some of the ‘wrongs’ people experienced, and chose to talk about, were 
directly related to the war. Yet, most of the accounts included ‘wrongs’ that 
were not directly related to the war, but simply happened during the years of 
war as part of everyday camp life. What the lay people, who gave their 
accounts, regarded as most ‘conciliatory’ in the aftermath of war was the re-
establishment of normal social relations – to be able to live as a family, visit 
friends and enjoy civility with their neighbours, which in this situation repre-
sent real hard-won accomplishments. The accounts we collected reflected the 
urge to mend these everyday relationships, sometimes by reflecting upon past 

104	
Lotte Meinert
experience, but more often by ‘starting anew’. Acholi use the expression of 
‘keeping something in your heart’, or ‘holding someone in your heart’ as a 
negative nagging feeling, as a cramped muscle, and they describe the relief of 
‘letting it go’ and forgetting certain past experiences to give room for the flow 
of social life in the present and the future. The fact that people wanted to move 
on in everyday life, by what they describe as ‘untying the knots’ of interper-
sonal wrongs, did not automatically imply that they disregarded ‘trial justice’ 
as appropriate for other scales of war crimes, even though many had little trust 
in these systems of justice.
Our research group found people who were willing to share accounts of 
personal experience of forgiveness. The study and its purpose were explained 
to each of them and we sought their consent to share their accounts with 
others. Initially ten accounts, in Acholi or English, were recorded and each 
lasted between fifteen minutes and one hour. These accounts were carefully 
edited into clips of three to six minutes, capturing details of the situation, the 
wrong committed, the decision to forgive, the process and the impact of the 
act of forgiveness (Meinert et al. 2014). In one of the huts in the former camp 
for Internally Displaced People in Awach trading centre, the artist installed a 
sound system in a drum so that people could sit together, choose accounts to 
listen to, and afterwards discuss them. In a nearby hut those who were inspired 
to record their own account could do so with one of our research assistants. 
Three radio programmes in local FM stations broadcasted some of the 
accounts and invited leaders and others to discuss them on air. A mobile out-
reach unit took the sound system to eight different villages in Awach sub-
county, where people were given a chance to listen to the accounts, record 
their own if they wanted to, and discuss ideas of forgiveness and ‘letting go’ as 
a tool for the attainment of peace. More than seven hundred people came to 
listen to the accounts and forty-eight people recorded their own accounts with 
the team. Apart from the artistic action project, we did a thematic analysis of 
thirty-five of the transcribed accounts and we carried out interviews with key 
informants about peace building and forgiveness. They included non-govern-
mental organization representatives, local and religious leaders. Two focus 
group discussions were held with groups of elders in Awach sub-county and in 
Gulu town. These interviews and discussions focused on notions of forgive-
ness and reconciliation in northern Uganda. For the purpose of this chapter I 
focus on a few of the accounts.
Acan Sara
One of the accounts is from a young woman who we call Acan Sara, who was 
twenty-four years old when we talked to her in 2010. Below is an edited version 
of her long description and reflections.

	
Every Day: Forgiving after War in Northern Uganda	 105
I am a person who passed through the problem of abduction by the LRA. By the time 
I was taken, I was a girl of 12 years. … I was forced to do things, which I did not want 
to do, like killing, which was not my wish, but because I was told to do it, I did. I was 
forced to have sex. Yet I did not have interest. Looting peoples’ harvest I also didn’t 
want to do, but I did. If you refused to do what they told you, they would beat you, or 
ask you to choose between death and doing what you were told to do. I was eating 
things, which I should not eat, like branches of trees, but I did, because I wanted to 
survive … You drink any water which is not good for human beings, sometimes you 
even drink urine of your colleague, because you know you may not get water, so you 
drink anything.
My return [to the community] was not easy. I escaped during the exchange of fire 
between the LRA and the Government. I managed to escape and I footed up to home. 
When I returned home I found my father no more, only my mother with a baby that 
she got when I wasn’t there. When I reached home, she welcomed me, because she 
knew it wasn’t my wish to go to the bush. She knew it happened the way I did not 
want, she welcomed me, and I stayed with her very well.
I only got problems from neighbors and children of my age pointing fingers. They 
looked at me as if it was my wish to go to join the rebels, and also some neighbors, 
whose children were abducted and went to the bush, but died during the war, they 
looked at me as if I was the one who killed their children.
At the borehole people did not want me to pump water first, even when I came 
there first. They would say I am a rebel and wherever I moved, people would point at 
me saying I had cen – bad spirits – and that if anyone associated with me I could kill 
or burn their houses or harm them.
If any boy came to talk to me about love they would tell the boy that this lady has 
bad evil because she was abducted by the rebels and she has been killing people. If you 
fall in love with her, she can get up anytime at night and strangle you.
I have passed through many problems, which cannot make me have peace even if at 
home. … I tried to go back to school …, but life in school was not easy, because I could 
not ask for anything from other students, because they look at me as if I have evil spirits.
People I was with in the bush (former rebels) are here now. I have already forgiven 
them because I know it was not their intension to do those things. Like one lady with 
whom I shared a man. She was older and the one in-charge of distributing things. 
When I was hungry, I could not eat unless she gave me, but sometimes she would only 
look at me [and not give me], even if there was something to eat. I did everything for 
her, I washed her clothes, I was like her house girl, but we were sharing a man.	
She was mistreating me, but now we are staying together, as I talk now, we work 
together…. I have forgiven her, because she was also mistreated there. So after we 
shared ideas among ourselves, as we talk now, we are okay, we share a lot, our children 
also love each other. Since their father is no longer there, we have to bring them up.
Who, What, Why Forgive?
There are several issues to consider in Acan’s account and reflections, but let 
me highlight a few of those that are also significant in other accounts for our 

106	
Lotte Meinert
discussion of moral engines. These issues have to do with who and what is 
forgiven, and why.
Acan in this account forgives her co-wife. Even though the wrongs commit-
ted by the co-wife (denying food) may not compare to the exploitation by the 
commanders who forced her to kill, have sex and loot villages, it is still the 
co-wife she ends up talking about and whom she forgives. It is possible that 
Acan considered the abuses by the commanders beyond forgiveness, beyond 
the moral domain. Or perhaps it was still too dangerous to forgive those more 
serious crimes, because to forgive someone also involves making an accusa-
tion and taking the moral high ground, which can be a critical and thus vul-
nerable position. At the time when Acan gave her account (2010), many of the 
LRA commanders were still in the bush and there was ambiguity around the 
legal amnesty processes for those who had held higher ranks. Yet, what seems 
even more prominent in Acan’s account, as well as in other accounts, is that 
the person who is experienced as relevant for forgiveness is always an intimate 
other, a person she lives with every day and a person she has a future with. The 
co-wife and Acan have children with the same man, the man has died, but as 
Acan said: we need to bring up the children.
In this sense – from Acan’s perspective – forgiveness emerges as pertinent 
when it regards a person she interacts with every day. Perhaps forgiveness, in 
the sense of ‘untying the knots’, is most likely to take place in everyday interac-
tion and words.3Acan does not interact with the commanders; they are not 
relevant in her present and future life and thus are unavailable for her forgiv-
ing actions or words.
Hannah Arendt saw forgiveness as a necessary element in social life, where 
people constantly transgress against one another. She writes: ‘Trespassing is an 
everyday occurrence which … needs forgiving, dismissing, in order to make it 
possible for life to go on by constantly releasing men from what they have done 
unknowingly’ (Arendt 1958: 240). I will get back to the discussion of the 
‘unknowingly’ aspect, but for now I want to emphasize how Arendt distin-
guishes radical evil, which can neither be forgiven nor punished, from the 
common wrongdoings that are not even necessarily intentional. For her, forgiv-
ing is an eminently human and social disposition arising ‘directly out of the will 
to live together with others in the mode of acting and speaking’ (ibid.: 246).
People forgive because of a determination to go on living with the person 
who offended them: ‘Forgiving and the relationship it establishes is always an 
eminently personal … affair in which what was done is forgiven for the sake of 
who did it’ (ibid.: 241), writes Arendt.
In the accounts we collected it was significant that most of those who were 
forgiven were kin: blood relatives or in-laws (such as a father, mother, brother, 
co-wife, step-mother, son, brother’s wife) or close relations (such as a friend, a 
room-mate or neighbour). In all of the accounts, the ‘forgiver’ (victim) and the 
wrongdoer had a personal relationship. Yet, these were never simple relation-
ships between two single persons. Because the wrongdoer was nearly always 

	
Every Day: Forgiving after War in Northern Uganda	 107
someone in an existing relationship with the forgiver, other persons and family 
members were involved as well. The relations were never exclusively dyadic. In 
Acan’s account there is the co-wife and the children to consider. The issue is 
not simply about two people’s hurt feelings, but about a family and genera-
tions who need to live together; life has to go on.
What was forgiven – the wrongs people considered forgivable – were 
remarkably often some kind of betrayal or mis-recognition in intimate rela-
tionships. Sometimes there was a direct link to the war, but often the ‘wrongs’ 
comprised conflicts and discrimination that occurred before the war, or elsewhere 
in Uganda, for example a stepmother’s neglect, a father’s failure to pay school fees, 
physical assaults, jealousy between co-wives, money issues. What were forgiven 
were common problems that are endemic to social life with its kinship organiza-
tion and competition over resources. Even though such conflicts seemed almost 
inevitable, there was a strong moral sense that solidarity, family unity and civility 
should prevail – also during times of war and displacement, despite the bad condi-
tions people lived under. A prominent theme in the accounts was that of betrayal 
by kin or neighbours upon whom one should be able to depend. Greed, selfishness, 
neglect and envy that hurt others were not only seen as offences against individual 
persons, but also as failures of social values. It was not always easy to distinguish 
the offences connected to the war from the betrayals by kin and neighbours, for 
example when Amal Jane was identified to the LRA by a neighbour and the 
LRA beat her senseless, trying to extort information from her about the 
whereabouts of her father-in-law (her account is described later in the 
chapter). Another example was Santa who was convinced that she would not 
have been abducted by the LRA had her father supported her with school fees 
to go to school as he should have. In these cases the offences committed by the 
LRA were linked to what was considered to be failures on the part of family 
and neighbours. Even in cases where the wrong was committed by a member 
of the LRA, the offence became an issue when the victim and the offender had 
to resume a personal relationship during or after the war.
The wrongs which stood out from the many wrongs as relevant for forgive-
ness were cases when someone had expectations of the person who commit-
ted the wrong: when they ‘thought they were together’, would protect each 
other, and – somewhat different from what Arendt writes – also when they did 
something bad ‘knowingly’, such as when Acan’s co-wife had food, but did not 
give Acan any, even though the co-wife knew she was starving; she only looked 
at Acan, acknowledging that she knew that she had made her suffer. Whether 
a person had violated others consciously or unconsciously was considered 
important for the relevance of forgiving. When George met his tormentor two 
years after he escaped from the rebel army, he first got upset and angry, but 
with time he realized that his bitterness was useless. ‘I started to see … maybe 
he didn’t know what he was doing … Me, what I saw, you know … Kony was 
abducting people when they were still young’. Being with the rebels in the bush 
(lum), in the tall grass and in the dark where you cannot really see, was 

108	
Lotte Meinert
sometimes considered a mitigating factor and a reason for forgiveness. If 
someone had committed wrongs he or she did not know about at the time – or 
did not come to realize later, or was not willing to realize – this could also 
make forgiving either irrelevant or more complicated.
Otti Peter debates the issue of knowing in his account about his abductor. 
Peter was abducted when he was about seventeen years and spent around six 
months with the rebels. When he was wounded he was able to negotiate a 
release. Years later Peter was confronted with his abductor in a boarding 
school, where they were supposed to share a room. This man did not want to 
admit the wrongs he did, but wanted to continue staying together, as if nothing 
bad had really happened. Peter tried to inspire his abductor by telling him 
about his own process of forgiving himself for what he had done, by explaining 
how it was done in a state of ‘bush’ lum mentality, darkness, because they did 
not really know what they were doing. They just kept going ‘unknowingly’. 
Peter’s abductor did not want to stop and reflect and realize what he had been 
doing and Peter reckoned that this was because the abductor was possibly still 
involved in some kind of economic rebel activity.
For wrongs to be forgivable they had to be considered by the actors to be 
within the domain of the moral – immoral rather than amoral – and the 
wrongs had to be considered immoral by the person who committed them, at 
least at some point. Actions may have been happening in a state of amorality, 
what Peter described as ‘in the bush’ and ‘in darkness’, but later he realized that 
those actions were immoral – part of what human beings know we should not 
do to each other. Marilyn Strathern notes that in Papua New Guinea (1997: 
142) when actions are undertaken unconsciously, such as when a person is 
driven to act by sorcery or having their minds twisted by magic, those actions 
are generally taken out of the moral domain and regarded as amoral rather 
than immoral. Peter tries to define ‘what happened in the bush’ as amoral 
rather than immoral. And many Acholi wonder about how the spirits of Joseph 
Kony were involved in twisting so many minds. When people are drawing 
lines around what happened in ‘the bush’ as amoral, we can see this as evoking 
the idea of bush as nature and wild, and the village as cultural and civilized, so 
well known in structural analyses of African cosmology. Yet, rather than defin-
itive and structural, I see the act of drawing a line as a form of moral experi-
mental work: for Peter talking to his abductor, it is a highly risky and uncertain 
endeavour to suggest that they were both very wrong ‘in the bush’, because he 
does not know how the man will react, and which side he is on now. Peter tries 
it out in the subjunctive mode: if we say that when we were in the bush we did 
horrible things, which we did not even realize – maybe some kind of evil spirit 
was involved – can we agree that at that time we did not know what we were 
doing, but by realizing now that it was wrong, we can be together, forgive each 
other? The abductor did not respond fully as Peter would have hoped by real-
izing that he had done wrong because he was in the bush, but now he was out 
of the bush. Peter took this as a sign that the man wanted to continue in an 

	
Every Day: Forgiving after War in Northern Uganda	 109
under-cover ‘bush-mode’, so Peter carefully backed off, but they promised 
each other to ‘let go’ of those memories of what they had done.
Jacques Derrida (2003) claims in his book on cosmopolitanism and forgive-
ness that that true forgiveness consists in forgiving the unforgivable. If forgive-
ness only forgave the forgivable, forgiveness would disappear, he argues. While 
the argument makes logical sense, and is an elegant historical analysis of the 
genealogy of concepts, the logic does not seem to hold entirely in relation to 
the experiences described in accounts in northern Uganda. What is true for-
giveness? Does it make sense to measure this? And by logic? By experience? 
Derrida points to a tension in the concept between unconditioned, gracious, 
uneconomic forgiveness granted to the guilty as guilty, and conditioned for-
giveness that is proportionate to recognition of fault and to repentance. This 
tension is always negotiated when forgiveness is in question, according to 
Derrida. This is a tension and negotiation recognizable in reconciliation rituals 
in northern Uganda. Some rituals, like the ceremony of stepping on eggs, 
nyono tonggweno, is unconditioned and uneconomic, while the mat oput ritual 
of ‘drinking the bitter root’ is highly conditioned upon recognition of fault and 
involves substantial material compensation. The character of the wrong com-
mitted is important for negotiating which ritual is needed and the decision is 
to some extent a political one, to be considered among elders. Yet when we 
turn away from the rituals to the accounts of interpersonal forgiveness, what 
was forgiven was not considered unforgivable. In fact, people often searched 
for reasons and conditions why the wrongs were forgivable and the actions 
were intelligible.
Now we will move on to the questions about why people take the trouble to 
forgive and how they do it. Clearly not all people forgive others for causing 
wrongs and we should keep in mind that the accounts I write about here are 
from a self-selected group of people who chose to forgive, and also decided to 
be explicit about it. In most accounts, the person forgiving mentions various 
kinds of ‘mitigating circumstances’ on the transgressor’s side, as an important 
reason why they can forgive. Acan explains that others also mistreated her 
co-wife in the bush, and the co-wife did not ‘want it to stop with her – she had 
to pay’. For Acan, the mitigating circumstance was the fact that the co-wife was 
being punished herself by others and wanted to pass this on, and this was a 
kind of logic Acan could grasp afterwards. In this way people could forgive 
when they were able to somehow explain and understand the actions and 
motivations of the other. Being able to understand the logic or dynamic behind 
certain actions was important, perhaps because one had been in a similar situ-
ation oneself. When Acan said ‘I can understand her actions’, there was prob-
ably also an implicit pledge and hope that others could and would understand 
and forgive Acan’s actions.
Peter went to the extent of explaining some of the ambivalent pleasures of 
violence and abduction, which he had experienced himself, as a reason why he 
could forgive his abductor. He understood the attraction to ‘bush life’ himself 

110	
Lotte Meinert
and knew that it was also something you could leave and give up. In his 
account Peter also emphasized the pragmatics of staying together as a reason 
why it was possible and necessary to forgive: 
He [the abductor] had to understand, ‘cause we were in the same room. We could 
take breakfast together, go to school together. [So] we promised each other. To let 
go of those memories. Whether bad or good. Because in the bush you were enjoying 
life, you looted things, you enjoyed, beating up people who tried to escape from the 
group. You enjoyed.
Peter explained how he dealt with the wrongs he himself had done: 
Of cause for me, I had already, even from my, from the bottom of my heart [let go]. 
I had even forgiven my own self, doing something wrong to some other person. Of 
cause you have to first forgive your self. You have done something. If you don’t 
meditate it fully, you may not think you have done something wrong. I had to medi-
tate it from within myself: I forgive my own self. Then I started also forgiving others.
The most prominent reason people mentioned for why they forgave was prag-
matic – in a deep sense – like Peter’s. He had to share a room with this man 
and wanted to do this in a way where he could feel safe and not terrified.
Listen to the words of Amal Jane, who was identified to the LRA by a neigh-
bour; the LRA beat her senseless, to get information from her about her 
father-in-law. After about ten years of silence, living next to the neighbour in 
the camp, she said:
I was annoyed with that man for a very long time. We stayed in the camp for almost 
ten years and we did not talk to each other. … Now we started talking, because we 
are in a group together, he also comes there. I found it really bad not to greet him, 
since they come in our place, and we also go to their place.
…
If you don’t let go, you yourself will also feel difficulties in life, if you are staying in 
the same place with somebody having a bad relationship. That kind of living is not 
good. Even you yourself you’ll feel bad. If you face wrongdoing by others, you should 
reduce your annoyance right from the heart.
Someone can kill your dear ones – and you still talk to them.
Water can also kill – and you still use water.
Fire can also burn your child – and you use fire.
What about human beings like you? You should talk to them, and forgive them.
There is a kind of practical moral wisdom in Jane’s words, and a coming to 
terms with the fact that bad and evil cannot be rejected; it is all part of life: 
Even when people are evil they still need each other, if they hope to have a 
future. There is a strong sense in the accounts that people forgive because they 
long to begin again.

	
Every Day: Forgiving after War in Northern Uganda	 111
For Arendt, new beginnings are made possible through forgiveness because 
the constant mutual release makes human beings free to start over. Forgiveness 
is what Arendt describes as the epitome of natality, because forgiveness is an 
action that makes something new possible, creating new promises (1958: 237), 
rather than re-actions, such as revenge, which tend to produce more 
re-actions.
In Arendt’s words, ‘the possible redemption from the predicament of irre-
versibility – of being unable to undo what one has done though one did not, and 
could not, have known what he was doing – is the faculty of forgiving’. Arendt 
goes on to describe how the remedy for unpredictability, for the chaotic uncer-
tainty of the future, is contained in the faculty to make and keep promises.
The two faculties belong together insofar as one of them, forgiving, serves to undo 
the deeds of the past, … and the other, binding oneself through promise, serves to 
set up in the ocean of uncertainty, which the future is by definition, islands of secu-
rity without which not even continuity, let alone durability of any kind, would be 
possible in the relationships between men. Without being forgiven, released from 
the consequences of what we have done, our capacity to act would, as it were, be 
confined to one single deed from which we could never recover, we would remain 
victims of its consequences forever.
Forgiveness, in the accounts we heard in northern Uganda, is considered a 
virtue of everyday interaction, civility and mutuality. People emphasized the 
moral and social value of forgiving as well as the personal benefits they real-
ized as individuals. In the accounts many underlined how they felt freed when 
the bitterness against a wrongdoer was released, enabling relationships with 
the offender to be smoothed out.
Likewise, ‘the promise’, in the sense Arendt writes about, is regarded as a 
fragile affair and considered contingent upon everyday action and words. So 
far the promises heard in northern Uganda have not been in big scale political 
rhetoric of ‘Never Again’, such as we have heard it recently about the Rwandan 
genocide. But there is a sense of promises that people try to keep alive by 
having everyday conversations and interactions with those in their vicinity, 
despite the fact that they have transgressed norms.
People sometimes discussed reconciliation rituals (‘drinking the bitter root’ 
and ‘stepping on eggs’ ceremonies), and political and religious speeches as 
inspiration for forgiveness processes; these were important in their own way, 
but the principal site of the work of forgiving was in everyday encounters. 
There was a sense in some of the political speeches that those words had very 
little to do with the social processes taking place on the ground. Veena Das has 
an apt description of this phenomenon when she writes ‘Words when they 
lead lives outside the ordinary, become emptied of experience, lose touch with 
life – in Wittgenstein, it is the scene of language gone on a holiday’ (2007: 6). 
Das, writing about the survivors of riots in India, notices that life was recov-
ered ‘not through some grand gestures in the realm of the transcendent but 

112	
Lotte Meinert
through a descent into the ordinary’. She argues that there is a mutual absorp-
tion of the violent and the ordinary (2007: 7). Das emphasizes how the ordi-
nary sometimes becomes, in fact, something wondrous, an essential source of 
hope, what she calls a ‘temporality of second chances’ (2007: 101). This sense 
of a special time and emerging possibilities seems to characterize the fragile 
and wondrous beginnings after war in northern Uganda.
Words and Every Day Actions
In Acholi people say that you can forgive with the tongue, but that does not 
mean that you have forgiven in your heart (Kusk 2013). Words alone cannot be 
trusted – if anything can. If you really forgive, it is something you may expli-
cate, but it is primarily something you demonstrate every day through your 
actions. Therefore forgiveness is not a final act but a continuing process. Yet, 
actions alone without any verbal communication are not enough either. One 
of the young women talks in her account about how, when she got back to her 
family after her abduction, she was allowed to live and be part of everyday life, 
but her father never really spoke to her, never said welcome, or had a conver-
sation, so she was uncertain and did not really know if she was forgiven and 
truly welcome back.
The emphasis, however, and evidence – or rather constant evaluation – of 
forgiveness was most often put on apparently small, everyday actions and their 
instability. Did a neighbour use to share food when children ran to her com-
pound, but recently sent them home without food? Did a co-wife start talking 
and chatting more than she used to? Did the children let Acan get her turn at 
the bore hole day after day? Forgiveness in this sense is not spectacular, dra-
matic or grandiose, but embedded in the ordinary. I borrow Lone Grøn’s oxy-
moronic term ‘significant routines’ (2005) to grasp the profoundness of the 
small actions in forgiveness. The routines of fetching water, cooking food, 
getting fire from a neighbour, are not seen as simply mundane and ‘getting on 
with it’, but significant actions – each single time they are practiced – as a 
window through which forgiveness can be monitored.
The Moral Machine: The Grinding Stone
It is in this sense that I think of every single day as moral machinery to empha-
size the strenuous continuous work implied in forgiving. It is not to be com-
pared to an automatic, well-oiled and smooth running machine, where you 
simply push a button and it works, where you insert a ‘wrong’ all tangled up, it 
runs through the machinery and comes out ‘righted’ and straight. No, rather 
it is like the most commonly known machines in rural East Africa: the grind-
ing mills and grinding stones where people transform their grain crops into 

	
Every Day: Forgiving after War in Northern Uganda	 113
edible food. Grinding mills, which run on the power of a small generator, are 
part of almost any small trading centre and are a place where people discuss 
and work, because they constantly break down or are out of fuel; people try to 
figure them out, constantly repair them, look for spare parts for them, and 
debate who should buy fuel for them to make them run, and when they don’t 
work anyway (which is actually most of the time), people retreat to the grind-
ing stone. The grinding stone is the most reliable ‘machine’ of the hand, that 
through hours and hours of muscle work transforms the hard grains and seeds 
of sesame, millet or maize into what it takes to make food, feed your family 
and sustain life. The grinding stone may not be what people in Uganda feel is 
‘the ideal machine’ because it is old fashioned, whereas the modern and 
powered grinding mill is faster and much less work; but given that the latter is 
often broken, the grinding stone is frequently the best possibility available. 
Practically every homestead has a grinding stone, and if you don’t have one 
you are dependent on borrowing your neighbour’s.
These experiences with grinding machines serve as a comment to the title of 
this book – Moral Engines – reminding us that engines require work, they don’t 
run by themselves without any attentions, they sometimes break down, and it is 
troublesome to repair them and understand them. It is wondrous when they do 
work, and when they don’t, we try some other solution. Grinding by hand is a 
good metaphor for forgiveness work in northern Uganda; it is slow, it takes 
muscle power, you get better at it with experience and it is continuous work that 
has to be done every single day, not unlike moral work such as forgiving.
The Laboratory of ‘How Can We Live Together?’
The work of forgiving in the post-conflict situation in northern Uganda finds 
great resonance with Cheryl Mattingly’s concept of moral laboratories, 
because this notion emphasizes the experimental and experiential aspect of 
moral reflexive practice that happens in the midst of everyday life, which is a 
messy and unpredictable affair (2014). As Mattingly writes, the everyday lab 
does not have a well-defined telos, but foregrounds the human predicament of 
trying to live a life that one is somehow responsible for (ibid.: xx).
The moral attempts in the forgiveness accounts from northern Uganda are 
less about trying to reach a normative ideal, but more about trying out what is 
possible, given the situation, the past and the prospects. Mattingly emphasizes 
how turbulence and uncertainty are pervasive qualities in the everyday lab and 
how ordinary routines are not the daily expression of a habitual way of life 
culturally inherited, so much as a fragile achievement, a hard won moment of 
mundaneness. Under such circumstances, the ordinary carries a special moral 
weight and it can acquire an unexpected symbolic density (ibid.). This cap-
tures precisely what I am trying to point out about the profoundness of every-
day actions in post-war Acholi.

114	
Lotte Meinert
An important aspect of the experimental work of forgiving had to do with 
working out how to deal with the fact that people knew – in some sense – 
when they wronged others. There were accounts about moral transgression 
that happened unknowingly, as Arendt describes, but often people knew they 
were doing wrong, and did it anyway.
The grinding work of forgiving afterwards involved, I would argue, a height-
ened sense of the fragility of the experiment to live together.
Lotte Meinert is a Professor of Anthropology at the Department of Culture 
and Society, Aarhus University, Denmark. She has been principal researcher 
and manager for Changing Human Security: Recovery after War in Northern 
Uganda (2008–2013) and is co-principal investigator and co-manager of the 
Center for Cultural Epidemics (EPICENTER). She is author and co-editor of 
multiple books, including Hopes in Friction (2008).
Notes
  1.	 I am inspired here by Jane Guyer’s ideas about possibility; Guyer, drawing upon Ernest 
Gellner, points to the continual temporal metamorphosis in human life: Another day is 
also An Other Day, another generation is also An Other Generation (Guyer, personal 
communication 2014). Everyday is also Every Day. In other words, the continuation and 
routine of every day carries possibilities that are beyond mere continuation and routine. 
  2.	 The Forgiveness Timu Kica project was part of a larger research collaboration between 
Gulu University in Uganda and Aarhus, Southern Denmark and Copenhagen Universities. 
The overall project was called ‘Changing Human Security: Recovery after Armed Conflict 
in Northern Uganda’ and was funded by the Danish research council for development 
research from 2008 to 2013. I would like to acknowledge all the collaborators and partici-
pants in the Timu Kica project, who have contributed in their various ways.
  3.	 There are two examples in the accounts of persons forgiving someone who is not present. 
One is geographically distant, and the other one dead. Yet this is not the trend in the 
accounts.
References
Akuni, Job. 2011. The Role of Traditional Rituals in Conflict Management. N.p.: LAP 
Lambert Academic Publishing.
Allen, Tim. 2006. Trial Justice: The International Criminal Court and the Lord’s 
Resistance Army. London, UK: Zed Books.
Arendt, Hannah. 1958 The Human Condition. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Baines, Erin. 2010. ‘Spirits and Social Reconstruction after Mass Violence: Rethinking 
Transitional Justice’, African Affairs 109(436): 409–30.
Branch, Adam. 2011. Displacing Human Rights: War and Intervention in Northern 
Uganda. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Das, Veena. 2007. Life and Words: Violence and the Descent into the Ordinary. 
Berkeley, Los Angeles and London: University of California Press.

	
Every Day: Forgiving after War in Northern Uganda	 115
Derrida, Jacques. 2003. On Cosmopolitanism and Forgiveness. New York and London: 
Routledge.
Dolan, Chris. 2009. Social Torture: The Case of Northern Uganda, 1986–2006. New 
York: Berghahn Books.
Fabion, James. 2001. ‘Toward an Anthropology of Ethics: Foucault and the Pedagogies 
of Autopoiesis’. Representations 70 (1): 83–104.
Finnegan, Amy. 2010. ‘Forging Forgiveness: Collective Efforts amidst War in Northern 
Uganda’, Sociological Inquiry 80(3): 424–47.
Finström, Sverker. 2008. Living with Bad Surroundings: War, History and Everyday 
Moments in Northern Uganda. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Grøn, Lone. 2005. ‘Winds of Change, Bodies of Persistence: Health Promotion and 
lifestyle change in institutional and everyday contexts’. Ph.D. thesis. Aarhus 
University. 
Harlacher, Thomas. 2009. Traditional Ways of Coping with Consequences of 
Traumatic Stress in Acholiland: Northern Ugandan Ethnography from a Western 
Psychological Perspective. Freiburg: Department of Psychology, University of 
Freiburg, Switzerland.
Heidegger, Martin. 1996 [1953]. Being and Time. Albany: State University of New 
York Press.
Kusk, Mette Lind. 2013. ‘At tilgive med hjertet eller med tungen?’ [To forgive with 
heart or tongue?], Jordens Folk 48(2): 4–11.
Laidlaw, James. 2002. For an Anthropology of Ethics and Freedom. Journal of the 
Royal Anthropological Institute. 8(2): 311–332.
Lambek, Michael. 2010. ‘Toward an Ethics of the Act’, in Michael Lambek (ed.), 
Ordinary Ethics. New York: Fordham University Press.
Lear, Jonathan. 2006 Radical Hope: Ethics in the Face of Cultural Devastation. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Mattingly, Cheryl. 2014. Moral Laboratories: Family Peril and the Struggle for a Good 
Life. Oakland: University of California Press.
Meinert, Lotte. 2014. ‘Tricky Trust: Distrust as a Point of Departure and Trust as a 
Social Achievement in Uganda’, in S. Lisberg, E. Pedersen and A.L. Dalsgård (eds), 
Anthropology and Philosophy: Dialogues on Trust and Hope. New York: Berghahn 
Books. 118–131.
Meinert, Lotte, Julaina Obika and Susan Reynolds Whyte. 2014. ‘Crafting Forgiveness 
Accounts after War in Northern Uganda: Editing for Effect’, Anthropology Today 
30(4): 10–15.
Robins, Joel. 2004. Becoming Sinners. Christianity and Moral Torment in a Papua 
New Guinea Society. University of California Press.
Strathern, Marilyn. 1997. ‘Prefigured Features: A View from the New Guinea 
Highlands’. The Australian Journal of Anthropology 8 (2): 89–103.
Verma, Cecilie Lanken. 2012. ‘Truths out of Place: Homecoming, Intervention, and 
Story-making in War-torn Northern Uganda’, Children’s Geographies 10(4): 
441–55.
Whyte, Susan Reynolds, Julaina Obika and Lotte Meinert. 2015. ‘Untying Wrongs 
in Northern Uganda’, in William Olsen and Walter E.A. Van Beek (eds), Evil in 
Africa: Encounters with the Everyday. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana 
University Press.
Zigon, Jarett. 2007. ‘Moral Breakdown and the Ethical Demand’, Anthropological 
Theory 7(2): 131–50.

6
The Provocation of Freedom
Rasmus Dyring
There is no other task of thought, on the subject of freedom, than that which 
consists in transforming its sense of a property held by a subject into the sense of a 
condition or space in which alone something like a ‘subject’ can eventually come to 
be born, and thus to be born (or to die) to freedom…
—Jean-Luc Nancy, The Experience of Freedom
Introduction
Recently anthropology has taken an interest in the ethical. But the question of 
the ethical is not an innocent one and this turn in anthropology toward the 
ethical is no innocent turn.
With the emphasis on such a conceptual prism as the ethical in the investi-
gation of human social life, the basic drives that gather and bind us together in 
communities and prompt social action are modified and appear in a new 
modality. Leaving behind the more traditional sociological approach that 
takes the question of the imperative quality in practical matters to be funda-
mentally reducible to the normativity inherent in a given social reality and the 
more or less mechanistic reproduction of this social normativity by way of 
enculturation and habitus, the basic drives in communitary life and their 
inherent imperative quality are now, with this turn to the ethical, to be under-
stood in connection with such concepts as the care of the self, practical 
wisdom, the good, judgment, responsibility and freedom.
In terms of ontology, this shift in analytical focus seems to imply a drastic 
reconfiguration in the modal hierarchy according to which social practice as 
analytical unit is construed. At least, this would be one consequence of James 
Laidlaw’s famous – and, I believe, accurate – proclamation that ‘an anthropology 

	
The Provocation of Freedom	 117
of ethics will only be possible – will only be prevented from constantly collapsing 
into general questions of social regularity and social control – if we take seri-
ously, as something requiring ethnographic description, the possibilities of 
human freedom’ (2002: 315, emphasis added). That is to say, the tenability of the 
ethical turn in anthropology requires that ontological priority is shifted from the 
modal category of reality – from the ‘moral facts’, to put it in the positivist termi-
nology of the often criticized Durkheimian sociology – to the category of possi-
bility in order to clear a conceptual space for undetermined deliberation (Lambek 
2010a, 2010b), moral experimentation (Mattingly 2013, 2014), cultural change 
(Robbins 2007) and a reflective stance (Laidlaw 2002, 2014; Zigon 2007).
If this is so – and this to be sure is still an open and largely unthematized 
question in the current theoretical debates – the possibility of an anthropol-
ogy of ethics would seem to hinge not only on the ability to address in ade-
quate methodological terms ‘the possibilities of human freedom’; a 
corresponding fundamental shift toward an ontological prioritization of the 
modal category of possibility in the understanding of the existential condi-
tions of human practice, of the human condition as such, would equally be a 
necessary requirement if the anthropological study of the ethical is to be prop-
erly different from the study of the reproduction of social normativity (I 
pursue this argument at length elsewhere; see Dyring under review).
That the notion of ethics urges us to recognize that the possible takes onto-
logical precedence over the real in the realm of human affairs by no means 
implies that we have to accept a version of human freedom that stresses the 
radical independence from external forces of an autonomous individual. The 
ontological characterization in question does not even initially speak of prop-
erties ascribed to an individual human being or the faculty of the will, but 
more primordially to the way a world, in casu a moral world, is opened, and 
the way in which human beings find themselves emplaced in a world where the 
moral appears to matter. In the terminology of hermeneutical phenomenol-
ogy, it expresses the point that a present reality only appears as it does within 
the horizon of an underdetermined future and hence in light of (still) unreal-
ized projects, ideals, values, narrative trajectories, etc. That is to say, the 
present state of affairs only becomes what it is because it is always already 
transcended, from the ground up, toward a range of possibilities.
At this point two fundamental problems present themselves and both 
revolve around the ontological issue of the modal characteristics of social 
practice. First, if the present is disclosed in light of a range of possibilities that 
can be spelled out, for instance, in terms of future projects, values and ideals, 
would this not simply – with half a turn of the hermeneutic circle – once again 
reinstate the ontological priority of the given, the hegemony of the positivist 
metaphysics of reality? After all, are these projects, values and ideals not 
themselves grounded in the historico-cultural reality in which they are 
pursued? And secondly, if the category of possibility really takes priority in 
ethical life, how are we to conceive of the practical necessity with which ethical 

118	
Rasmus Dyring
matters make themselves known in human life? In the Durkheimian picture it 
is the reality of ‘attachment to group’ and the disciplining, sanctioning power 
of society that constitute the ‘moral engines’ in social practice (Durkheim 
1973; 2010: 43ff). But if it is possibility and not a given reality that takes onto-
logical priority, how can ‘possibility’ be said to drive ethical life and necessitate 
ethics as an inexorable dimension of practical life?
Both of these problems involve questions of such magnitude and complex-
ity that they each go well beyond what a single chapter can address satisfacto-
rily, let alone exhaustively. All I can hope for here is to begin qualifying these 
problems and make a convincing case for a certain existential phenomenologi-
cal approach to them. In what follows, I will hence present one path into the 
intricate web of questions they raise.
In the first section, I consider the notions of the real (or the actual) and the 
possible, and direct further investigations towards the idea that an anthropol-
ogy of ethics should concern itself not only with ‘the possibilities of human 
freedom’, but equally with an experiential exploration and explication of the 
conditions of possibility of such possibilities. This line of argument will simul-
taneously indicate an opening in the circularity that threatens to reinstate the 
hegemony of the metaphysics of reality as pointed to in the first problem out-
lined above. In the second section, I will follow a clue from Kierkegaard’s 
moral psychology as to the experiential domain in which the possible inter-
sects and unsettles the real. Here I make the case that the advent of ethical 
possibility is to be explored in terms of moral experiences that are character-
ized by the passivity of moods and pathic stirrings, rather than the active 
comportment of reflective agency. Throughout the final three sections, I will 
present an elaborate phenomenology of the moral experience that Marco 
Evaristti’s art installation Helena and El Pescador (2000) elicits. By qualifying 
and pursuing the question of how the moral experience of possibility in and of 
itself institutes a dimension of practical necessity, I address the second 
problem raised above. Since the notion of freedom that emerges from these 
explorations more precisely relates to a fundamental feature of the human 
condition that calls forth and demands our practical engagement, rather than 
to free agency in the face of constraining structures, or the Kantian autono-
mous subject, or the Foucauldian active exercise of freedom in the care of the 
self, I will term this phenomenon – which I take to be an originary existential 
moral engine – the provocation of freedom.
The Anthropology of Ethics and the Question of (its) Possibility
What is at stake – both in this chapter, in this book, and in general in the current 
debate – is how to understand the very possibility of the anthropology of the 
ethical. The word ‘possibility’ should here be heard in two senses; at stake is the 
possibility of developing a sound anthropological approach to the ethical. But 

	
The Provocation of Freedom	 119
such an approach relies heavily on figuring out what the term ‘possibility’ itself 
can even mean in the anthropology study of the ethical. The battle over the defi-
nitional power in this bourgeoning field of study is, hence, a battle that is to a 
large extend to be fought on the battlefield of modality, about the nature of the 
ontological relationship between possibility, reality and necessity.
This discussion and, in particular, the question of the meaning of possibil-
ity, might be illustratively framed in dialogue with Jonathan Lear’s Radical 
Hope (2006), which deals with the coming to an end, i.e. the becoming impos-
sible, of the traditional way of life of the Native American Nation of the Crow 
toward the end of the nineteenth century. In his methodological considera-
tions in the beginning of the book, Lear writes of the difference between 
anthropology and philosophy that ‘[a] philosophical inquiry may rely on his-
torical and anthropological accounts of how a traditional culture actually 
came to an end, but ultimately it wants to know not about actuality but about 
possibility’ (Lear 2006: 9). And in a similar vein a couple of pages earlier, Lear 
writes of the work presented in Radical Hope, that it ‘is a work of philosophical 
anthropology. Unlike an anthropological study, I am not primarily concerned 
with what actually happened to the tribe or any other group. I am concerned 
rather with the field of possibilities in which all human endeavors gain meaning’ 
(Lear 2006: 7, emphasis added).
According to this view, then, a basic difference between a sociocultural 
anthropological and a philosophico-anthropological approach lies in the fact 
that the latter is concerned with possibility, while the former is concerned 
merely with actuality, with the positively given ‘data’: i.e. with culture under-
stood as ‘that complex whole which includes knowledge, belief, art, morals, 
law, custom, and any other capabilities and habits acquired by man as a 
member of society’ (Tylor 1920: 1); or as ‘the totality of the mental and physi-
cal reactions and activities that characterize the behavior of the individuals 
composing a social group collectively and individually in relation to their 
natural environment, to other groups, to members of the group itself and of 
each individual to himself’ (Boas 1938: 159); or with the social facts under-
stood as ‘any way of acting, whether fixed or not, capable of exerting over the 
individual an external constraint’ and which is ‘general over the whole of a 
given society whilst having an existence of its own, independent of its individ-
ual manifestations’ (Durkheim 1982: 59, emphasis in original; cf. 2010: 35); or 
with the ‘the imponderabilia of actual life’ observed ‘in their full actuality’ 
(Malinowski 1984: 18); or with the total social fact (Mauss 1990: 100ff); or 
with habitus as a ‘socially constituted system of cognitive and motivating 
structures’ (Bourdieu 2013: 76).
In spite of the testimony of these seminal voices from the anthropological 
tradition, I believe that Lear’s wholesale characterization of anthropology as a 
study of the human being that is merely concerned with the givens of an actual 
reality misses the mark and, as a consequence, obscures a more important 
distinction to be drawn within the ‘fields of possibilities’ rather than between 

120	
Rasmus Dyring
actuality and possibility. A first objection to this wholesale characterization 
might thus be that especially after the Writing Culture movement in the 1980s, 
it has been impossible to think of culture as an actually given homogenous 
‘complex whole’ and of social reality as something ethnography can represent 
exhaustively. Instead, Culture, as a unitary whole, is something produced in 
the process of ethnographic writing. For such a postmodern anthropology, the 
division between what is actually the case and what might possibly by the case 
seems also to have been undercut (Clifford and Marcus 1986). A second objec-
tion, which brings us closer to the present considerations, is that a main 
concern in recent anthropological writing on the ethical has indeed been that 
of how to deal with the such notions as possibility, potentiality, indeterminacy 
and freedom within, and somewhat against the grain of a theoretical tradition 
that finds itself in the very long shadows of the so called social sciences of 
unfreedom (cf. Laidlaw 2014).
In these recent anthropological considerations of possibility and freedom 
there seems to be four recurring, although by no means universally accepted, 
traits. First of all, freedom, or undetermined possibility more generally, is not 
simply considered a fact of the state of nature, nor a fact of transcendental 
reason, but something actively exercised, something that takes place in acts 
and speech acts, practical experimentation etc. Secondly, the exercise of 
freedom takes place within a historically and culturally constituted field of 
possibilities, within value spheres or in relation to cultural discourses and 
institutional regimes. Thirdly, this exercise of freedom involves some aspect of 
character formation or work-of-self. And fourthly, this exercise of freedom 
and ethical work entails some degree of reflectivity, consciousness or delibera-
tion (Laidlaw 2002, 2014; Lambek 2010a, 2010b; Mahmood 2005; Mattingly 
2010, 2012, 2013; Robbins 2007; Zigon 2007, 2008, 2009. C. Jason Throop 
[2010, 2012, this volume] notably diverts from these activist schematics and 
emphasizes the more passive registers of moral life).
Yet, even, or perhaps especially, with this current theoretical development 
in mind, I would still like to press this issue of a distinction that turns on the 
ontological relationship between the actual and the possible. But here the 
point will not be to pit a science of the actual against a science of the possible, 
but rather to make a more delicate distinction between an approach to the 
ethical that grants ontological primacy to the real (e.g. cultural discourses and 
subject positions that reside on the level of the collective etc., cf. Mahmood 
2005; Faubion 2011) and one that grants ontological primacy to possibility.
Let me start by calling to mind that the kind of possibility with which Lear’s 
Radical Hope is concerned is not limited to an investigation of a historical field 
of possibilities within which ethical subjects can exercise their freedom, 
according to which a self can work on itself and ‘subjectivate’ itself, and 
according to which a virtuous character can take form – although this, to be 
sure, is also part and parcel of the picture painted of the traditional way of life 
of the Crow. Instead, the main aim of Lear’s work is to inquire as to what it, on 

	
The Provocation of Freedom	 121
the one hand, means for singular human beings that such culturally framed 
fields of possibilities become impossible and, on the other, to explore the 
ethical, or, as it were, the existential dynamics involved in the becoming pos-
sible of new fields of possibilities. Hence, the distinction in levels of analysis 
that Lear’s work foregrounds – pace Lear’s own obstructively imprecise char-
acterization of this point – is not that between a level of brute facts and a level 
of possibilities open for actualization. Rather, the distinction is, on closer 
inspection, to be draw between a level on which the ranges of possibilities 
open for actualization belong and a level on which such possibilities are con-
stituted and repeated in their being-possible.
What is thus elucidative in this – at first sight, rather harsh and in some 
respects reductive – division between a study of actuality and a study of possi-
bility is not that an anthropological approach is supposedly unable to deal with 
the subjunctive, with the fields of possibilities for action, with possible futures 
and the haunting of past possibilities, with the evaluation and choice of various 
courses of action (because it evidently is dealing with these matters), but that 
the radical inquiry into the very conditions of possibility of historically and cul-
turally framed fields of possibilities is the heartland of philosophical inquiry. An 
anthropology of ethics that takes seriously ‘the possibilities of human freedom’ 
must venture into the philosophical anthropological borderland and investigate 
exactly the generative relationship between these levels of possibility.
Freedom, Anxiety and Moral Experience
Having briefly discussed various approaches to social practice and ethical life 
in terms of their modal configurations, and having found in the process an 
opening in the theoretical landscape for a philosophical anthropology of 
ethics, the task in the remainder of this chapter will be to elaborate on the 
question of the possibility of possibilities.
A primary concern in this respect must be that of where this kind of condi-
tion of possibility is to be sought out phenomenologically, when we are no 
longer speaking about fields of possibilities concretely afforded in specific 
historico-cultural contexts. Obviously, if this approach is to have any rele-
vance in the anthropology of ethics, this cannot be a matter of conditions of 
possibility in the Kantian sense; i.e. those a priori conditions that make pos-
sible empirical experience, but that qua conditions of empirical experience, 
are not themselves open to empirical examination, but accessible only in 
transcendental deductions. The conditions of possibility of interest here will 
have to be open to phenomenological and ethnographic exploration and 
hence be accessible in ordinary experience. In order to approximate an under-
standing of what this means, let me briefly, once again, consult Lear and his 
account of how the Crow people manage to make possible a new horizon of 
possibilities.

122	
Rasmus Dyring
The main protagonist in the story told by Lear is the last of the great Crow 
chiefs, Chief Plenty Coups. As a child, the chief-to-be had had a dream that 
would guide him the rest of life in his efforts to lead the Crow through the 
world shattering changes their way of life would experience in the face of the 
predicament imposed on them by their white colonizers. Here is not the place 
to account in detail for Plenty Coups’ dream and Lear’s analysis of it. Of 
importance in the present context is Lear’s insistence on taking the dream 
seriously as a wellspring of ethical possibility.
Lear contends that Plenty Coups’ dream amounts to more than the soaring, 
hallucinating fantasy of an exhausted, self-mutilated young boy (as was some-
times done on a vision quest to induce dreaming, Plenty Coups had cut off a 
joint on one of his fingers). Rather, Plenty Coups’ dream was a creative 
response to the dire predicament of the Crow Nation; it should be seen as ‘a 
response to a communal sense of anxiety’ (2006: 77). And furthermore, it 
should be seen as a mode of responding to the pathos of anxiety that was able 
to transcend the limits of the accustomed fields of possibilities and the limits 
of ordinary ethical deliberation. As Lear puts it, ‘It is not unreasonable to 
suppose that a sensitive nine-year-old was attuned to the anxiety in his com-
munity and that he was able to dream what he was not yet in a position to 
think’ (2006: 77). But it was not merely because he was still a child that he was 
unable to arrive by way of reflective ethical deliberation at what the dream 
showed him. No Crow, however prudent, would have been able to.
The new possibility which the dream revealed – namely the possibility of 
building a Crow life around virtues of learning, instead of virtues of war – was 
not a matter ‘that could be reasoned about in the preexisting terms of the good 
life.’ (Lear 2006: 92) Only with Plenty Coups’ dream – a dream that was 
grounded in a communitary pathos of anxiety shared by the Crow, the anxiety 
of a way-of-life, and thus a dream that Plenty Coups dreamed on behalf of the 
tribe – did it become possible to transcend in practice the traditionally 
afforded range of Crow possibilities for ethical being, because it immediately 
opened the possibility of a radically hopeful posture that surpassed any avail-
able traditional conception of the good Crow life and reached toward a pos-
sible future beyond the current comprehension of any Crow, Plenty Coups 
himself included.
Returning now to the question of locating a realm of experience in which to 
seek out the possibility of possibilities, Lear clearly directs the analysis away 
from the level of intentional, deliberative action and towards registers of exis-
tential pathos – in the present case the pathos of anxiety and the posture of 
hope assumed in the place opened and circumscribed by this anxiety. This is 
the clue that I wish to take from Lear.
Kierkegaard writes of the concept of anxiety that it ‘is altogether different 
from fear and similar concepts that refer to something definite, whereas 
anxiety is freedom’s actuality as the possibility of possibility’ (Kierkegaard 
1980: 42 [SV 6: 136]). Concluding this preparatory discussion of the 

	
The Provocation of Freedom	 123
ontological relationship between actuality and possibility – and in the effort of 
avoiding the misunderstanding that the philosophical-anthropological inves-
tigation of possibility dismisses any appeal to the actual, and thereby also the 
misunderstanding that the present chapter should be an argument against 
experience-near exploration and against the importance of fieldwork – it is 
worth noting that Kierkegaard intimately relates actuality and possibility in 
this characterization of the phenomenon of anxiety. Freedom is actual in 
anxiety, but not actual in the sense that freedom can be examined by treating 
anxiety as a neuro-physiological state that can be measured and subjected to 
the methods of the hard sciences. And, it is not actual in the same sense that 
the object of fear – for instance, the speeding car that suddenly makes an 
unexpected turn toward my son – is actual. The actuality of freedom that takes 
place in anxiety has no object, it is an experience that experiences no definite 
thing, no-thing, and as such it harbours an experiential disclosure of possibil-
ity as such. I will unpack this important characterization later in the chapter.
In the sections that follow, I will work out in more detail how this shift in 
analytical focus from ethical activity to registers of existential pathos may be 
fruitful in the anthropology of ethics. More specifically I will point to a phe-
nomenon I shall call the provocation of freedom as a phenomenon that origi-
narily calls forth and thus ‘precedes’ the more active exercise of freedom.1 I 
will do this first by looking to a very special work of art, and secondly by con-
sulting Kierkegaard’s phenomenology of anxiety.
Helena and the Question of the Practical Necessity  
of Ethical Engagement
In the year 2000, the Chilean-Danish artist Marco Evaristti put on exhibition 
his work Helena & El Pescador at the Trapholt Museum in Kolding, Denmark. 
The work consisted of two parts. One part called El Pescador (the Fisherman) 
is a self-portrait of the artist which did not receive much attention. The other 
part – Helena – on the other hand caused quite a stir. Let me quote at length 
art historian Anna Karina Hofbauer’s description of the work:
Ten white Moulinex Optiblend 2000 Mixers stood on a perfectly normal table. Each 
blender was filled with water, and in these rather unusual aquariums orange-red 
swordtails were swimming around. The blenders were clearly connected to the 
power supply and could be activated, everything being arranged in full view to the 
public. There were no notices or directions attached to the equipment but as the 
power switches were in full view this was unnecessary. If anyone decided to press the 
yellow button, this would immediately kill the fish and turn the contents of the 
mixers into cold fish soup. In this way, the public was placed in the situation of being 
judges making life and death decisions. The absence of information about what 
should be done with the work on display in the exhibition did not leave Helena 
undisturbed for long. Soon after the exhibition opened a visitor pressed the button. 

124	
Rasmus Dyring
Power was connected to the blenders for two days and over that period a total of 16 
fish died. The power was then cut off by the police and the Director of the museum 
at the time, Peter S. Meyer, was charged with cruelty to animals. (Hofbauer 2013: 22)
As Hofbauer here describes it, the spectator confronting the work finds him- 
or herself in a situation that with a certain urgency calls for a decision of 
whether or not to take an innocent life. In that respect there is something in 
this situation that at first glance resembles those perplexity inducing thought 
experiments so often found in moral philosophy. Take for example Bernard 
Williams’s well known thought experiment in which the botanist Jim acciden-
tally finds himself in the midst of a counter-insurgency operation in a village 
somewhere in the South American jungle:
Jim finds himself in the central square of a small South American town. Tied up 
against the wall are a row of twenty Indians… in front of them several armed men in 
uniform… [T]he captain in charge … explains that the Indians are a random group of 
the inhabitants who, after recent acts of protest against the government, are just about 
to be killed to remind other possible protesters of the advantages of not protesting. 
However … the captain is happy to offer him [Jim] a guest’s privilege of killing one of 
the Indians himself. If Jim accepts, then as a special mark of the occasion, the other 
Indians will be let off. Of course, if Jim refuses, then there is no special occasion, and 
Pedro [a soldier] here will do what he was about to do when Jim arrived, and kill them 
all… What should he do? (Smart and Williams 1973: 98–99)
Indeed – what should he do? What should one do in such a situation? Despite 
this similarity between Helena and the ‘Jim and the Jungle’ thought experi-
ment, that one is faced with the urgent decision of whether or not to take an 
innocent life, there is the obvious and all-decisive difference – a difference that 
will give a first pointer toward the provocative advent of freedom – that in 
Williams’ scenario the ethical urgency and the subsequent ethical perplexity 
springs from the objective necessity inherent to the situation in which Jim at 
gun point must choose from a clearly delineated range of objective possibili-
ties, whereas in Helena there is no such objective necessity that can account 
for the urgency felt by the spectator. So from where does this captive force 
spring that emplaces the spectator, as Hofbauer puts it, ‘in a situation of 
making life and death decisions?’ This question must be explored by examin-
ing the manner in which the spectator engages actively with the work and how 
the confrontation with the work, more primordially, prompts the engagement 
of the spectator.
According to the artist, Marco Evaristti himself, the spectator, when con-
fronted with Helena, engages actively with the work in one of three ways: as a 
sadist, who presses the blender button; as a voyeur, who watches those who 
press the button; or as a moralist, who protests, files complaints and alerts the 
authorities (Hofbauer 2013: 22). No matter which kind of engagement the 
spectator enacts, he or she is quite concretely interacting with the work, 
responding to it – most directly and most actively, of course, in the case of the 

	
The Provocation of Freedom	 125
one who in fact presses the button, thereby taking part in the work. But the 
way Evaristti describes it, those belonging to the other two groups are also 
actively involved with the work: whereas the one who presses the button is 
obviously active, those watching and those moralizing are reactive to the 
activity of the former (or the activity of the artist or that of the museum putting 
the work on display). Whether actively pressing the button or re-acting to 
others pressing the button – all the three types of engagement with the work 
proposed by Evaristti are understood as activist types of engagement, relying 
in their engagement on the fact, on the objective reality2 of the act of pressing 
the button. Such an activist interpretation is also advanced by Hofbauer. In 
her words, ‘Helena would not have become a complete interactive work if the 
button had not been pressed. The total completion of the work occurred when 
an observer decided to press the button and take the opportunity to partici-
pate’ (Hofbauer 2013: 23). So, Hofbauer emphasizes the fact of the pressed 
button – here almost rendered as the result of an arbitrary decision, an act of 
liberum arbitrium – as that which originarily realizes participation, as that 
which completes the work, as that which thereby institutes the ground of 
objective necessity upon which the subsequent play of reactions can unfold.
But is participation in the work really accomplished only and originarily in 
and through the direct and indirect interaction with the work based on an 
arbitrary, free choice? I quoted Hofbauer earlier as writing that when con-
fronted with Helena, ‘the public was placed in the situation of being judges 
making life and death decisions’ (Hofbauer 2013: 22). But if participation in 
the work is only and originarily accomplished in the activity of, and the re-
activity to, the pressing of the button, how can we account for the prior experi-
ence of being emplaced in such a situation of being judges over life and death?
It seems that the work prior to affording the concrete ethical possibilities of 
being sadists, voyeurs and moralists has already somehow called the specta-
tors into a shared space in which these concrete possibilities for action origi-
narily are made possible not merely by virtue of the objective possibility that I 
in fact can, and possess the know-how to, press a button on this apparatus, but 
by virtue of an experienced urgency that I, exactly I, must decide whether or 
not to press the button. In other words, I am irrevocably put on the spot, and 
no one can decide in my place.
We can hence discern two moments in this experience that takes place 
between the work and the spectators, and that emplaces the spectators in an 
ethically engaging space before the spectator begins engaging actively of his or 
her own accord: there is, on the one hand, the moment in which the spectators 
engage with and respond quite concretely to the work, press the button or 
react to others pressing the button. And there is, on the other hand, a moment 
that in an ontological sense is prior to this – a moment I shall call proto-
responsive – in which the work originarily engages the spectators and calls 
forth, and demands of them, their engagement. The concrete acts of the first 
moment are easily observable. In the case of Helena these concrete acts made 

126	
Rasmus Dyring
it through the camera lenses and into the newspapers the next day. The proto-
responsive moment, however, is most often covered over in day-to-day living 
in a haze of objective necessity, as it was also covered over with objective 
necessity in Williams’s thought experiment.
Kierkegaard’s Phenomenology of Responsive Engagement
In Kierkegaard’s work we find some resources for thinking through more elab-
orately what is at play in this proto-responsive dimension of ethical engage-
ment. In his analysis of the phenomenon of sin – in particular, Adam’s original 
sin – in The Concept of Anxiety, Kierkegaard explores the existential forces at 
play before Adam’s transgressive act brought about the fall of man into sin, i.e. 
into the ethical domain in which the difference between good and evil is 
posited. Dissatisfied with the traditional theological explanations of the transi-
tion from a state of absolute innocence to a state of sinfulness – explanations 
that rest on the notion of concupiscentia, that is, a desire for the forbidden – 
Kierkegaard suggests that this transition should be investigated instead with 
reference to the phenomenon of anxiety. Interestingly, both the explanation 
drawing on concupiscentia and the one drawing on anxiety find Adam’s trans-
gressive act to be grounded in a certain pathos and both take the confronta-
tion with the prohibition not to eat from the tree of knowledge of good and 
evil to be that which awakens in Adam the pathic responses of desire or 
anxiety, respectively, and hence, that which modifies the pathically circum-
scribed manner in which Adam finds himself emplaced in the world into a 
mode of being-in-the-world in which the transgressive act first becomes pos-
sible.3 But the way this dynamic between demand and response is understood 
is what radically sets apart the two explanations.
The doctrine of concupiscentia states that the prohibition stirred in Adam 
the desire to do the forbidden, which consequently caused Adam to act and eat 
from the tree of knowledge of good and evil. But, as Kierkegaard points out, 
how can a desire to transgress arise in he who is as yet absolutely ignorant of 
good and evil, when the very understanding of such categories as ‘transgres-
sion’, ‘the forbidden’, ‘prohibition’ entails the understanding that it is wrong, 
perhaps even evil, to transgress, to do the forbidden, to break the prohibition. 
This means that in the doctrine of concupiscentia, the knowledge of good and 
evil that Adam is supposed to have attained only after the transgressive act is 
presupposed in the explanation of the causal conditions of that very act, and 
by the same token, a chain of causality and necessity is introduced between the 
sphere of innocence and that of sinfulness. By introducing such a link, as 
Kierkegaard writes, ‘[t]he qualitative leap is enervated; the fall becomes some-
thing successive’ (1980: 40 [SV 6: 135]).
By contrast, Kierkegaard’s anxiety-based explanation of the transition 
refrains from giving any causes of the act that led to the fall. Yet, despite the 

	
The Provocation of Freedom	 127
absence of causal necessity, the transgressive act is performed neither into a 
pure, non-restrictive vacuum, nor is it arbitrary. Anxiety, in Kierkegaard’s 
understanding, comes in as a liminal phenomenon between absolute inno-
cence and fallen sinfulness. An analysis of this phenomenon of anxiety will 
hence bring our explanation of the transition right up to that outermost ledge 
whence Adam’s qualitative leap is taken, without, on the one hand, introduc-
ing an instance of causal necessity from which the leap follows as an effect, 
and, on the other hand, leaving it an absolutely arbitrary deed.
Let me sketch the main points in Kierkegaard’s account of the fall, before 
moving on to a discussion of some phenomenal similarities between Adam’s 
situation and the situation in which the spectators of Helena find themselves. 
As Kierkegaard explains, Adam is initially innocent and innocence is igno-
rance – Adam does not know any better and is therefore exempt from respon-
sibility. But with God’s prohibition the state of innocence is modified: a 
modification that is in essence an experiential or phenomenological modifica-
tion. As Kierkegaard writes of the events immediately surrounding the prohi-
bition: ‘Innocence still is, but only a word is required and the ignorance is 
concentrated. Innocence naturally cannot understand this word, but at that 
moment anxiety has, as it were, caught its first prey. Instead of nothing, it now 
has an enigmatic word’ (1980: 44 [SV 6:138], emphasis added). Adam cannot 
understand what is said. The understanding of the semantic content of the 
prohibition qua prohibition, as we have already noted, relies on the not yet 
acquired knowledge of good and evil. But there is something indicative in the 
very saying of the prohibition that Adam can indeed ‘understand’, because this 
kind of ‘understanding’ requires only a pathic modification of his ignorance, 
not positive knowledge as such. The saying of the prohibition confronts Adam 
with a limit, but not a limit that outlines spheres of right and wrong conduct 
within his paradisiac world. The limit stands forth as a rift in the fabric of 
Adam’s innocent world, a rift of concentrated, impenetrable ignorance, the-
matized nothingness, and as such the prohibition confronts Adam with a limit 
that enigmatically delimits his very world. It is, however, of crucial importance 
to note that this experience of the limit drawn in and through the prohibition 
does not close off Adam’s world – it opens his world towards the enigma indi-
cated in this experience of limit, because the enigmatic quality of the liminal 
experience overflows the experienced limit, thus assailing and drawing in the 
experiencing person. Because the prohibition says that Adam should not do 
this thing that he does not understand, it indicates that Adam is in fact able to 
do ‘something’ that, however, withdraws into the inexplicable and enigmatic. 
As Kierkegaard writes: ‘The prohibition induces in him anxiety, for the prohi-
bition awakens in him freedom’s possibility… the anxious possibility of being 
able’ (1980: 44-45 [SV 6: 138], emphasis in original). The experience of the 
limit drawn in the prohibition overflows with an experience of ‘pure’, enig-
matic potency that comes over Adam in the unsettling pathos of anxiety: 
unsettling, because this experience of simply being-able immediately also 

128	
Rasmus Dyring
entails the at once sweet and terrifying urge to throw oneself into the unknown 
and begin doing something, whatever it might turn out to be: ‘The infinite pos-
sibility of being able’, Kierkegaard writes, ‘that was awakened by the prohibi-
tion now draws closer, because this possibility points to a possibility as its 
sequence’ (1980: 45 [SV 6: 139]).
The experience of being-able is, hence, pointed towards the possibility of 
doing something inexplicable in the direction of that enigmatic ‘beyond’ indi-
cated by the limit drawn by the prohibition. Standing anxiously on this ledge, 
drawn towards it by the enigmatic experience of this double possibility of 
simply being-able and of doing something inexplicable with this sensation of 
being-able, Adam’s innocence is, as Kierkegaard puts it, ‘brought to its utter-
most [til sit Yderste]’ (1980: 45 [SV 6: 139]). In conclusion, the pathos of 
anxiety emplaces Adam at that limit whence the qualitative leap leaps into the 
positively ethical domain in which good and evil are posited. This limit is the 
limit at which the concrete transgressive enaction of the concrete possibility 
of eating from the tree originarily is constituted as possible.
The Responsive Engagement in Helena and in Moral  
Experience in General
Having now followed Kierkegaard and Adam up to that point where the con-
crete acting begins, we have arrived again in that nexus we found also in the 
moral experience that arises in the confrontation with Helena: the nexus that is 
a point of transition between a proto-responsive engagement that originarily 
opens a situation for action and the more concrete responses to the possibilities 
that present themselves in this situation. So let me return again to Helena and 
the question of how we can account for that engagement with the work, which 
seemed to be in place prior to any active operation of the blender button; and, 
hence, how we can account for that manner in which the work engages the spec-
tators and emplaces them, as art historian Hofbauer puts it, ‘in the situation of 
being judges making life and death decisions’ (Hofbauer 2013: 22).
Let me suggest first of all that what the work calls forth, what it provokes is a 
situation in which the spectators – before anyone pressed the button the first 
time, and simply by virtue of their being in the presence of what to a matter-of-
fact assessment is nothing but quite normal blenders on a quite normal table 
containing quite normal fish – find themselves in an experience overflowing 
with a sense of being-able. This sensation crystallized in the observable fact that 
the artist and the director of the museum were asked by several spectators 
immediately after the opening of the exhibition and prior to the liquidation of 
the first fish if there indeed was power connected to the blenders. Both the 
director and the artist refused to answer the questions (Richter 2000).
Whether these questions took the concrete shape of worries, of shock or 
whether they fed off the shared atmosphere in the room, which was described 

	
The Provocation of Freedom	 129
by journalists as ecstatic and exhilarated, the grounding experience underlying 
them was an unsettling sense of being-able awoken in those present: a sense of 
being-able which was directed towards an enigmatic possibility of exercising 
this being-able – namely the enigmatic possibility of perhaps, perhaps not – 
depending on the unknown aspect of the connection to electric power – liq-
uidating a fish. Finding themselves in this situation of being-able, the spectators 
were at once anxious and urged on, repulsed and attracted. They were, as 
Kierkegaard writes of anxiety, in a certain ambiguous state of pathos charac-
terized as ‘a sympathetic antipathy and an antipathetic sympathy’ (1980: 42 
[SV 6: 136]). As one of the first persons to liquidate a fish said: ‘Almost all of us 
desire to do it, but refrain from doing it, because we are ethically educated not 
to do it’ (Richter 2000, my translation).
Just as Adam, by way of the pathos of anxiety, was emplaced at that limit of 
possibility whence the qualitative leap leaps into the concrete enaction of a 
possibility, so too do we find here that the spectators are engaged by Helena 
and brought to the limit by a grounding experience of simply being-able and 
the indication of an enigmatic possibility that urges on this sensation of being-
able to transition itself into concrete action; this action may now – only by 
virtue of this transition – be observed as the enaction of the concrete possibili-
ties of one of those types of ethical character of which we earlier heard Evaristti 
speak: namely, the sadists, the voyeurs and the moralists.
Yet, there seems to be an important difference between the situation in 
which Adam finds himself and the situation of Helena’s spectators: Adam is 
absolutely innocent qua ignorant as regards good and evil, whereas the specta-
tors facing Helena – as I quoted the fish-blending person saying above – are 
‘ethically educated’. That is, the spectators find themselves in a world where 
the notions of good and evil are already effectively in play. However, towards 
its end Kierkegaard’s explanation of the fall takes a quite surprising turn, 
which might also smooth out a bit this radical separation between a sphere of 
ignorance and a sphere of ethical knowledge of good and evil.
Where the notion of concupiscentia – the desire for the forbidden – relates 
causally the prohibition, this intermediary desire, and the consequent trans-
gressive act, Kierkegaard’s notion of anxiety, as I have already argued, makes 
the prohibition only an occasion that by virtue of its inexplicability awakens an 
experience of possibility in Adam. Kierkegaard has thus cleared of all substan-
tive content the prohibition as it is experienced by Adam and made it a merely 
formal indicator. But Kierkegaard goes further in this direction and proposes 
that there need not even be an external party that forbids in order for the 
anxious experience of freedom to arise. As Kierkegaard writes:
Innocence can indeed speak … [and] in language it possesses the expression for 
everything spiritual. Accordingly, one need merely assume that Adam talked to 
himself… From the fact that Adam was able to talk, it does not follow in a deeper 
sense that he was able to understand what was said. This applies above all to the 

130	
Rasmus Dyring
difference between good and evil, which indeed can be expressed in language but 
nevertheless is only for freedom… (1980: 45–46 [SV 6: 139])
So the prohibition only reifies something that already looms in language itself 
– in the clear world of meaningfulness itself, we might even say – as a per-
petual source of anxiety. One only has to stumble across it and anxiety, and 
with it, the experience of freedom, is awoken. So qua language-beings, who are 
always already emplaced in linguistic contexts, we have the conceptual dis-
tinction between good and evil in potentia without necessarily understanding 
it but it is only when freedom is awoken that we truly come to understand this 
distinction in its actuality. But what is it that we understand? It is not good and 
evil in the sense of substantive accounts of what is good and what is evil. What 
we understand qua free beings is the difference between good and evil qua 
difference. As free beings we understand that the difference between good and 
evil matters, but that we at same time cannot account once and for all for what 
the good is. Abstracting from this the Christological terminology of good and 
evil, what is indicated with this elusive difference is a realm of practical inde-
terminacy, a being-in-the-difference of existential indeterminacy, that qua its 
enigmatic, anxiety-inducing character discloses in practical life a poignantly 
felt imperative, practically necessitating quality.
The anxious experience of freedom arises here not because we as ethically 
educated people know with certainty that we should not blend fish, but 
because we do not know. Helena hence shows us that we are in a fundamental 
state of ignorance as to what in an absolute sense counts as good and evil, but 
that we are free beings for whom the difference between good and evil is none-
theless absolute and absolutely a matter to be reckoned with.
Conclusion
Judging by aesthetic standards, Helena is certainly not in the same league as 
Michelangelo’s David. It is more than anything a provocative gesture. But its 
provocation does not consist in simply going against the grain of moral or 
legal conventions like the provocative acts of civil disobedience or political 
activism actively does. To be exact, the provocative force arising in the experi-
ence of Helena does not come from the work itself, it does not have an objec-
tive source, but resides in the very experience of the work and in the experience 
of this enigmatic, elusive difference between good and evil. The work, then, 
like the prohibition in the tale of Adam, is merely an occasion for something 
to expressly come to the fore within experience: namely, as Kierkegaard puts 
it, freedom’s actuality as the possibility of possibility. The provocative, impera-
tive, engaging force, then, is really the force of freedom making itself known. 
Hence, Helena is a window onto the moral engine that is the provocation of 
freedom.

	
The Provocation of Freedom	 131
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank the participants at the Moral Engines conference for their 
great questions. In particular, I would like to thank Michael D. Jackson for 
opening a very stimulating line of thought. Finally, I would like to thank Line 
Ryberg Ingerslev, Kasper Lysemose and Thomas Schwarz Wentzer from the 
‘Existential Anthropology – Inquiring Human Responsiveness’ research 
project for their helpful comments. The work presented in this chapter is sup-
ported by a grant from the Danish Research Council (FKK), 11-104778.
Rasmus Dyring is Assistant Professor at the Department of Philosophy and 
History of Ideas, Aarhus University. In dialogue with the anthropology of 
ethics, Dyring’s research aims at foregrounding the existential dimensions of 
ethical life. He has published several articles on this subject, for instance, ‘A 
Spectacle of Disappearance’ (Tropos, 2015).
Notes
  1.	 Elsewhere I have undertaken a longer analysis of Kierkegaard’s philosophical anthropol-
ogy and its analytical potential in the context of a philosophical anthropology of the 
ethical (Dyring 2015b). 
  2.	 The same goes for the imagined fact of having pressed the button, and the registration of 
one’s reaction to this imagined fact.
  3.	 It would be natural to extend this discussion of the relationship between interdiction and 
the experience of freedom to the terrain of traditional anthropological issues such as that 
of the taboo. I would like to thank Michael D. Jackson for raising this point – and in 
particular the question of the relationship between the incest prohibition and human 
freedom – in the discussion of the conference version of this chapter. Prima facie, it 
would seem odd to insist that this kind of prohibition also carries that formally indicative 
force I am here calling the provocation of freedom. However, two things might be said 
in this respect. First, the provocation of freedom explored here is not to be equated with 
the liberty from structural constraints experienced in moments of actual transgression. 
And furthermore, the argument would not be that freedom follows from the ‘sin’ of 
incest. Secondly, it might be wise to follow Bataille on this matter, when he acknowl-
edges the universal adherence to this taboo throughout the world, but nonetheless finds 
it reducible it to a general taboo on sexuality; i.e. on the natural violence that lurks in the 
human being (Bataille 1986: 50-51). Bataille argues that the taboos – both the taboo on 
death and the taboo on sexuality – respond to the pathos of anguish before the violence 
of our natural being that at any moment threatens to break into our ordinary, regulated 
‘world of work’. Hence, the taboo erects a barrier against such excessive, anxiety provok-
ing phenomena. However, just as Kierkegaard observed in his treatment of the respon-
sive relationship between prohibition and anxiety, Bataille writes that ‘[i]t is always a 
temptation to knock down a barrier; the forbidden action takes on a significance it lacks 
before fear widens the gap between us and it and invests it with an aura of excitement’ 
(Bataille 1986: 48). And as is the case in Kierkegaard, it should be noted that in Bataille’s 
rendition it is not the prohibition itself that tempts: the operative term is rather the fear, 
or better yet, the sweet anguish before the excess of our natural being.

132	
Rasmus Dyring
References
Bataille, G. 1986. Erotism: Death and Sensuality, trans. Mary Dalwood. San Francisco: 
City Light Books.
Boas, F. 1938. The Mind of Primitive Man. New York: The MacMillan Company.
Bourdieu, P. 2013. Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Clifford, J. and G. Marcus (eds). 1986. Writing Culture: the Poetics and Politics of 
Ethnography. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Durkheim, E. 2010. Sociology and Philosophy, trans. D.F. Pocock. New York: 
Routledge.
 . 1973. Moral Education: A Study in the Theory and Application of the Sociology 
of Education, trans. Everett K. Wilson and Herman Schnurer. New York: The Free 
Press.
 . 1982. The Rules of Sociological Method and Selected Texts on Sociology and its 
Method, trans. W.D. Halls. New York: The Free Press.
Dyring, R. 2015a. ‘A Spectacle of Disappearance: On the Aesthetics and Anthropology 
of Emancipation’, Tropos 8(1): 11–33.
 . 2015b. ‘The Pathos and Postures of Freedom: Kierkegaardian Clues to a 
Philosophical Anthropology of the Ethical’, Danish Yearbook of Philosophy 47: 
41–63.
 . under review. ‘From Moral Facts to Ethical Facticity: On the Problem of 
Freedom in the Anthropology of Ethics’, HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory. 
Special Issue: ‘The Human Condition – Reinventing Philosophical Anthropology’, 
ed. Cheryl Mattingly and Thomas Schwarz Wentzer.
Faubion, James D. 2011. An Anthropology of Ethics. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Hofbauer, A.K. 2013. ‘The Participation of the Observer as an Experiment in the Art of 
Marco Evaristti’, in Malou Erritzøe (ed.), Marco Evarristi, published in connection 
with the exhibition Marco Evaristti. Kolding: Kunstmuseet Trapholt.
Kierkegaard, S. 1980. The Concept of Anxiety: Kierkegaard’s Writings, VIII, trans. 
Reidar Thomte. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
 . 1995. Samlede Værker bd. 6 (SV6). Haslev: Gyldendals Bogklubber.
Laidlaw, J. 2002. ‘For an Anthropology of Ethics and Freedom’, Journal of the Royal 
Anthropological Institute 8(2): 311–32.
 . 2014. The Subject of Virtue: An Anthropology of Ethics and Freedom. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lambek, Michael. 2010a. ‘Introduction’, in Michael Lambek (ed.), Ordinary Ethics: 
Anthropology, Language and Action. New York: Fordham University Press, pp. 
1–38.
 . 2010b. ‘Toward an Ethics of the Act’, in Michael Lambek (ed.), Ordinary 
Ethics: Anthropology, Language and Action. New York: Fordham University Press, 
2010, pp. 39–63.
Lear, J. 2006. Radical Hope: Ethics in the Face Cultural Devastation. Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press.
Mahmood, S. 2005. The Politics of Piety: The Islamic Revival and the Feminist Subject. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press
Malinowski, B. 1984. Argonauts of the Western Pacific. Long Grove: Waveland Press, Inc.
Mattingly, C. 2010. The Paradox of Hope: Journeys through a Clinical Borderland. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.

	
The Provocation of Freedom	 133
 . 2012. ‘Two Virtue Ethics and the Anthropology of Morality’, Anthropological 
Theory 12(2): 161–84.
 . 2013. ‘Moral Selves and Moral Scenes: Narrative Experiments in Everyday 
Life’, Ethnos: Journal of Anthropology 78(3): 301–27.
 . 2014. Moral Laboratories: Family Life and the Struggle for a Good Life. 
Oakland: University of California Press.
Mauss, M. 1990. The Gift, trans. W.D. Halls. New York: Routledge.
Nancy, J.-L. 1993. The Experience of Freedom, trans. Bridget McDonald. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press.
Richter, L. 2000. ‘Jeg kunne ikke holde fingerne væk’, Ekstra Bladet (12 February), Side 
4, Artikel-id: Z5518886.
Robbins, J. 2007. ‘Between Reproduction and Freedom: Morality, Value, and Radical 
Cultural Change’, Ethnos: Journal of Anthropology 72(3): 293–314.
Smart, J.J.C. and B. Williams. 1973. Utilitarianism: For and Against. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Throop, C.J. 2010. Suffering and Sentiment: Exploring the Vicissitudes of Experience 
and Pain in Yap. Berkeley: University of California Press.
 . 2012. ‘Moral Sentiments’, in D. Fassin (ed.), A Companion to Moral 
Anthropology. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 150–68.
Tylor, E. 1920. Primitive Culture. New York: J. P. Putnam’s Sons.
Zigon, J. 2007. ‘Moral Breakdown and Ethical Demand’, Anthropological Theory 7(2): 
131–50.
 . 2008. Morality: An Anthropological Perspective. London: Berg.
 . 2009. ‘Within a Range of Possibilities: Morality and Ethics in Social Life’, 
Ethnos: Journal of Anthropology 74(2): 251–76.


Part II
Moral Engines and ‘Moral Facts’


7
On the Immanence of Ethics
Michael Lambek
Ethics is a complex topic on which it would be impossible to construct a model 
that was at once fully comprehensive, consistent and true to life. Indeed, that 
very inability itself serves as a subject of some ethical thought. Hence, I invite 
you to read my chapter as just one among many possible ways to think about the 
ethical in human life. I begin by reflecting on some of the words in the title and 
introduction to this volume and continue by presenting my perspective on 
ethics, an argument that will unfold in two movements and a coda on irony. The 
first movement elaborates an Aristotelian conception of practical judgment 
while the second draws from the philosophy of language for an understanding 
of action.1
Moral Engines or Moral Tracks?
When I think of engines, the first image that comes to mind is a steaming 
locomotive. Engines are big and powerful beasts; they pull mysterious loads of 
freight, nose into the Gard du Nord and out of Paddington, or steam across the 
Ganges Plain with masses of people sprouting from them. With respect to 
ethics I find the concept of engines too powerful, too mechanical, and, all in 
all, rather frightening. Made by human hands and human design, they too 
readily take on an inhuman force and autonomy.
Engines are doubly engineered, both designed and driven. Hence talk about 
moral engines is likely to move from description to prescription. Some would 
say that this is precisely the ethical, engaged thing to do. Others would con-
sider it an invitation to the sins of moralizing or hubris. We do know that 
moral engineering can be a very dangerous business.
The introduction speaks also of ‘striving’, as if ethics did not come easily or 
naturally. I do not think this is quite right. While the acts and issues we describe 
specifically as ethical are often marked by their difficulty, this has to do less with 

138	
Michael Lambek
the presence or absence, strength or weakness of any force either external or 
intrinsic to something we could call ‘ethics’ or ‘morality’ (words that I use inter-
changeably), but rather to the situation of our being in the world, and the com-
plexity of our social commitments and concerns. Two widely prevalent sources 
of difficulty are conflict among prior commitments and the incommensurability 
of criteria. We cannot care equally for everyone or for every goal or challenge 
that life offers and we are forced to think about these matters. But again, terms 
like ‘driving’ and ‘striving’ exaggerate the effort.
I don’t think engines drive ethics and I am not enough of a post-humanist 
to think that engines can be moral. I would say rather that morality – or ethics 
– is in one sense a human capacity (Macpherson 1973), like musicality, but 
more evenly distributed. The questions then, are what is needed to bring out 
this capacity, to cultivate it, and what conditions are necessary for people to 
exercise and realize their capacity, or conversely, what conditions inhibit its 
exercise. You cannot readily exercise the capacity to make music without 
voice, instruments or compositions. What counts in making music is less an 
engine than, so to speak, a track.
For engines to move trains, there must be tracks. Tracks are humble, unob-
trusive, ordinary. Tracks are fundamental in these respects: they are enabling, 
providing a surface that facilitates movement against the friction of rougher 
ground; they are part of broader landscapes; and they run in specific direc-
tions, they lead somewhere, somewhere in particular, not everywhere at once. 
They provide direction and continuity: horizons but also limits. I evoke this 
metaphor to think about the criteria and means necessary for moral thought 
and action and to reframe the question from one of force to quality.
Approaching the Ethical
If the idea of ethical relativism makes many people uneasy, meta-ethical rela-
tivism or perspectivism is a perfectly reasonable conclusion to draw from the 
history of philosophical accounts. Kantians, Aristotelians and Nietzscheans 
each have interesting things to say. To go even further, maybe there is no single 
discrete field of ethics or morality to isolate and think about, no single, let 
alone pair, of elephants, for blind scholars to touch from different sides. The 
point here is analogous to the one Talal Asad (2003) makes about religion, 
namely that ethics as a demarcated field is a social objectification, not a natural 
kind (cf. Hacking 1999). That said, what I think Asad missed out with respect 
to religion, and what I claim for ethics is that it names something intrinsic to 
social life. To draw on a term from religion, ethics is immanent to human soci-
ality. The problem is how to perceive this immanence without destroying it 
through acts of rationalization or objectification.
I see ethics as neither a discrete object nor a distinctive force. And while 
not discounting it as a distinctive human capacity, I write about it more as a 

	
On the Immanence of Ethics	 139
property, quality or function2 of human action, or a perspective on action, 
hence of or on actors, and cumulatively of or on character and lives. I take 
ethics to be found at the conjunction of practical judgment and performative 
action. By ‘immanent’ I signal that the ethical is a constitutive dimension of 
social life, neither transcendent of it nor a detachable part of it. Indeed, I think 
it as much a category mistake to attempt to distinguish ethics from action as 
it is mind from body.
This position is close to Durkheim on the moral, but where Durkheim saw 
morality as a function of rules or structure and linked it to the obligatory, I see 
it as a function of action and criteria and link it rather to obligation. Ethics is 
less static, less determined and less mechanical than a simplistic picture of 
Durkheim would have it, but it is no less immanent to the social.
I acknowledge two strands of thought about ethics, one of which sees the 
ethical path in the correct and deliberate following of rules and the other in 
the courage or insight to ignore, subvert, reinvent or transcend rules. But I 
think there is a middle path, which is exactly the theory of the middle path, 
namely the Aristotelian attention to practical judgment and the wisdom or 
character to judge well. From this perspective, there are no absolute rules and 
every circumstance opens its own challenges. Correctness of judgment is 
subject to debate and the ethical subsists as much in serious engagement in 
that debate as it does in following any one path. Morality must always be open 
to the challenge that it is mistaken. Hence any account of moral engines, judg-
ment or rules must also think about the affordance of voice and of plurality of 
voice. Insofar as recognizing and ensuring the plurality of voice is politics or 
the political, so too is the ethical also at once political. But there is more to 
voice than volubility or being heard and more to ethics than mere politics.3
Without ignoring the compelling questions about whether politics governs 
ethics or how ethics should or could govern politics, or where matters of 
ethics transcend those of religious practice, or indeed who can and should 
decide where the boundaries among ethics, law and religion lie, I am after 
something deeper and perhaps prior. I attend to the relatively pre-objectified 
ethical dimensions of everyday life and ordinary action, perhaps the infra-
ethical. My approach also attempts to escape or transcend issues raised by 
cultural difference and relativism without resorting to a universalism grounded 
directly in either abstract reason or human biology. Instead I ground ethics in 
human sociality and language. We cannot and do not live without it. Ethics is 
ordinary before it is extraordinary.
Ethical Practice: Judgment, Acknowledgement and Justification
Some thinkers distinguish between ethics and morality, according to whether 
people conceive of the good as a matter of following convention or as having 
the freedom, need, courage or imagination to break free of it. Such 

140	
Michael Lambek
distinctions objectify from the start what must be part of the ongoing work of 
ethics and evade some of the most challenging questions.4 One of the lessons 
of social theory has been that the distinction between convention and freedom 
is a false or limited opposition. Precipitous existential freedom is rarely 
encountered in ordinary life; we are always already committed to some iden-
tity, relationship or course of action. Hence, there is an inextricable connec-
tion, or productive tension, between freedom and obligation in practice, a 
relationship that is easier to see when we approach the subject ethnographi-
cally than by means of reified abstractions.
Ethnographically, it is also evident that people both collectively and indi-
vidually often freely and deliberately engage in specific kinds of discipline in 
order to cultivate an ethical disposition in themselves or their children, as 
though the ordinary social rules or conventional cultural ends were not 
enough, but equally as though sheer freedom was at least as dangerous an 
alternative.5 We cannot think how to live in the absence of postulated ends and 
instantiated criteria and we cannot live in the abstract or only in our minds.
The relation between freedom and rule or convention is evident also in the 
mundane fact that people are regularly faced with deciding among several com-
peting or incommensurable commitments. As a trivial example, we may feel 
relatively obligated to spend Christmas with family but relatively free to decide 
whether to spend it with our own parents or those of our partner, and free even 
to rationalize the fact that we’ve decided to stay at home this year, go to Mexico, 
or convert to Islam instead. This entails practical judgment, which is a more 
realistic concept than either freedom or rule, especially when the latter are 
understood as mutually exclusive alternatives or distinct provinces of social life 
or moments of social history. In other words, we are not free to live outside any 
rules or obligations, but we are both free and obliged to distinguish among 
them. Rather than speak of rules that we follow or break, it is more precise to 
talk about criteria, commitments and incommensurable values. And rather than 
speaking of choosing between them, I think it is clearer to say that we exercise 
some kind of judgment among and with respect to them.6
In distinguishing judgment as the central feature of ethical action I refer 
not primarily to the acts of courts of law or divine beings, nor to what is always 
explicit, handed down as a judgment. Another word might be discernment. 
The concept of practical reason or judgment (Aristotelian phronesis) begins 
with the idea that the good or right thing to do in a given set of circumstances, 
or how to do it, is not always obvious. We may learn to exercise judgment such 
that it goes smoothly, almost without saying, as a matter of virtuous character, 
but that does not make it simple. For Aristotle it is a matter of finding the right 
balance to fit the circumstances. Not only are circumstances always changing, 
but in social life there are always diverse calls upon our attention, competing 
or incommensurable criteria, obligations, values, desires, interests, relation-
ships, etc. Our initial judgment is often poor and wisdom is not readily 
achieved.

	
On the Immanence of Ethics	 141
Some qualifications of common depictions of Aristotle are in order. In con-
trast to some virtue theorists, I do not think that in any given circumstance the 
right thing to do is always obvious to the person of good character, or that the 
virtues to apply are necessarily consistent with one another. For example, the 
tension between justice and compassion might remain irresolvable; phronesis 
can be seen precisely as the meta-virtue of balancing among the virtues. 
Practical judgement likewise entails adjusting between incommensurable 
values, that is, values that do not meet fully along a single dimension or crite-
rion, as for example, between devotion to one’s job or calling and to one’s 
children. This is one reason we say we cannot put a price on them; to do so 
would render them falsely commensurate. That is exactly why judgment is 
called for and why it is often neither evident nor easy, nor likely to produce 
common agreement. Hence also why it changes according to circumstances.
A further qualification to some renderings of Aristotle’s depiction of virtu-
ous judgment lies in the observation that there are often disruptions. This is a 
point developed in a variety of ways by Jonathan Lear (2000, 2011) in his con-
frontation of Greek thought with psychoanalysis. Such disruptions, character-
ized perhaps by bad judgment, incontinence, doubt, self-reflection, indecision 
or retraction, can produce real disorientation, vertigo, but also, as Lear insists, 
renewed enthusiasm, aspiration and commitment. Indeed, Lear says, ‘It is 
constitutive of our life with the concepts with which we understand ourselves 
that they are subject to ironic disruption’ (2011: 22). So if ethics is immanent 
to society or sociality, this does not mean that virtuous practice goes without 
saying; Cheryl Mattingly (2012) and James Laidlaw (2014) have each lucidly 
addressed this point.
Indeed, for Aristotle wise judgment entails reflection and feeling.7 
Reflection can occur before, during and after the act. Put another way, and 
anticipating a different tradition that I am coming to, ethical practice entails 
acknowledgement of what one is about to do, is doing or has done. If judge-
ment is a defining feature of the ethical dimension of practice, so acknowl-
edgement is the quintessential ethical act, a point developed in the work of 
Stanley Cavell. At certain moments, as he says, we owe people an acknowl-
edgement and often we owe it to ourselves.
Of course, simple acknowledgement rapidly expands into justification.8 We 
can explore the reasons people give for what they do; how they describe acts 
of commission or omission, as committed by themselves or others; how they 
explain giving more attention to one set of parents than another; how they live 
with the fact that there are homeless and hungry people down the street or 
across town; how they justify killing in warfare or infanticide; how they, or we, 
live with a moral queasiness about the state of the world and turn that into 
programmes and projects from religious piety to existentialism or humanitari-
anism, or from social or political activism (of various stripes) to critique or 
academic anthropology, or how people justify withholding engagement 
entirely; if religious, how they live with passionate investment in redemption 

142	
Michael Lambek
while recognizing the ultimate inadequacy of any human return for divine 
gifts; and how they abstract and objectify all these justifications into and with 
respect to the discursive fields and professional codes that some people take to 
be the actual substance of ethics.
But ethics does not enter the picture only with such rationalized objectifi-
cations as professional codes or programmes, or with respect to big ticket 
items or exceptional circumstances like abortion or warfare; it inflects our 
practice all the time. Nothing could be more ordinary than ethical judgment, 
as ordinary as hailing someone by name or kinship term or saying good 
morning; greetings themselves are forms of practical acknowledgment. As 
Jack Sidnell (2010) has shown by means of conversational analysis, judgment 
occurs by the microsecond.
A lesson from taking practice seriously is that the connection between 
freedom and convention, no less than that between ambiguity and certainty, 
has an intrinsically temporal dimension.9 Action and disruption take place in 
time and, obviously, the degree to which judgment is rendered explicit or coa-
lesces into a narrative is a function of time. For the duration of this chapter I 
will juxtapose two features of temporality, namely the continuity inherent in 
the stream of practice and the discontinuity occasioned by discrete, conse-
quential acts. Ongoing judgment and specific acknowledgments are expres-
sions of this dichotomy.
Practice and Performance
I have suggested that judgment is intrinsic to practice and I called such practi-
cal judgment ethical. Practical judgment transcends any simple distinction 
between freedom and rule or convention; it describes the shifting balance of 
interest and disinterest (selfishness and unselfishness, but also attention and 
complacency) in our lives; and it describes what happens when incommensu-
rable values or virtues meet. However, in and of itself it cannot redress ambiv-
alence and uncertainty. For example, what is to say that a given judgment is 
right or that it will not be immediately overturned?
How is judgment possible in the first place? Whence come the criteria on 
the basis of which to exercise judgement, render justifications or authorize the 
judgments and justifications made? Whence come the criteria appropriate for 
a given situation, including the criteria that define a situation as such in the 
first place? I suggest that the source of criteria lies in the act of speaking itself. 
This is the next step of my argument for the immanence of the ethical.
It is an entailment of the focus on judgment that ethics and the ethical in my 
terminology describe not just the right and the good, or actually doing what is 
right or good, but the possibility – and indeed the necessity – for discriminating 
between right and wrong, just and unjust, for conceptualizing, discerning and 
acknowledging what is right and good, and for acknowledging the means at 

	
On the Immanence of Ethics	 143
hand for constituting practice as right and good, for reflecting on the right and 
good, and for orienting human beings towards them. Ethics depends on the 
availability of criteria. I make no assumptions that reasoning will inevitably 
reach the same conclusions about what is right and good; the point is rather how 
specific criteria move in and out of relevance. Nowhere do I say that good 
behaviour or wise judgments are themselves immanent. What I do say is that the 
possibilities for acting (well) and judging (wisely) are immanent.
One way that criteria emerge is through illocutionary action. Once I 
perform the act of marriage, the criteria that apply to me and to my subse-
quent behaviour change. My behaviour itself may not change but it is subject 
to different evaluation. Marriage is an obvious example but the effects are 
equivalent for any rite de passage and indeed any ritual, or even such ostensi-
bly trivial matters as making an appointment. Among Azande both the accu-
sation of witchcraft and the apology for it put the protagonists and their 
relationships under particular descriptions (as philosophers say) and with 
respect to new or renewed criteria. Performativity establishes who we are in 
relation to one another, to ourselves and the world, that is to say, it establishes 
the criteria by which our relational practice – as a marital partner, citizen, 
Christian, Muslim, Hindu, Jew or Azande, but also as a parent or child, friend, 
man or woman, or simple human being – ought to be carried out and can be 
evaluated. It does not determine practice, but it establishes the relevance of 
specific criteria for practice and the nature of our commitments to persons 
and projects.
In his monumental work on ritual and religion, Roy Rappaport (1999) 
begins by arguing that ritual serves to offset the uncertainty made available by 
language, namely the fact that we can use language both to lie and to imagine 
alternative worlds and courses of action. Hence we may be sceptical of what 
others say to us and be ambivalent, inconsistent or untrustworthy ourselves. 
Ritual offsets or overcomes these effects by offering public enactments of com-
mitment to particular statements, relationships and courses of action as well 
as acceptance of the very means that establish such things, thus, not only to 
this marriage, but to weddings and the institution of marriage. Following from 
Rappaport, I have been implicitly suggesting two reasons, uncertainty and 
ambivalence, as to why ethics cannot be a purely subjective matter, and hence 
a matter of either pure freedom or biology, but subsists in reference and rela-
tion to public conventional formulations, acts and utterances that are pre-
cisely certain and unambiguous.10 Such public acts provide criteria that 
enhance clarity or reduce uncertainty, not just with respect to specific judg-
ments, but also to specific commitments, and indeed to who we are.
Whereas Rappaport saw ritual as redressing certain effects of language and 
hence as a necessary complement to language as a constitutive element of 
human society or the human condition, it is more precise and truer to his 
source in J.L. Austin to say that if language in its semantic or locutionary 
dimensions generates alternatives and uncertainty, in the senses Rappaport 

144	
Michael Lambek
explicates, language simultaneously generates certainty or at least commit-
ment in its pragmatic or illocutionary dimensions.11 This is more in line with 
the reading of Austin offered by Cavell in which every utterance may carry the 
illocutionary entailment of meaning what we say (1976) and equally imposes 
the requirement of an acknowledgement on the part of the addressee. Even to 
say ‘yes’ or ‘I know’ are performative acts. As Cavell himself says, they are 
‘similar to “I promise” in a specific respect … namely, that you give others your 
word’. Cavell continues, ‘this connection (this inner connection…) between 
claiming to know and making a promise … reveals human speech to be radi-
cally, in each uttered word, ethical. Speaking, or failing to speak, to another is 
as subject to responsibility, say to further response, as touching, or failing to 
touch, another’ (2010: 320–21).
Rappaport can be read to argue that what ritual does is to extend and elabo-
rate this function of language, to shore it up against what also concerns Cavell, 
namely scepticism and the recognition that ordinary language is ‘founded on 
nothing but itself’ (Laugier 2005: 87). Cavell’s response is to situate the pre-
cariousness of the ordinary. ‘One struggle is between criteria (i.e., the ordi-
nary) and scepticism (the desire for the empty, freedom from myself); another 
is between the ordinary and the aphoristic (the desire for the transcendental, 
for a satisfaction out of the ordinary that is not provided by the provision of 
language games…)’ (Cavell 2005: 170). The ordinary is precarious insofar as 
criteria are not ‘the means by which the existence of something is established 
with certainty’. Cavell’s is a kind of intellectual post-religious stance and one 
might note in comparison how ritual in Rappaport’s argument is meant to 
offset scepticism and to provide at least moments of certainty or a glimpse of 
what certainty might be, as well as how it is religion that offers the aphoristic 
or transcendental.
As Maurice Bloch has argued (2004), ritual shifts the weight or balance 
from the locutionary to the illocutionary function or force of ordinary speak-
ing such that the latter comes to outweigh the former and moreover is wit-
nessed or authorized by more than merely a single speaker and addressee. This 
is especially evident with respect to what Rappaport (1999) called ultimate 
sacred postulates, which are in effect semantically empty (‘informationless’) 
utterances, and hence devoid of locutionary function or referential meaning, 
that are charged with illocutionary force. As parts of liturgical orders each 
sacred postulate also carries the weight of multiple invocations within the 
imagined past and present community. Established and reiterated in ritual, 
ultimate sacred postulates offer sanctification to more mundane utterances, as 
in blessings, curses or oaths.
Performance includes a spectrum from fundamental and profoundly real-
ized but highly formalized and specific ritual acts like the transubstantiation 
and ingestion of Christ, through those practices we refer to as simple eti-
quette, to the illocutionary force of any and every utterance. One can be put 
under a description as a god or a fellow human being, an invited dinner guest 

	
On the Immanence of Ethics	 145
or unwelcome neighbour, dignified or shamed. Performativity can transform 
tacit processes or understandings into explicit descriptions,12 acts into facts, 
or the inchoate into structure. It consigns to the background the range of what 
is possible but unsaid or undone while foregrounding the specificity of what is 
said or done and must now be acknowledged as said and done. Within any 
given social field, the divisions can become more elaborate and the criteria 
more specific, producing various modes of refinement, the sorts of distinc-
tions made evident in J.L. Austin’s (1979) wonderful discussion of excuses or 
in Jane Austen’s ironic attunement to social form.
Where I conducted fieldwork, from 1975 onwards in the western Indian 
Ocean island of Mayotte, exchanges of acts of Muslim prayer over and on 
behalf of one another were very common. But performativity is not uniformly 
positive. In Mayotte sorcery was sometimes described by lurid details of 
dancing naked on a new grave or bribing a spirit with a bloody sacrifice to do 
one’s bidding. But in the end, it was understood as someone proactively taking 
responsibility for, and satisfaction from, the misfortunes of others, through a 
performative act (Lambek 1993: 262). An act of sorcery is a kind of decisive 
acknowledgement to oneself before the fact that, should so-and-so fall ill, I am 
happy to consider this my doing. This is a deliberate act, but it is an act, as 
philosophers say, of placing something under a description. As in Zande 
witchcraft, the act of sorcery in Mayotte is understood as distinct from the 
direct material causes of the misfortune, whether understood as operating 
through nature, termites, amoral spirits or God. However, the performative 
act is at one level of abstraction from material causality beyond what the 
Zande and Evans-Pritchard (1937) call witchcraft; it is not spontaneous or 
unrecognized by the agent, not discernible in the bowels of the sorcerer. 
Moreover, its direct effects lie only in the ethical, not the material realm; it 
does not produce the misfortune, only the accountability for it. In Mayotte, to 
take on the responsibility or satisfaction for another’s misfortune is a deliber-
ate act of judgment or acknowledgment instantiated by means of a specific 
kind of utterance. And, no doubt, as a deliberate act it occurs with far less 
frequency than certain other performative acts, namely diagnoses or accusa-
tions of sorcery, would suppose. Given the possibility of Schadenfreude, there 
is room for ambiguity as to what one might have liked to do, but unlike the 
Azande, who cannot be sure whether the accusation against them is unjusti-
fied, persons in Mayotte know whether they committed sorcery, that is, 
whether they committed themselves to sorcery. The catch is that in the face of 
accusation they have no means to prove their innocence.
I have been giving pre-eminence to ritual rather than to bureaucratic 
regimes of ethics and hence putting aside the question of the sort of historical 
break marked by Weber, Foucault or Asad. My ‘framework of “ordinary ethics” 
… suggests that action is best [or first] understood in terms of the performa-
tive criteria which authorize it rather than in terms of an external body of 
thought which legitimates it’ (Alex Beliaev, personal communication, 2012).

146	
Michael Lambek
In sum, my argument for the immanence of ethics rests on the relationship 
between practice and performative acts. Practice and performance in my 
usage are not discrete phenomena but different modalities of action and dif-
ferent analytic lenses on it. While practice is conceptualized as relatively con-
tinuous and open, performance in the sense I use it here refers to acts that can 
be conceptualized as discrete, finite, precise, and as completed in the doing 
(though this does not preclude their repetition).13 Muslim practice is consti-
tuted through performative utterances like the b’ismillah, which confer crite-
ria on the segments of practice they initiate, whether starting a prayer, journey 
or meal. To borrow for one sentence from the language of cybernetics, perfor-
mance is practice divided and marked digitally, practice is performance 
extended analogically. Hence the relationship of practice to performance is 
one of the continuous to the discontinuous, the open to the finite, the free to 
the determined, the uncertain to the certain, or the ambiguous to the defini-
tive. By means of the performativity found in proclamations, people like 
uncertain bridegrooms or Azande accused of witchcraft no longer need to 
wonder about their actions but receive conclusive attribution and hence also a 
relatively clear framework with which to guide or interpret their subsequent 
practice.
I have been articulating practice, especially practical judgment, from the 
Aristotelian tradition, with a concept of performance, or rather performative-
ness, in Austin’s sense. Performative acts provide the means or criteria accord-
ing to which practical judgment is executed and distinct intentions or 
commitments are specified and clarified (Lambek 2010a). The utterance of a 
promise, say to show up for an event, is different from vague hopes that one 
will, and it can be further strengthened by swearing an oath. Promise and oath 
set up new relations between the parties involved, casting forward a moral 
space such that the relations between the parties are constituted by expecta-
tions and criteria through which subsequent practice will be articulated and 
evaluated, both by themselves and by others. It doesn’t mean that the promise 
will be kept but it does mean that not keeping it will be judged as a more or 
less spectacular failure of some kind. Discrete performances emerge from and 
are marked within the stream of practice; simultaneously, they articulate the 
practice that follows from them (and sometimes retroactively what led up to 
them), putting people and relationships under a particular description and 
providing their practice with the criteria through which it may be ascertained, 
defined, appreciated and evaluated.14
The proclaimed marriage of Aristotle and Austin may appear a somewhat 
unusual performative event, though hopefully not an infelicitous one. My argu-
ment does not contradict the initial concern with virtuous practice or practical 
judgment but rather moves beyond mere description of judgment to grasp how 
the criteria that constitute specific practices are established and instantiated, 
that is, to grasp the conditions or criteria that make practical judgment possible 
in the first place and that shape particular stretches of practice. However, if 

	
On the Immanence of Ethics	 147
performances articulate practice and make judgment possible and necessary, it 
is equally the case that new performances can only arise from the stream of 
practice, as products of practical judgment, for example, whether to address 
someone by a particular kin term or consult the oracle, how to acknowledge a 
gift or respond to a verbal address, when to perform an ancestral sacrifice, and 
so forth. In many instances, of course, access to authoritative consequential 
performance may be contested and constrained.
Social acts occur under a description or set of descriptions and initiate new 
descriptions, and we all operate with a set of criteria by which we can – or 
must – describe our own conduct, as well as that of others. One could distin-
guish relatively standard acts from contested and limited ones, as well as from 
surprising disruptions or contingent events – things like the arrival of Captain 
Cook, for example – that have no description to begin with or whose descrip-
tion may be fought over retroactively, even centuries later. The criteria that 
define acts as such or that are put into play in consequence of them are not 
universally shared, categorical (absolute) or entirely obvious; culture, history, 
religious traditions, public institutions, retroactive narrative and the relative 
power of distinct voices and interests articulate with whatever mental struc-
tures, forces and dispositions we have.
Many questions remain, for example the availability and specificity of dis-
tinct performative acts and the very large matter of the relationship of acting 
or doing to being, in both ordinary and exceptional forms of life. There is the 
perennial Jewish question of whether one is a Jew by virtue of birth, practice 
or interpellation; that is to say, which are the performative acts – or the orders 
or registers of such acts – that count? The same holds for hyphenated-Ameri-
cans (and others) of all kinds and, in some conversations, for gender and sexu-
ality, no less than for the matter of simple dignity. There is also the question of 
radically original acts and how beginnings are retroactively inscribed.15
Preliminary Conclusion
To sum up, before we can talk about moral engines, we need to know how we 
recognize what is good and distinguish it from what is not good, or less good. 
In order to do so we need criteria. So the question is, where do criteria for 
action and judgment – or for thinking about action and judgment – come 
from and how are they activated or put into play? I am less interested in 
whether they are given or constructed, universal or particular, derived from 
nature or from nurture, than in how they become foregrounded, relevant at 
particular times, places, events and circumstances. Insofar as the ethical 
depends on the establishment of specific criteria and commitment to them, it 
is intrinsic to registers of personhood, hence in the first instance kinship, and 
established by means of ritual, especially in what is constituted through litur-
gical orders and hierarchies of sanctity, hence of religion, and of contract and 

148	
Michael Lambek
precedent, hence of law and citizenship. These overlapping fields, registers 
and orders of personhood and relationality provide the tracks along which 
moral engines can run. Ethics is not an autonomous realm but is always part 
of a broader landscape.
One track along which criteria and commitments emerge is the culturally 
constituted life cycle, the ways in which infants are socialized, biological 
beings come to be committed to one another in the relationships we call 
kinship, young people are initiated into various kinds of community member-
ship, and adults, elders and ancestors are tasked with responsibility or granted 
deference. Such a perspective does not force us to distinguish the natural from 
the cultural but rather encourages us to look at how life unfolds by means of 
performative acts, from spontaneous responses between mother and child 
through the explicit and elaborated ones we call ritual. Ethics is simply an 
aspect of ordinary life, emerging in and through ordinary acts and shaping 
further acts. The ethical is intrinsic to the conjunction of language and action 
that constitutes ordinary human worlds, as inseparable from social action as 
mind is from body.
Harder questions include the following. Assuming that criteria do not 
remain stable and constant, what accounts for the presence, kind and differen-
tiation of criteria? What enables or authorizes the performative acts that put 
criteria into play? And how is it that when criteria conflict or are incommen-
surable, some become more relevant or salient than others? Can we talk about 
contexts – social fields, cultures, historical periods, religious traditions or 
movements – in which there are more or fewer criteria in play? Can there be 
too few criteria, or too many? If criteria form a condition for moral thought 
and action, can they also inhibit or constrain it, in certain circumstances their 
very number or clutter getting in the way of moral insight? I am thinking here 
of the ways in which criteria constitute and elaborate social hierarchy, inhibit 
social mobility and produce shame or complacency as well as excellence.
Conversely, what disables performative acts or reduces their availability or 
consistency, such that there is a diminishment in the kinds and coherence of 
acts and the forms of fine ethical discrimination they provide, hence fewer 
criteria by which to orient and evaluate practice, exercise judgment or 
acknowledge one’s own actions, commitments and relationships as well as 
those of others? The result would be not so much a rise in unethical or immoral 
behaviour (except possibly from an external perspective) as a loss of precision, 
a thinning or flattening of the ethical terrain, not Auschwitz but anomie. A 
broader question is what are the right sorts of criteria? Criteria need to articu-
late with one another and with the world. We might argue, for example, that 
there needs to be an attunement between available criteria and the sorts of 
tasks Erik Erikson (1950) attributed to the various phases of the life cycle, suit-
ably calibrated to cultural differences.
Ethics then is not something found or generated entirely within us, sponta-
neous urges, needs or desires to care for the self or care for others, nor some 

	
On the Immanence of Ethics	 149
force that comes from the outside like fear of punishment or social shaming, 
nor yet is it described by some intersection or fusion of the internal and exter-
nal, like guilt or conscience. These models each place culture and social action 
at some distance from the individual. I begin instead with a kind of Weberian 
or Geertzian understanding that human being is itself always already cultur-
ally constituted and that meaning and meaningfulness are critical to existence, 
and further, and more specifically, that what Geertz calls models of the world 
and models for living in it must reasonably coincide. Meanings and models are 
not simply in the air, not purely ideal; rather, they are enacted and re-enacted 
in performative acts, through illocutionary force. Hence to move to another 
(mixed) set of predecessors, like Durkheim and Wittgenstein, I see ritual as 
intrinsic to society and to human being in the world with others.
Coda on Irony
The final reason I speak of the immanence of the ethical is the human recogni-
tion of the limits to, or the limitations of, what I have said about the conjunc-
tion of performance and practice. Human beings acknowledge the inevitability 
of difficulty, lapses, competing obligations, incommensurable, imposed and 
arbitrary criteria, and sometimes the inadequacy or sheer absence of any cri-
teria with which to face a given situation. These matters have been the subject 
of much tragedy, both written and lived. A poignant modern instance is 
Sophie’s Choice,16 in which a mother has no criteria for selecting which of her 
children will die and no criteria for justifying her choice, hence an act she is 
unable to acknowledge.
Thus, if the subject of ethics, qua philosophical, poetic or religious discourse, 
must account first for the possibility and necessity in the human situation for 
discriminating what to do, it must also explore the void or tragedy of the exhaus-
tion or absence of criteria with which to make judgments and our scepticism 
concerning them. Making criteria available is part of the work of culture (or 
social life) and a feature of action. Conversely and concomitantly, recognition of 
the limits of criteria and of the impossibility of ever being completely or consist-
ently ethical (and, paradoxically, sometimes failing in its own recognition of 
impossibility) is part of the work of philosophy, that is, of ethical reflection, and 
of therapy. In both making criteria available, unquestionable and authoritative 
and in reflecting on their limits, religion – or the kinds of practices and reflec-
tions we now place under the name of religion – has played a central role. The 
human condition is not a simple state of nature and it is not a state of innocence. 
In this respect, the expulsion from the Garden of Eden offers a more sophisti-
cated account than most evolutionary psychology.
At the threshold of necessity and impossibility, ethical recognition is not 
only tragic but ironic.17 Witchcraft, in Evans-Pritchard’s famous argument, is 
supposed to explain unfortunate events. But it also raises a good deal of 

150	
Michael Lambek
uncertainty. One cannot know before the fact who the witch is, or where and 
when a witch will strike next. One cannot even know whether one may be 
accused of being a witch oneself, or even whether the accusation might be 
correct. In fact, the presumption or diagnosis of witchcraft raises more ques-
tions than it answers. Who was the witch responsible for this event? Who are 
the witches among us? Why, really, do they act as they do? What, actually, am 
I capable of doing? (Lambek 2003: 7). The accused responds by acknowledging 
the possibility that he is a witch. The ethical scene here affords a kind of irony 
that is not merely the irony that we cannot know the intentions of others or 
that as we plan our life projects and programmes, they are being undermined 
by other forces. Rather, it is the recognition that we cannot fully know our own 
intentions. This is of course not restricted to the Azande or to witchcraft. As 
Paul Antze has aptly put it, 
If it is true, as Freud says, that much of our life is driven by impulses lying outside of 
consciousness, and that the unconscious consists precisely in what is opposed or 
contrary, what is ‘incompatible with the ego,’ then it becomes much harder to be 
sure what our actions mean or even who is acting. To what extent are we the authors 
of anything we do? Can we ever know our own intentions? Does knowing make a 
difference? (Antze 2003: 104, emphasis in original)
Or, as I have put it (after Alexander Nehamas), ‘What irony frequently throws 
into question is intentionality itself’ (Lambek 2003: 10, emphasis in original). 
Whatever the status we ascribe to the unconscious, there is the question of 
how we find ourselves in the language games we do and how we face or tran-
scend the arbitrariness of the claims we have made as to who we are (Lear 
2011). For Lear this can be aspirational rather than tragic.18 No account of the 
ethical would be complete without recognizing these matters. The questions 
are how ethical subjects recognize them, how discursive forms, rituals and 
therapeutic or disciplinary practices enable or conceal them, and how claims 
of moral effectiveness or fulfilment may contain their own undoing.
Here is a final illustration of a limit to the arguments I have made so far. In 
a recent essay, Didier Fassin (2014) takes up a documentary film about a 
Palestinian mother whose child, suffering from a life-threatening illness, is 
taken to an Israeli hospital.19 The mother thanks the doctors, wishing for her 
son to be cured so that he can grow up to become a suicide bomber. Fassin 
reads her statement as performative, but equally thinks that it is unclear what 
kind of performative is being enacted. There is a level of irony in the sense that 
the mother herself may not know what she wants or means, at least not con-
sistently, or that she is saying different things to different audiences, perhaps 
in different voices. While a clear performative act can establish criteria, an 
ambiguous one can hardly do the same. The example illustrates how one and 
the same utterance can look different depending on whether it is understood 
in reference to pre-existing criteria, thus as on-going practice, in my sense, or 
as establishing new criteria, as performative, but to what effect. This returns 

	
On the Immanence of Ethics	 151
us to Rappaport’s gradation between ordinary acts and the more elaborate 
constructions we call ritual and liturgical orders and why significant perform-
atives are embedded within the latter – both to abstract them more conclu-
sively from the stream of practice and so that participants and witnesses can 
know precisely what kind of performative acts they are jointly engaged in and 
whether the felicity conditions are met.
The ambivalence of the Palestinian woman adds a final point. If I have tried 
to articulate a connection between Aristotle on practice and Austin on action, 
the third figure lurking in this chapter has been Freud.20 I cannot articulate 
the relationship between Aristotle or Kierkegaard and Freud as lucidly as Lear, 
nor the relationship between Austin and Freud as subtly as Cavell, but like 
Cavell and Lear I want to articulate philosophy with psychoanalysis (and both 
with anthropology), in a way that doesn’t mistake mind and emotion for finally 
clear-cut cognitive, social, neurological or genetic forces or mechanisms. 
Instead, ‘The pervasive irony of the human condition [lies in] the unfathom-
ability of the sources of our judgment and action’ (Lambek 2010b: 722).
Michael Lambek is professor of anthropology and Canada Research Chair 
at the University of Toronto Scarborough. In 2016–2017 he was a fellow 
at the Wissenschaftskolleg zu Berlin, and interim editor of Hau. Relevant 
publications include The Weight of the Past (Palgrave Macmillan, 2002), The 
Ethical Condition (Chicago, 2015), Four Lectures on Ethics (with Veena Das, 
Webb Keane and Didier Fassin, Hau Books, 2015), and Ordinary Ethics (ed. 
Fordham 2010).
Notes
I dedicate this chapter to Saba Mahmood, a brilliant, forceful thinker and pioneer in the 
anthropology of ethics, politics, and religion.
  1.	 My work is supported by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of 
Canada and the Canada Research Chairs programme. Earlier versions were presented at 
the Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton; the Department of Anthropology, Berkeley; 
and the Institute on Culture, Religion, and World Affairs, Boston University. My thanks 
go to Didier Fassin, Nancy Scheper-Hughes and Bob Hefner, respectively, as well as to 
very attentive audiences. Since the Aarhus conference, much of the material in this 
chapter has been considerably extended and developed as ‘The Ethical Condition’, 
Chapter One of my book, The Ethical Condition: Essays on Action, Person, and Value 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015). Many passages here are similar or repro-
duced verbatim, with permission of the University of Chicago Press. 
  2.	 I mean of course function in the mathematical sense, not the organic or Radcliffe-
Brownian one.
  3.	 Veena Das (2007) draws a perceptive distinction between voice and volubility, a point I 
have been reminded of by Anna Kruglova (2015), who is putting it to excellent use. My 
ideas about ethics have developed in conjunction with a continuing interpretation of a 
body of ethnographic material from fieldwork conducted in the western Indian Ocean: 
in a village on the island of Mayotte since 1975; and in the city of Majunga in northwest 

152	
Michael Lambek
Madagascar since the early 1990’s. Attention to Malagasy spirit possession has privileged 
in my thinking questions of voice and action, that is, of ethics, first, because possession 
is itself a kind of meta-commentary, at once serious and ironic, about personhood and 
ethical life; second, because it is an intensified form of living with others; and third, 
because it sets up the challenge of showing how even speech and action conducted in a 
state of dissociation and as someone other than oneself is nonetheless deeply ethically 
informed. For one thing, it heightens questions of the relationship of action to passion 
that I take to be central to ethics but do not take up here.
  4.	 Moreover, there is no consistent application of the terms ethics and morality, some 
writers applying them in more or less directly opposite senses from other writers.
  5.	 It could therefore be said that adherents of piety movements like those described by 
Mahmood (2005) act like good Durkheimians.
  6.	 For further discussion of practice and incommensurability, see Lambek 1993, and on the 
distinction between choice and judgment, Lambek 2008.
  7.	 Phronesis entails a conjunction of doing the right thing, feeling the right way about it and 
doing it for the right reasons; action, intention and feelings should be aligned. My thanks 
to Simon Lambek (personal communication) for phrasing it so succinctly for me.
  8.	 Where Keane (2010) places justification – the giving of reasons – as the distinguishing 
feature of ethics, I see it as secondary to judgment.
  9.	 The temporality of practice is a lesson learned from Bourdieu (1977), after Mauss.
10.	 However, to follow from Weber, if performative acts like those of the Zande oracle 
reduce uncertainty or produce certainty, that is not to say they alleviate anxiety or that 
their very existence may not produce or enhance it. Anticipating the results of the oracle 
would certainly not be a matter of equanimity for anyone whose name might be invoked.
11.	 I leave aside the perlocutionary; however, the opposition or tension might be compared 
with Plato’s conflict between philosophy and poetry (locutionary and perlocutionary).
12.	 Maurice Bloch (personal communication, 24 August 2013) challenges this point insofar 
as ‘The whole point about performatives is that they create something that does not exist 
before the performance. So they can’t possibly make explicit something which exists 
elsewhere’. But I am saying that rendering the tacit into the explicit is precisely a matter 
of creating something new.
13.	 Elsewhere I speak of taboos as ‘continuous performatives’ and such a usage might be 
closer to Butler on gender or Goffman on everyday life. These usages are still closer to my 
depiction of performance than of practice in the current chapter. In Lear’s terms (2011) 
they are all ‘pretending’.
14.	 In a somewhat different, possibly confusing, but not contradictory usage, ‘performances’ 
could be individual occurrences or instances of particular practices, where a ‘practice’ 
signifies such genres of acts as naming, thanking, accusing, blessing, marrying, initiating, 
terminating and so forth. Thus Harvey Sacks (1985) can write of ‘doing “being 
ordinary”’.
15.	 See Faubion (2011) on radical acts, Arendt (1998) on narration, and Lambek (2007) on 
sacrifice as beginning.
16.	 In the book by William Styron and subsequently the film, directed by Alan J. Pakula, a 
mother must decide which of her two children to save and which to give up to the mur-
derers at a Nazi death camp.
17.	 On the irony of ethics or the ethics of irony, Kierkegaard is no doubt the master. Like 
spirit mediums or a good novelist, he makes his points through an ironic play of voices. 
For a recent foray into this terrain, see Lear (2011) and also Nehamas (1998), whose 
otherwise excellent philosophical account of irony largely omits Kierkegaard.
18.	 Lear writes of irony as ‘pretense-transcending aspiring’ (2011: 20) and as ‘a peculiar form 
of committed reflection’ (21, his emphasis).
19.	 Shlomi Eldar, Precious Life.
20.	 Arendt on action is also buried here.

	
On the Immanence of Ethics	 153
References
Antze, Paul. 2003. ‘Illness as Irony in Psychoanalysis’, in Michael Lambek and Paul 
Antze (eds), Illness and Irony: On the Ambiguity of Suffering in Culture. New York: 
Berghahn Books, pp. 102–21.
Arendt, Hannah. 1998 [1958]. The Human Condition. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Asad, Talal. 2003. Formations of the Secular: Christianity, Islam, Modernity. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press.
Austin, J.L. 1976. How To Do Things with Words. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 . 1979. ‘A Plea for Excuses’, in O. Urmson and G.J. Warnock (eds), Philosophical 
Papers. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 175–204.
Bloch, Maurice. 2004. Ritual History and Power. New York: Berg.
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1977. Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Cavell, Stanley. 1976. Must We Mean What We Say? Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
 . 2005. ‘Responses’, in Russell Goodman (ed.), Contending with Stanley Cavell. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 157–76.
 . 2010. Little Did I Know. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Das, Veena. 2007. Violence and the Descent into the Ordinary. Berkeley: University of 
California Press.
Durkheim, Emile. 1973. Emile Durkheim on Morality and Society, ed. R. Bellah. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Erikson, Erik. 1950. Childhood and Society. New York: Norton.
Evans-Pritchard, E.E. 1937. Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic among the Azande. Oxford: 
Clarendon.
Fassin, Didier. 2014. ‘In Praise of Treason: The Parallel Lives of Philosophy and 
Anthropology’, in Veena Das, Michael D. Jackson, Arthur Kleinman, Bhrigupati 
Singh (eds.), The Ground Between: Anthropologists Engage Philosophy. Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press. 
Faubion, James. 2011. An Anthropology of Ethics. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Hacking, Ian. 1999. The Social Construction of What? Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Keane, Webb. 2010. ‘Minds, Surfaces, and Reasons in the Anthropology of Ethics’, in 
M. Lambek (ed.), Ordinary Ethics: Anthropology, Language, and Action. New York: 
Fordham University Press, pp. 64–83.
Kruglova, Anna. 2015. ‘Anything Can Happen: Everyday Morality and Social Theory in 
Russia’. Ph.D. thesis, University of Toronto.
Laidlaw, James. 2014. The Subject of Virtue: An Anthropology of Ethics and Freedom. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lambek, M. 1993. Knowledge and Practice in Mayotte: Local Discourses of Islam, 
Sorcery, and Spirit Possession. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
 . 2003. ‘Introduction’, in Michael Lambek and Paul Antze (ed.), Illness and 
Irony: On the Ambiguity of Suffering in Culture. New York: Berghahn Books, pp. 
1–19.
 . 2007. ‘Sacrifice and the Problem of Beginning: Reflections from Sakalava 
Mythopraxis’, Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 13(1): 19–38.
 . 2008. ‘Virtue and Value’, Anthropological Theory 8(2): 133–57.

154	
Michael Lambek
 . 2010a. ‘Towards an Ethics of the Act’, in Michael Lambek (ed.), Ordinary 
Ethics: Anthropology, Language, and Action. New York: Fordham University Press, 
pp. 39–63.
 . 2010b. ‘How To Make Up One’s Mind: Reason, Passion, and Ethics in Spirit 
Possession’, University of Toronto Quarterly 79(2), Special issue on Models of 
Mind, ed. Marlene Goldman and Jill Matus, pp. 720–41.
 . 2015. ‘The Ethical Condition’, in Michael Lambek (ed.), The Ethical Condition: 
Essays on Action, Person, and Value. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 
1–39.
Laugier, Sandra. 2005. ‘Rethinking the Ordinary: Austin after Cavell’, in Russell 
Goodman (ed.), Contending with Stanley Cavell. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
pp. 82–99.
Lear, Jonathan. 2000. Happiness, Death, and the Remainder of Life. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
 . 2011. A Case for Irony. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Macpherson, C.B. 1973. Democratic Theory: Essays in Retrieval. Oxford: Clarendon.
Mahmood, Saba. 2005. Politics of Piety. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Mattingly, Cheryl. 2012. ‘Two Virtue Ethics and the Anthropology of Morality’, 
Anthropological Theory 12: 161–84.
Nehamas, Alexander. 1998. The Art of Living. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Rappaport, Roy. 1999. Ritual and Religion in the Making of Humanity. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Sacks, Harvey. 1985. ‘On Doing “Being Ordinary”’, in Structures of Social Action. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 413–29.
Sidnell, Jack. 2010. ‘The Ordinary Ethics of Everyday Talk’, in M. Lambek (ed.), 
Ordinary Ethics: Anthropology, Language, and Action. New York: Fordham 
University Press, pp. 123–39.

8
Where in the World are Values? 
Exemplarity and Moral Motivation
Joel Robbins
As will quickly become apparent, this is a chapter about values. It is concerned 
with providing a socially and psychologically realistic answer to the question 
of where people find values in the world. I also mean it to be a contribution to 
the rapidly growing anthropological discussion of morality. With a few notable 
exceptions, anthropologists only began to discuss morality and ethics system-
atically in the last decade or so, but they have quickly made up for lost time 
and are currently producing a large number of studies in this area (for a wide-
ranging recent account, see Laidlaw 2013; for a partial review of some impor-
tant issues in the emerging literature, see Robbins 2012a). In general terms, I 
want to suggest that the topic of values should be central to this developing 
discussion (Robbins 2012b). In the course of writing this chapter, however, I 
have found that in working out the problem of where in the world people find 
values, I have had little space to explicitly discuss the link between values and 
morality. Given this, I thought I might mention here at the outset that I follow 
Durkheim (1974) in defining moral facts as ones that awaken in people a com-
bined sense of both duty and desire. It is values, I think, that account, at least 
in part, for the desire part of that mixture – the desire we have to do what is 
good or, put otherwise, our moral motivation. What people actually do will 
depend not only on how they balance the competing desires different values 
awaken within them, but on how they balance these desires with the feelings 
of duty different moral facts also arouse. For this reason, the relationship 
between what people value and what they do by way of carrying out moral 
actions is very complex. But in the background of the chapter that follows is 
the notion that there is some relationship between values, desires and moral 
actions that is worth investigating, and the linked idea that for this reason 
values are, in the terms of this collection, important moral engines that have 
the ability to act as drivers of people’s moral behaviours.

156	
Joel Robbins
This is an absurdly compressed and rough sketch of the moral social psychol-
ogy that underlies this chapter. It is a moral social psychology that gives an 
important place to values, and in order to be both psychologically and socially 
realistic as a whole, this moral psychology needs to include a psychologically 
and socially realistic account of how people come to experience values as 
engines of moral force. This kind of account is what I am working towards in the 
current chapter. Up until several decades ago, anthropologists and many soci-
ologists felt they had a secure answer to the questions of where values exist in 
the world and where people encounter them. This answer asserted that human 
beings are cultural animals, values are part of culture, and people receive their 
values by being socialized into cultures. But the recent loss of confidence in the 
culture concept has rendered this answer less persuasive than it once was. I 
begin, then, by discussing the social scientific loss of faith in the notion of 
culture and the problem this raises of how to talk about where values exist in the 
world. Having started there, I will not from that point on say much about moral-
ity, but I hope I have said enough to indicate that it is the horizon towards which 
my arguments here are ultimately heading.
If one looks around anthropology today, it is hard to miss that we are in the 
midst of what one might call a strongly anti-cultural moment. If the study of 
culture is about observing and explaining repeated patterns of behaviour and 
the recurring complexes of meaning or understanding that shape them, then 
an anthropology that is all about emergence, novelty and ever-shifting assem-
blages or networks of people, things and ideas cannot but reject the notion. 
Similarly, if we hold that the world is created anew every moment, culture is 
too slow, too heavy, too plodding to be of much analytic use. Better to approach 
our object of study by developing models of process and becoming if we want 
to account for a world we assume is much more fluid than the world of culture 
ever was, or was ever meant to be.
I realize this is a very hurried account of what is at most only one part of the 
contemporary anthropological zeitgeist. By way of fleshing it out, I will later 
try to give a slightly more developed account of one route anthropology fol-
lowed in arriving at this anti-cultural point. But I want to allude to this aspect 
of the zeitgeist briefly at the outset because the fact that this anti-cultural 
emphasis is gaining momentum at present – that it appears to be attracting a 
lot of anthropology’s best theoretical energies these days – provides an impor-
tant frame for the argument I want to make here. Indeed, this argument arises 
from the fact that while I find myself still relatively happy with the concept of 
culture – especially with that version of the concept in which a cultural 
anthropological appreciation of its more idealist aspects is complemented by 
the tools linguistic anthropology affords us for paying greater attention to how 
it is realized and reproduced in interaction – I also recognize that culture is a 
harder and harder sell these days. Given that I lean in this contrary or even old 
fashioned cultural direction, I have to ask myself what someone with these 
inclinations can productively say now.

	
Exemplarity and Moral Motivation	 157
I have had two different impulses concerning how to respond to this ques-
tion. One would be to launch a full-fledged defence of the concept of culture, 
working along the way to call into question the importance if not the existence 
of the emergent and fluid aspects of the world by stressing, among other 
things, the massively structured aspects of the lives we do in fact mostly live. 
In my quieter moments, I realize that mounting a full-scale defence of the 
culture concept along these lines would be a big job, perhaps taking up so 
much time that the moment at which it makes sense to offer it would have 
passed by the time I was ready to put it in play. Moreover, it may in any case 
be too early to undertake such a defence. Better perhaps to wait until anti-
cultural anthropology has matured enough that its strongest arguments have 
risen to the surface and can be fully identified and directly taken on. And 
finally, I have a nagging sense that perhaps it would be best not to move imme-
diately to defending the notion of culture against these attacks, but rather to 
begin by asking what new things one might learn about culture by exploring 
some of the issues they raise.
Mindful of these concerns, and intrigued in particular by the possibility 
that one might learn something new about culture by giving recent anti-cul-
tural criticisms their due, my second, more modest impulse has won out. This 
one points to the project of asking how, assuming that culture may not be 
quite as powerful a force in shaping social life as anthropologists once thought, 
we might be able to account in new ways for the existence of some of the most 
important cultural things we were once so adept at using the culture concept 
to identify and analyse. Some years ago, I wrote an essay in this vein asking 
how we might still think about ritual in Durkheimian terms from the point of 
view of theoretical frameworks that hold that there is no such thing as society 
(Robbins 2010). Here I want to take on another classic object of cultural study 
– values – and ask if we might discover where in social life they exist. This 
becomes a pressing question once we set aside, at least for the purposes of 
argument, the claim that they exist within an enduring, routinely reproduced 
phenomenon called culture.
As it happens, the question of where values might be said to exist is not a 
new one; it arose well before our current anti-cultural debates, emerging at 
roughly the same time in fact as some of the ideas that eventually contributed 
to forming the now contested modern notion of culture. At the risk of remain-
ing a bit longer at a relatively abstract level of argument, I want to review some 
of the history of this question of where values exist as a way of moving into my 
main argument.
It is important to recognize at the outset that the use of the term value with 
which we are familiar is not ancient.1 It first takes off in the middle of the nine-
teenth century, when philosophers pick it up from political economists 
(Schnädelbach 1984: 161). From that point on, discussions about the nature of 
values play a key role in German philosophy in particular, and in the emerging 
social sciences as well, until the 1920s, after which they largely fade from the 

158	
Joel Robbins
social scientific scene outside of their original home in economics. For our 
purposes, it is important to note that values became a preoccupation in the 
late nineteenth century just as the scientific-materialist worldview finally 
entrenched itself as the dominant modern understanding of the nature of 
existence. In that worldview, all that exists is matter, and matter is in itself 
devoid of meaning or purpose. What exists is not good or bad, beautiful or 
ugly, true or false (the classic triumvirate of value dimensions) – it simply is. 
In this worldview, as we all know, there is no intellectually legitimate way to 
move from ‘is’ to ‘ought’ – from fact to value. This way of construing matters 
left philosophers with a key question – what is the mode of existence of values? 
If the good, or the beautiful, or the true by definition cannot exist, since what 
exists is matter and matter is meaningless or without value in itself, then what 
is their mode of being in the world? It is this question that gets the philosophy 
of value off the ground.
As social scientists, we are most familiar with this set of problems from 
Weber, who was steeped in some of the German debates about the nature of 
value I alluded to above. He bequeathed to the social sciences the enormously 
influential view, one that comes out of this philosophical problematic (and 
ultimately out of Protestantism, but that is another story – see Albrow 1990; 
Scheler 1973: 67), that the world (including human existence) considered in 
material terms is a chaotic flux which only acquires meaningful shape when 
human beings impose their values upon it. In this view, values exist in human 
thought and are expressed in human action, and such action in turn orders the 
world in ways humans can comprehend. The claim that values are ideas that 
motivate action is thus one answer to the question of the mode of being of 
values. But as an answer to the question of how values exist that aims to 
explain why human beings do not live in chaotic, meaningless worlds, it leaves 
one problem unresolved. This is the problem of why it is that each human 
being does not impose his/her own unique set of values on the world, leading 
social life to take the form of a cacophony of opposed projects each based on 
wholly singular meaningful structurings of the chaos of material existence. 
This would only lead to another kind of unformed meaninglessness – a human 
war of all against all over whose meaningful orderings will rule the day. The 
anthropological notion of culture is a solution to this second problem of how 
values as ideas that motivate action can create an orderly world, for it suggests 
that values are shared between members of a society. People who share values 
will, on this model, all impose order on the chaos of existence in similar ways, 
thus allowing them to live relatively orderly lives together.
Various versions of this cultural solution to the problem of how values exist 
in the world and order it in meaningful ways served anthropology well for 
much of the twentieth century (which is perhaps why the issue of values has 
not of late been a central concern in the discipline). But in the last twenty-five 
years or so this cultural solution has in many quarters been abandoned. For a 
large number of contemporary anthropologists, the proximate cause of this 

	
Exemplarity and Moral Motivation	 159
abandonment has been the postmodern turn – a phrase which I realize now 
cannot but sound somewhat quaint, almost nostalgic, but which does usefully 
name an intellectual movement the effects of which still mark the intellectual 
scene today, at least in anthropology.
It was the postmodern turn which made notions of shared culture seem too 
deterministic, too disrespectful of the reality of chaos and the true individual-
ity of persons, each of whom many anthropologists came to believe does have 
his or her own individual position in and perspective on the world. In a longer 
view, one that is just now coming into focus, it may well prove to be the case 
that the abandonment of notions of shared culture was in fact the result of 
another strong turn of the screw of the scientific worldview and its denial of 
the meaningfulness of what exists, a turn to which the postmodern critique of 
meaning and structure unwittingly lent a hand and which is evidenced, for 
example, in the contemporary ascendency of scientizing models across the 
social sciences and humanities, including in many of the anti-cultural theo-
retical positions with which I began. But regardless of the reasons for our 
current situation, it is certainly true that these days many anthropologists are 
not inclined to see the idea of shared culture as a good answer to the question 
of how values exist in the world, and are in anti-cultural terms more interested 
in documenting the world’s chaotic or emergent aspects than its orderly and 
predictable ones. What I want to propose here is that if we accept that this is 
the case – that values are not likely to be as fully shared as anthropologists 
once supposed because we can no longer assume they are part of an enduring 
shared phenomenon called culture – then we will need to face anew the ques-
tion of where in the world values exist. In providing a fresh answer to this 
question, I want to suggest that values exist in the first instance in what I am 
going to call exemplars or examples, or at least that people first encounter 
them in the world in this form.
What, then, is an example? I ultimately want to suggest that examples are 
concretely existing realizations of single values in their fullest forms. Having 
offered this definition, I realize that it is going to take some argumentative 
work to make it convincing, or even comprehensible, so let me start a bit 
further back in my chain of reasoning. A good place to turn at the outset is the 
work of the Italian philosopher Alessandro Ferrara (2008). In a book entitled 
The Force of the Example, Ferrara argues that we easily recognize two kinds of 
forces in the world. There is the force of what exists, or what he calls the force 
of things (1). And there is also, at least for human beings, the force of ‘what 
ought to be the case – the force of ideas’ (2, emphasis removed). These two 
forces, Ferarra recognizes, align with the modern dichotomy between fact and 
value, or the real and the ideal (ix). But as we have seen, this leaves us with the 
problem of the nature of the existence of values, for if the ideal or values are 
defined precisely by not existing as material things in the world, then where do 
they exist? And if they exist only in people’s minds, why is the world not a 
chaotic mess of persons each pursuing wholly unrelated projects? Though 

160	
Joel Robbins
Ferrara’s questions are close to these, he does not pose them in precisely this 
way. But he nonetheless does offer us some help in answering them when he 
proposes that the two sides of the dichotomy between what is and what should 
be needs to be supplemented by a middle term – ‘the force of what is as it 
should be or the force of the example’ (2–3, emphasis removed). ‘[T]he force 
of the example’, he goes on to assert, ‘is the force of what exerts appeal on us … 
by virtue of the singular and exceptional congruence that what is exemplary 
realizes and exhibits between the order of its own reality and the order of the 
normativity to which it responds’ (3). To put this in the terms I will use from 
now on, an example is a realization of a value in the world, and it solicits our 
attention for precisely this reason.
When I claim that an example is the realization of a value in the world, I 
mean this in a somewhat special sense. In some respects, all human action real-
izes, or at least aims to realize, something the actor defines as valuable in the 
context in which the actor undertakes it. This is a very common view of human 
motivation and I do not intend to counter it here. Given this view, is it also right 
to say that every action, as the realization of a value in the world, is exemplary? 
If this is true, then I cannot be saying anything very useful about examples.
As a way around this problem, I want to sketch much too briefly an account 
of how values operate in action that suggests that most actions, even if moti-
vated by values, do not fully realize any one of them and are thus not exemplary. 
Let me start by asserting that in any social milieu there are numerous values in 
play. I am going to take this claim about the plurality of values in any given 
society for granted here, rather than argue for it (as I have done elsewhere – 
Robbins 2013), and I hope that readers find it plausible enough on the basis of 
what they know about social life to let it stand for the purposes of my present 
argument. Now, given that in every society there exist a number of values, we 
can go on to note that some of these values work together such that realizing 
one value helps you to realize another one you count as even higher and so on, 
in what Nancy Munn (1986) refers to as chains of value transformation. For 
example, on Gawa Island, Papua New Guinea – a society in which people par-
ticipate in the system of Kula exchange made famous by Malinowski – if you are 
a man you plant taro and yam gardens to give over to the family of the husband 
of one of your female relatives so that this family can eventually give you a Kula 
valuable and a canoe that you can further exchange along Kula paths in order to 
increase your range of spatio-temporal control and thus bolster your fame 
(Munn 1986: 123–29). At each step you are acting in terms of a value, though 
the ultimate purpose of the whole chain is only given by the final transformation 
that increases your fame, an outcome which realizes the chain’s overall value. 
Much of the time, you are realizing only lower level values in actions that will 
have been of limited import if the chain is never completed.
By contrast with sets of values that link up in chains of value transforma-
tion, there are also values that do not work together in this way, but rather 
conflict, such that realizing one precludes realizing the other. Among some 

	
Exemplarity and Moral Motivation	 161
Papua New Guinea groups, for example, giving the gift of a whole pig to one’s 
affines so that they will reciprocate with a gift of access to a particular piece of 
land precludes giving that same pig to one’s clan-mates to secure support in 
disputes. When faced with an exclusive choice between values of this kind, 
people often hedge, giving some smaller gifts of pork in each direction, real-
izing both values partially but neither one of them fully.
In both of these kinds of value relationship – that of value chains and that 
of value conflicts – values are often, perhaps usually, compromised in action. 
Most actions either do not realize a value that is in itself of great importance, 
but only one that is a link in a chain oriented toward realizing another value, 
or they are driven by a mix of partial value considerations. This is why not 
every action is exemplary, even if all actions are motivated by values.2
Against the background of this argument that most actions do not realize 
peoples’ most important values, or realize them only in limited ways, I want to 
suggest that some actions stand out for accomplishing the opposite. There are 
some actions or products of action that realize important values in their fullest 
forms, or at least come close to this. It is these actions and their products that 
become exemplary and that have, as Ferrara puts it, a ‘force’ that solicits a 
special kind of attention or demand for appreciation from people. Examples, 
on this account, are social forms that realize a value to such a full extent. It is 
as embodied in examples in this way that values most forcefully or tangibly 
exist in social life.
Up to this point I have been discussing the tie between examples and values 
in relation to exemplary actions taken as a general phenomenon. But to render 
this argument realistic, we have to acknowledge that the appearance of exam-
ples is not random throughout social life. They do not occur, or at least people 
do not tend to encounter them, just anywhere and as performed by just 
anyone. In any given society there are specific people – living or historical – 
who are well known for having cultivated the ability to realize one or other 
value, and who thus stand as exemplary in relation to it. So one way people 
encounter examples in social life is in the form of exemplary persons. I also 
want to argue that perfected realizations of value can exist in certain kinds of 
institutions. Such value-perfected institutions most often take the form, I 
think, of rituals. Exemplifications of value probably also find more or less 
routine existence elsewhere in social life, for example in myth (Scheler 1987: 
146). But for present purposes, I will focus on exemplary people and rituals by 
way of trying to sketch in ethnographic terms where both we as analysts and 
the people we study find values existing in social life.
I will start with exemplary persons. In thinking about such people, we can 
draw on the work of Max Scheler, one of the most important of the late nine-
teenth- to early twentieth-century philosophers and sociologists of value. In 
his essay ‘Exemplars of Person and Leaders’, Scheler defines exemplars, much 
as we have here, as the coming together of an idea of a value and a person 
(134), or, as he also expresses his point, as ‘the cast of a value formed by 

162	
Joel Robbins
personhood’, using ‘cast’ here in the sense of a mould into which personhood 
must be fit in order to realize itself as valuable (139, emphasis in original). ‘We 
consider our exemplars’, Scheler further explains, ‘as something good, perfect, 
and something which ought to be’ (133). Moreover, we relate to exemplars 
most importantly on the basis of our ‘faith’ in them. This is not a religious 
faith, Scheler is quick to add, but faith ‘in the sense of a well-founded, eviden-
tial and true love, and of the full understanding of the knowledge of the exem-
plar and his value’ (144). Scheler’s reference to love here is not casual, for he 
famously developed a phenomenology of value perception in which the emo-
tions, and love and hate most prominently among them, are the ‘organs’ that 
perceive values in the world. But I refer to Scheler’s claim that we love our 
exemplars not as an opening to a discussion of its elaborate theoretical 
grounding, but rather to connect it with Ferrara’s claim that the exemplary 
exerts a force, that it draws us in and solicits a response. I will try to convince 
you that this holds up ethnographically in a moment. But to conclude laying 
out Scheler’s ideas, let me just add that it is on the basis of the connections 
such love forges and the motivations it provides that people come to strive to 
realize values in themselves. ‘[I]t is as if’, Scheler puts it, ‘human beings pull 
themselves up by such interhuman exemplary strings’ (143, emphasis in origi-
nal). This is why for Scheler, ‘What has a forming and grafting effect on our 
souls is not an abstract, universal moral rule but always, and only, a clear and 
intuitive grasp of the exemplarity of the person’ (134).
The approach to examining the existence and force of values in social life 
that Scheler has helped me to lay out encourages us to look ethnographically 
at which persons people in the societies we study treat as exemplary and at the 
values they realize. Where I did fieldwork, among the Urapmin of Papua New 
Guinea, the cast of exemplary characters is not in broad outlines hard to iden-
tify; there are some people the Urapmin talk about far more than others, 
report dreams about with great frequency, and clearly orient to in thinking 
about the possibilities life presents to them. Because the Urapmin as a rule do 
not casually gossip, the fact that they regularly discuss the doings of this rela-
tively small group of people is strong evidence of how important they are to 
them. Before looking at the exemplary quality of these characters in some 
detail, however, it will be useful for me to briefly introduce Urapmin society 
and the most general values that give it shape.
Finding Values among the Urapmin of Papua New Guinea
Urapmin is a community of approximately 390 people located in Papua New 
Guinea’s West Sepik Province. I have elsewhere described the primary tradi-
tional value that Urapmin people orient to as that of relationalism – a value 
that defines the creation and maintenance of relationships as the most impor-
tant things people do (Robbins 2004). While one can argue that relationalism 

	
Exemplarity and Moral Motivation	 163
is common throughout Melanesia – as evidenced, for example, by the strong 
tendency for people living in the region to find relation-making and maintain-
ing exchanges the most worthwhile of social activities – its preeminence is 
perhaps even more to the fore in societies like the Urapmin which are cog-
natic, a form of social organization that renders people constantly aware of 
their need to create relations of residence, realized kinship, work, and the like, 
none of which are constituted by structural rules that might cause them to 
appear of their own accord. Households, villages, work groups, soccer teams, 
churches and all other relational assemblages shift composition regularly in 
Urapmin, and everyone recognizes that it takes relational work to put them 
together and keep them going. For this reason, relationships are what the 
Urapmin are working to produce most of the time.
Just beneath relationalism in the traditional Urapmin value hierarchy are 
two values that can, when realized in particular ways, support people’s rela-
tional efforts. These are values that the Urapmin refer to as those of ‘wilful-
ness’ and ‘lawfulness’. One’s will (san) is the desiring part of the person, and it 
is the part that ‘pushes’ people to try to bring others into relationships and to 
keep them oriented to those relationships. It is a father’s wilfulness, for 
example, that leads him to push his son and his son’s new wife to live with him, 
rather than with her family, and then continues to push the new couple to 
garden with his family most days, rather than with the wife’s relatives. In con-
trast to such wilfulness, which aims to create new relationships or enforce the 
maintenance of existing relationships against the claims of competing ones, 
lawfulness consists in honouring the hold each already existing relationship 
has over one’s energy: a hold each relationship expresses by its demand that 
the legitimate expectations it establishes – most generally expectations for 
reciprocity and equivalent investment of attention – be met before any other 
relationship is attended to or any new relationship is established.
In order to fully serve the value of relationalism, people have to temper the 
full realization of the values of wilfulness and lawfulness. Developed to its 
furthest extent, the value of wilfulness constantly creates new relationships, 
letting older ones flame out as neglect and dispute take their toll. Lawfulness, 
for its part, when expressed most fully, meets only the demands of existing 
relationships and produces nothing new – an outcome that is equally unten-
able in a cognatic world where no relations can be assumed and none of neces-
sity will last, and thus all have to be wilfully made in the first instance. Given 
that an excess of either wilfulness and lawfulness is ultimately counter-pro-
ductive in relation to the paramount value of relationalism, the trick for most 
Urapmin is to learn to temper the full expression of either of these two subor-
dinate values, balancing the exercise of will in creating relationships with a 
commitment to lawfulness in maintaining them.
What I have presented in a nutshell is a basic sketch of three of the key 
values traditionally recognized by the Urapmin, and I have laid out the hierar-
chy that holds between them, such that wilfulness and lawfulness, though each 

164	
Joel Robbins
valued in itself to some extent, are ultimately subordinated to relationalism 
and usually only partially realized in the course of social life. But the argument 
about the mode of existence of values that this chapter has been laying out 
suggests that for people to come to know wilfulness and lawfulness as values, 
they need to encounter them in fully developed form as embodied in exem-
plars somewhere in their social worlds. People who exemplify these values in 
this sense, I want to suggest, are some of the ones that Urapmin people talk 
and dream about all the time.
Take Semis, for example. Semis is a man for whom many Urapmin feel great 
affection. He is most of the time a paragon of lawfulness. In 1977 the Urapmin 
converted themselves without the aid of missionaries to a vigorous version of 
charismatic Christianity that came to them in a revival movement that swept 
through Papua New Guinea. I cannot here tell the story of how the Urapmin 
became in their own understanding a completely Christian community at that 
time. But to understand how Semis lives his life and the bond many people feel 
to him as an exemplar, it helps to know that he was one of the leading figures in 
the revival, bravely helping to carry out the difficult and dangerous work of dis-
posing of the powerful bones of the ancestors that had been at the centre of 
traditional Urapmin religion. Since the revival, he has gone on to serve for many 
years as one of the main pastors in the community.
The Urapmin Christianity Semis preaches and that his congregation seeks 
to practice promotes lawful behaviour while wholly condemning displays of 
wilfulness, and Semis comes closer than most people to living out its dictates. 
He displays his lawful character in many different ways. He does not, for 
example, push others to meet his relational demands. As a result of this, he has 
remained for many years a widower, raising his sole daughter to young adult-
hood and forming with her the smallest, least relationally complex household 
one can imagine in Urapmin, where one needs at least one man and one 
woman to carry out the work required to keep a family alive. Semis also works 
hard to control feelings of anger that ‘arise’ when his relational expectations 
are violated. This means he is sometimes taken advantage of in exchange rela-
tions, as when over time he accepted without any attempt at redress that his 
gift of a bow to establish a trade friendship with an important visitor to his 
house was destined to go unreciprocated, despite his many visits to the recipi-
ent’s house in an effort to elicit the appropriate return. His success in keeping 
his anger at bay has given him a reputation as someone with an ‘easy’ heart, 
thought to be the ultimate cause of his lawful demeanour.
There are other people in Urapmin as committed to lawfulness as Semis, 
but most of them come close to falling into the role of what Urapmin call 
‘rubbish men’. Rubbish men are those so lacking in will that they are virtually 
without relationships. The Urapmin pity such people, rather than condemn 
them, but at the same time they do not hold them to be exemplary. Poor in the 
material resources one needs relationships to be able to produce in Urapmin, 
if rubbish men do not actively violate the law, they hardly fulfil it either. To 

	
Exemplarity and Moral Motivation	 165
fully realize lawfulness, one must both have relationships and meet the 
demands they put in place for reciprocal treatment, even as one does not push 
to expand into new relational territory. Semis manages to lawfully meet his 
relational obligations without any need for wilful expansion of them by virtue 
of his role as pastor – a position people support by sometimes giving him 
garden produce and by helping him to make and manage his own gardens. 
They do this for him more or less spontaneously (though he often wishes they 
would do more), and thus he does not need to push others in order to procure 
the resources he needs to lawfully relate to them. This makes him a paragon of 
robustly lived lawfulness – a kind of fully realized lawfulness that does not 
lead to social marginalization. Virtually no other Urapmin person can live like 
this, for they generally have to temper their realization of the value of lawful-
ness by putting their wills into play. But many of them admire Semis greatly. 
They go to him for advice, talk warmly about him in his absence, and fairly 
often they have dreams where they see Jesus take him to heaven.
It was not difficult during fieldwork to determine that people held Semis to 
be an exemplar. So many people made their regard for him clear in our conver-
sations that his status was obvious to me almost from the start. Things were 
otherwise with the primary exemplar of wilfulness in the community. 
Kinimnok, a fifty-year-old man, is loud, domineering, energetic and extrava-
gant in all sorts of ways, and he is clearly the most ostentatiously wilful 
Urapmin adult. One can observe the shape of fully realized wilfulness by 
looking at almost any area of Kinimnok’s behaviour and personality. He is, for 
example, an almost obsessive hunter. Hunting is a prestigious activity for 
Urapmin men, and hunting success provides men with the prestige-food 
resources to make wilfully expansive, high-profile, relation-creating gifts. But 
there is also a general recognition that hunting is no substitute for responsible 
garden work when it comes to feeding a household and meeting the lawful 
demands of a normal relational network. A good man will put some energy 
into hunting, the Urapmin say, but only as a sideline to his more serious and 
steady gardening work.
The point that men should not be overly involved in hunting, despite its 
occasionally great rewards, is expressed in myths and folktales in which men 
obsessed with hunting fare poorly in the end by comparison with their more 
garden-focused cross-cousins. It is also complexly embedded in people’s belief 
in the existence of a figure known as the Nuk Wanang or Marsupial Woman. 
The Marsupial Woman is a spirit guardian of the marsupials that humans hunt 
and eat. Sometimes she involves herself with men who hunt frequently. As a 
Marsupial Woman begins to have sexual relations with such a man and even-
tually marries him, she also gives him dreams telling him where to find game. 
This man then becomes a spectacularly successful hunter. But there is a down-
side to this arrangement, for eventually the Marsupial Woman becomes 
jealous of the hunter’s human spouse and begins to feel that she is giving up 
too many of her marsupial wards in return for too little from the hunter. At 

166	
Joel Robbins
this point, she begins to send notice of her dissatisfaction to him, causing him 
to have accidents while hunting and eventually killing him.
I knew several Urapmin men who, as they began to develop careers as suc-
cessful hunters, came to suspect that the Marsupial Woman was making over-
tures to them by giving them so much game. As soon as they had even a close 
brush with an accidental fall in the bush they stopped hunting regularly to 
avoid contracting a marriage with her. But this is not the case with Kinimnok. 
He has long been an extraordinarily successful hunter, and he openly pro-
claims that he owes his success in part to his marriage to the Marsupial 
Woman. One often sees him publicly clutching his chest in pain and announc-
ing that the Marsupial Woman is trying to kill him, but he has made no effort 
to break off his relationship with her by ceasing to hunt. Moreover, he has 
never foregone hunting in the face of the gardening difficulties his over-com-
mitment to the bush have caused him and his family. Once during my field-
work, things got so bad for Kinimnok in terms of staple garden foods that he 
was forced to buy a ripening taro garden from someone else in the community, 
a kind of purchase the Urapmin regard as very shameful. In his indulgent 
obsession with hunting, his acceptance of his marriage to the Marsupial 
Woman, and his failure to attend to the demands of routine subsistence 
chores, Kinimnok models what unbridled wilfulness looks like.
And that is just hunting. Kinimnok’s wilful streak is also attested to by his 
conjugal life, for his marriage to the Nuk Wanang is not his only irregular 
union. At a time when Christianity has called polygamy into question, and 
when very few men try it and even fewer succeed, Kinimnok has for many 
years maintained plural marriages with a changing array of women. His 
current connubial arrangement is particularly shocking to Urapmin sensibili-
ties. The Urapmin do all they can to erase any distinctions between natal 
children and step or adopted children, and growing up in a family for any 
reason confers all the rights of birth. Hence, when Kinimnok married the 
woman who is currently his senior wife and she brought with her a very young 
daughter, Kinimnok raised this daughter as his own. But when she reached 
puberty, he married her. Now he is married both to her and to her mother. The 
Urapmin recognize this arrangement as uncomfortably close to father-daugh-
ter incest and at best a very wilful act on Kinimnok’s part in relation to his 
senior wife.
Kinimnok’s overall personality is also marked by the regular display of wil-
fulness in interpersonal interaction. Particularly striking is how Kinimnok is 
quick to anger and to utter threats of physical violence, something other 
Urapmin rarely do. Some of Kinimnok’s truculence stems from his belief that 
other men are always attempting to seduce his wives. It is also fuelled by his 
(largely unfounded in my experience) worry that others are slandering him 
behind his back or threatening to fight with him. His fears of encroachment 
are so highly pitched, and his short fuse so easily ignited, that he cannot even 
live in a normal Urapmin village. Instead, he lives in his own homestead a 

	
Exemplarity and Moral Motivation	 167
short walk from a village where many of his closest associates live, keeping a 
safe distance from others who might incite his wilful jealousy and rage.
There is a deep irony to Kinimnok’s residential situation, however, and it 
points us towards his status as an exemplar of the value of wilfulness in its 
most fully realized form. This irony stems from the fact that although he 
resides outside of the village nearest to his house, Kinimnok is the person the 
village residents have elected to serve as their ‘alderman’ (Komiti) in the intro-
duced structure of formal government in contemporary Urapmin. In this role, 
he represents them to the leading state government figure in the community 
– the Councillor – and acts as the mediator of first resort for their disputes.
As his status as alderman demonstrates, the fact that most Urapmin find 
Kinimnok’s behaviour to exemplify wilfulness does not preclude their devel-
oping positive sentiments towards him. Indeed, most Urapmin feel some 
fondness and even admiration for Kinimnok, something I found quite shock-
ing at first, since I had initially thought of him as a bully and buffoon. At one 
point when his anger had become particularly extreme, and when many people 
had heard him utter threats to murder an important Urapmin big man, there 
was talk of taking him to the District Court at the government office some six 
hours walk to the east of Urapmin. People were convinced that the magistrate 
at the district court would jail Kinimnok for a long time for his threatening 
behaviour. After the fear that Kinimnok’s fate would include years of confine-
ment away from the community became widespread, I began to hear from 
people how much they would miss him. He is so funny, he makes us laugh, 
they said. And they pointed out what a great hunter he was, and how generous 
he always was with food when one visited his house. I wondered at that point 
if perhaps I was just catching the positive commemorative mood that wells up 
when people anticipate an imminent death (albeit in this case a social one). So, 
long after this event had blown over without Kinimnok having to go to jail, I 
occasionally probed peoples’ feelings about him only to find that they were in 
fact privately very positive, even if publicly they sometimes condemned his 
behaviour. I once asked a young man who his favourite Urapmin person was. 
‘Kinimnok’, he answered without hesitation: ‘He is funny, a great story teller, a 
skilful hunter and generous’. As is the case with Semis and his embodiment of 
an ideal of lawfulness lived out without compromise to the demands of wilful-
ness, so it was with Kinimnok and his untempered wilfulness: no one else 
managed to live like him. But they talked regularly about him, and in many 
respects they loved him in the way Scheler says exemplars must be loved. 
Through him, they learned by observation what wilfulness as a value looks like 
when it is realized to its fullest extent.
Up to this point, I have identified where the values of wilfulness and lawful-
ness exist in fully realized form in the landscape of Urapmin social life. It is 
through such exemplary figures as Semis and Kinimnok that the Urapmin 
encounter these values and learn to think about their own lives in terms of 
them. But what about the preeminent value of relationalism, the value in the 

168	
Joel Robbins
service of which people usually temper their realization of lawfulness and 
wilfulness? Where do people find this value? They find it, I would suggest, in 
their big men.
I have written about Urapmin big men before in a manner that is quite 
compatible with my argument here, so I’m going to discuss them rather quickly 
(Robbins 2007). There are four big men in Urapmin. There is no disagreement 
about who qualifies for this role, and no suggestion that anyone but these four 
big men deserves this status. People talk about big men, and they dream about 
them, all the time. They are often frustrated with their own big men, the ones 
they personally follow, who can be quite wilfully pushy and themselves 
acknowledge that in terms of the law they are often ‘bad’ men. But at the same 
time, people also recognize that big men, who use their wills to build villages, 
push people to work together, and defend their followers’ rights against 
infringement by the followers of other big men; they also treat them much of 
the time in the kinds of reciprocal ways that show their respect for the law. By 
balancing wilfulness and lawfulness in the most relationally productive way, 
the big men create the social contexts that allow their followers to live out 
their own relational lives productively as a compromise between these two 
values. This is why so much of people’s sense of their own security, their sense 
that they can live their own lives productively, is bound up with their ties to 
their big men, such that people routinely express marked disquiet when the 
big man who lives closest to them leaves the community on an extended 
sojourn to visit friends and relatives elsewhere.
I do not want to say much more about big men here, except to note that at 
first their existence in Urapmin was a puzzle to me. Many of the culturally 
similar groups that live near the Urapmin do not feature prominent big men as 
part of their social organization. And in terms of relations of production and 
exchange, Urapmin social arrangements, like those of their neighbours, take 
the form generally understood to produce diversified, ‘great man’ styles of 
leadership instead of the more concentrated, multifunctional style of Urapmin 
big-manship. Given this, I am inclined to argue, and have argued more thor-
oughly elsewhere, that the Urapmin invest so heavily in their big men, and 
lend them such authority, not because they need them to operate their social 
lives in pragmatic terms, but because they need them as exemplars who dem-
onstrate how the value of relationalism can be fully realized as a synthesis of 
partial realizations of the values of lawfulness and wilfulness that Semis and 
Kinimnok so fully represent (Robbins 2007). It is by encountering and ponder-
ing exemplars of the three values of relationalism, lawfulness, and wilfulness 
that the Urapmin identify the interhuman strings by which they can pull 
themselves up through their own social lives, and in this set the big men, who 
exemplify the realization of the preeminent value of relationalism, provide the 
sturdiest ropes.
Having to this point discussed in some detail how people encounter fully 
expressed values in the form of exemplary persons, I would like quickly to 

	
Exemplarity and Moral Motivation	 169
indicate how this analysis might be expanded by showing that people can also 
experience them through participation in institutions, and particularly 
through participation in some rituals (Robbins 2015 presents a fuller develop-
ment of this argument about ritual and values). That rituals at least sometimes 
enact an idealized picture of the world is not a new insight. Jonathan Z. Smith 
(1982: 63) long ago defined ritual as ‘a means of performing the way things 
ought to be in conscious tension to the way things are in such a way that this 
ritualized perfection is recollected in the ordinary, uncontrolled course of 
things’. Kapferer (2006: 673), more recently, has argued for a view of ritual as 
constituting a space of virtuality which ‘allows people to break free from the 
constraints or determinations of everyday life’ not in order to leave everyday 
life and its concerns behind, but to slow ‘down its flux and speed’ (676) so they 
can examine and perhaps transform its elements. In keeping with Kapferer’s 
and Smith’s analyses, I want to argue that some rituals accomplish this process 
of slowing down the production and perfecting the shape of representations 
precisely for values. They allow people to suspend the complex relations 
between values and action that usually holds in daily life – the kind of complex 
relations I explored earlier by pointing out that most of the time people are 
only making limited progress through the middle stretches of long chains of 
value transformation or are acting in ways the realize a number of values at 
once but only in compromised forms – and to thereby experience what it is 
like to realize one value fully. Such a value is realized in a space that has been 
in some respects simplified, but its ritual accomplishment nonetheless also 
remains in play in the rushed flux of everyday life because each ritual perfor-
mance provides a brush with exemplarity that will henceforward solicit some 
of each ritual participants’ energy toward the further realization of the value 
involved in more quotidian contexts of action.
To illustrate this approach to analysing ritual as affording an experience of 
fully realized value, I will briefly discuss the Urapmin Christian ritual of the 
Spirit dance or what they call the ‘Spirit disco’. To understand the work the 
Spirit disco does in modelling a fully realized value, one needs to know that 
Urapmin Christianity largely disregards the traditional Urapmin value of rela-
tionalism in favour of its own promotion of the value of individualism. In the 
terms of their Christianity, the Urapmin recognize that they must save them-
selves as individuals, and that in their pursuit of such salvation their relation-
ships will not help them. As one man told me, ‘my wife cannot break off part 
of her belief and give it to me’. When it comes to belief, everyone has to have 
his or her own. And the way belief is displayed is through a constant commit-
ment to lawfulness, for it is the will that leads to sin. This is why Urapmin 
Christianity only recognizes the value of lawfulness, and does not promote 
wilfulness in any situations, even when it contributes to realizing relational 
goals. It is because Semis, who we met earlier, lives by this Christian code that 
he stands for other Urapmin as an exemplar of lawful behaviour.

170	
Joel Robbins
People can appreciate the shape of uncompromised lawfulness by observ-
ing Semis. But they can also come to experience it in their own practice 
through the Spirit disco, a setting in which lawfulness also helps to realize the 
preeminent Christian value of individualism in the fullest form it ever takes 
in Urapmin life. Spirit discos are circular dances performed at night inside 
the church. During the dance, some of the dancers become possessed by the 
Holy Spirit. Once this happens, they begin to flail wildly and will be ‘con-
trolled’ by other dancers who hold them and do their best to prevent them 
from hurting themselves or others. During a successful dance, several people 
will become possessed in this way for up to an hour. At the height of the rite, 
the scene inside the church can be chaotic, with all of the possessed people 
careening unpredictably around the room as others struggle to keep up the 
circular pattern of the dance. Eventually, the Spirit will leave the possessed 
dancers one by one. When the Spirit leaves a dancer, he/she collapses on the 
floor, completely limp, effectively unconscious, and, as the Urapmin see it, at 
peace. After possession, people will lie on the church floor in this state for 
some time as the dancers slow down and eventually stop. Participants remain 
in church until those who were once possessed regain normal consciousness. 
Then everyone will pray together and the ritual ends.
In Urapmin understanding, the violence of possession during the Spirit disco 
is due to a battle within the possessed person’s heart between the Holy Spirit 
and his/her sins. It is also noteworthy that it leads to exceptionally wilful behav-
iour, as the dancers lash out violently without regard to those around them. The 
conclusion of possession happens when the Spirit finally succeeds in ‘throwing’ 
the person’s sins out of his/her body and the person is left in a peaceful, ‘easy’ 
state. Before commencing the Spirit disco, everyone must confess their sins to a 
pastor or deacon who will pray over them and tell God that the sins have been 
given to Him. But it is only during Spirit disco possession that the sins are finally 
removed from the body. This leaves the person ready for salvation. As the 
Urapmin see it, the previously possessed person lying still and alone on the 
Church floor represents the full realization of a lawful person, their slack bodies 
undisturbed by any wilful strivings. The person in post-possession repose, lying 
alone and unattended to on the church floor, also represents the fullest realiza-
tion of the saved individual possible before Jesus’ return. Since, as one person 
crystallized the general Urapmin understanding for me, ‘once people leave the 
church building they will start sinning again’, it is only at this moment at the end 
of the rite that one can be sure of one’s own or someone else’s salvation. It is thus 
the only time in Urapmin social life that the value of becoming a wholly lawful 
individual worthy of salvation is fully visible. The Spirit disco provides, then, an 
exemplary image of the value of Urapmin Christian individualism worked out in 
its fullest form.

	
Exemplarity and Moral Motivation	 171
Conclusion
Having considered the question of exemplarity and the existence of values 
from several ethnographic angles, I want to turn to a brief conclusion.
Louis Dumont (1980: xxxix), arguably the most important anthropological 
theorist of values, once wrote that ‘If one concentrates no more on function 
but on meaning, then each sort of representation must be grasped where it is 
fully accentuated and elaborated, where it rises to predominance and not 
where it is kept, by the prevalence of other representations, in a rudimentary 
or residual state’ (Dumont 1980: xxxix). The ‘one’ doing the grasping in 
Dumont’s comment is clearly the analyst. But I have argued here that the 
people we study also need to grasp representations – at least representations 
of values – where they are ‘fully accentuated and elaborated’. It is in grasping 
such fully elaborated representations that people experience the existence of 
values and come to feel their force as engines of moral action. That values 
come to exist in this way has been the burden of my argument.
Central to that argument has been the claim that people encounter fully 
elaborated versions of values not so much by being presented with abstract 
cultural definitions of them, but by coming into contact with people and insti-
tutions that exemplify them. For almost everyone, everyday life is in fact not 
marked by the realization of key values, but rather by the performance of 
actions aimed at achieving much lower level values or at realizing a number of 
values in compromised form. This is why exemplary persons and institutions 
are so important in social life: they present us with values in a way our routine 
experiences rarely do. I would in the end want to go further than this to suggest 
that it is our encounters with key values embodied in exemplary people and 
institutions that lend our lives a sense of moral purpose and of investment in 
the future, the pitched-forward quality of moving toward the good that is so 
crucial to our will to keep going and that the notion of moral engine that is at 
the centre of this collection aims to capture. And it is when such exemplary 
people and institutions are hard to find in the midst of our social lives that the 
moral investment in the future is most likely to falter. But that is an argument 
about what values do, not about where in the world they are, and so I’ll leave 
it for another day.
All that remains then is for me to close what I referred to at the outset as 
one of the key frames around my argument – the one that has to do with our 
current anti-cultural moment and how we can rescue from its forceful critique 
some of the key figures of cultural analysis we might not want to lose. Having 
defined values as one of those figures worth holding on to, I have tried to give 
an account of how people might come to find themselves attached to values 
not because they have been bequeathed them from on high by an enduring, 
shared culture, but because they sometimes encounter them in the form of 
really existing exemplars. Such exemplars, when encountered, display a force 
that helps people think about what kinds of things they might really be after in 

172	
Joel Robbins
the course of lives that do not at every moment appear to be directed toward 
much beyond momentary goals. If I have made my argument successfully, I 
hope to have conveyed that we can think about this value-directed, morally-
informed, forward-looking aspect of human life without relying on older 
notions of culture, even as I would not want to preclude returning to such 
notions at some other time.
Joel Robbins is Sigrid Rausing Professor of Social Anthropology at the 
University of Cambridge. He is the author of Becoming Sinners: Christianity 
and Moral Torment in a Papua New Guinea Society (University of California 
Press, 2004), which was awarded the J.I. Staley Prize by the School for 
Advanced Research.
Notes
  1.	 From this point through the next section of this chapter, the text that appears here also 
appears in similar form in a forthcoming volume to be published by Cambridge 
University Press entitled ‘Recovering the Human Subject’, edited by B. Bodenhorn et al. 
I thank the editors and publisher for allowing me to use this material here.
  2.	 I would also note in passing that the fact that there are always numerous values in play, 
combined with the fact that most actions do not fully realize the values people find most 
important, is what gives social life the kind of complexity that leads so many anthropolo-
gists to abandon notions of order and culture. But this complexity is not proof of the 
absence of values, but rather follows from their existence.
References
Albrow, Martin. 1990. Max Weber’s Construction of Social Theory. New York: St. 
Martin’s Press.
Dumont, Louis. 1980. Homo Hierarchicus: The Caste System and its Implications, 
trans. M. Sainsbury, L. Dumont and B. Gulati. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Durkheim, Emile. 1974. Sociology and Philosophy, trans. D.F. Pocock. New York: Free 
Press.
Ferrara, Alessandro. 2008. The Force of the Example: Explorations in the Paradigm of 
Judgement. New York: Columbia University Press.
Kapferer, Bruce. 2006. ‘Virtuality’, in J. Kreinath, J. Snoek and M. Stausberg (eds), 
Theorizing Rituals: Classical Topics, Theoretical Approaches, Analytical Concepts. 
Leiden: Brill, pp. 671–84.
Laidlaw, James. 2013. The Subject of Virtue: An Anthropology of Ethics and Freedom. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Munn, Nancy M. 1986. The Fame of Gawa: A Symbolic Study of Value Transformation 
in a Massim (Papua New Guinea) Society. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Robbins, Joel. 2004. Becoming Sinners: Christianity and Moral Torment in a Papua 
New Guinea Society. Berkeley: University of California Press.

	
Exemplarity and Moral Motivation	 173
 . 2007. ‘Morality, Politics and the Melanesian Big Man: On “The Melanesian 
Manager” and the Transformation of Political Anthropology’, in J. Barker (ed.), The 
Anthropology of Morality in Melanesia and Beyond. Aldershot: Ashgate, pp. 25–37.
 . 2010. ‘If There is No Such Thing as Society, Is Ritual Still Special? On Using 
The Elementary Forms after Tarde’, in M. Candea (ed.), The Social after Gabriel 
Tarde: Debates and Assessments. London: Routledge, pp. 93–101.
 . 2012a. On Becoming Ethical Subjects: Freedom, Constraint, and the 
Anthropology of Morality. Anthropology of This Century 5. Available at http://
aotcpress.com/articles/ethical-subjects-freedom-constraint-anthropology-
morality/.
 . 2012b. ‘Cultural Values’, in D. Fassin (ed.), A Companion to Moral 
Anthropology. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 117–32.
 . 2013. ‘Monism, Pluralism and the Structure of Value Relations: A Dumontian 
Contribution to the Contemporary Study of Value’, Hau: Journal of Ethnographic 
Theory 3(1): 99–115.
 . 2015. ‘Ritual, Value, and Example: On the Perfection of Cultural of Cultural 
Representations’, Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 21(S1): 18–29. 
(Special Issue: The Power of Example).
Scheler, Max. 1973. Formalism in Ethics and a Non-Formal Ethics of Values: A 
New Attempt toward the Foundation of an Ethical Personalism. Evanston, IL: 
Northwestern University Press.
 . 1987. Person and Self-Value: Three Essays, trans. M.S. Frings. Dordrecht: 
Martinus Nijhoff.
Schnädelbach, Herbert. 1984. Philosophy in Germany 1831–1933. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Smith, Jonathan Z. 1982. Imagining Religion: From Babylon to Jonestown. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.

9
Fault Lines in the Anthropology of Ethics
James Laidlaw
In May 2001, in that year’s Malinowski Memorial Lecture at the London 
School of Economics, I said that there did not yet exist an anthropology of 
ethics (Laidlaw 2002). I tried to be clear that by this I did not mean that 
anthropologists did not write about morality. They have always done so, 
through the whole history of the discipline; indeed, it has always been central 
to their concerns. There being no ‘anthropology of ethics’ was a matter, rather, 
of the absence of debate among anthropologists as to the ethical dimension of 
human social life: its bases, its character, its extent and consequence, or what 
the editors of this volume are calling ‘moral engines’. Anthropologists had not 
been arguing, explicitly and as such, about ethics or morality in the way they 
did argue about the nature of religion, the economy, politics and kinship, or 
about sacrifice, animism, prayer, development, gift-giving, money, dispute set-
tlement, charisma, marriage, parenthood or naming. There were, that is to say, 
no focused debates on the nature of ethical life, no contending positions or 
rival schools of thought about it, and very little writing that took morality or 
ethics overtly as its object of inquiry and theoretical reflection.
About a decade and a half on, that situation has changed markedly. The 
volume of literature describing itself as contributing to the anthropology of 
ethics or morality is now large, and growing at what still seems to be a gathering 
pace. It is also still changing as it grows, but it is already clear that what is taking 
shape is not a unified movement, or anything so unidirectional or unbalancing 
as a ‘turn’, although I have seen the idea that we are going through an ‘ethical 
turn’ floated on occasion. Instead, I think we can begin to see emerging a set of 
questions and areas of inquiry, and in some cases, beginning to take shape, some 
moderately well formed debates. There are some questions that seem founda-
tional enough to divide people and to start to define positions, even if it is not 
(yet) the case that the answers to these various questions correlate with each 
other so that people line up to form camps or schools.

	
Fault Lines in the Anthropology of Ethics	 175
In this chapter, I should like briefly to set out what seem to me to be the 
most fundamental questions that anthropologists interested in ethics/moral-
ity are in the process of taking positions about. Fittingly, they concern the very 
foundations of the ethical dimension of social life: again, what our editors refer 
to as the engines that drive moral life. The exercise is worth doing, I think, not 
just for the information of anyone coming more or less new to the literature, 
and not merely as an occasion for indicating and defending my own positions, 
but as an attempt to direct everyone’s attention – and participants’ argumen-
tative focus – to where I think genuine and consequential debate and disagree-
ment lie. Perhaps because it is a new and still rather inchoate field, it is, I 
observe, not at all uncommon to find that works currently being published 
present themselves rhetorically as refutations or critiques of positions or 
claims that, to the best of my knowledge, no one has ever put forward: straw 
men are being set alight and the resulting smoke is obscuring the shape of the 
field, so we are in danger of walking round in circles. My hope then is to help 
us to see a bit more clearly what we do and don’t disagree about, and what 
might be at stake in those disagreements.
The following questions all overlap with each other, but just how they relate 
differs depending on how one answers each of them, so I shall treat them here 
as independent points of entry into the field. What is ethical agency and what 
range of entities in the world act as ethical subjects? Is ethics immanent and 
pervasive in all human life, or is it expressed in particular in certain circum-
stances, or in certain institutions or practices? Is freedom a necessary compo-
nent of ethical life? If so, of what kind, and what, if any, relation does that 
freedom have to various ideas of political freedom?
What is an Ethical Subject?
One question that seems to me to be a matter of concern, and a useful diag-
nostic of different anthropological approaches to the ethical, is ‘what is an 
ethical subject?’ What is included among the things in the world that do or 
have ethics? This question, it is important to insist, is at least potentially and 
at least in part responsive to empirical ethnographic description, analysis and 
comparison, and therefore different in kind from the irremediably normative 
questions that concern the appropriate objects of one’s ethical concern. To put 
the matter rather crudely: it is quite possible to think, and not a few people do 
say, that ‘the planet’ ought to be a central ethical concern and that ‘we’, as 
ethical subjects, should all be worried about it; rather fewer people think that 
‘the planet’ is itself an ethical subject and that it should be worried about us. 
The question of what is our proper range of ethical concern is clearly distin-
guishable from the question of whom that ‘our’ – the class of agents to whom 
appeal might be made on ethical grounds – in fact encompasses. Who or 
what, as a matter of fact, has ethical concerns and values, and does ethics?

176	
James Laidlaw
Let us take, as instances of how anthropologists are thinking about these 
questions, two contrasting comments on my recent book, The Subject of Virtue 
(2014a). Eduardo Kohn (2014) complains that I appear to conceive of ethical life 
in a way that restricts it too much to humans, which ignores the ways in which, 
in radically other ontologies such as those in Amazonia, other animal species, 
spirits and indeed the forest itself are recognized as being ethical agents. Cheryl 
Mattingly (2014a; also 2014b) meanwhile expresses the opposite worry, namely 
that in order to take account fully of everyday moral perplexity, a rich concep-
tion of specifically human moral agency is required, one that encompasses and 
integrates complex moral emotions, creativity and narrative self-understanding. 
So do we decide to extend ethical agency, as Kohn wants us to do, ‘beyond the 
human’, or do we resist the reduction this must entail in the name of a fulsome 
humanism? I think it is possible to agree with some of what both these authors 
say, so long as we approach the question of what is an ethical subject in strictly 
operational terms – who and what does ethics, when and where and in what 
ways? – and carefully not muddle that with the question of whether, as ethical 
subjects, we (including Amazonians) do or should care about nonhumans. 
Kohn’s way of putting things – ‘what role might nonhumans play in an ethical 
life?’ – unfortunately invites just that confusion.
In this way, what we recognize as an ethical subject becomes obviously and 
directly related to the question of what we take ethical life to consist in. So, on 
the one hand, how we characterize ethics needs to be adequate to the complexi-
ties and subtleties of human experience as we encounter and describe them in 
diverse cultural settings, including the activities and processes Mattingly points 
to; on the other, we should recognize as instances of ‘ethics’ everywhere we find 
those processes and activities instantiated, including by entities other than 
human individuals. As it happens (see Laidlaw 2014b), I do not think Kohn actu-
ally provides evidence of animal species or spirits acting as ethical agents, even 
in an Amazonian ontology, but I do not rule out that such evidence could be 
provided, if not of the fully rounded and complex agency Mattingly rightly says 
is characteristic of human persons, then at least of some of the component pro-
cesses or activities. We might decide that not every instance of every one of 
these, but only some set of them in complex interrelation, usefully counts as 
‘ethical agency’, but that is a judgement that should come if at all as a result of, 
rather than being a premise of, our enquiries.
One of the things we have in mind when we take it as obvious that, gener-
ally speaking, human beings are ethical subjects, is that we are, as Charles 
Taylor puts it, ‘self-interpreting animals’ (1985). We do not merely do things, 
but as we do things – and indeed as a constitutive part of how we do things 
– we routinely form and hold descriptions of what we are doing. We know as 
we do it that we are ‘cooking’, ‘typing’, ‘relaxing’, ‘telling a lie’, ‘sparing her feel-
ings’, or whatever. And we also evaluate those self-descriptions. This we do 
implicitly all the time, since our self-descriptions are not and cannot be 
always value neutral, and they are always subject also to conscious, reflective 

	
Fault Lines in the Anthropology of Ethics	 177
evaluation from time to time. This reflective self-evaluation, and the ways in 
which we adjust and shape our conduct in light of it, means that to some 
extent we shape and form ourselves, in the process of living a reflective life. It 
is obvious, and obviously central to what we mean when we say that human 
beings are ethical subjects, that ordinary human life is a life of continuous 
and routine self-description, self-evaluation and incremental self-constitu-
tion in this sense.
But is all this true of all humans, in all circumstances? It is not difficult to 
think of cases where the question is at least worth asking, people whom we 
hesitate to hold ethically responsible for things that they do: infants, people 
with severe learning disabilities, those suffering from dementia or in the grip 
of a psychotic illness. If we focus on questions not of who or what is of ethical 
value, but of who or what does ethical valuing and acts in light of that valuing 
(who or what engages in ethical reflection and judgement) and of who or what 
is socially recognized as doing so, then it seems reasonable to suggest that not 
all humans are ethical subjects, at least not in all respects or all of the time.
And might this question be open also to historical change and cultural vari-
ability? Jonathan Lear (2006, 2015) has forcefully argued that unjust societies 
systematically disable the ethical thought of those who live within them: both 
those who suffer and those who ostensibly benefit from injustice. If this is true, 
might one say that the more unjust a society, the more stunted and constricted 
would be the ethical life of its members? It does not seem plausible to suggest 
there could be a society in which people didn’t describe and evaluate their 
actions to themselves at all, but it might make sense to say, for instance of the 
privileged in a monstrously unjust society, that no accurate self-description 
would be endurable, and that this fact would so effectively discourage con-
scious reflection that the higher orders at least of ethical life, in conscious and 
deliberate self-fashioning, would be lost to them. Foucault approached a paral-
lel conclusion when he asked us to consider a slave so effectively and totally 
subject to physical coercion (what he referred to as ‘capacity’ rather than 
‘power’, the latter being always to some degree reciprocal: Foucault 2000: 342) 
that he or she could do nothing other than to carry out the will of his or her 
master. He asserted that such a person would have no ethics (Foucault 1997: 
286). What he seems to have meant by this is not merely that it would be 
unjust to hold the slave responsible for what he or she does under this kind of 
compulsion and duress, but further that such a situation would leave the slave 
no space for the kind of reflection that Foucault took to be diagnostic of ethical 
practice. So according to this view of ethics, perhaps social milieux differ, 
among other things, in the degree to which they allow people to function as 
ethical subjects.
Another possible limit to the apparently obvious idea that all humans are 
ethical subjects might lie in the fact that some projects of self-fashioning, 
while they begin in reflective self-interpretation and self-formation, progres-
sively eliminate those capacities as they proceed. Ascetic regimes of ethical 

178	
James Laidlaw
self-cultivation, including in some of the major world religions such as 
Christianity, Islam, Buddhism and Jainism (see, for example, Lester 2005; 
Hirschkind 2006; Mahmood 2005; Cook 2010; Laidlaw 1995, 2005), follow a 
dynamic that necessarily begins with the exercise of reflective self-interpreta-
tion, and the freedom to adjust one’s conduct in light of self-evaluation, but 
lead people progressively to relinquish such capacities as they seek to conform 
to externally imposed criteria and norms, and ultimately to do so in ways that 
are not just habitual but actually involuntary: to make oneself literally unable 
to do other than conform to an ideal such as humility, obedience to God or 
non-attachment. Might we say that these are ethical projects that are in some 
respects at least self-negating, in that they lead one out of the ethical domain 
– out of what is seen in these religious traditions as merely worldly ethics – 
and into a realm of transcendent values and escape from the ordinary human 
condition (see discussion in Laidlaw 2014a; Faubion 2014b; Laidlaw 2014b)?
James Faubion (2014a) further points out that many religious and quasi-
religious traditions valorize, and provide means for striving towards, a condi-
tion – sometimes called mystical – that involves the renunciation or 
self-transcendence of the self, to the point of the ontological negation of the 
subject as such. This kind of telos is indeed paradoxical: as Faubion puts it, the 
outcome is ‘a subject that is not one’. And while embodying, in some respects 
and from particular points of view, the highest ethical ideals of their respective 
traditions, those who come closest to realizing these conditions are always 
also ethically eccentric and marginal figures, declaring themselves beyond the 
rules of right conduct that apply to everyone else, and therefore always in an 
at-best ambiguous relationship with established moral authority. In this 
respect, the mystic resembles more muscular figures of charismatic authority 
such as prophetic leaders in being at the same time central to the ethical field, 
in some ways indeed creative of the very possibility of specific forms of ethical 
life, yet also standing outside any such definite form of life: refusing the routi-
nization that would follow from recognizing obligations to or value in either 
ordinary followers or everyday life, resolutely non-relational and, although 
being a law unto others, subject to no law themselves. So we have then a range 
of figures – ascetic renouncers, mystics, prophets – who seem to some extent 
to transcend the ethical condition.
But in addition to the question of whether some human individuals are 
excluded or act to absent themselves from the company of ethical subjects, we 
might ask whether human entities other than individuals engage in ethical 
thought and practice. There seems no reason a priori to exclude this idea, and 
several good anthropological ones for making as much sense of it as we can. It 
is surely a very serious testing ground, for instance, for the idea that persons 
in some social contexts are dividuals rather than individuals. Can we make 
sense of the idea that a dividual might be the locus of ethical self-fashioning?
More straightforward, I think, is the point that various groups of people 
and institutions – families, clubs and associations, corporations – engage in 

	
Fault Lines in the Anthropology of Ethics	 179
processes of self-description and evaluation, and seek more or less concertedly 
to shape themselves in the light of their ideals and values. And insofar as they 
do this – as a joint family seeks to contract a marriage or collectively manage 
its reputation, or as a political party seeks to ‘return to its core values’, or what-
ever – they exercise ethical agency. A good deal of the anthropology of kinship 
might be re-read, in light of the recent anthropology of ethics, as showing how 
collectivities and not just individuals are ethical subjects.
An interesting variant on this, and the most systematic exercise in the 
recent literature in the anthropology of ethics, describing how something 
more inclusive than an individual might properly be regarded as an ethical 
subject, is Faubion’s (2011: 302–67) compelling account of the relationship 
between himself, as ethnographer, and his principal interlocutor in his 
research on Christian millennialism in Texas. Faubion argues persuasively that 
the relational entity that was himself-and-his-interlocutor engaged in an 
extended process of reflective self-formation.
So far we have considered the question of whether all humans are ethical 
subjects, and whether they are such only as individuals or also in some other 
groups or formations. But some anthropologists (Kohn, already mentioned, 
among them) have suggested that entities wholly other than humans ought 
also to be considered as ethical subjects. This is no surprise, given the energy 
currently being expended across a range of disciplines in the social sciences 
and beyond, advancing avowedly anti- or post-humanist agendas. These 
agendas have typically involved one of two strategies. The first is to downplay 
altogether attributes that might be thought to be distinctively human. This 
might involve for instance denying that ethics is more than a superficial or 
fundamentally fraudulent aspect of human life: those self-descriptions are 
never more than pleasing delusional fantasies; our genes make us act in their 
interests, or our animal emotions impel us to evolutionarily selected behav-
iour patterns, whatever we tell ourselves. That is one kind of anti-humanist 
agenda. The second involves re-imagining or redefining those supposedly spe-
cifically human attributes – reason, agency, reflection, freedom, ethics – so as 
to make them fit for non-human purposes.
A version of this second strategy seems to be emerging in the work of 
Jarrett Zigon, whose recent writings on drug rehabilitation (2014a, 2014b, this 
volume) include an argument for locating the agency required for ethical 
action and change not in human subjects but in what he calls ‘assembled and 
situated worlds’ of practices and policies. Zigon presents his argument as 
opposed to ‘metaphysical humanism’, and draws on a range of vitalist and phe-
nomenological sources of inspiration that are common currency in the bur-
geoning ‘post-human’ literature to suggest that ethical life does not rely on any 
intrinsic characteristics or capacities of humans. Indeed, his is a determinedly 
externalist perspective: to live ethically is to live in ‘attunement’ with the life-
world you inhabit. On this account, the features of the distinctively human 
that are at the forefront of Mattingly’s ‘first-person virtue ethics’ (individual 

180	
James Laidlaw
creativity, and the narrative continuity given to a human life by temporally 
extended projects and by enduring relations of intimate care) are replaced 
wholesale by a picture in which agency and care (or their absence) reside 
instead in the complex of institutions and practices which the individual 
inhabits, and morality consists in the individual being receptively in tune and 
affectively at one with that environment, so that he or she inhabits it in a state 
of ‘existential comfort’.
This certainly has the effect of ‘democratizing’ ethical life well beyond the 
human, but it comes at a cost. Notice that instead of identifying the ethical, as 
I have been suggesting here, with a set of processes, such as reflection and 
self-evaluation, through which people may conceive, develop, embrace, 
pursue, question, revise and overhaul their various conceptions of the good 
and of how they should live, Zigon instead identifies moral life with a specific 
and singular ideal – what he describes in unambiguously affirmative terms as 
‘living sanely’ in a state of what he calls ‘existential comfort’ – and he defines 
ethics as whatever conduces to the maintenance or restoration of that state. 
And the cost of this arises not only if this conception of sane moral living can 
be shown to be flawed or objectionable; it arises on account merely of the fact 
that it is corrigible. So while some may no doubt share Zigon’s positive view 
of the condition of attunement, others might, for example, find this ideal 
unappealingly passive and conformist, or might be worried by its implicit 
authoritarianism (a danger, I myself would suggest, for which we might want 
generally to be on the lookout, wherever ideas are borrowed heavily from 
Heidegger). But the important point is that whatever we ourselves might vari-
ously think of these different judgements of this particular ideal, an anthro-
pology of ethics, if it is to be of any interest whatsoever, necessarily requires a 
conception of the ethical that recognizes the historical and cultural variety of 
forms of ethical life, and recognizes also the variety of ideals and values and 
conceptions of human flourishing that have animated them. And for this, it is 
surely necessary that we do not assume that we already know what ethics 
looks like, or that only values we share and forms of life we approve are 
‘ethical’. Thus we must equip ourselves with concepts that do not pre-emp-
tively commit us exclusively to our already-favoured vision of the good life. 
And whereas a focus on processes of reflection and self-formation does not do 
this, since these processes might be deployed in diverse ways and towards 
radically (if not quite infinitely) divergent ends, to identify the ethical exclu-
sively with achieving and maintaining a state of ‘attunement’ plainly does pre-
emptively so commit us.
Now my claim is emphatically not – to revert again to Mattingly’s concern 
– that self-interpretation and reflective self-formation exhaust what we should 
mean by ethical agency. I would however wish to claim that these, if anything 
is, must be part of what we mean by ethics. So I have taken this as my starting 
point in addressing the question of what is the range of entities we might iden-
tify as ethical subjects. But recognizing that there are other activities and 

	
Fault Lines in the Anthropology of Ethics	 181
processes that might make up ethical agency, and also wishing, in response to 
Kohn and others, to be open to the question of whether ethical agency is 
restricted to humans, another line of enquiry suggests itself.
One of the interesting themes in recent ethnographies of human-animal 
relations is the idea that animals behave differently and exhibit more or fewer 
of the features of a mental life (they become more intelligent, etc.) depending 
on how they are treated by the humans with whom they are in relations. The 
claim is that important characteristics we might think of as distinguishing dif-
ferent species – such as intelligence – are not in fact rigidly species-specific 
and determined biologically, but are at least in part performative and interac-
tive. To put it very crudely, animals become more intelligent if you treat them 
as if they are (e.g. Crist 1999; Despret 2004). Insofar as there might be merit in 
this argument, we could then similarly ask whether some of what Mattingly 
identifies as specifically human moral agency – for example the expression of 
moral emotions such as guilt, shame, anger or compassion – might be similar. 
Some species might be able to come to express such emotions, in the right 
kinds of social relations.
This possibility is interesting, from my point of view, however, not princi-
pally in relation to this question of non-human ethics – I doubt that anything 
we will learn about ethical agency among animals will radically change our 
understanding of human ethical life – but because the general argument about 
the interactive origins of moral emotions is an extremely plausible one, and is 
of the first interest, whether non-humans are part of our enquiry or not. How 
do we become ethical subjects, with the capacities of self-description and 
evaluation, already discussed, and expressing moral emotions? Are these 
capacities that are somehow inherent, or do they emerge and develop only 
through social interaction? I find the case for the latter thesis – one of the 
most eloquent and sophisticated expressions of which remains Adam Smith’s 
The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1976 [1790]) – generally very persuasive. If it 
is the case, as Smith insists, that being ‘in society’ is the essential medium 
through which we develop our sense of self, our capacity for reflection and 
self-evaluation, and the expression of our moral sentiments, this would cer-
tainly help to explain why these same effects might be observable, if only to a 
limited degree, in animals that are incorporated closely into our social life. So 
I would see attempts to show that forests think or that dogs can show compas-
sion as interesting not so much for any anti-humanist agenda with which they 
might be associated, as for the light they throw on some of the constituent 
features of the ethical dimension of human life.
I would add that insofar as one takes this broadly Smithian view of the 
ethical subject as necessarily constituted relationally, then the tension some 
authors feel there must somehow be between ethics conceived as care of the 
self and ethics conceived as care for others is revealed as the mirage that it is. 
They can only ever be two sides of the same coin.

182	
James Laidlaw
Is Ethics ‘Ordinary’?
Who or whatever we decide are ethical subjects, a related question is: are they 
ethical all of the time? In the recent anthropological literature, some have 
wanted to say that the ethical is woven pervasively into everyday life in such a 
way that human conduct is always necessarily ethical; others have wanted to 
identify ethics as something that happens occasionally, in distinct episodes 
and specific situations. The disagreements that are emerging around this 
matter are clearly strongly felt, but perhaps not yet clearly delineated.
One position holds that ethics is ‘ordinary’, in the sense not just that it is 
normal and everyday for human action to be ethical, but further that to be 
ethical is an immanent and essential feature, by definition present in all human 
action everywhere. This position has been developed and articulated by 
Michael Lambek over a number of years (e.g. 2000, 2008, 2010, 2015b, this 
volume). For Lambek, it is a category mistake to distinguish ethics from action 
in general, so in his terms even asking the question of whether all action is 
ethical makes no sense. Because human action is always subject to criteria of 
evaluation, it cannot be other than ethical. Therefore, the ethical dimension is 
an immanent aspect of all human action as such.
Another rendering of this position is given by Veena Das (2007, 2010a, 
2010b, 2012, 2014, 2015), using very similar vocabulary and invoking a similar 
series of intellectual reference points. Like Lambek, Das strenuously resists 
locating ‘the ethical’ anywhere other than in what she refers to as the everyday 
or ordinary. This means in particular that the ethical is not to be found pre-
cisely where it is most often and most insistently claimed in practice: by reli-
gious or political leaders or movements aiming at a transcendent good (Das 
2015). Lambek is perhaps less determined than Das to exclude all figures of 
religious authority from the ethical, although even he prefers to find it in mar-
ginal or eccentric rather than powerful figures (e.g. Lambek 2002). Das’s eth-
nographic essays do invite us to recognize exemplary moral wisdom, but 
always in instances of un-dramatic actions by apparently unremarkable people 
in modest circumstances: the undemonstrative gestures whereby the afflic-
tions wrought on ordinary people – very commonly by precisely the people 
and institutions who set themselves up as ‘ethical’ – are ameliorated, and an 
endurable ordinary life together pieced together and sustained. And Das is 
reluctant to describe the work people do to bring this about – characteristi-
cally, in her accounts, in almost imperceptible modifications of gesture or 
conduct – as resulting from anything as explicitly deliberative or conscious as 
a ‘decision’. The thinking that inhabits everyday conduct, in Das’s accounts, is 
characteristically tacit.
For both Lambek and Das, then, the ethical is pervasively immanent in eve-
ryday human life – not in thought more than action, not in religion more than 
in getting a livelihood, not in this day more than that, and especially not in 
organized or explicit striving for the good more than in habitual getting along.

	
Fault Lines in the Anthropology of Ethics	 183
Perhaps the most directly contrasting position is Zigon’s (2007, 2014a, 
2014b). Zigon characterizes moral life in ways that superficially resemble 
those of Das and Lambek (why this should be is an interesting question, but 
one which I shall not address here), with an emphasis on habit and routine 
(alongside, in his case, formal institutions and public discourse) as one impor-
tant location of everyday morality. But his conception of everyday practice is 
really crucially different from theirs. While Lambek emphasizes that human 
action pervasively requires the exercise of practical reason, and Das similarly 
insists that the habitual and everyday are where ethical thinking is most 
importantly located, the absence of thought is precisely what for Zigon char-
acterizes moral life in a state of equilibrium: everyday morality on his account 
is the unconscious following of rules, and conforming to standards and expec-
tations without even being aware that this is what one is doing, so that moral-
ity is ‘a kind of habitus or an unreflective and unreflexive disposition of 
everyday social life’ (2008: 17). Ethics, thus, is the process that occurs when 
this equilibrium breaks down, following a change in the environment or cir-
cumstances meaning that established unconscious routine may no longer be 
followed. In terms of the vocabulary Zigon introduces in his more recent writ-
ings, ethics is the recuperative process that occurs when a state of attunement 
is disrupted. In response to this external shock, conscious thought and reflec-
tion may become necessary, and as a result changes occur in the agent’s 
conduct and dispositions, so that a new equilibrium, a new state of attune-
ment with a changed life-world, becomes possible. Or, as we have seen, the 
processes that restore attunement may have their origins largely outside the 
individual, in the assemblage of institutions and relations he or she dwells 
within. Either way ethics, in Zigon’s account, is episodic, and sane everyday 
moral life is what we find outside and after the successful completion of those 
episodes. So in addition to an argument for locating ethical agency very sub-
stantially outside the human individual, in the institutions and practices of the 
life-world, Zigon also argues for restricting that agency temporally, to outside 
the ordinary, where Das and Lambek by contrast want to insist that it exclu-
sively resides.
A third position, which is not exactly located between these two because it 
is much more nearly compatible with the first than with the second, has been 
articulated by Webb Keane (2010, 2014a, 2014b, 2016), and (in relation to this 
question) is also roughly my own. On this account, ethics is certainly woven 
pervasively into everyday life, and it is not an accidental but an intrinsic 
feature of human social life that this is generally so. Ethical life is non-contin-
gently built on basic facts about human action. But this does not mean that it 
is always and everywhere the same, or always equally to the fore. As Keane 
observes, sometimes we are very much in the midst of what is going on, and 
the ethical dimension is largely tacit – though this does not mean that it is 
unavailable to consciousness; the habitual, again, is not ‘unthinking’ – but 
sometimes we stand back to some extent from what we are doing and the 

184	
James Laidlaw
situation we are in, and experience some kind of reflective distance. On this 
account, both these states of affairs (or rather, the infinite subtle gradations 
between the poles that mark them) are part of ethics. And because the factors 
that provoke and enable reflective distance – most conspicuously the institu-
tions, practices and relationships explicitly associated with encouraging and 
enabling ethical self-fashioning – have histories, so too does ethics. It is part 
of the work of an anthropology of ethics to describe the historical changes, the 
changing kinds of institutions and practices, that explain the greater and lesser 
degrees to which, as well as the differing ways in which, people at varying his-
torical junctures have become taken up with ethical reflection and the formu-
lation and following of explicit, more or less rationalized, ethical doctrines.
Ethical reflection is more concerted in some settings and institutions (such as 
those dedicated to ethical pedagogy) than in others, and it is subject at times to 
intensification, such as in periods of reforming (religious or political) zeal. The 
idea that there are institutionalized settings that frame explicit projects of 
ethical self-fashioning – and that make ethical reflection a more or less full-time 
or especially intensive matter – follows directly from my description above of 
humans as self-interpreting animals. We are all the time necessarily involved in 
describing to ourselves what we are doing, and those descriptions are always at 
least implicitly evaluative. And this necessarily means that in the midst of our 
everyday going on, we incrementally and over time fashion ourselves, as the 
usually unintended outcome of the everyday decisions and actions we take, in 
light of those changing descriptions and evaluations. This, expressed in slightly 
different language, is roughly what Lambek and Das mean by ordinary ethics 
(and differs from either attunement or moral breakdown as Zigon’s envisages 
them). But there are many situations in which people do go beyond this. They 
quite deliberately set out on a concerted project of re-fashioning themselves, in 
light of a set of values or doctrines to which they consciously subscribe, or of 
modelling their conduct on that of chosen exemplars. Sometimes this occurs in 
response to the kind of external shock Zigon calls a ‘moral breakdown’, and this 
might help to explain why some people join a piety movement, a revolutionary 
cell, a monastery, a therapeutic programme or a self-improvement scheme. But 
conscious ethical self-formation of this more-than-ordinary kind is also a rou-
tinely available set of options, present in valued exemplars, in ritual, in specific 
roles and institutions, in all societies and civilizations.
In insisting on the ordinariness of ethics, Das highlights the incontestable 
fact that projects directed towards achieving a transcendent ideal or ultimate 
good very often motivate people to behave in highly destructive ways, on 
occasions for instance to set aside the subtle attentiveness and responsiveness 
to others that enable them to maintain decent lives together, and instead to 
follow remorselessly a single, perhaps decontextualized set of criteria of judge-
ment so that they become cruel and brutal in the name of an ultimate good. 
This is all obviously true and important to remember. But not all projects of 
self-improvement have these features to an equal degree. In addition, some 

	
Fault Lines in the Anthropology of Ethics	 185
also obviously lead people to heightened sensitivity or enlarged sympathy or 
motivate them much more strenuously to try to do good. And most impor-
tantly, to say that these efforts to achieve an ideal, however liberal or intolerant 
their effects might be, are ethical projects is not to approve of them (any more 
than saying as I did above that some religious and political projects lead their 
participants out of the ethical domain is to deprecate them). Such projects are 
massively various, and directed towards mutually conflicting ends and ideals. 
It would be impossible coherently to approve of them all. There is nothing 
paradoxical in saying that a cause, a movement, or a course of action is ethical 
and also making a negative judgement on it.
Das and Lambek make an important point when they insist that such pro-
jects are not – even if their proponents often claim this – either all there is to 
ethics or where it essentially lies. And they are right too to point out that 
sometimes they are actively hostile to or act to undermine the delicate fabric 
of everyday ethical life, especially as that is experienced by poor or otherwise 
disadvantaged people. The rationalization, systematization and institutionali-
zation that separates these projects of self-cultivation from the same processes 
of self-description, reflection and evaluation in ‘everyday’ or ‘ordinary’ life 
have varied and complex effects. Believing that sometimes, or even typically, 
those effects are on the whole negative, which, I take it, is the basis for these 
authors’ antipathy to un-ordinary ethics, is not a good reason to deny the con-
tinuities that exist between them and ‘ordinary’ ethics, or to deny the term 
‘ethical’ to them.
But if this is conceded, and we enlarge the field of ethics to include much 
that is not in Das’s or Lambek’s terms ‘ordinary’, a distinction drawn within 
that field is nevertheless, I think, helpful. Keane adopts from the philosopher 
Bernard Williams (1985; see also Laidlaw 2002, 2014a: 110–19) a distinction 
between ethics and morality that is very different from that described above 
from Zigon. ‘Ethics’ here designates what happens whenever and wherever 
and to whatever extent people address Socrates’s question: ‘How ought one to 
live?’ So it encompasses both reflective everyday evaluation and concerted 
self-cultivation, the ordinary and the aspirational. ‘Morality’ or ‘the morality 
system’ on the other hand is used to refer to a subset of answers to that general 
ethical question. In Williams, it refers to the most influential moral philoso-
phies in the West since Kant, which include both deontological and conse-
quentialist theories, all of which have been profoundly shaped by a Christian 
inheritance, and all of which share distinctive features in their formulation, 
including the notion of specifically moral obligations that are supposed to 
trump all other kinds of values, duties or injunctions. Keane broadens this 
conception beyond the modern West, and beyond some of those specific fea-
tures Williams thought central to ‘the morality system’, and uses the expres-
sion ‘morality systems’ to include all formulations of ethical rules, values and 
practices that have been subject to deliberate, self-conscious systematization, 
typically through the agency of a specialist clerisy, of some form or other.

186	
James Laidlaw
Now, Keane’s own discussion of what he calls ‘morality systems’ does 
depend heavily on an account of the consequences of monotheism. Since there 
are systems that share the general features Keane ascribes to ‘morality systems’ 
(but not those of Williams’s ‘morality system’ – this being a reason why Keane’s 
coinage might confuse as much as it clarifies) but which are not monotheistic 
– not only those such as Marxist Communism, which might plausibly be 
argued to have inherited those features at one remove, but also forms of 
Buddhism, Jainism and Hinduism, which do without a monotheistic theology 
– it might be necessary to amend some features of his account in light of a 
wider set of historical comparisons. But it is certainly helpful to be able to 
focus on the question of what happens to ethical life when it is subjected to 
self-conscious and institutionalized reflexive systematization.
The three positions identified here on the ordinariness of ethics imply 
divergent research programmes for anthropology. For those who maintain the 
immanence of ethics in ordinary life, the priority seems to be to deepen our 
understanding of the irreducibly ethical dimension of the human condition, to 
maintain resistance to the claims to transcendence of that condition in overtly 
self-proclaimed ‘ethical’ or ‘moral’ institutions and projects, and to celebrate 
the ways in which the ordinary reasserts itself in the face of such aspirationally 
transcendent institutions and practices. The facts of cultural difference and 
historical change are largely incidental to these concerns; engagement is with 
very general if not actually universal or invariant features of the human condi-
tion (see the exchange between Lempert (2013, 2015) and Lambek (2015a)). 
This would suggest an affinity with much of the literature in the anthropology 
of suffering, which as Robbins (2013) has recently argued tends to emphasize 
both the commonalities among states of affliction irrespective of social and 
cultural diversity, and the ability of the ethnographer’s innate human sympa-
thy to establish understanding, irrespective of social and cultural distance, 
based on those affective commonalities, obviating the need, apparently, for 
systematic social or cultural analysis. These observations point to where both 
the appeal and the limitations of this programme might lie for anthropology.
With respect to Zigon’s ideas, two research programmes suggest them-
selves. One would be to try to specify the causes and courses of ‘moral break-
down’ and the relation (somewhat obscure, it seems to me, so far, in Zigon’s 
writings) between the micro-dynamics of individual psychology and macro-
historical change. Can the apparently intuitive idea that the breakdown of 
Soviet socialism was somehow causally related to widespread moral crises 
among Russians be substantiated in detail? How do we tell the difference 
between the effects of the breakdown of that system, and the effects of ‘break-
down’ attributable to the system itself? The other would be to test claims to 
non-human ethical agency (on the part of ‘life-worlds’ or non-humans, for 
example). Do such claims bring into view hitherto unappreciated aspects of 
ethical life? Or do they require, in order to include the non-human, a 

	
Fault Lines in the Anthropology of Ethics	 187
hollowing out of the content of ethics to the point where it cannot begin to 
capture the complexities of what the ordinary ethicists describe?
The third position, which I have summarized here mostly from Keane, 
would assign a much less central importance than in Zigon’s approach to 
questions of non-human ethical agency, but equally, by contrast with ‘ordinary 
ethics’, would directly imply a commitment to historical and comparative 
analysis. Foucault (1986) was embarking on a project to describe the differ-
ences between historically produced moral systems when he distinguished 
those focused on ethical projects from those focused on moral codes. What 
kinds of historical circumstances give rise to Keane’s ‘morality systems’ and 
empower them in relation to each other and to less systematized versions of 
ethical life? How do they differ from each other in their constitution – how 
important are codified rules, exemplars, narratives, distinctive moods or emo-
tions? – and how does significant change happen?
Does Ethics Require Freedom?
How, if at all, does ethical life differ from or exceed the observation of gener-
ally accepted social conventions? Kenneth Read asked this question in his 
seminal 1955 paper, ‘Morality and the Concept of the Person among the 
Guhuku-Gama’, and it was such a profound challenge to an assumption held in 
common by the dominant schools of anthropology in the mid-twentieth 
century that it seems hardly to have registered. For British structural-func-
tionalists, the thing to be explained about morality was ‘how custom binds’ 
(Fortes 1977). Morality was assumed to be a matter of following custom; the 
question was by what mechanisms people are brought to do so. Equally, for 
Boasian cultural anthropology, morality was, in Ruth Benedict’s chilling 
phrase, ‘a convenient term for socially approved habits’ (1934: 73). Against all 
this, and against the cultural relativism with respect to morality that both 
stances inevitably seemed to underpin, Read protested that ethics surely also 
includes the possibility of critical reflection on the familiar or generally 
accepted, and that ethical ideals and values inevitably imply the possibility of 
the perception of a gap between how things are and how they ideally ought to 
be, and therefore at least open up the possibility of a desire and motivation to 
close such a gap. So ethics cannot consist only of conformity with ‘socially 
accepted habits’. Conventional anthropological descriptions of morality, Read 
protested, were simply bypassing all that is most interesting and puzzling 
about their declared subject matter.
His own proposal was to focus on the ontological assumptions underlying 
culturally various conceptions of the moral person: in the moral psychologies 
prevalent in different societies, what capacities (reason? will? conscience? 
heart? friends?) do people need to possess in order to live ethically? What are 
the culturally variable ways in which people are something more than merely 

188	
James Laidlaw
followers of custom? In this programmatic essay, Read did not get very far – 
and as far as he did get, he was going, I think, in the wrong direction (Laidlaw 
2014a: 214–16) – in answering this question, but it remains clearly an indis-
pensable one to ask. And I agree with Read that while – to put it in my terms 
rather than his – the ethical subject is differently constituted in different social 
relations, morality systems and ethical projects, anything recognizable as 
ethical life will presuppose subjects being able to exercise something like what 
I have called reflective freedom (Laidlaw 2014a: 147–49): the capacity reflec-
tively to evaluate in the light of values and ideals.
The proponents of ordinary ethics seem content to bypass this matter of 
freedom. Lambek, for instance, prefers to avoid reference to freedom in favour 
of the observation that people’s conduct is ‘undetermined’ (2015b). Although 
it is part of their account of everyday conduct that it involves the exercise of 
reason and judgement, and that habit is not unthinking, there is resistance to 
the implication, undoubtedly present in the idea of reflective freedom, of 
standing back or self-distancing, perhaps because it suggests that there could 
be a continuity between a reflective or critical dimension of everyday ethical 
life and ethical projects that claim or aim at transcendence. Since self-distanc-
ing reflection is often where commitment to projects of self-transformation 
begins, acknowledging such reflection as an essential part of ethical life might 
seem to ordinary ethicists to come perilously close to legitimizing such tran-
scendence-oriented projects, and so by extension the churches, states and 
other powerful institutions that propagate or impose them. But logically I do 
not think any of that follows: again, if we accept that recognizing something as 
an aspect or instance of ethics is not the same thing as approving of it.
In the formulation I set out above, ethics is founded on the pervasive fact 
of self-interpretation and on the fact that the self-descriptions this process 
gives rise to are necessarily evaluative. Not all of this, of course, is conscious 
or reflective. Much of it is routine, habitual and taken-for-granted. But we 
would be left, I think, with a significantly truncated picture of human life if we 
allowed that fact to deflect us from acknowledging our capacity for reflection, 
however intermittently it might be exercised. If we did not develop such 
capacities – and as I have said already, I see them as the outcome of the ines-
capable inter-subjective, relational nature of social life – we simply would not 
be, in Taylor’s terms, self-interpreting animals. We do not have to be exercis-
ing this capacity continuously, or indeed at any specific time, for it to make a 
difference to the quality of our conduct. To put it very baldly, if we were not at 
times capable of conscious reflection, or if we never in our lives exercised that 
capacity, our everyday and habitual conduct would not be pervasively satu-
rated with meaning, as the ordinary ethicists rightly insist that it is.
A key element in Taylor’s (1985) account of self-interpretation is his 
concept of ‘strong evaluation’, which refers to the fact that we do not merely 
have, for instance, this or that wish or desire, on the basis of which we act and 
of which we might become conscious. We also evaluate those wishes and 

	
Fault Lines in the Anthropology of Ethics	 189
desires. There are some we approve, identify with, and commit ourselves to; 
there are others about which we are ambivalent; others still that we deprecate, 
regret or struggle against. Taylor is not the only author to have thought that 
this is central to human agency. Harry Frankfurt (1988) sees the existence of 
what he calls ‘second-order desires’ as the basis for such form and degree of 
‘freedom of the will’ as is required to make sense of moral agency. This 
‘freedom of the will’ is plainly not possible without – again, at least intermit-
tent – conscious reflection, and it is a prerequisite for any of the narrative 
consistency and self-identity through time on which Mattingly rightly insists 
as a feature of ethical life. As Adam Smith asserted, this capacity for reflection 
on the self is developed as a result of our inter-personal interactions and social 
relations. And without the capacity for strong evaluation and reflection on the 
self – which is impossible to imagine without self-consciousness – I do not see 
that it would make much sense to say that we even had an ethical life: the term 
would be redundant.
Therefore, I think Kenneth Read was on the right track in claiming that 
some kind of reflective evaluation is what marks ethics from the mere follow-
ing of custom. It is clear, however, that there is deeply felt resistance among 
some anthropologists (though by no means all) to this line of thought, and in 
particular to the inescapable conclusion from it that something that it would 
be eccentric not to call freedom is therefore at the heart of ethics.
Much of this resistance derives, I think, from the concern that ‘freedom’ as 
a value inevitably carries specifically Western cultural baggage. Some have 
claimed that freedom has never been much valued or emphasized except in 
the modern West – and indeed the modern, secularist, liberal, capitalist West 
– and although that is demonstrably untrue (Laidlaw 2014a: 138–78), freedom 
has certainly been a matter of very extensive and developed concern in the 
West; for this reason, and also because specific ideas and representations 
about freedom have featured prominently in and been exported as part of 
colonial and neo-colonial projects, it has come to be thus associated (posi-
tively or negatively) for many people in many parts of the world. Furthermore, 
and perhaps most pertinently, contending ideas of political freedom, and their 
conflicts with other values such as equality, have been and remain diagnostic 
of the major ideological cleavages within those roughly modern, secularist, 
liberal, capitalist, ‘Western’ polities. These are ideas about which it is impos-
sible to be neutral, certainly if you live in one of these polities. But two things 
need saying to counter this concern.
First, the idea of reflective freedom that is necessary to get any concept of 
ethics off the ground is just not the same idea as any of those of political liberty 
that have been central to our ideological battles, whether it is the liberal idea 
of ‘negative liberty’, or the ‘positive liberty’ that has been so often opposed to 
it (Berlin 2002), or competing non-liberal ideas such as republican freedom 
(Skinner 1998). It differs also from ideas about political liberty in persistently 
non-liberal polities, such as Russia (Humphrey 2007).

190	
James Laidlaw
On the other hand, although these are importantly different and distinct 
ideas, the possibility that there might be causal connections between them is 
of the first importance for a serious anthropological engagement with ethics. 
To return to a point made earlier, as Jonathan Lear eloquently points out, peo-
ple’s capacity for reflective freedom and therefore their capacity for ethical life 
may be curtailed in some political and social systems and encouraged and 
developed in others, and we should surely see it as part of the anthropological 
project to discover which is which. It would be strange indeed if the presence 
or absence of different forms of political liberty were irrelevant to those 
dynamic processes of development or suppression of human capacities.
It has become a commonplace piety that however else it might develop, the 
anthropology of ethics or morality should not become cut off from the anthro-
pology of politics (e.g. Fassin 2014). And many have rightly called for connec-
tions between them to be established or clarified. Well, here is the clearest and 
most direct connection possible: a framing for ethnographic enquiry into the 
forms, constraints and possibilities of ethical life under diverse political 
regimes and circumstances, and the basis for a project of systematic compari-
son of political orders in terms of the possibilities of ethical life they respec-
tively promote and inhibit. Of course, as I have said already, to say that 
something is ethical is not necessarily to approve of it – one can imagine a 
movement, a party or even a society of highly ethical monsters – but the ques-
tion of the extent to which a political form enables or inhibits ethical life is 
unlikely to be irrelevant to its evaluation. And although it obviously involves a 
risk that political doctrines or regimes one personally subscribes to or has 
some kind of vicarious sympathy for might not come out entirely well from 
being examined and compared in these terms, that risk should surely not 
impel us to shy away from an exercise of such clear and substantial anthropo-
logical value.
James Laidlaw is William Wyse Professor of Social Anthropology, and a Fellow 
of King’s College, in the University of Cambridge. His publications include The 
Subject of Virtue (2014), Religion, Anthropology, and Cognitive Science (2007), 
Ritual and Memory (2004), The Essential Edmund Leach (2000), Riches and 
Renunciation (1995) and The Archetypal Actions of Ritual (1994).
References
Benedict, Ruth. 1934. ‘Anthropology and the Abnormal’, Journal of General 
Psychology 10: 59–79.
Berlin, Isaiah. 2002. Liberty, ed. Henry Hardy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cook, Joanna. 2010. Meditation in Modern Buddhism: Renunciation and Change in 
Thai Monastic Life. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Crist, Eileen. 1999. Images of Animals: Anthropomorphism and Animal Mind. 
Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

	
Fault Lines in the Anthropology of Ethics	 191
Das, Veena. 2007. Life and Words: Violence and Descent into the Ordinary. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
 . 2010a. ‘Moral and Spiritual Striving in the Everyday: To Be a Muslim in 
Contemporary India’, in Anand Pandian and Daud Ali (eds), Ethical Life in South 
Asia. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, pp. 232–52.
 . 2010b. ‘Engaging the Life of the Other: Love and Everyday Life’, in Michael 
Lambek (ed.), Ordinary Ethics: Anthropology, Language, and Action. New York: 
Fordham University Press, pp. 376–99.
 . 2012. ‘Ordinary Ethics’, in Didier Fassin (ed.), A Companion to Moral 
Anthropology. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 133–49.
 . 2014. ‘Ethics, the Householder’s Dilemma, and the Difficulty of Reality’, HAU: 
Journal of Ethnographic Theory 4: 487–95.
 . 2015. ‘Everyday Life and its Moderate Amorality’, in ‘There is No Such Thing as 
the Good: The 2013 Meeting of the Group for Debates in Anthropological Theory’, 
ed. Soumhya Venkatesan, Critique of Anthropology 35: 433–40.
Despret, Vinciane. 2004. ‘The Body We Care for: Figures of Anthropo-zoo-genesis’, 
Body & Society 10: 111–34.
Fassin, Didier. 2014. ‘The Ethical Turn in Anthropology: Promises and Uncertainties’, 
HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory 4: 429–35.
Faubion, James D. 2011. An Anthropology of Ethics. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
 . 2014a. ‘The Subject that is Not One: On the Ethics of Mysticism’, 
Anthropological Theory 13: 287–307.
 . 2014b. ‘Anthropologies of Ethics: Where We’ve Been, Where We Are, Where 
We Might Go’, HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory 4: 437–42.
Fortes, Meyer. 1977. ‘Custom and Conscience in Anthropological Perspective’, 
International Review of Psychoanalysis 4: 127–54.
Foucault, Michel. 1986 (1984). The Use of Pleasure: The History of Sexuality, Volume 2. 
London: Viking.
 . 1997. Ethics, Subjectivity, and Truth: Essential Works of Foucault 1954–1980, 
Volume 1, ed. Paul Rabinow. New York: New Press.
 . 2000. Power: Essential Works of Foucault 1954–1980, Volume 3, ed. James D. 
Faubion. New York: New Press.
Frankfurt, Harry G. 1988. The Importance of What We Care About: Philosophical 
Essays. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hirschkind, Charles. 2006. The Ethical Soundscape: Cassette Sermons and Islamic 
Counter-Publics in Egypt. New York: Columbia University Press.
Humphrey, Caroline. 2007. ‘Alternative Freedoms’, Proceedings of the American 
Philosophical Society 151: 1–10.
Keane, Webb. 2010. ‘Minds, Surfaces, and Reasons in the Anthropology of Ethics’, in 
Michael Lambek (ed.), Ordinary Ethics: Anthropology, Language, and Action. New 
York: Fordham University Press, pp. 64–83.
 . 2014a. ‘Affordances and Reflexivity in Ethical Life: An Ethnographic Stance’, 
Anthropological Theory 14: 3–26.
 . 2014b. ‘Freedom, Reflexivity, and the Sheer Everydayness of Ethics’, HAU: 
Journal of Ethnographic Theory 4: 433–57.
 . 2016. Ethical Life: Its Natural and Social Histories. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press.
Kohn, Eduardo. 2014. ‘Toward an Ethical Practice in the Anthropocene’, HAU: 
Journal of Ethnographic Theory 4: 459–64.

192	
James Laidlaw
Laidlaw, James. 1995. Riches and Renunciation: Religion, Economy, and Society among 
the Jains. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
 . 2002. ‘For an Anthropology of Ethics and Freedom’, Journal of the Royal 
Anthropological Institute 8: 311–32.
 . 2005. ‘A Life Worth Leaving: Fasting to Death as Telos of a Jain Religious Life’, 
Economy and Society 34: 178–99.
 . 2014a. The Subject of Virtue: An Anthropology of Ethics and Freedom. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 . 2014b. ‘Significant Differences: Response to HAU Book Symposium on 
Laidlaw, James. 2014. The subject of virtue: An anthropology of ethics and freedom. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press’, HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory 4: 
497–506.
Lambek, Michael. 2000. ‘The Anthropology of Religion and the Quarrel between 
Poetry and Philosophy’, Current Anthropology 41: 309–20.
 . 2002. ‘Nuriaty, the Saint, and the Sultan: Virtuous Subject and Subjective 
Virtuoso of the Postmodern Colony’, in Richard Werbner (ed.), Postcolonial 
Subjectivities in Africa. London: Zed Books. Available at https://www.sss.ias.edu/
files/Nuriaty,%20the%20Saint%20and%20the%20Sultan.pdf.
 . 2008. ‘Value and Virtue’, Anthropological Theory 8: 133–57.
 . 2010. ‘Toward an Ethics of the Act’, in Ordinary Ethics: Anthropology, 
Language, and Action. New York: Fordham University Press, pp. 39–63.
 . 2015a. ‘On the Immanence of the Ethical: A Response to Lempert’s “No 
Ordinary Ethics”’, Anthropological Theory 15: 128–32.
 . 2015b. The Ethical Condition: Essays on Action, Person, and Value. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Lear, Jonathan. 2006. Radical Hope: Ethics in the Face of Cultural Destruction. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
 . 2015. ‘Waiting with Coetzee’, Raritan 34(4): 1–26.
Lempert, Michael. 2013. ‘No Ordinary Ethics’, Anthropological Theory 13: 370–93.
 . 2015. ‘Ethics Without Immanence: A Reply to Michael Lambek’, 
Anthropological Theory 15: 133–40.
Lester, Rebecca J. 2005. Jesus in Our Wombs: Embodying Modernity in a Mexican 
Convent. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Mahmood, Saba. 2005. Politics of Piety: The Islamic Revival and the Feminist Subject. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Mattingly, Cheryl. 2014a. ‘Moral Deliberation and the Agentive Self in Laidlaw’s 
Ethics’, HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory 4: 473–86.
 . 2014b. Moral Laboratories: Family Peril and the Struggle for a Good Life. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Read, Kenneth E. 1955. ‘Morality and the Concept of the Person among the Gahuku-
Gama’, Oceania 23: 233–82.
Robbins, Joel. 2013. ‘Beyond the Suffering Subject: Toward an Anthropology of the 
Good’, Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 19: 447–62.
Skinner, Quentin. 1998. Liberty Before Liberalism. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Smith, Adam. 1976 [1790]. The Theory of Moral Sentiments, ed. D.D. Rafael and A.L. 
Macfie. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Taylor, Charles. 1985. ‘Self-Interpreting Animals’, in Human Agency and Language: 
Philosophical Papers, Volume 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 
45–76.
Williams, Bernard. 1985. Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy. London: Collins.

	
Fault Lines in the Anthropology of Ethics	 193
Zigon, Jarrett. 2007. ‘Moral Breakdown and Ethical Demand: A Theoretical 
Framework for an Anthropology of Moralities’, Anthropological Theory 7: 131–50.
 . 2008. Morality: An Anthropological Perspective. Oxford: Berg.
 . 2014a. ‘Attunement and Fidelity: Two Ontological Conditions for Morally 
Being-in-the-World’, Ethos 42: 16–30.
 . 2014b. ‘An Ethics of Dwelling and a Politics of World-Building: A Critical 
Response to Ordinary Ethics’, Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 20: 
746–64.


Part III
Moral Engines and the Human Condition


10
An Ethics of Dwelling and a Politics  
of Worldbuilding
Responding to the Demands of the Drug War
Jarrett Zigon
As this volume attests, analyses of morality and ethics have become central to 
the work of many anthropologists. Indeed, the disciplinary scene has certainly 
changed since the early 2000s when I was writing my dissertation and desper-
ately searched for explicit anthropological work on the topic. Since that time 
there has been a wave of anthropological work on moralities and ethics, the 
most noteworthy of which, I would argue, is the specifically programmatic or 
theoretically-analytic questioning of what counts as morality and ethics (e.g., 
Robbins 2004; Zigon 2007, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2017; Lambek 2010; Throop 2010; 
Faubion 2011; Mattingly 2014). This work has made at least three significant 
contributions: firstly, the avoidance of simply equating morality or ethics with 
normative social behaviour; secondly, the avoidance of analysing ethnographic 
data through the lens of our own moral assumptions, traditions and concepts; 
and thirdly, the avoidance of falling into moralizing analysis motivated by the 
urge, for example, to reveal the injustices uncovered through fieldwork.
This is an approach to the study of moralities and ethics that takes them 
seriously as social phenomena, and recognizes them not as distal aspects of 
primary social practices such as politics or religion but as distinct and signifi-
cant factors in shaping these. Perhaps what is most significant about this 
approach is the possibility it allows for questioning and rethinking some of the 
most basic assumptions and concepts generally associated with morality. For 
a critical anthropological study of moralities is perfectly situated not only to 
disclose the genealogy of moral concepts and reveal their potentially (not so) 
hidden political-economic implications, but also to offer new concepts that 
better articulate the moral experiences of our ethnographic subjects (Zigon 
2014a, 2014b, 2017).

198	
Jarrett Zigon
In this chapter I will do just this by addressing the central question of this 
volume – indeed, perhaps the central question of human existence – that is, 
how to understand ethical motivation or the ethical drives of human life. To 
do this I take up an ethnographic example of anti-drug war political activism 
that shows how critical hermeneutics provides a framework for recognizing 
the emergence of ethical demands from a world. The first step of such herme-
neutics is the recognition that although many of our informants may utilize 
the dominant moral vocabulary available today, ethical imperatives may 
exceed that which is intended or meant by this vocabulary. As a result, it 
behoves us to consider that when our informants use a familiar moral concept, 
it may be because it is the only concept historically available to try to articulate 
something about being-in-the-world that exceeds what it is that concept has 
come to represent, indicate or mean; and, as such, we may recognize this 
concept as a marker of the problematic of ethics – a place from which our 
analysis can begin – but not as the end or aim of ethics. In so doing, critical 
hermeneutics, furthermore, seeks to counter the deep moralism that has to a 
great extent saturated much of our social, analytic and political lives, and as a 
result attempts to rethink the link between ethics and politics. Thus, I argue 
that a critical hermeneutics of moralities provides a theoretic-analytic for 
rethinking a moral tradition characterized by metaphysical humanism, as well 
as the social and political worlds in which the concepts and assumptions of 
this tradition are mobilized (see Zigon 2017).
Drug War
The war on drugs was first declared by Richard Nixon and since the early 
1980s has become a highly militarized, punitive, highly expensive interna-
tional ‘war on people’, as many anti-drug war activists put it, waged to some 
extent by nearly every country on the globe. It is difficult to conclude that the 
drug war has been anything but a disastrous failure no matter how one looks 
at it. From the mass incarceration of a significant proportion of a generation 
of African-American men in the United States, to the street battles, assassina-
tions and ‘collateral damage’ that has led to over 70,000 deaths in Mexico since 
2006, to the torturous rehabilitation conditions found throughout Russia, to 
the extrajudicial killings in 2003 of at least 2,275 suspected drug ‘offenders’ in 
Thailand by the military and police, to the preventable health risks users and 
non-users are exposed to everywhere as the result of stigmatization and lack 
of harm reduction programmes, the drug war seemingly has resulted in little 
more than the death, suffering and stigmatization of millions of users and 
non-users alike. Meanwhile, drug cartels continue to accumulate wealth and 
power that in some instances far surpasses that of sovereign nations, and 
states increasingly tighten security and surveillance that impacts the lives of 
entire populations.1

	
Responding to the Demands of the Drug War	 199
It is precisely this situation that anti-drug war activists around the globe are 
mobilizing against (Zigon 2015). Like nearly every political movement on the 
contemporary political scene, the anti-drug war movement regularly mixes 
moral language with its political agenda and in this sense could be seen as an 
example of the political moralism that Wendy Brown (2001) argues character-
izes contemporary politics. Thus, dignity, rights, respect and justice are some 
of the moral key words that the spokespersons for this movement will regu-
larly invoke. For example, once while interviewing a regional director of one of 
the most influential international drug policy reform organizations, I was told 
that one of the goals of the organization, as well as her personal view on the 
matter, is that all drug users should be treated with dignity. Indeed, this was 
not surprising as dignity is a moral concept that is regularly used by anti-drug 
war political activists in their struggle against prohibition and the negative 
effects of what they call ‘a war on people’ – drug users and non-drug users 
alike. I asked her what she meant by ‘dignity’ and she replied:
Well, I mean our health policies, our criminal justice policies. None of them really 
treat an individual who is struggling with drugs, whether it’s drug possession, drug 
use, drug selling, with dignity. They don’t recognize the fact that an individual’s life 
may have been challenging and so the decisions that they’ve had to make, that have 
brought them to this place in their life, may not be decisions that we think are good, 
but maybe the best decision out of a range of decisions and options that were avail-
able at the time those decisions were made. And, I think a lot of the local healthcare 
collaboratives that have sprung up over the last couple of decades like syringe 
exchange programs and things like that, are some of the only places where there 
actually is dignity for people who are using drugs and who are struggling in life.
It seems, then, that according to this leading advocate of drug policy reform, 
dignity is not about an inherent essence or capacity of the natural human as it 
is so often glossed in human rights discourse. Rather, dignity here is primarily 
conceived as the outcome of a particular social configuration of non-prohibi-
tionist policies and services that begin not with judgment but with quality care 
and an understanding of how certain life trajectories may provide limited pos-
sibilities for being-in-the-world. In fact, in the director’s utterance she locates 
dignity only once and it is not in, on or as a part of an individual person, but 
rather she locates it in a socio-politically configured space she calls local 
healthcare collaboratives. It is in particularly assembled and situated worlds of 
certain practices, policies, ideas and aims, ‘where there actually is dignity for 
people’. When persons become a part of such assemblages they too take on 
such dignity not because it was a latent aspect of their natural essence, but 
because this particular assemblage provides certain conditions within which 
they can dwell. As a result, and as will become clear below, new possibilities 
arise for them that may allow them to become something that previously 
would not have been possible. It is this being-at-home in the world and the 
openness to possibilities that this form of being allows that the director articu-
lates when she uses the word ‘dignity’ but that I will refer to as dwelling.

200	
Jarrett Zigon
In the rest of this section I will try to show that what this director refers to 
as ‘dignity’ may in fact be better conceived as dwelling, and that an anthropo-
logical study of moralities/ethics2 is most productive when it does not assume 
that we already know how to recognize these. Rather, we may be analytically 
better off accepting that although oftentimes our informants will use the 
moral vocabulary of dominant moral discourses, they may use this vocabulary 
to indicate an ethical imperative that exceeds that which the former can artic-
ulate. Is this, after all, really very surprising? Is it unreasonable to consider the 
possibility that a very particular set of moral concepts that have a very particu-
lar history would not entirely or even adequately cover the range of possible 
moral/ethical concerns, problems, anxieties or ways of being-in-the-world? 
For the director’s use of dignity in this utterance clearly seems to be intending 
some other state of affairs that exceeds what the ‘ordinary’ or dominant use of 
‘dignity’ would entail. Her use of dignity seems to be pointing to a moral aim 
that is not covered under the ordinary use of the concept but she uses it 
nevertheless.
Perhaps this is so because there is not yet another moral concept available 
for her to use. It is the gap of this ‘not yet’ that critical hermeneutics attempts 
to fill. And this is the case because hermeneutic analysis assumes that we 
humans are always ahead of ourselves, constantly engaged in an existentially 
interpretive process to catch up to our being, a being that can never be com-
pletely met. Because of this assumption critical hermeneutics cannot take 
concepts to literally mean what they are ‘supposed’ to mean, but, rather, by 
doing ethnographic analysis as a form of the phenomenological epoché 
(Throop 2012), critical hermeneutics asks what the use of the concept points 
us towards. In so doing, a central task of critical hermeneutics is to offer pos-
sibilities for thinking, doing and becoming morally and politically otherwise, 
rather than reproducing the moral vocabulary that clearly no longer resonates 
with what it is like to be-in-this-world today (Zigon 2017).
But the director did use ‘dignity’ and when I pushed her a little bit on just 
this point she responded that she is trying to talk ‘about the way the social 
context has impacted this individual’s life and how that all goes together to 
create the current circumstances. Regardless of what those current circum-
stances are, everyone should be treated with dignity’. And here again we see 
that in response to my slight pushing she more or less repeats – in a much 
abbreviated form – what she had told me above but this time seems to put 
more emphasis on the dignity of individuals rather than how singular assem-
blages in the world are places of ‘dignity’. It is in the anthropologist’s push for 
clarification, I suggest, in the forced reflection upon the use of language, that 
the director returns to the dominant use of dignity as that which is a charac-
teristic of individuals; that individuals should be treated as dignified beings. In 
this reflection, return and reliance upon a dominant moral discourse the 
director shifts her articulation of ‘dignity’ from that of a description of an 
assembled world, as a part of which one can dwell, to that of the dominant 

	
Responding to the Demands of the Drug War	 201
notion of an adjectival being standing over and against the world and already 
pre-known in its moral totality. This shift is not surprising since our contem-
porary dominant moral discourses and their attendant political discourses – 
those that utilize the language of rights, dignity, responsibility, good, evil and 
so on – begin from the ontological condition of a priori totalized subjects 
standing over and against the world they happen to live in, and stand there as 
the basis and source of morality/ethics.
Ethics of Dwelling – NYC
The police in New York City already ‘know’ the being-in-the-world of a young 
black man when they (not so) randomly stop and frisk him on the street. Stop 
and Frisk has been a key police tactic in the war on drugs used in New York 
City. In 2012, for example, 532,911 individuals were stopped and frisked in 
New York City, 55 per cent of whom were African American and 32 per cent 
of whom were Latino. Perhaps most disturbing about this form of surveillance 
is that 89 per cent of all of those stopped and frisked in 2012 were deemed 
‘innocent’, that is, the search they were exposed to turned up nothing. The 
highest number of arrests (more than 5,000) were carried out for possessing 
personal-use quantities of marijuana, which under New York City law is not 
an offence unless it is shown in public, which is exactly what it is when a police 
officer asks you to empty your pockets. Overwhelmingly, those stopped, 
frisked and arrested are young African-American and Latino men, and this 
tactic is predominantly carried out in the neighbourhoods where these men 
live.3 It has created a situation in which one’s neighbourhood, one’s street, 
one’s own front stoop is no longer a place where one can dwell. It is just this 
inability to dwell in their world that has led many African-American and 
Latin-American people in New York City who do and do not use drugs to 
politically mobilize against this and other tactics of the war on drugs. 
Consider, for example, Terrance, who is a fifty-year-old African-American 
man from the Bronx, a former crack user who has been incarcerated twice; 
now, as a leader of the city’s users’ union, he regularly meets with New York 
State and City politicians and officials in an attempt to end prohibitionist laws 
and policies. Terrance once told me:
I kind of think that what really put me, or what really motivated me was uhm, was 
seeing the harassment that, you know, people in our community are going through 
on a daily basis trying to struggle, trying to make ends meet, you know. I mean, it’s 
not fair that you would come to my community, and you don’t live there and you can 
tell me where I can stand, you can tell me that because I live here I can’t stand in 
front of my building, I can’t stand on this corner, I can’t congregate with individuals 
in my social setting in front of my building. You know, I’m trespassing in my own 
neighbourhood. Come on! You know, then uhm, and all these unnecessary, all these 
arrests that were taking place that were just, I can’t even find the words to describe 

202	
Jarrett Zigon
it, you know what I’m saying, but it was unorthodox, you know, to a point where if 
I’m coming out of my building, like I been many times, and stopped and frisked 
because I’m a person of colour and I don’t have my sneakers tied or I’m wearing, you 
know, or I have clothes on that are related to gangsters or whatever, which are the 
clothings that a lot of people in the neighbourhood wear, you know, and I’m going 
to work and I’m still being stopped. You’re not giving me no freedom to walk in my 
own neighbourhood, but if I was in another neighbourhood, another colour, you 
wouldn’t be stopping me. So why am I, at this point right here, being profiled? So, 
profiling was something that really irritated me … So that was my motivation for, 
you know, starting to come to [the union] and getting involved.
The director of the drug policy organization might characterize the situation 
Terrance describes as one in which Terrance and his neighbours are treated 
without dignity. Those who protest against Stop and Frisk policies in front of 
City Hall often hold signs that call for justice. But Terrance finds no use for 
what Hannah Arendt called ‘bannisters’ to articulate the moral breakdown 
that motivates him to struggle politically against the drug war. Rather, for 
Terrance it all comes done to the fact that the drug war situation has rendered 
him a stranger in his world: a person who in his total being is assumed from 
the beginning to be untrustworthy, dangerous, potential evil waiting to mani-
fest. Terrance’s motivation for becoming and remaining politically active is not 
moral outrage erupting from an internal sense of dignity, but is better consid-
ered, I suggest, as a moral breakdown that stems from the fact that the drug 
war situation has resulted in him experiencing himself as if ‘You know, I’m 
trespassing in my own neighbourhood’.
This moral breakdown, however, is not simply about Terrance and his 
neighbours not being able to live normally and go about their everyday lives, 
although it is also about that. But this unsettledness points to a deeper and 
more existential and ontological demand to be in the world in a certain way. 
For not only is Terrance unable to live the everyday in his world, neither can 
he dwell in his world. And this is an important distinction for the purpose of 
this chapter as it provides a line of flight along which we can reconceive moral-
ity/ethics, as well as politics. For dwelling is not simply being able to live one’s 
everydayness. Humans have an incredible capacity to adapt to all kinds of 
conditions in which they can live. The innumerable stories of mundane every-
dayness lived out in extreme contexts of poverty or war attest to this. In con-
trast, to dwell is to be-in-the-world in such a way that one’s being is not 
reduced to such a degree that being-in-the-world becomes something like 
trapped in a world. The everydayness that Terrance and his neighbours are 
forced to live because of the situation of the drug war is more akin to being 
trapped in a world than dwelling.
This distinction can be seen, for example, in Heidegger’s conception of 
dwelling as both building and care (1975b). In considering the phrase ‘poeti-
cally man dwells’ found in one of Hölderlin’s poems, Heidegger (1975a) inter-
prets dwelling as ongoing poiesis, or as creative building that allows for 

	
Responding to the Demands of the Drug War	 203
continued poetic dwelling. Such poetic or creative dwelling is being-in-the-
world in such a way that as part of that world one is intimately intertwined 
with and concerned for it and its constituent parts. Furthermore, to dwell is 
also to be in a world in such a way that one’s being is never pre-limited within 
a pre-assumed totality, but, rather, that possibilities for becoming otherwise 
remain open. Becoming otherwise, then, is a process of poetic dwelling, of 
building and maintaining a world in which such dwelling always remains pos-
sible (cf. Heidegger 1975b; Ingold 2011; Povinelli 2011). This is an ethic of 
dwelling as a politics of worldbuilding.
Terrance is struggling to dwell in a world that has made it nearly impossible 
for him and his neighbours to do so. And yet he keeps going. Despite having a 
prison record that is a direct result of drug war surveillance – a record that has 
taken away his ability, for example, to vote, receive student and other kinds of 
loans, to travel abroad, and to be hired for many jobs – Terrance struggles to 
find a way to dwell, to be in the world in such a way that both feels, as it were, 
right, and provides possibilities for becoming otherwise. A significant part of 
his ethical struggle to dwell has been his political activity with the users’ union, 
but perhaps more important for Terrance is his work at the syringe exchange 
programme in his Bronx neighbourhood. Just as the director of the drug policy 
reform organization articulated syringe exchanges and other such collabora-
tive health programmes as a place where ‘dignity’ is located, Terrance sees his 
neighbourhood programme as one of the few places where people who use 
drugs can dwell. Terrance, of course, does not put it quite like this, but he does 
describe it as a place where people who use can feel safe, not judged or stigma-
tized, where they can just ‘hang out’ and socialize with others; he describes it 
as a place where many of their needs can be met, and they can learn how to 
satisfy their own needs. The programme is also a place where – through a 
project run by Terrance – people who use can be trained to become outreach 
workers, learn skills and become educated in certain ways that translate into 
other kinds of jobs, and, significantly, become trained to participate in the 
political activity of the users’ union. All of this – the being and feeling at home, 
the sociality, and the openness of possibilities to become otherwise – is what 
I am trying to get at by using the term dwelling not only as a moral concept but 
as an ethical imperative for human existence.
What is an ethical imperative for human existence and how does it differ 
from the metaphysical humanism that is characteristic of much moral phi-
losophy and, as I have argued elsewhere (2014a), increasingly anthropological 
studies of ethics and moralities as well? Both dwelling as an existential impera-
tive and metaphysical humanist conceptions such as dignity make claims 
about the essential ‘nature’ of being human. To make a claim that all humans 
share some essence in and of itself is not a problem. How, after all, could it be 
said that we study humans and not chimpanzees, dogs, trees or starfish if we 
do not acknowledge that there is something essential about what it is to be any 
one of these particular existents? The problem of metaphysical humanism is 

204	
Jarrett Zigon
that it assumes an a priori, predefined human with very specific characteris-
tics and capacities – such as Reason and Morality, along with the latter’s 
assumed qualities of dignity, rights and autonomy – that are held to be the 
case prior to any actual intertwining with any particular world. The only ques-
tion that remains is if these characteristics and capacities will be allowed to 
manifest and flourish in a particular social and political world. Luckily, built 
into this perspective is the answer to the question of what the social and politi-
cal world ought to be like in order to support this flourishing: it just so happens 
to be a world that very much resembles our own.
To claim that dwelling is an ethical imperative for human existence, on the 
other hand, does not assert any predefined characteristics or capacities of 
humanness. Rather, it is simply to claim that to be human is to be intimately 
intertwined with a world for which one is concerned and which is concerned, in 
turn, for it.4 And, it should be noted that this concern makes no normative claim 
beyond maintaining the ability to dwell in that world. Because of this mutual 
concern between oneself and a world, an openness always remains such that 
both oneself and that world can become otherwise so as to maintain this mutual 
concern. To speak of dwelling as an ethical imperative, then, does not predefine 
how or what a human becomes, nor does it predefine what kind of world this 
human must become a part of. Rather, it is simply to acknowledge that to be 
human is always to be concernedly intertwined in a world with others, and this 
being-together always manifests differently. Dwelling, then, is that existential 
imperative of humanness that allows for the very differences of ways of being-
in-the-world, ethically acting and valuing, and socially and politically inter- and 
intra-acting that anthropologists tend to focus on. Thus, while it is certainly the 
case that I assume an existential essence of the being we call human, this is a 
minimal essence that provides the open ground for becoming in diverse and 
differing ways. In contrast, metaphysical humanism assumes a predefined and 
closed conception of humanness whereby to be human is always and only to be 
defined by Reason and Morality and their concomitant attributes such as dignity 
or responsibility. Thus, while metaphysical humanism simply repeats and pro-
jects a certain predefined conception of humanness, dwelling offers an ontologi-
cal starting point for understanding how differences manifest because of an 
essential sharedness, as well as offering a link between this ontological starting 
point, ethical motivation and political practice.
This is so because when worlds breakdown, dwelling is no longer possible. 
When this occurs the demand of an ethics of dwelling is felt and some respond 
to this demand. Thus, Terrance is not alone in his struggle to enact an ethics 
of dwelling in New York City. There is also, for example, Martin, an African-
American man in his mid-forties, who formerly used heroin but now only 
occasionally uses cocaine. Like Terrance, Martin also works at a syringe 
exchange programme in his neighbourhood and is one of the leaders of the 
New York City users’ union and one of the union’s most publicly outspoken 
members. Once when we were talking about how he got involved with the 

	
Responding to the Demands of the Drug War	 205
union and what his involvement has done for him, he told me that for him it 
was an ‘awakening’. As he put it: ‘I guess you could say it was more of an awak-
ening once I saw what [the union] was actually about. And that’s the way I like 
to look at it now, as basically an awakening’. I asked him what he meant by an 
awakening and he continued:
When I say an awakening, meaning that for so long being a user and just not having 
the understanding that there are opportunities for people like myself to actually 
meet with our legislators and actually talk to them about things that are needed in 
our community, actually being able to have an influence and getting new legislation 
passed, you know what I’m saying, and moving, and possibly moving policy. To me, 
that’s an awakening as far as being, as far as being able to be made aware that, yeah, 
these things are possible. So that’s what I mean by saying that’s an awakening … It 
was a whole new world that basically opened up and it’s a challenge, it’s an everyday 
challenge to try and let others know that they have the same opportunities that I had 
as far as gaining that awakening.
Martin describes his participation in anti-drug war politics as an awakening, 
as the opening of ‘a whole new world’ in which he could do, think and be in 
ways that he never imagined were possible for him before. As he told me later 
that day, participating in the union and working as an advocacy liaison at the 
exchange programme have given him the possibility of becoming an entirely 
different person than he was before. Martin’s motivations for joining the 
union, like Terrance’s, did not stem from moral outrage but instead from the 
experience of having his mother, who was also an injecting drug user, die in his 
arms from complications related to the HIV/AIDS she contracted as a user 
who had no access to syringe exchange. The moral breakdown that resulted 
from this experience brought about for Martin a deep-seated awareness that 
for drug users it had become impossible to dwell in a world in which the war 
on drugs is waged on people like his mother, himself and his friends. Of course 
those who did not die could survive within the limiting conditions allowed by 
this war. But Martin felt that he and his loved ones could not dwell; he felt that 
they had their open possibilities for being-in-the-world closed simply because 
they put a substance in their body that the state prohibits.
Martin eventually discovered that the ethics of dwelling as a politics of 
worldbuilding that he enacts opens new possibilities, new worlds for him and 
others. He discovered that this ethics of dwelling awakened him. Motivated by 
this awakening, he now seeks to provide this to those users who are still 
trapped in what he calls the ‘void’ that most people who use drugs are trapped 
in as a result of prohibitionist policies that, among other things, limit users’ 
being-in-the-world to the stigmatized identity of an immoral and irresponsi-
ble addict who is certainly untrustworthy and potentially dangerous. As of yet 
Martin and Terrance’s activities are limited to building what we might call new 
‘subjective worlds’. But in the next section I will briefly consider a politics of 
worldbuilding that is in the process of building an entirely new and parallel 
world in the midst of another North American city.

206	
Jarrett Zigon
Politics of Worldbuilding – Vancouver
Terrance’s experience in parts of the Bronx shows us that prohibitionist poli-
cies render entire neighbourhoods zones of uninhabitability. Another such 
zone of uninhabitability emerged in the Downtown Eastside of Vancouver, 
Canada, as a result of the drug war situation in that city. A hundred years ago 
the Downtown Eastside was a centre of business, commerce and government 
in Vancouver, but by the late twentieth century it had become the frontline of 
the drug war in the city. Businesses and government offices had moved out to 
be replaced with single room occupancy (SRO) hotels and abandoned spaces. 
It was not uncommon for commuters who had no other option than to take a 
bus through this part of town to look out the window and see dead bodies 
from overdose lying on the sidewalks. The back alleyways that run throughout 
the neighbourhood had become heroin shooting galleries, places of business 
for sex workers, a place to sleep and congregate and buy and sell drugs, and yet 
another place to die from overdose. Hundreds of people a year, in fact, would 
die of overdose in this neighbourhood alone. It was, as one eventual protest by 
drug users would call it, ‘the killing fields’.
This neighbourhood had become a world in which the people who lived 
there – a great number of whom were drug users – could no longer dwell. This 
world had become uninhabitable and unbearable. Those who lived there were 
reduced to objects that metaphorically and quite literally became just another 
‘piece of trash’ on the sidewalk or in the alley. Eventually many of these users, 
their neighbours and some of the organizations already working in the neigh-
bourhood – mostly SRO organizations – mobilized to address the fact of the 
unbearableness of this world. Here is an example of how from the breakdown 
of a world, out of its unbearableness, a demand for another kind of ethics 
emerges; this is an ethics of dwelling, which we can also call politics – that is, 
politics as a process of worldbuilding.
Such an ethics of dwelling as a politics of worldbuilding is underway in 
Vancouver, and anti-drug war activists around the globe look to it as a model 
for their own activities. In addition to similar kinds of harm reduction prac-
tices and activism to that done by Terrance and Martin in New York, activists 
in Vancouver were also able to create the only legally sanctioned safe injection 
site (Insite) in North America. But while the establishment of Insite is a central 
aspect of the new world that has emerged out of the breakdown of the 
Downtown Eastside, it is just one aspect of this new world, within which it is 
now possible for drug users to dwell. This new world consists of, among other 
things, art galleries and studios, a bank, a grocery store, a dentist office, a com-
munity centre, a medical centre, and a network of social enterprises, where 
users can be trained for employment and work, and which includes two coffee 
shops/cafes and various stores.
This is a new world attuned to itself and its inhabitants, and as such remains 
open to possibilities for it and them becoming otherwise (see Zigon 2017). 

	
Responding to the Demands of the Drug War	 207
Consider the following example. One October morning I was standing outside 
one of the social enterprise cafes talking with its manager and the director of 
the first nations programme of one of the neighbourhood organizations. The 
director was telling me that unlike most service programmes around the 
globe, Vancouver’s is unique in that they have built what he called a structure 
but I will call a world, in which any one of the programmes or businesses 
within this world serves as an entry point for the others. The director went on 
to draw a distinction. As he put it, normally if one is seeking some services 
then one must and can only find these at a particular location run by a particu-
lar organization that is generally disconnected from other kinds of pro-
grammes and services. The director called this common way of providing and 
finding services linear because there is only one entry point and it provides 
only one kind of service. Vancouver’s Downtown Eastside, on the other hand, 
is a world of networked services and social enterprises into which one can 
enter at any point and be referred to, learn about, and take advantage of any 
number of other available possibilities within this world.
The director continued and gave me the following example of how this 
emergence of possibilities happens. The bank, he said as he pointed to it across 
the street and which is a part of this networked world, can be an entry point 
for a range of possibilities. The bank is a space where tellers come to know 
local customers quite well as they all tend to be people from the neighbour-
hood. Over time they hear their stories, see them in the streets and in the 
cafes, or in the community centre, and thus a relationship is built over time. It 
is not uncommon, then, that someone might confide in a teller about some 
difficulties she might be experiencing, or the teller might simply be able to see 
that she is acting differently than usual, and thus the teller can suggest she go 
across the street to the detox centre, for example, or to the dentist, or suggest 
she seek employment at one of the social enterprises within the neighbour-
hood. The bank, then, becomes an entry point into a range of possibilities that 
emerges from a world that is attuned to the ways of being and becoming of 
itself. It is a space or clearing from which a world opens itself to one of its 
inhabitants who dwells within it.
The bank is not simply a place to keep one’s money so that the bank can 
make profit; it is also a clearing in a world specifically attuned to those beings 
that dwell there. Thus, not only are the tellers and customers attuned to these 
possibilities, but so too is the architectural space and technology of the bank. 
The lobby, for example, unlike in other banks, is not simply a place to fill out 
deposit slips or wait to meet a teller or service representative, it is also a space 
for people in the neighbourhood to hang out, drink the free coffee, and use 
computers and the internet provided to anyone free of charge. The bank lobby 
is a clearing where it is possible to learn about what is happening elsewhere in 
the neighbourhood – for example, political rallies, concerts, yoga sessions or 
art exhibitions – by talking with others or reading the announcements posted 
there. It is also a clearing opening onto the globe as one can interact with 

208	
Jarrett Zigon
others anywhere or learn about anything via the internet. The bank lobby, 
then, is a clearing out of which possibilities of learning, acting and becoming 
are opened. And just in case this is not enough, the lobby is also a space where 
anyone can go and get a safe crack pipe from a vending machine, probably the 
only bank anywhere that offers a crack pipe vending machine. This bank, then, 
is a space of opening possibilities that is just one part of a new world that has 
emerged in the Downtown Eastside as a result of the politics of worldbuilding 
enacted as a result of the demands of an ethics of dwelling.
This is a brief example, then, of how unlike much political activity in North 
America and other parts of the globe that is driven by a political moralism that 
shouts out platitudes of moral outrage, activists in Vancouver are enacting 
another kind of politics because it evokes another kind of morality. They are 
not holding on to bannisters in their attempt to build a world in which they 
and others can once again dwell. Rather, they are responding with an ethics 
that has emerged from the demand that as a human being-in-the-world it is 
existentially necessary to be able to do so, that is, dwell.
Some Closing Words
In this chapter I have tried to show that anthropological studies of moralities 
and ethics are best served by not restricting their analyses to the already well-
established moral concepts and frameworks of Western moral philosophy. As 
an illustration, I have provided a critical hermeneutics that discloses how 
ethical imperatives may exceed familiar moral concepts despite the fact that 
the latter are utilized in ordinary everyday language because they are the only 
moral concepts currently available. I have argued that familiar moral concepts 
ought not be considered as moral aims, but rather as pointing to or indicating 
an ethical problem or imperative that cannot yet be neatly conceptualized but 
nevertheless motivates action in the world. It is the analysis of these ethical 
problems or imperatives that I have been arguing critical hermeneutics is 
suited to do.
‘Dignity’ is one of those familiar moral concepts that anti-drug war political 
activists regularly utilize. I have tried to show that how at least one major 
player in the international drug policy reform world uses this concept is better 
conceived as pointing to the existential inability for many people around the 
world to dwell in worlds conditioned by the war on drugs. Terrance and 
Martin made this particularly clear in their articulation of why they were 
motivated to become politically active in the users’ union, and further 
described to me how they conceive of this work as providing spaces within 
which users and non-users can dwell and as such become open to new possi-
bilities for being-in-the-world. Martin described this experience of dwelling as 
an ‘awakening’. Both Terrance and Martin, like many other activists around the 
globe, look to the new world being created ‘on the ground’ in Vancouver as an 

	
Responding to the Demands of the Drug War	 209
example of the kind of politics of worldbuilding they are trying to enact in 
response to the ethical demand they have felt.
The dominant meaning of the concept ‘dignity’ captures none of this, and 
yet this is precisely what the director, Terrance, Martin, activists in Vancouver, 
and many others have talked to me about and shown me they are doing in 
their political activism. They are attempting to transform worlds so that those 
who have found themselves in them no longer have their way of being-in-the-
world limited to such a degree that in a very real sense they may be better 
described as trapped in a world than as dwelling in a world. In other words, by 
looking to see what the familiar concept of ‘dignity’ points to, rather than 
taking it as the aim or end of moral activity, we discover that in this instance 
‘dignity’ points to an ethical imperative that has ontological and political 
implications. That is to say, the ethics of dwelling that drives the anti-drug war 
political movement is an ethical motivation for doing a kind of politics that 
seeks to change the ontological conditions of worlds because those conditions 
that are currently enacted through the war on drugs have become existentially 
unbearable. In this sense, moralities and ethics, and the politics they may 
demand, emerge from the ontological conditions we happen to find ourselves 
in for being-in-the-world.
Jarrett Zigon is the William and Linda Porterfield Professor of Biomedical 
Ethics and Professor of Anthropology at the University of Virginia. His 
most recent book, Disappointment: Toward a Critical Hermeneutics of 
Worldbuilding, addresses the question of political motivation and disappoint-
ment in our contemporary world through a rethinking of the relation between 
ethics, politics and ontologies.
Notes
  1.	 Significantly revised versions of this chapter have been published in Journal of the Royal 
Anthropological Institute as ‘An Ethics of Dwelling and a Politics of World-Building: a 
Critical Response to Ordinary Ethics’ (Zigon 2014a), and in Disappointment: Toward a 
Critical Hermeneutics of Worldbuilding (Zigon 2017). For more information see, for 
example, www.drugpolicy.org and www.opensocietyfoundations.org. 
  2.	 I use the shorthand morality/ethics or ethics/morality when discussing anthropological 
studies and approaches since as of yet there is no agreement by anthropologists as to 
what either concept means, or which is more useful; both are thus often used inter-
changeably or one is simply chosen rather than the other. This conceptual situation is 
reflected in this volume.
  3.	 For this and other information, see http://www.nyclu.org/content/stop-and-frisk-data 
and http://www.nyclu.org/news/
analysis-finds-racial-disparities-ineffectiveness-nypd-stop-and-frisk-program-links-
tactic-soar. 
  4.	 Here I want to go beyond the Heideggerian notion of concern (Besorgen) as Dasein’s 
concern for things and practices of the world, and even beyond the late Heidegger’s 
extension of care and concern to that of Being in general, and suggest that an ethics of 

210	
Jarrett Zigon
dwelling ultimately entails a mutual concern between all of those existents that become 
intertwined within a world. Dwelling entails a mutual responsivity of all existents of 
proximity; this mutual responsivity can be called attunement. 
References
Brown, Wendy. 2001. Politics Out of History. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Faubion, James D. 2011. An Anthropology of Ethics. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Heidegger, Martin. 1975a. ‘…Poetically Man Dwells …’, in Poetry, Language, Thought. 
New York: Harper Colophon Books, pp. 211–29.
 . 1975b. ‘Building Dwelling Thinking’, in Poetry, Language, Thought. New York: 
Harper Colophon Books, pp. 143–61.
Ingold, Tim. 2011. The Perception of the Environment: Essays on Livelihood, Dwelling 
and Skill. London: Routledge.
Lambek, Michael. 2010. Ordinary Ethics: Anthropology, Language, and Action. New 
York: Fordham University Press.
Mattingly, Cheryl. 2014. Moral Laboratories: Family Peril and the Struggle for a Good 
Life. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Povinelli, Elizabeth A. 2011. Economies of Abandonment: Social Belonging and 
Endurance in Late Liberalism. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Robbins, Joel. 2004. Becoming Sinners: Christianity and Moral Torment in a Papua 
New Guinea Society. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Throop, C. Jason. 2010. Suffering and Sentiment: Exploring the Vicissitudes of 
Experience and Pain in Yap. Berkeley: University of California Press.
 . 2012. ‘On Inaccessibility and Vulnerability: Some Horizons of Compatibility 
between Phenomenology and Psychoanalysis’, Ethos 40(1): 75–96.
Zigon, Jarrett. 2007. ‘Moral Breakdown and the Ethical Demand: A Theoretical 
Framework for an Anthropology of Moralities’, Anthropological Theory 7(2): 
131–50.
 . 2011. HIV Is God’s Blessing: Rehabilitating Morality in Neoliberal Russia. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
 . 2012. ‘Narratives’, in Didier Fassin (ed.), A Companion to Moral Anthropology. 
Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 204–20.
 . 2013. ‘On Love: Remaking Moral Subjectivity in Postrehabilitation Russia’, 
American Ethnologist 40(1): 201–15.
 . 2014a. ‘An Ethics of Dwelling and a Politics of World-Building: A Critical 
Response to Ordinary Ethics’, Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute (N.S.) 
20: 746–64.
 . 2014b. ‘Attunement and Fidelity: Two Ontological Conditions for Morally 
Being-in-the-World’, Ethos 42(1): 16–30.
 . 2015. ‘What is a Situation? An Assemblic Ethnography of the Drug War’, 
Cultural Anthropology 30(3): 501–24.
 . 2017. Disappointment: Toward a Critical Hermeneutics of Worldbuilding. New 
York: Fordham University Press.

11
Human, the Responding Being
Considerations Towards a Philosophical 
Anthropology of Responsiveness
Thomas Schwarz Wentzer
This chapter makes a case for a way to deal with ethics from an angle that is 
rather unusual in recent philosophy as well as in anthropology. I take the ques-
tion concerning ‘moral engines’ to be a matter of philosophical anthropology. 
The concept of responsiveness qualifies this perspective by pursuing a phe-
nomenological approach; hence I take human responsiveness to be the exis-
tential condition that helps us to understand the roots – rather than the engine 
– of ethics and human agency.
It might be helpful to begin this chapter by adding some introductory 
remarks to the drift of the argument and the aforementioned notions. The term 
‘philosophical anthropology’ means something different than merely the philo-
sophical reflection of ethnographic fieldwork, its ontologies, epistemologies or 
methodologies. It refers to the legacy of a tradition in the first half of twentieth-
century German thinking, which attempted to deal with the human in a way 
that avoids both naturalistic reductionisms and idealist shortcomings, while 
defending a philosophical take on the human (a comprehending analysis is pro-
vided by Fischer 2008; for an informative characterization see Solies 2010; Wulf 
2013). The representatives of this tradition – one might mention books by, 
among others, Paul Alsberg (1975 [1922]), Max Scheler (2009 [1928]), Helmuth 
Plessner (1975 [1928]), Arnold Gehlen (1986 [1940]), Erich Rothacker (2008 
[1944]), Adolf Portmann (1969 [1944]), but also Ernst Cassirer (1992 [1944]), 
Hannah Arendt (1958) and even Martin Heidegger (1962 [1927]) could be said 
to belong to its scope – all tried to pursue the question ‘what is the human 
being?’ in contrast to traditional religious and metaphysical conceptions and in 
contact to recent findings in both social and natural sciences. They took Scheler’s 
lament as their vantage point; a century ago in an essay entitled ‘Towards the 

212	
Thomas Schwarz Wentzer
Idea of Man’ (1915) Scheler observed what he maintained to be the paradox of 
his age, according to which there never had been a time that knew so much 
about the human being and that yet lacked an approach apt to encompass the 
findings of the various disciplines in science and the humanities into a suitable 
conception of human nature (Scheler 1955).
Although a philosophical undertaking, the protagonists of philosophical 
anthropology thus draw heavily on biology, psychology, ethology, sociology, 
linguistics, history or palaeoanthropology. They shared the conviction that 
philosophy can no longer claim the authority to deal with the human condi-
tion in a mere conceptual analysis a priori. Akin to Wittgenstein, whose slogan 
‘Back to the rough ground’ articulated the need to account for the distur-
bances, anomalies and frictions that real life poses to all too smooth philo-
sophical conceptualizations (Wittgenstein 1958: 107; on the impact of 
Wittgenstein to anthropologists, see for instance Geertz 2000: xii ff.), the dif-
ferent approaches all provide accounts which highlight the cosmopolitan or 
mundane openness of human existence as the flipside of its dispersed nature 
that necessarily disseminates humanity into an infinite number of sociocul-
tural lifeforms. The myth of the tower of Babel provides an early version of the 
anthropological conundrum involved with the question of human nature. 
Examining the (rough) ground of the historical truth that it entails – the dis-
persion of human nature expressed as the dissemination of human sociocul-
tural life – means to partake in the discourse of philosophical anthropology.
Traditional (metaphysical) anthropology from Plato through Pico della 
Mirandola to Kant had tried to locate the question ‘what is the human being?’ 
on a vertical axis, locating humanity somewhere between the beast (or pure 
nature) and the divine (or spirit viz. pure reason). On this axis one might place 
the discourse concerning the human-animal distinction (Agamben 2004) and 
its critical revision in various forms of evolutionary theory and adjacent forms 
of naturalism (with developmental cognitive science as a recent prominent 
approach; Baron-Cohen et al. 2000; Tomasello 2008). Modern and postmod-
ern (social and cultural) anthropologies counter this set-up by insisting on the 
horizontal axis. In the aftermath of historicist criticism, they deliver studies 
based on ethnographic material to encompass the empirical manifold of the 
diversity of human living in its historical social reality. Philosophical anthro-
pology tries to place the facticity of human existence in the crossing of the 
vertical and the horizontal, claiming some functional equivalent to human 
nature that precisely lets us understand why the human species is not bound 
to a particular niche or determinate life form, but why it instead is released 
into the openness of a global existence in history.1
Given the recent interest in the interface between ethnography and phi-
losophy (Das et al. 2014; Ingold 2011), it seems odd that the tradition of philo-
sophical anthropology does not enjoy more general interest both within and 
beyond philosophy; it remained by and large without any resonance in Anglo-
American philosophy nor in cultural and social anthropology. It could be 

	
Considerations Towards a Philosophical Anthropology of Responsiveness	 213
interesting to dig into the reasons for this unrealized reception that ultimately 
left philosophical anthropology to be a German affair. But this cannot be done 
in this chapter.
The reason why I nonetheless believe that we might gain a lot from this 
forgotten tradition lies in its efforts to conceptualize what may be called the 
‘immanent transcendence’ (Tugendhat 2007: 19) of the human. The fact that 
any attempt to determine something like human nature or human essence 
obviously has failed due to the irreducible manifold of human lifeforms, its 
dynamicity and wealth of cultural values and societies in history, gives striking 
evidence of the need for a corresponding philosophical discourse. The anti-
metaphysical impulse of cultural relativism and the corresponding debates in 
twentieth-century anthropology bear witness to the necessity to reflect this 
fact. The subject matter – the human being – seems to transcend or to exceed 
any effort of its conceptual determination. Philosophical anthropology 
acknowledges this peculiar situation, presuming that it is due to the way 
humans are that they transcend their essence. It is worth recalling that philo-
sophical anthropology from the very start endorses the substantial truth of 
Scheler’s aforementioned paradox. Hence, we need to develop a conception of 
the human that reflects the essential impossibility of any positive account of a 
human essence. As Scheler wrote, ‘precisely the indefinability belongs to the 
essence of man’ (Scheler 1955: 186); it seems to be part of human nature to 
transcend its nature. The human way of being is characterized by this imma-
nent transcendence; and philosophical anthropology could be the name for an 
agenda that elaborates on this crucial aspect of the human condition.
In what sense then does a plea for philosophical anthropology help in order 
to deal with the question concerning ‘moral engines’? In my view ethics or the 
ethical is characterized by a familiar state of immanent transcendence. On the 
one hand the ethical does not refer to a domain alongside, say, religion or 
economy. Morality does not only enter into the picture when one acts accord-
ing to moral norms, or when one claims the authority of such norms for one’s 
actions over and against laws or traditional social rules of an allegedly lower 
moral value. The ethical penetrates human social existence to a degree that 
literally every action of ours can possibly be subjected to ethical evaluation. 
Hence, I agree with what has recently been phrased as the ‘immanence of the 
ethical’ (Lambek 2015); human life is ethical in nature, which obviously does 
not imply that human acting always or mostly could be qualified as morally 
good. But on the other hand it is precisely the possible ubiquity of the ethical 
that exceeds the limits of norms and values. It might well be that philosophical 
ethics can basically be rendered by the single question ‘how should one live?’ 
as Plato’s Socrates reveals to Thrasymachos as to the real issue of their argu-
ment on the nature of justice (Plato, Resp. 352 d). But as Bernard Williams 
convincingly has shown, performing the very question implies pressing phi-
losophy to its limits (Williams 1985). Put in other words, the ethical perspec-
tive – which can be put on every action – leaves human agency in a situation, 

214	
Thomas Schwarz Wentzer
which seems to establish an asymmetry between the question and its ethical 
demand (‘how should one live?’) on the one hand and our available answers on 
the other. Or even worse, we lack criteria that could qualify our responses to 
provide valid answers to this question in the first place. We may fall back on 
norms that have proven to be socially acceptable or to customs that use to 
satisfy, say, religious needs and requests. But the ethical perspective implies a 
certain dynamic that exceeds the positivity of a given norm and its measurable 
fulfilment in a particular action. As every father or every teacher knows only 
too well, the trouble is that doing our best is not the same as providing the 
good (Lear 2011). There will always remain more to be said, to be said appro-
priately, as there is more to know, to know completely and more to be done, to 
be done well, rather than well enough.
Hence the ethical is characterized by a dynamic similar to what was said 
above about human nature. Its power – whether captured as ‘moral engine’ or 
in a non-mechanistic metaphor – lies within the immanent urge to transcend 
any given option towards its presumably better state or alternative. It too is 
characterized by its immanent transcendence. And I believe that there is a 
certain explanatory relation between the essential indefinability of the human 
and the immanent transcendence of the ethical; it is due to the human condi-
tion that humans have to lead a life instead of just living it. The essential inde-
terminacy of our human condition urges us to live a life in light of ethics and 
ethical evaluation. Hence the roots of ethics have to be found in human nature, 
but, as indicated, neither ethics nor human nature depict determinable con-
ceptual elements that would represent available fixed entities or features.
Although this chapter, due to the profession of its author, does not draw on 
ethnographic fieldwork, I nonetheless believe I have a case in claiming that the 
agenda that might follow from my considerations so far is not unfamiliar to 
other (‘real’) people dealing with their life in everydayness. What I have loosely 
outlined so far might come along rather theoretically, presupposing philo-
sophical terms, traditions and disciplines, authorships and maybe even clas-
sics in philosophy. The intention behind this setting, however, is to understand 
what I take to be an existential condition for human agency as such and from 
a first-person perspective. Plato’s and William’s question – ‘how should one 
live?’ – does not gain its significance from being located in a noble philosophi-
cal discourse among the experts in the ivory tower, but from its universal rel-
evance to everybody struggling with the burdens of living a human life. This is 
not to say that everybody actually asks or should ask this particular question 
in its literal phrase. But I presume that everybody has probably undergone 
situations in which she experienced the overwhelming force of a demand and 
the insufficiency of her response in return. One does the best one can, but one 
does not know to what degree one is able to achieve what really would have 
been appropriate. One still has to act. This situation adds a dimension to prag-
matism that due to the normativist or rule-based set-up of its available posi-
tions to my knowledge has not found its adequate treatment yet. I feel that 

	
Considerations Towards a Philosophical Anthropology of Responsiveness	 215
human agency cannot sufficiently be dealt with by describing agency in terms 
of following rules or norms, of taking initiatives or deliberative actions, but, 
rather, in terms of responsiveness (Waldenfels 1994). The ethical dimension is 
not a perspective that an agent is free to choose or to dismiss. It is not based 
upon moral norms, principles or maxims alone, but precedes as well as 
exceeds the scope of our normative commitments towards something I would 
like to call an existential commitment. One experiences oneself as being 
exposed to a demand that remains transcendent, even when it comes from 
within, from what one takes to be one’s own moral obligations. A moral agent 
in that sense is somebody who responds to an ethical demand; hence my sug-
gestion is to think of the human as the responsive being.
This leaves us with three claims I want to elaborate upon in the rest of the 
chapter. First, philosophical anthropology pursues the question concerning the 
nature of the human being by acknowledging the essential indeterminacy of the 
human. Second, the ethical is characterized by its immanent transcendence, 
experienced in claims and requests that exceed what we can positively account 
for. Its essence is to be the counterfactual that perforates the pure facticity of the 
given. Third, such a set-up calls for its analysis from the point of view of phe-
nomenology, from the first-person perspective, illuminating what it is like to be 
in a state of ontological indeterminacy and ethical overload. Humans are 
responsive beings, responding to the demands of existence.
A World of Difference: Human Indeterminacy,  
World-Openness and Philosophical Anthropology
What is the human being? Some readers will suspect that this question is 
hopelessly outdated, as it is said to presuppose metaphysical essentialism or to 
favour humanity to the disadvantage of other species; and in both cases it 
seems to ignore the immeasurable diversity of human life on Earth. Recent 
approaches commonly referred to as post- or transhumanism dismiss this 
question for reasons of its alleged commitment to (Christian) humanism, 
which apparently falls short of describing the continuity of organic life, or for 
its incapacity to give a timely account of the significance of technology and its 
bio-cultural potential for the future to come (Ferrando 2013; Braidotti 2011).
A thinker commonly held to be unsuspicious of either of these worries is 
Friedrich Nietzsche, whose diagnosis of modern nihilism famously culminates 
in the claim concerning the ‘death of God’. Nietzsche unmistakably espouses a 
future ‘philosophy of the Earth’ as his kind of naturalism that nonetheless sup-
ports the idea of an ‘enhancement [Erhöhung] of the type “Man”’ (Nietzsche 
2002, sec. 257). In his Thus spoke Zarathustra, Nietzsche recommends a stance 
known as the doctrine of the Übermensch, according to which one must over-
come oneself in order to become oneself. Setting aside Nietzsche’s aristocra-
tism with its problematic heroic undertones, he does nevertheless try to 

216	
Thomas Schwarz Wentzer
capture what has been referred to as immanent transcendence above, namely 
the drive to push the limits of human life and to reanimate its petrified struc-
tures, overcoming their traditional values in the name of the dynamics of life 
itself. Nietzsche’s vitriolic criticism of Christian morality and his genealogical 
approach accordingly rebut unhistorical, a priori thinking that Western 
humanism had been based upon. It therefore does not surprise that Nietzsche’s 
thinking and some of his motives have gained entrance into posthumanist 
discussions. However, Nietzsche does not dismiss the problem of the human; 
these motives do not preclude him from addressing and exploring human 
nature, on the contrary. It is because of the lack of a metaphysical essence, of 
a divine moral authority and transcendent eternal values that the question 
‘what is the human being?’ becomes all the more striking. Nietzsche’s texts are 
documents in favour of the project called philosophical anthropology, based 
on the fundamental immanence and the naturalism (which is not the same as 
physicalism) of his thinking (on Nietzsche and the succeeding tradition of 
philosophical anthropology see Schacht 2015).
Nietzsche characterizes the peculiar human condition by referring to man 
as ‘the not yet determined animal’ (Nietzsche 2002, sec. 62). The human is an 
animal species, but it differs from the rest of the animal realm with regard to 
the indeterminacy of its nature. It has an issue with limits and boundaries, 
with the shape and the form of its living, transgressing and overcoming itself 
in the course of its self-preservation. Whereas we are used to thinking of 
animals as being determined by the evolutionary process of genetic mutation 
and environmental pressure of selection, which made a species specialize to a 
determinate life form, apt to a biological niche, humans epitomize a species 
without proper specialization. Gehlen (1986: 33), commenting on Nietzsche 
and drawing on Herder’s initial notion of man as the ‘deficient being’ 
(Mängelwesen), characterizes the human as being distinct from its primate 
ancestors and other living creatures by its lack of instincts and corresponding 
morphological dispositions, by the poverty of bodily abilities and suitable 
physiological equipment that all seem to guarantee the success of a species in 
the animal kingdom. Whereas all other species survive due to phylogenetic 
specialization, homo sapiens became a species of versatile generalists. Humans 
do not adapt to their environment via specific instincts and senso-motoric 
refinements of the body, but adjust to the world in all sorts of milieus, develop-
ing registers of flexible responses in social interaction via processes of com-
munication, learning and knowledge exchange, mediated in language. Human 
infants are ‘physiological premature neonates’ (Portmann 1969: 45), who com-
pensate for their natural poverty and their enduring neoteny by cultural pro-
cesses, establishing technologies and social institutions; their nature is culture 
as ‘the human world’ (Gehlen 1986: 36ff.).
To what degree one is inclined to share or to object to Gehlen’s homo 
pauper thesis in detail seems to be of minor importance (a prominent criti-
cism is provided by Sloterdijk 2004: 701ff.); what is important is its result 

	
Considerations Towards a Philosophical Anthropology of Responsiveness	 217
– human’s natural assignment to its being-in-the-world that adds human 
history and historicity to the registers of human evolution. The global conse-
quence of the process of an entanglement of evolution and human history, 
which in fact undermines the ontological distinction of nature and culture, 
might be seen in what has recently been suggested under the name of the 
Anthropocene (Zalasiewicz 2013; Steffen et al. 2011). I believe that we have 
not yet understood the historical momentousness of the Anthropocene; we 
are in need of a corresponding conception of the human.
Hence humans entertain mediated relations to their world, transgressing 
the immediate functional circle of environmental metabolism towards a sym-
bolic mediated and technologically facilitated mundanity. Alsberg (1975 had 
coined the notion and the principle of the ‘elimination of the body’ 
(Körperausschaltung), suggesting an understanding of hominid evolution 
based on a process of increasing distance to and remoteness from physical 
nature (on Alsberg see the illuminative contribution by Lysemose 2012). 
Alsberg saw the ability of early hominids to throw stones at natural enemies as 
the possibility to establish a boundary as a kind of virtual wall, suggesting that 
the human hand – the universal organon according to Aristotle – gains its 
virtuous versatility due to the ability to slip and let go, allowing the individual 
to distance itself from the world notwithstanding the lack of bodily strength or 
velocity. It is as if biological evolution led to a species that was bound to its 
nature by overcoming its natural boundaries, developing reflective and tech-
nological distance to its nature as its natural strategy to survive. According to 
Plessner, ‘Due to its open drive structure and due to language appropriate to 
it, man is released from biological unambiguity – that the animals throughout 
reveal – to biological ambiguity. … In a twofold distance to his own body, i.e., 
even distinct from his being-himself in his center, his inner life, man is placed 
in a world’ (Plessner 1975: xviii, 293). Human evolution supports the species 
to survive in the stance of an ‘eccentric positionality’ (ibid.), with which notion 
Plessner – maybe too technically – captures his take on human embodiment 
in the double bind of being one’s body and having one’s body (in the delicate 
unity as lived body [Leib] and physical body [Körper]). The human being lives 
in ‘mediated immediacy’ (321ff.) and ‘natural artificiality’ (309ff.), being part 
of nature only via techniques of mediation that transcend the confines of 
nature. In short, we are not bound to a particular environment; our nature 
releases us towards a world.
Hence the discourse that Nietzsche inaugurates, ironically ‘defining’ the 
human as the not yet determined animal, leads to an insight that the leading 
representatives of philosophical anthropology in different versions and via 
diverging methodologies jointly endorse. In-der-Welt-sein (‘Being-in-the-
world’; Heidegger 1962: 78ff.), Weltbildung (‘world-formation’; Heidegger 
2008: 274ff.) and Weltoffenheit (‘world-openness’; Scheler 2009) characterize 
the key feature of a being that remains naturally indeterminate and enacts its 
living in world-open existence.

218	
Thomas Schwarz Wentzer
This claim obviously entails elements about human agency and freedom. 
But note that philosophical anthropology does not address the issue of 
freedom by maintaining the possession of reason, consciousness or language 
as metaphysical features that establish a dualistic ontology (such as mind vs. 
matter or culture vs. nature), as Western rationalism since Descartes in various 
forms tends to presume. Philosophical anthropology approaches freedom in 
terms of human indeterminacy (or underdeterminism; Lambek 2015: 2), 
trying to give an account of the human condition that explains the peculiarity 
of its subject in a holistic approach and in contact with science without 
drawing on metaphysical or theological axioms.
Under Pressure: Locating the Ethical
The aforementioned notice according to the agenda of philosophical anthro-
pology leaves us with an ontological result, claiming humans to be world-open 
creatures that are not bound to an environment but released to the world. I 
will at least give a sort of illustration of what ‘world’, ‘world-openness’ or 
‘being-in-the-world’ in our context might mean. But I will do so by giving this 
argument a twist that adds an ethical dimension.
Nietzsche’s phrase – the human as the not yet determined animal – 
entails not only a description of human biological indeterminacy as the 
condition of the possibility for an unrestricted engagement with and within 
the natural and social world. It also implies an implicit individual assign-
ment, according to which we have to live up to its meaning by taking its 
content as a task to be fulfilled. Hence it is only a small step from Nietzsche’s 
naturalistic to Heidegger’s existential anthropology, according to which ‘the 
“essence” of Dasein lies in its existence’, urged by the facticity of its having to 
be (Heidegger 1962: 67). Due to its essential indeterminacy, the human being 
is concerned with its being, and this concern characterizes its existence in 
the most fundamental way. Humans are entities who ‘in their Being, comport 
themselves towards their Being … which is an issue for every such entity’ 
(ibid.). I take it to be of pivotal importance to note that this claim introduces 
an existential dimension to what was until now only an academic or classifi-
catory problem. The need for ethical orientation does not arise, because 
intellectuals with sociological, theological or philosophical training diag-
nose a certain decline of moral standards in postmodern societies in the age 
of globalized capitalism, even if such a verdict may actually be of some 
factual evidence. The need for ethical orientation is located on the level of 
the individual human in the pursuit of its daily living. It is not Nietzsche 
whose sentence prescribes moral behaviour as an ethical maxim; his sen-
tence rather echoes the existential urge that is experienced by any member 
of the species independent of and prior to any ‘recommendation’ by moral-
ists or ethical analytics. To understand Nietzsche’s verdict means to feel the 

	
Considerations Towards a Philosophical Anthropology of Responsiveness	 219
unease of the truth of its sentence: we have to lead a life instead of just living 
it (Gehlen 1986: 17).
I see in the work of recent anthropologists, for instance Cheryl Mattingly 
(2010, 2014), Michael Lambek (2003, 2015), Jarrett Zigon (2007, 2008) and 
notably Michael Jackson (2005, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2016, Jackson and Piette 
2015), a kindred approach towards existential anthropology, delivering issues 
of universal human significance from ethnographic studies of particular life 
stories. Maybe one may say that existential anthropology actually indicates the 
intersection between philosophical anthropology and ethnography, approach-
able from both ends, with the first-person perspective and a sensitivity for the 
universal relevance of lived experience with its ethical quandaries as its 
vantage point.
Approaching from philosophy, I sense a similar drift already in Kant, who 
typically has to serve as the prime example of an armchair philosopher, far 
away from real life. But I think the argument in favour of philosophical anthro-
pology pursued as existential anthropology actually accords with what Kant 
terms the ‘cosmopolitism’ of philosophy, i.e. the kind of question that every 
human qua being human presumably is interested in.
Kant famously divided the task of philosophy into three questions that in 
totum would cover the scope of human questioning: ‘What can I know? What 
shall I do? What may I hope?’ This interrogative threefold, Kant continues, can 
be expressed in one single question: ‘What is the human being?’ (Kant 2000: 
25). Kant thus claims that the question regarding the nature of human beings 
is the ultimate subject of any philosophical concern. As such, all philosophical 
problems lead to this question about the human being. In doing so, Kant not 
only promoted philosophical anthropology to be the true successor of former 
metaphysical thinking (Tugendhat 2007), he did so using the first-person per-
spective as his starting point (this tends to be overlooked). The question 
regarding human nature is stated as the triple query posed to an ‘I’ or to ‘me’. 
Thus, it cannot be dealt with in objective, observational discourse alone, but 
must recognize the authority of the questioning person too. Hence, the ques-
tion ‘what is the human being?’ refers back to the question ‘what kind of being 
am I / are we?’ In this way the philosophical problem regarding the human 
becomes a matter of existential quality. The interrogator is forced to acknowl-
edge the impossibility of a neutral stance towards the particular subject matter, 
experiencing herself as called upon to respond to the issue in her own name. 
The result of this reasoning inaugurated by Kant is this: the most universal 
question concerning humanity proves to be in requirement of an answer with 
a very special kind of individual dedication. It leaves no room for an evasive 
move that would allow individual commitment and responsibility to be 
avoided, as I myself am what I take human beings to be. That is to say, philo-
sophical anthropology must be conceived as existential anthropology.
In fact Saint Augustine already sincerely expressed the existential pressure 
of human indeterminacy, thus responding to the question ‘what am I?’ by 

220	
Thomas Schwarz Wentzer
confessing the course of his life: ‘What am I then, O my God? What nature am 
I? A life various and manifold, and exceeding immense’ (Augustine 2008: book 
10, chap. 17, verse 26). I take an episode of his as an example that might illus-
trate the claim concerning human world-openness with regard to ethical eval-
uation and judgment.
Thus, in the first autobiography of European literature, the Confessions, 
Augustine tells the following episode (Augustine 2008: 2. 4.9–10.18). He was a 
young man, sixteen years of age, and together with his friends he took pears 
from a tree in somebody’s garden. The ruffians were not caught and had a good 
time. But decades later, Augustine, now the bishop of Hippo, has to acknowl-
edge that it was a misdeed, indeed a moral mistake. Why did he do it? He 
could have been hungry. But as a matter of fact, it was neither hunger nor the 
prospect of delicious fruits that motivated this action. The gang threw most of 
their prey straight to the pigs. Maybe, Augustine ponders, he stole those pears 
because of a certain social dynamic that tends to tempt him to do things that 
he alone would not be capable of. Being in a pack alters things, so it might have 
been the struggle for social recognition that made him commit his crime. But 
then again, maybe the deed is the result of an even more complex psychologi-
cal disposition. Augustine scrutinizes himself: what if the prospect of doing 
something illegal gave him a thrill and triggered him to commit the deed? But 
if that was the case, the motive cannot be localized between an agent’s subjec-
tive desire and its intended object at all, but must be linked to his behaviour, 
to the normative systems that frame and sanction his actions. Hence Augustine 
has to confess that his desire was directed towards a violation of those norms 
in legal, moral and religious perspective. In this scenario, the motive of the 
action is a rather complex second order desire, to which Augustine has a 
certain evaluative predicate: sin, since the crime at the same time both 
acknowledges and wilfully violates the norm concerning the prohibition of 
theft, which is a divine commandment, after all. Augustine identifies this vio-
lation itself as lust provoking and as the true motive of the crime. In violating 
the law, he for a moment imitated the divine legislator, as if he was the autono-
mous creator of his life, not the creature of the Almighty. To feel this power 
was the true motivation for his deed, Augustine confesses; and while Nietzsche 
will praise the ‘will to power’ as the principle of life per se and the person able 
to affirm this truth as the Übermensch, Augustine exposes his desire as evil, 
blaming himself and his juvenile attitude. Why did he do it? He did so because 
he had the power to do so.
It might seem trivial, but let me point out that this power does not refer to 
a physical faculty. It is not that young Augustine can pick a pear from a tree. 
His power is not displayed by the ability to cope with the laws of gravitation, 
but by the possibility of violating the norms of social behaviour and moral 
conduct. He proves himself to be addressed by, but not subjected to, the com-
mands of the normative systems that used to rule his life. It is hence the expe-
rience of not being bound by norms that lies at the bottom of ethical reasoning, 

	
Considerations Towards a Philosophical Anthropology of Responsiveness	 221
the experience of freedom transcending the limits of socially sanctioned 
behaviour and moral conduct, or, in the idiom of Freud, of ‘ego’ to disobey the 
commands of ‘super-ego’ (Freud 2000: 273–330). The experience that 
Augustine describes seems to me as valid as ever, notwithstanding the reli-
gious agenda in which the episode is embedded. The true problem of ethics 
does not consist in the modern discourse about how to defend a universal 
moral law (Kant) or moral principle (utilitarianism) that determine moral 
goodness, but in the challenge to deal with the indeterminacy of human living. 
It is not a philosophical problem of how to legitimate norms and values, but an 
existential problem of how to respond to the excessive demand of performing 
human being.
To Augustine, a series of possible contexts with different norms and values 
enter the picture so that each could be taken to explain young Augustine’s deed. 
The point here is not that Augustine or we are to find the ‘true’ motive behind 
his action. It is simply to recognize the fact of a plurality of possible economies 
of drives and desires that each belong to a corresponding normative system, 
altogether part of his world. Augustine can place his experience of stealing pears 
in different contexts, including the problem of his own possible freedom, which 
becomes manifest in his reflections. He is not only able to shift between those 
contexts, which each would lead to different interpretations and possibly to 
divergent ethical evaluations; he also reflects on the context dependence of 
human agency as such, arguing from a second-order interpretation, when he 
evaluates the various attempts of his interpretations. Hence Augustine experi-
ences his world-openness and the ethical pressure linked to this existential con-
dition. A creature adapted to its environment would behave in the context of a 
certain motivational system; Augustine must navigate between different possi-
ble contexts and normative systems that in their entirety belong to the world of 
his living. Ethics then is the expression and the discourse of the human need for 
orientation in their being-in-the-world.
I grant that my ‘case’ – the stolen pears, an autobiographic episode retold 
by the church father Saint Augustine – surely serves the catholic agenda of his 
author, who lets his ethical journey begin with the primordial sin of stealing 
the pear, not the apple, from the forbidden tree, ultimately finding the guiding 
thread for ethical orientation in the narrative confession of his faith to his 
God. The incident as such – the theft – seems moreover to be of minor ethical 
significance, compared to experiences of severe remorse in light of one’s inhu-
manity (depicted for instance in Kleinman 2006: 27ff.), of fighting for one’s 
family members against the odds of structural discrimination (Mattingly 2014: 
35ff.), of everyday violence against women (Das 2007) or of life in the face and 
the aftermath of civil war (Jackson 2005: 53ff.). But, nevertheless, I take this 
case as an illustration for the claim I want to pursue, which maintains the 
essential indeterminacy of human existence experienced as the immanent 
transcendence of the ethical.

222	
Thomas Schwarz Wentzer
From a Phenomenological Point of View:  
Human, the Responding Being
For these reasons, I believe that there is an immense and not yet exploited 
potential in the phenomenological tradition that is waiting for existential 
anthropology, both in its ethnographic as well its philosophical version 
Heidegger’s phenomenology of Dasein in both its earlier (Heidegger 1962) and 
its later version (Heidegger 1947), Gadamer’s philosophical hermeneutics 
(Gadamer 1986), Levinas’ ontology of the ethical Other (Levinas 1969), Derrida’s 
ethics of deconstruction (Derrida 1995, 1996), most recently Jean-Luc Nancy’s 
social ontology (Nancy 2000, 2003) and notably Bernhard Waldenfels’ phenom-
enology of alienness and alterity (Waldenfels 1994, 2011, 2015) all provide con-
ceptual resources that might help us to understand what it means to live a life in 
light of the ethical. As mentioned above, Gehlen’s phylogenetic approach char-
acterizes the human by strategies of individual and collective compensations, 
which in turn deal with the species’ residual instinct structure while being 
exposed to sensory overload and an excess of impulse. This third-person 
description can be rendered phenomenologically as the hiatus between demand 
and response. People do not notice the human condition in acts of cognitive 
acquisition, as if there was an specific universal character that they individually 
happen to instantiate as being just another token of a human type. They meet 
their lot in modes of lived experience, individually assigned to them; and phe-
nomenology provides means to conceptualize these modes in accord with their 
givenness in first-person perspective (a corresponding anthropological approach 
as ‘first-person virtue ethics’ is outlined and pursued in Mattingly 2012 and 
2014). In the following I will argue that the hiatus between demand and response 
characterizes the human condition from a phenomenological point of view. 
Responsiveness is the name for a way to cope with one’s fragile and finite exist-
ence that captures our being called upon to act anyway.
This responsivist approach draws heavily on the phenomenology of 
Bernhard Waldenfels. In a programmatic passage, we find the following claim:
Responding that comes to meet the alien call is not restricted to spoken utterances. 
… Responding embodies an ethos of the senses that extends from greeting rituals 
down to lovers’ playing. In the end, the ancient definition ‘The human being is an 
animal which has speech or reason’ can be reformulated as follows: ‘The human 
being is an animal which responds’. (Waldenfels 2011: 38)
The ‘alien call’ refers to the demand that calls upon our responsive strategies, 
which it both precedes as well as exceeds. Its alienness is due to its originating 
somewhere else, beyond the control of an agent’s mastering, who nonetheless 
has to deal with its request. Responding thusly cannot erase the alienness of this 
origin, which remains an incommensurable moment that withdraws itself from 
its integration into the regulatory circuit of understanding. It is of pivotal impor-
tance not to misunderstand the phenomenology of responsiveness as a renewal 

	
Considerations Towards a Philosophical Anthropology of Responsiveness	 223
of classical behaviorism and its stimulus-response model. Rather, we might 
think of a dialogical frame of questions and answers – hence a certain family 
resemblance to Gadamer’s hermeneutic on the one and Austin’s ordinary lan-
guage philosophy on the other hand, which the responsivist approach neverthe-
less is distancing itself from – that provides a model to the responsivist account 
of experience and agency, thus without restricting the scope of this model to our 
linguistic capacities or communication in language. Responsiveness is not 
limited to communicative rationality; it is at stake already in our bodily exist-
ence as Leibwesen and our erotic existence, in aesthetic experiences, in our lis-
tening to memories and the voices of our past (for a responsivist account of 
historical experience, see Wentzer 2014). It characterizes our experiential exist-
ence in every direction: ‘We conceive of responsiveness as the principal feature 
of all our discursive activity, practical doings and bodily comportment, which all 
become accessible from there’ (Waldenfels 1994: 336).
The idea is that we deal with the situational affordances in our daily rou-
tines as well as in adventurous challenges during the course of our life, as if we 
were addressed and called upon (what late Heidegger rather dramatically 
phrases as ‘the call of Being’, ‘der Anspruch des Seins’; Heidegger 1947); we 
respond when we act. In this view, human agency is neither causally deter-
mined (as in classical behaviorism) nor the spontaneous initiative of an auton-
omous subject (as modern philosophy often wants to make us believe).
The paradigm of responsiveness opens up a third way to the all too rigid 
dichotomy between ‘passive’ causal determinism and ‘active’ intentional 
freedom. Responding means to only have the second word, not to be in the 
position to initiate one’s doings, but having to answer the requests that come 
from elsewhere or from somebody else, from a place that notoriously with-
draws itself into the blind spots of our intentional awareness as well as of our 
normative entitlements (for the following, see Waldenfels 1994: 178, 327ff.). 
Whereas hermeneutics tend to integrate alterity – which urges the task of 
understanding to begin with – into the horizon of shared meaning, pragma-
tism in its various forms (including speech-act theory) usually finds norms of 
evaluable behaviour that deprives what is experienced from its unique singu-
larity for the sake of general rules and their social structures. In both 
approaches, otherness is only dealt with within the safe harbour of intentional 
or normative comprehensibility. The irreducible event of our being-called-
upon as such that urges the response is skipped over. Both accounts ignore 
what might be called the ‘responsive difference’ (Waldenfels 1994: 193ff., 344), 
the unbridgeable hiatus between the whereupon (the occasional event) of our 
responding and the what (the content) of our answer (for a similar interpreta-
tion, with a strong emphasis on the religious implications of this line of think-
ing, see Chrétien 2004).
An indication of this hiatus can be found in the difference between answer 
and reply, the two types of the response in our linguistic practices. I might 
reply to a tourist that I don’t know the way to the station, but in doing so I do 

224	
Thomas Schwarz Wentzer
not answer her question. I nevertheless acknowledge her demand in replying, 
even if I am not able to fulfil the intention of her questioning. It is not that 
‘replying’ in that sense was on the same scale as ‘answering’, only less exact or 
with a minor degree of epistemic evidence. Both types refer to two different 
and irreducible aspects of every demand, acknowledging the event of a request 
(raised for instance by a person’s questioning) in replying and addressing the 
intention (what was asked in a corresponding question) in the answering 
statement. In situations like these we can easily distinguish between the 
speech act of replying and the propositional content that would satisfy the 
requirements of being a both correct and truthful answer to the question. 
Exactly the inability to answer however reveals the event as such and of having 
to respond anyway, as we grant that the demand deserves to be heard and 
responded to, even if we cannot fulfil what we take to be the questioner’s 
intention. One might say that the demand expressed in a question entails an 
illocutionary force of otherness that escapes from its fulfilment in the content 
of its answer. Needless to say, we respond even if we refuse to reply, as not 
replying is a response too, correspondingly sanctioned in social intercourse.
As the use of the term ‘illocutionary force’ above indicates, Waldenfels’ 
phenomenology and his account on responsiveness draw to some extent on 
Searle’s theory of speech acts and especially on Austin’s philosophy of ordi-
nary language (see the discussion of both in Waldenfels 1994: 49ff.). However, 
both accounts are developed from the perspective of a speaker, intending to do 
something, not of a listener or respondent, being exposed to an alien demand. 
From the point of view of phenomenology, the ‘force’ is given as an ‘illocution-
ary affection’ or simply as pathos, which is not the passive counterpart or 
receiver to the active cause, but the affective illocution that a person finds 
herself delivered to in case of a demand that she meets. Pragmatism and ordi-
nary language philosophy hence presuppose a set of rules or a system of norms 
that are already in play in order for the speech act analysis to start. By contrast, 
the paradigm of responsiveness does not just aim at a phenomenological 
(instead of pragmatist) reconstruction of those rules and norms. It is not that 
we inverse the order of normative behaviour, focusing on the respondent 
instead of the questioner, or on the listener instead of the speaker in their dia-
logical or pragmatic interaction. The phenomenon at stake – indeterminable 
otherness that requests my response – displays a pre-normative obligation 
that anchors the space of normative behaviour in the first place on the grounds 
of my factical existence. It reveals an existential commitment that precedes 
intentionality and its accounts on intentional subjects as well as (neo-)prag-
matism and its approaches on competent speakers.2 In contrast to these 
important theories in recent philosophy, Waldenfels aims at saving the unruly 
and unintentionable otherness that we meet as a potentially infinite demand. 
We give something in return; hence we re-act.
It might be helpful to add that the term existential commitment corre-
sponds to what Michael Jackson’s existential anthropology (2005, 2016) alludes 

	
Considerations Towards a Philosophical Anthropology of Responsiveness	 225
to as existential imperative. It addresses the phenomenon from its other side, 
highlighting a person’s or an agent’s being addressed by such an imperative. 
Maintaining an existential imperative prior to moral (categorical) imperatives 
or social norms makes sense because one understands its imperative force 
without further ado. Being human simply means finding oneself committed to 
the task of this very being; being under the command of the existential imper-
ative just is what this life form is about. The peculiarity of this kind of commit-
ment relies in the fact that one cannot represent the content of the imperative 
without endorsing its imperative force.
Hence responsiveness is characterized by a certain pathos or pathic dispo-
sition of our responsive experiences. Pathos literally means the event of being 
affected; it is the event that happens to somebody in the dative clause of being 
the addressee of this happening (Waldenfels 2011: 27). Phenomena like atten-
tion or awareness are pathic in the sense that they rely on something that we 
are subjected to respond to, independent of or logically prior to our conscious 
or intentional directedness. We can be surprised or surprise ourselves; we can 
be hit by anxiety or joy; we fall in love or have to discover having been aban-
doned. In every one of those instances we find ourselves confronted with an 
event that happens to us; and this being exposed to something from beyond 
remains the irreducible source of the dynamics of human life and ethical ori-
entation. Like ideas that happen to strike our minds or memories that all of a 
sudden come to the surface from their oblivion, we find ourselves struck by a 
request the moment we feel the urge to respond. From a third-person perspec-
tive one might be tempted to describe the relation of pathos and response 
following the timeline of successive moments, as if the antecedence of the 
pathos effected the consequence of its response. But this causal description 
misspells the phenomenological evidence of our lived experience, as
pathos and response do not follow one after the other like two events; they are not 
even two distinct events, but one and the same experience, shifted in relation to 
itself: a genuine time lag. … For this reason, we initially do not encounter pathos as 
something which we mean, understand, judge, reject or affirm; rather, it forms the 
time-place from which we do all this by responding to it. Everything which happens 
to me and to which I respond does not have a sense as such and does not obey a rule. 
(Waldenfels 2011: 50).
This passage contains Waldenfels’ phenomenological account on what I have 
captured above as the ‘existential commitment’. The very fact of our pathic 
being-affected has to be taken as the indication of a most individual position, as 
our disposition, as our spot, our Dasein or being-there (Heidegger 1962; Dyring 
2015 speaks similarly of our ‘emplacement’). The time-place of our existence 
becomes the stance from which we enter into the discourses of understanding 
and rule following; but as such this place withdraws itself from every possible 
intentional or pragmatist reconstruction. Like the eye that cannot see itself, 
pathos reminds us of the irreducible event character of the whereupon of our 

226	
Thomas Schwarz Wentzer
responding that refrains from its normative or semantic reconstruction. That is 
to say, one cannot explain away the facticity of an event by merely understand-
ing it, regardless of whether this understanding follows the hermeneutics of 
meaning interpretation or the pragmatism of social normative commitments 
and entitlements. One has to respond anyway – and this puts a responsive agent 
into the position to take responsibility to her responses (for a thouroughgoing 
monograph on this point, see Raffoul 2010). I am the addressee of the demand 
that an event might raise to me, and as occupying this address or individual 
Dasein I experience myself as responsible for my responses.
We are now in a position to evaluate the claim concerning the human as the 
responding being, and to ask to what degree this claim might contribute to the 
guiding question concerning ‘moral engines’ or the ‘roots of ethics’. The ethical, 
I would maintain, is bound to human responsiveness. The concept of respon-
siveness qualifies the facticity (Heidegger 1999) of human life, the fact that we 
always already find ourselves in particular situations that we did not initiate or 
design, without ever being capable of reaching the origin of these demands. To 
think of human existence in terms of responsiveness means acknowledging its 
internal remoteness and intrinsic alterity. Hence a phenomenology based on 
responsiveness reinterprets human living in light of the perspective of a person 
that experiences her existence as a demand she responds to in every sequence 
of her course of life. This means acknowledging our existential commitment as 
an ethical demand, i.e. as the task of leading one’s life instead of living it. 
Responsiveness captures the thrownness of our existence in terms of qualified 
and yet insufficient and finite behaviour. We are responding to the fact of our 
historically situated existence in being who and what we are, responding in the 
conversation that we are
Thomas Schwarz Wentzer is associate professor and chair in the Department 
of Philosophy and History of Ideas, Aarhus University. He is author of 
Bewahrung der Geschichte: Die hermeneutische Philosophie Walter Benjamins 
(Philo-Verlag, 2002), and co-editor of Finite but Unbounded: New Approaches 
in Philosophical Anthropology (DeGruyter, 2017). He has published numer-
ous articles on Heidegger, phenomenology, hermeneutics and philosophical 
anthropology.
Notes
  1.	 The distinction of a vertical and a horizontal axis is inspired by Plessner 1975: 32 and 
Krüger 2009: 146 ff. The version rendered here is rather superficial and very sketchy. See 
Marquard 1971 and Zammito 2002, whose studies support the implicit historical argu-
ment of this claim.
  2.	 The term ‘existential commitment’ is borrowed from John Haugeland (1998: 2). I agree 
with Haugeland that this term marks a claim against ‘traditional’ theories of intentional-
ity, critically engaging with pragmatism and its followers in recent philosophy (such as 
Brandom 1994 and McDowell 1994). 

	
Considerations Towards a Philosophical Anthropology of Responsiveness	 227
References
Agamben, Giorgio. 2004. The Open: Man and Animal. Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press.
Alsberg, Paul. 1975 [1922]. Das Menschheitsrätsel: Versuch einer prinzipiellen Lösung. 
Dresden: Focus.
Arendt, Hannah. 1958. The Human Condition. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Augustine. 2008. Confessions, Oxford World’s Classics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Baron-Cohen, Simon, Helen Tager-Flusberg and Donald J. Cohen. 2000. 
Understanding Other Minds: Perspectives from Developmental Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 2nd edn. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
Braidotti, Rosi. 2011. The Posthuman. Cambridge: Polity.
Brandom, Robert. 1994. Making it Explicit: Reasoning, Representing and Discursive 
Commitment. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Cassirer, Ernst. 1992 [1944]. An Essay on Man: An Introduction to a Philosophy of 
Human Culture. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Chrétien, Jean-Luc. 2004. The Call and the Response. New York: Fordham University 
Press.
Das, Veena. 2007. Life and Words: Violence and the Descent into the Ordinary. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Das, Veena, Michael D. Jackson, Arthur Kleinman and Bhrigupati Singh. 2014. The 
Ground Between: Anthropologists Engage Philosophy. Durham: Duke University 
Press.
Derrida, Jacques. 1995. On the Name, ed. Thomas Dutoit. Stanford: Stanford 
University Press.
 . 1996. The Gift of Death, ed. David Wills. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Dyring, Rasmus. 2015. ‘Mood and Method: Where does Ethnographic Experience 
Truly Take Place?’, in Dorthe Jørgensen, Gaetano Chiurazzi and Søren Tinning 
(eds), Truth and Experience: Between Phenomenology and Hermeneutics. 
Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, pp. 293–317.
Ferrando, Francesca. 2013. ‘Posthumanism, Transhumanism, Metahumanism and 
New Materialsm: Differences and Relations’, Existenz. An International Journal in 
Philosophy, Religion and Arts 8(2): 26–32.
Fischer, Joachim. 2008. Philosophische Anthropologie: Eine Denkrichtung des 20. 
Jahrhunderts. Freiburg: Alber.
Freud, Sigmund. 2000. Psychologie des Unbewussten: Studienausgabe, ed. Alexander 
Richards, Angela Mitscherlich and James Strachey. Vol. 3. Frankfurt am Main: 
Fischer.
Gadamer, Hans-Georg. 1986. Hermeneutik Wahrheit und Methode, Gesammelte 
Werke 1. Tübingen: Mohr.
Geertz, Clifford. 2000. Available Light: Anthropological Reflections on Philosophical 
Topics. Princeton: Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Gehlen, Arnold. 1986. Der Mensch: Seine Natur und seine Stellung in der Welt. 13. 
Aufl., Studienausgabe der Hauptwerke / Arnold Gehlen. Wiesbaden: AULA-Verlag.
Haugeland, John. 1998. Having Thought Essays in the Metaphysics of Mind. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Heidegger, Martin. 1947. Platons Lehre von der Wahrheit mit einem Brief über den 
‘Humanismus’. Bern: Francke.
 . 1962. Being and Time, trans. John McQuarrie and Edward Robinson. New 
York: Harper and Brothers.

228	
Thomas Schwarz Wentzer
 . 1999. Ontology: the Hermeneutics of Facticity. Bloomington, IN: Indiana 
University Press. 
 . 2008. The Fundamental Concepts of Metaphysics: World, Finitude, Solitude. 
Trans. William McNeill, Nicholas Walker. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University 
Press, 
Ingold, Tim. 2011. The Perception of the Environment Essays on Livelihood, Dwelling 
and Skill, reissued with a new pref. ed. London: Routledge.
Jackson, Michael. 2005. Existential Anthropology: Events, Exigencies and Effects, 
Methodology and History in Anthropology. New York: Berghahn Books.
 . 2011. Life Within Limits: Well-being in a World of Want. Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press.
 . 2012. Between One and One Another. Berkeley: University of California Press.
 . 2013. Lifeworlds: Essays in Existential Anthropology. Chicago and London: The 
University of Chicago Press.
 . 2016. As Wide as the World is Wise: Reinventing Philosophical Anthropology. 
New York: Columbia University Press.
Jackson, Michael and Albert Piette. 2015. What is Existential Anthropology. New York: 
Berghahn Books.
Kant, Immanuel. 2000. Schriften zur Logik, Physische Geographie, Pädagogik. 
Unveränd. photomechanischer Abdr. des Textes der von der Preussischen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften 1902 begonnenen Ausg. von Kants gesammelten 
Schriften ed. 10 Bände vols. Vol. 9, Kants Werke. Akademie Textausgabe. Berlin: de 
Gruyter.
Kleinman, Arthur. 2006. What Really Matters: Living a Moral Life Amidst Uncertainty 
and Danger. New York: Oxford University Press.
Krüger, Hans-Peter. 2009. ‘Philosophische Anthropologie als Lebenspolitik’, Deutsche 
Zeitschrift für Philosophie (Sonderband): 146–62.
Lambek, Michael. 2003. The Weight of the Past: Living with History in Mahajanga, 
Madagascar, Contemporary Anthropology of Religion. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
 . 2015. The Ethical Condition Essays on Action, Person, and Value. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Lear, Jonathan. 2011. A Case for Irony, The Tanner Lectures on Human Values. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Levinas, Emmanuel. 1969. Totality and Infinity. An Essay on Exteriority, trans. 
Alphonso Lingis. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press.
Lysemose, Kasper. 2012. ‘The Being, the Origin and the Becoming of Man: 
A Presentation of Philosophical Anthropogenealogy and Some Ensuing 
Methodological Considerations’, Human Studies 35(1): 115–30.
Marquard, Odo. 1971. ‘Anthropologie’, in Joachim Ritter (ed.), Historisches 
Wörterbuch der Philosophie. Basel: Schwabe, 362–74.
Mattingly, Cheryl. 2010. The Paradox of Hope: Journeys Through a Clinical 
Borderland. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
 . 2012. ‘Two Virtue Ethics and the Anthropology of Morality’, Anthropological 
Theory 12(2): 161–84.
 . 2014. Moral Laboratories: Family Peril and the Struggle for a Good Life. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
McDowell, John Henry. 1994. Mind and World. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Nancy, Jean-Luc. 2000. Being Singular Plural, Meridian, Crossing Aesthetics. Stanford, 
CA: Stanford University Press.

	
Considerations Towards a Philosophical Anthropology of Responsiveness	 229
 . 2003. A Finite Thinking, Cultural Memory in the Present. Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. 2002. Beyond Good and Evil: Prelude to a Philosophy of the 
Future. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.
Plessner, Helmuth. 1975. Die Stufen des Organischen und der Mensch. Einleitung in 
die philosophische Anthropologie. 3 ed, Sammlung Göschen. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Portmann, Adolf. 1969. Biologische Fragmente zu einer Lehre vom Menschen. 3., erw. 
Aufl. Basel, Stuttgart: Schwabe.
Raffoul, François. 2010. The Origins of Responsibility. Bloomington, IN: Indiana 
University Press.
Rothacker, Erich. 2008. Probleme der Kulturanthropologie. 3. Aufl. Bonn: Bouvier.
Schacht, Richard. 2015. ‘Gehlen, Nietzsche and the Project of a Philosophical 
Anthropology’, in Phillip Honenberger (ed.), Naturalism and Philosophical 
Anthropology: Nature, Life, and the Human between Transcendental and Empirical 
Perspectives. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 49–65.
Scheler, Max. 1955 [1915]. ‘Zur Idee des Menschen’, in Maria Scheler (ed.), Vom 
Umsturz der Werte Abhandlungen und Aufsätze. Gesammelte Werke. Bern: 
Francke, pp. 171–195
 . 2009. The Human Place in the Cosmos, Northwestern University Studies in 
Phenomenology and Existential Philosophy. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University 
Press.
Sloterdijk, Peter. 2004. Schäume. Vol. 3, Sphären. Plurale Sphärologie. Frankfurt a. M.: 
Suhrkamp.
Solies, Dirk. 2010. ‘German Anthropology’, in H. James Birx (ed.), 21st Century 
Anthropology. A reference handbook, Online-Ressource. Los Angeles: SAGE.
Steffen, Will, Jacques Grinevald, Paul Crutzen and John McNeill. 2011. ‘The 
Anthropocene: Conceptual and Historical Perspectives’, Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society A (369): 842–67.
Tomasello, Michael. 2008. Origins of Human Communication, The Jean Nicod 
Lectures. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tugendhat, Ernst. 2007. Anthropologie statt Metaphysik. Munich: Beck.
Waldenfels, Bernhard. 1994. Antwortregister. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
 . 2011. Phenomenology of the Alien: Basic Concepts. Northwestern University 
studies in phenomenology and existential philosophy. Evanston, IL: Northwestern 
University Press.
 . 2015. Sozialität und Alterität: Modi sozialer Erfahrung. Berlin: Suhrkamp.
Wentzer, Thomas Schwarz. 2014. ‘“I have seen Königsberg burning”: Philosophical 
Anthropology and the Responsiveness of Historical Experience’, Anthropological 
Theory 14(1): 27–48.
Williams, Bernard. 1985. Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1958. Philosophical Investigations, 2nd edn. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wulf, Christoph. 2013. Anthropology: a Continental Perspective. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press.
Zalasiewicz, Jan. 2013. ‘The Epoch of Humans’, Nature Geoscience 6, 8–9.
Zammito, John H. 2002. Kant, Herder, and the Birth of Anthropology. Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press.
Zigon, Jarrett. 2007. ‘Moral Breakdown and Ethical Demand’, Anthropological Theory 
7(2): 131–50.
 . 2008. Morality: An Anthropological Perspective. New York: Berg.

12
The History of Responsibility
François Raffoul
The Question of Responsibility
When engaging with the question of ‘moral engines’ or ‘moral drives’ in human 
life, the first task is to rethink ethics and responsibility in light of the human 
condition, as a feature of human life, approached phenomenologically so as to 
remain faithful to its constitution. It will appear that responsibility, once reen-
gaged phenomenologically, is to be taken as responsiveness to a call, rather than 
as the traditional accountability of the willful and powerful subject or agent. The 
aim of my recent work on responsibility (Raffoul 2010) was indeed to reengage 
the question of responsibility as it was elaborated in post-Nietzschean continen-
tal thought, and to explore its post-metaphysical, phenomenological and onto-
logical senses, away from its traditional metaphysical understanding as 
accountability of the free autonomous subject. Returning through a historical 
genealogy to ‘the origins of responsibility’, following the ‘long history of the 
origins of responsibility’ of which Nietzsche speaks in the second essay of his 
Genealogy of Morals1 (1967), I sought to reveal the emergence of post-meta-
physical senses of responsibility in the works in Sartre, Levinas, Heidegger and 
Derrida. Despite what a certain doxa claims, ethics has not only been a constant 
concern of contemporary continental thought but has been in fact problema-
tized anew and understood less as a normative body of moral rules and even less 
as an applied discipline, and more in terms of a philosophical reflection on the 
meaning of ethics as such, on the ethicality of ethics. Responsibility itself has 
been rethought in such a context, in a novel and original way, that is, away from 
an ideology of subjectivity, free will and power.
This project might seem paradoxical in several respects. Nietzsche’s cri-
tique of morality, for instance, has often been described as a nihilistic 

	
The History of Responsibility	 231
enterprise of the destruction of values leading to the impossibility of ethics, as 
if questioning ethics amounted to an attack on it, an assumption mocked by 
Merleau-Ponty when he wrote that ‘From the simple fact that I make of moral-
ity a problem, you conclude that I deny it’ (Merleau-Ponty 1964). One can also 
ascertain that Nietzsche’s genealogy is not the simple dismissal of ethics as 
such, but rather an attack on a certain way of understanding ethics: Nietzsche 
targeted what he termed ‘life-denying’ philosophies, which he saw in 
Christianity, and of course Platonism, both of which posit another world 
beyond this world in a projection of ideals in opposition to life. In The Will to 
Power, in the section entitled ‘Critique of Morality’ (paragraph 254), Nietzsche 
explains that ‘The inquiry into the origin of our evaluations and tables of the 
good is absolutely no way identical with a critique of them, as if often believed’. 
Further, he clarifies that such inquiry seeks instead to evaluate the value of 
morality for life: ‘What are our evaluations and moral tables worth? What is 
the outcome of their rule? For whom? In relation to what? – Answer: for life’ 
(Nietzsche 1968: 148).2 By ‘critique’, Nietzsche does not mean a negative enter-
prise, nor an attack against morality, but rather an inquiry into the history of 
the origins of morality. Through the deconstruction of the tradition of respon-
sibility (as we will see, essentially a critique of the identification of responsibil-
ity with accountability), Nietzsche undertakes a genealogy of responsibility 
and its fundamental concepts (causality, agency, will, subjectivity), thereby 
opening the way for a reelaboration of its phenomenological senses.
A clarification may then be helpful at the outset. Continental philosophies 
of ethics, which are in their very basis post-Nietzschean thoughts, have often 
been accused of moral relativism and nihilism. It is often alleged that post-
Nietzschean continental thought has little to offer in terms of an ethical 
theory, or worse, that it actually develops an un-ethical posture, exemplified in 
the works of Heidegger, or the deconstructive work of Jacques Derrida. 
However, deconstruction needs to be taken in its positive sense, following 
Derrida who defined it as an affirmative gesture, as an opening of new possi-
bilities, as the very reopening of the open. Derrida has stressed that ethical 
questions have always been present in his writings, even when they were not 
explicitly raised. To those who, as Derrida puts it, ‘believe themselves to have 
found in Deconstruction [‘la’ Déconstruction] – as if there were one, and only 
one – a modern form of immorality, of amorality, or of irresponsibility’, he 
replies by mentioning a number of his texts that ‘testify to a permanent, 
extreme, direct, or oblique, in any event, increasingly intense attention, to 
those things which one could identify under the fine names of “ethics”, “moral-
ity”, “responsibility”, “subject”, etc.’ (Derrida 1995).3 There is an ethics of decon-
struction, as such, before anything is said explicitly on ethics. Further, Derrida 
clarifies that his more explicit works on ethics (whether on justice, law and 
right, responsibility, moral decision, forgiveness, the gift, the secret, hospital-
ity, etc.) do not constitute a system of moral norms, a normative ethics in the 
established sense of the term. In fact, one may ask whether it is the role of 

232	
François Raffoul
philosophy to prescribe norms of ethics, to establish a ‘morality’, to posit 
norms or values. Jean-Luc Nancy for instance considers that ‘no philosophy 
either provides or is by itself a “morality” in this sense. Philosophy is not 
charged with prescribing norms or values’ (Nancy 2002b).4 Rather, the task of 
philosophy is to question the ethicality of ethics, to engage a philosophical 
reflection on the meaning of ethics, on what puts us ‘in the position of having 
to choose norms or values’ (HPP, 66). Philosophy does not indicate a choice, 
but articulates the situation of being ‘in the position of making a choice’. A 
philosophical inquiry would then not so much propose a moral system as 
inquire into the meaning of ethics, the ‘ethicality’ of ethics. In an interview 
given a few months before his death, on 28 January 2004, to the daily commu-
nist newspaper l’Humanité, Derrida readily conceded that ‘if by ethics one 
understands a system of rules, of moral norms, then no, I do not propose an 
ethics’ (Derrida 2004).5 In this respect, to understand ethics as an applied dis-
cipline forecloses the possibility of raising the indispensable prior question of 
the ethicality of ethics. The notion of application indeed assumes a ground for 
ethical rules. But it may be the case that ethical judgment, as Heidegger, Sartre, 
Levinas or Derrida would show, takes place in an un-grounded way, indeed, 
becomes only possible from such groundlessness: for Heidegger, being 
happens without a ground and the call of conscience has no author and no 
foundation. For Sartre, responsibility arises out of the groundlessness of exis-
tence, and ethics has no ‘a priori Good’ to rely upon. For Levinas, ethics arises 
out of a concern for an infinite other, and not from a rational basis. As for 
Derrida, responsible decision takes place as a leap and absolute risk beyond 
knowledge in an abysmal experience of the undecidable.6 Applied ethics is 
thus the name of an ethics whose meaning is not reflected upon and which is 
inappropriately understood in terms of the theory-praxis, model-application 
schemas. At stake is a philosophical reflection on the meaning of responsibil-
ity, too often covered over by a problematic of accountability.
The motif of responsibility is central in contemporary continental philoso-
phies of ethics, but it is reconceptualized from the ground up, in the wake of 
Nietzsche’s genealogical deconstruction of morality and accountability. For 
instance, with Sartre the ethical is not a body of norms but instead a charac-
teristic of existence. Ethics arises out of his phenomenological ontology 
because even though ontology is unable to formulate ethical imperatives, it 
nonetheless allows us to glimpse the existential situation of ethics. Existence 
for Sartre is identified with responsibility itself. Sartre posits human existence 
as absolute responsibility based on the withdrawal of essence and situates the 
origin of ethics and responsibility in the disappearance of a theological foun-
dation for values. Human existence is identified with an absolute responsibil-
ity for itself based on the surge and self-invention of a groundless freedom. To 
that extent, there is an intrinsic ethicality of existence in Sartre’s phenomeno-
logical ontology. This strongly suggests that if ontology cannot provide a 
morality or an ethics per se, it nevertheless articulates what one may call here 

	
The History of Responsibility	 233
the ethicality of ethics, the very possibility of ethics. When Heidegger was 
asked in his ‘Letter on Humanism’ why he did not write an ethics to supple-
ment his fundamental ontology, he replied famously that the thinking of being 
was an originary ethics. The first gesture by Heidegger is thus to no longer 
separate ethics from ontology, as if they constituted separate independent 
spheres. Ethics cannot be approached except in terms of the event of being. In 
a sense, for Heidegger ethics is ontology itself. There is no need to ‘add’ an 
ethics as an applied discipline to an ontology that would then have been pre-
supposed as unethical. Heidegger rethinks our being-responsible in terms of 
our answering the call of being and the ethical by way of a critique of the meta-
physical tradition of ethics and a meditation on human beings’ sojourn on the 
earth as ethos. He understands Dasein as an ethical notion and our relation to 
being as one of responsible engagement. Levinas defines the self as a respon-
sibility for the other human, and breaks with Kantian universalism by situating 
ethics in the encounter with the singular other. Derrida understands decon-
struction as responsiveness that engages – aporetically – a responsible deci-
sion. Responsibility itself is engaged as an experience of the impossible. We 
see the notion of responsibility articulated in terms of phenomenological 
responsiveness rather than in terms of the autonomy of the subject. It is clear 
that in such a context, responsibility itself is entirely rethought, in a novel and 
original way, that is, away from an ideology of subjectivity, will and power. 
Whether explicitly or implicitly, those continental thinkers allow for a rethink-
ing of ethical responsibility as they take issue with traditional models, that is, 
with the model of accountability.
Indeed, the concept of responsibility has traditionally been associated, if 
not identified, with accountability, under the authority of a philosophy of free 
will and causality, itself resting upon a subject-based metaphysics. 
Responsibility is conceived in terms of causality as ground of the act or of the 
event. Accordingly, one is accountable as a subject who is the cause of his or 
her actions through the freedom of the will. Accountability, as a concept, thus 
assumes the position of a subject-cause, an agent or an author who can be 
displayed as a subjectum for its actions. Such is, for instance, Kant’s definition 
of accountability or imputability (Imputabilität) in the third antinomy in the 
Critique of Pure Reason,7 which he situates in the ‘transcendental freedom’ of 
the subject, capable of absolutely and spontaneously beginning a new series of 
causes. Identified with the concept of accountability, responsibility thus desig-
nates the capacity by an agent to be the cause and the ground of its acts. The 
unceasing calls for responsibility in our contemporary culture are always calls 
to such agency, to the position of a subject-cause – an insistence which as such 
deserves scrutiny. One might ask at the outset: what concept of responsibility 
does it seek to reinforce? What lack does it aim at supplementing? What 
shortcoming is it trying to compensate? What irresponsibility is it trying to 
suppress, exclude or negate? From what danger does it aim at protecting it? 
These questions already take us to the heart of the matter. This is necessarily 

234	
François Raffoul
accompanied by a system of control and punishment: a ‘ready-made’ guiding 
metaphysical interpretation of the concept of responsibility – namely account-
ability as indication of the power of a masterful and wilful subject – is thus left 
to rule exhaustively the hermeneutic domain of responsibility. Ironically, this 
predominant ‘ideology of responsibility’ is often accompanied by a singular 
absence of genuine reflection on the senses of responsibility, on what it means 
to be responsible – an ironic situation to be sure, as it is quite irresponsible not 
to know what responsibility means while one is calling for it! In the words of 
Jacques Derrida: ‘not knowing, having neither a sufficient knowledge or con-
sciousness of what being responsible means, is of itself a lack of responsibility. 
In order to be responsible it is necessary to respond to or answer to what being 
responsible means’ (Derrida 1996: 25).8
In Beyond Good and Evil, Nietzsche took issue with the so-called ‘science 
of morals’ in which there is always something lacking, ‘strange as it may sound: 
the problem of morality itself; what was lacking was any suspicion that there 
was something problematic there’ (Nietzsche 1989: 98).9 In paragraph 345 of 
The Gay Science (Book V), under the title of ‘Morality as a problem’, Nietzsche 
also suggests quite plainly that it is a matter of problematizing morality and its 
value, that is, of questioning it, as opposed to taking it for granted and leaving 
it unquestioned. For even 
if a morality has grown out of an error, the realization of this fact would not as much 
as touch the problem of its value. Thus nobody up to now has examined the value of 
that most famous of all medicines which is called morality; and the first step would 
be – for once to question it. Well then, precisely this is our task. (Nietzsche 1974: 
285). 
Insisting on the necessity and urgency of raising anew the question of the 
ethical, of making it problematic, indeed aporetic, Derrida thus writes: ‘All 
this, therefore, still remains open, suspended, undecided, questionable even 
beyond the question, indeed, to make use of another figure, absolutely apo-
retic. What is the ethicality of ethics? The morality of morality? What is 
responsibility? What is the “What is?” in this case? Etc. These questions are 
always urgent’ (P, 16). This questioning, however, proves to be historical.
The History of Responsibility
No concept is atemporal or a-historical. Nietzsche challenges this characteris-
tic of philosophy to approach philosophical problems in an a-historical or 
dehistoricized way, and in particular those so-called historians of morality 
who lack ‘historical spirit’. Nietzsche claims that ‘the thinking of all of them is 
by nature unhistorical’ (GM, 25). Such would be the ‘common failing’ of phi-
losophers: they do not take account of the historicity of their object, and think 
of man as an ‘aeterna veritas’. Nietzsche accounts for this a-historicity in 

	
The History of Responsibility	 235
reference to what he calls the fetishism of language, i.e., our belief in grammar, 
and in paragraph 11 of volume I of Human, All Too Human, he explains that 
‘man has for long ages believed in the concept and names of things as in aeter-
nae veritates’, and that ‘he really thought that in language he possessed knowl-
edge of the world’ (Nietzsche 1986: 16).10 Lack of historical sense is therefore 
‘the family failing of all philosophers’ (HH, 13); this is what is ‘idiosyncratic’ 
about them: ‘their lack of a sense of history, their hatred for the very notion of 
becoming’ (Nietzsche 1997: 18). They produce nothing but ‘conceptual 
mummies’. Challenging the same a-historical approach to the question of 
responsibility, Derrida states that it ‘is often thought, on the basis of an analy-
sis of the very concepts of responsibility, freedom, or decision, that to be 
responsible, free, or capable of deciding cannot be something that is acquired, 
something conditioned or conditional’ (GD, 5). However, as Nietzsche writes, 
‘everything has become: there are no eternal facts, just as there are no absolute 
truths. Consequently, what is needed from now on is historical philosophiz-
ing, and with it the virtue of modesty’ (HH, 13). Responsibility would need to 
be resituated in its proper historicity.11 An authentic philosophizing on 
responsibility would engage the history of the concept of responsibility, and 
would seek to ask: ‘What would responsibility be if it were motivated, condi-
tioned, made possible by a history?’ (GD, 5).
The first task of such an enterprise will consist in undertaking a decon-
structive genealogy of the concept of responsibility, which will reveal how 
responsibility has been constructed in such a way as to be progressively identi-
fied with accountability under the authority of a philosophy of will and subjec-
tivity. Exposing this construction already entails undertaking its 
deconstruction. In fact, responsibility, the concept of accountability, might 
already be, in and of itself, in a state of self-deconstruction, according to the 
‘general law of construction’ identified by Jean-Luc Nancy, who writes that a 
construction, ‘like any construction, according to the general law of construc-
tions, exposes itself, constitutively and in itself, to its deconstruction’ (Nancy 
2008: 48). This self-deconstruction of responsibility allows us to understand 
how the position of an accountable subject is always accompanied by an una-
voidable double-bind: such a subject will be both in a position of mastery and 
the possible seat of accusation and punishment. The more it establishes its 
position of power as subject, the more it proposes itself as the potential recipi-
ent of an accusation or a persecution. In short, the more it asserts its power, 
the more the ‘responsible subject’ also undermines itself and deepens the 
abyss beneath it: the position of the power of the subject of imputation under-
mines itself in the very moment of its position, which also helps us to under-
stand how Levinas is able to reverse the subject from the nominative of the 
tradition to the accusative of the hostage of the other, and how the ‘subject’ 
becomes ‘the subjected’. Responsibility deconstructs itself. This is also why, no 
doubt, one is never responsible enough: responsibility actually engenders irre-
sponsibility from within itself, it produces irresponsibility all the while 

236	
François Raffoul
reengaging efforts to suppress it. Irresponsibility will always be an integral and 
irreducible part of a fuller concept of responsibility.
In fact, one may discern the irreducible presence of a certain irresponsibil-
ity at the heart of responsible engagement: each time in different ways in 
Nietzsche, Heidegger, Sartre, Levinas or Derrida, one notes that responsibility 
seems rooted in an originary experience of irresponsibility, with responsibility 
arising out of it. Nietzsche speaks of the radical unaccountability of all things, 
negating responsibility and proclaiming the radical innocence of life and 
becoming. There is no intention, no design, no author, no cause, no responsi-
bility, no agent: life eventuates in a tragic and innocent play, without a goal, 
not directed by a divine will. It is thus irresponsibility (as the unaccountability 
of all things) that is affirmed by Nietzsche! And yet, it is out of this very inno-
cence and unaccountability of all things that a certain responsibility arises, as 
the affirmation of that very groundlessness and the recognition of a self-legis-
lating humanity. One becomes responsible for a Godless existence, engaged in 
the creation of an existence that unfolds out of an absence of essence. In 
Heidegger’s work, being happens without reason (the rose has no why, it 
grows because it grows, states The Principle of Reason), and there is no author 
of being. Yet one has to respond to this authorless call, and be responsible for 
one’s thrown existence. For Sartre, even though he claims that we are respon-
sible for everything and for all men, it is also the case that we have not chosen 
to be responsible, that we are not free to be free. We are ‘condemned to be 
free’, and this expression designates both the irresponsibility of our facticity 
and the unavoidability of our responsibility: one should almost speak here of 
the irresponsibility of responsibility. Derrida, for his part, seeks to return to 
the an-ethical origins of ethics. There is an irreducible irresponsibility at the 
origin of responsibility, so that we could be said to be irresponsibly 
responsible.
The two-fold aspect mentioned above of the prevailing metaphysical sense 
of responsibility – establishment of a power and accusation of a subject, sup-
position of a subject and undermining of the subject – in other words, the 
intimate connection between power and persecution, appears clearly, not only 
in Levinas’s work (where responsibility is actually defined as persecution), but 
also in any genealogy of the concept of responsibility. As Nietzsche has shown 
decisively, at the root of responsibility as accountability we find the need to 
posit an agent-cause, that is, someone who can be held accountable and pun-
ished. A post-metaphysical sense of responsibility will certainly have to be 
distinguished from a problematics of punishment, just as it will also have to be 
differentiated from accountability. Responsibility will become less about the 
establishment of a sphere of control and power, less about the establishment 
of a sovereign subject, and more about an exposure to an event that does not 
come from us and yet calls us. The issue is to explore these senses so as to 
rethink the concept of responsibility from the ground up.

	
The History of Responsibility	 237
In this respect, one needs to question the classical opposition between free 
will and determinism, which has enframed traditional accounts of responsibil-
ity and continues to structure a large number of discussions on responsibility, 
and which may prove inadequate to an exploration of the phenomenological 
senses of responsibility. A questioning on the being of responsibility will nec-
essarily undercut the classic opposition between free will and determinism, 
which ultimately remains an ontical distinction. One also needs to question 
the identification of responsibility with imputation or accountability. 
Imputability, or accountability, itself rests upon and presupposes a certain 
conception of the human being, as subject. A philosophical enterprise would 
thus need to distinguish responsibility – whose etymological roots, from the 
Latin respondere, mobilize the domain of answerability or responsiveness – 
with the accountability of a subject, that is, within a metaphysics of the free 
autonomous subject. What does ‘to be responsible’ mean, if no longer referred 
to the subject? This question requires a historical genealogy which allows us to 
dissociate the senses of responsibility from its enframing in a metaphysics of 
subjectivity, power and will. Might there not be other ways to think of respon-
sibility, once the categories just mentioned are questioned or challenged with 
and after Nietzsche’s genealogy of responsibility? What would responsibility 
mean if not thought as the consequence of free will? If it no longer designates 
the capacity of a subject to ‘own’ its thoughts and acts? If the category of cau-
sality is no longer operative or at least problematized?
Is the concept, indeed the experience, of responsibility exhausted by the 
sense of accountability? Should responsibility be conceived exclusively in 
terms of the causality of the will? On the basis of the voluntary, or conscious 
intention? As the subjectivity or ground of the act? Should responsibility be 
identified with the position of a power, of a sovereign agency? Can responsibil-
ity be enframed exclusively within a philosophy of accountability, in the 
context of a metaphysics of subjectivity and free will? In fact, it may well be the 
case that in such an enframing, the phenomenological and ontological sources 
of what is called ‘responsibility’ have remained obscure and neglected. It will 
thus be a matter of dissociating the concept of responsibility from its meta-
physical interpretation, and freeing it from the dominance of the motifs of 
subjectivity and power so as to retrieve its phenomenological provenance.
In the course of a historical deconstructive genealogy of responsibility, four 
motifs that govern the traditional interpretation of responsibility – what we 
could call the four ‘fundamental concepts’ of the traditional account of respon-
sibility – appear. 
First, the belief that the human being is an agent or a subject, i.e., the reli-
ance on subjectivity (subjectum in its logical or grammatical sense of founda-
tion) as ground of imputation. A critique of such a subject, whether 
Nietzschean in inspiration, phenomenological or deconstructive, will radically 
transform our understanding of what it means to be responsible. A 

238	
François Raffoul
reconsideration of responsibility away from the dominance of the motif of the 
subject will imply a reconsideration of what it means to be human. 
Second, the notion that the subject is a voluntary agent, i.e., the reliance on 
the voluntary and so-called ‘free will’. A phenomenological critique to the 
notion of free will, whether Nietzschean (free will is a fiction), Heideggerian 
(free will does not capture the essence of freedom, of what it means to be free) 
or Levinassian in inspiration (responsibility takes place before the freedom of 
the self, pre-assigned passively to the other), would radically transform our 
understanding of responsibility. It would in any case reveal responsibility not 
as the position of the power of the subject, but as a relation to and assumption 
of a certain passivity, that of our finitude as mortal beings and of our exposure 
to the inappropriable alterity that calls us. 
Third, the reliance on causality. To be the ‘cause of’ and to be ‘responsible 
for’ are conflated. However, this in itself is problematic: does the category of 
cause apply to the human being’s relation to itself and others? Does it apply to 
what happens in its eventfulness? Is an event, as event, ‘caused’? Is it caused by 
a ‘will’? Does the very eventfulness of the event not precisely point to a certain 
excess with respect to the enframing of causality? Can an event worthy of its 
name be even conditioned by a causality? Or should one not assume, as Jean-
Luc Marion invites us to do, a certain excess of the event with respect to cau-
sality? Marion writes of ‘the character and the dignity of an event – that is, an 
event or a phenomenon that is unforeseeable (on the basis of the past), not 
exhaustively comprehensible (on the basis of the present), not reproducible 
(on the basis of the future), in short, absolute, unique, happening. We will 
therefore call it a pure event’ (Marion 2000: 204).12 Further, does causality 
capture the original sense of responsibility as responsiveness? 
Fourth, the assumption that the responsible subject is a rational subject, 
that the basis for ethical responsibility is rational agency. Nietzsche stated that 
traditional moral philosophers ‘wanted to supply a rational foundation for 
morality … Morality itself, however, was accepted as “given”. … What was 
lacking was any suspicion that there was something problematic here’ (BGE, 
98). What would happen to the concept of responsibility if it were dissociated, 
as is the case with Levinas, but also with Heidegger or Derrida, from the pre-
dominance of reason, of giving reasons (principle of sufficient reason) or pro-
viding an account of oneself? Should responsibility be placed under the 
authority of the principle of sufficient reason? Under the request or demand 
for a ground or justification (accountability), characteristic of rationalist meta-
physical thought? Derrida understands responsibility as a response to the 
event of the other, an event that is always unpredictable, incalculable, one that 
thereby always breaks the demand for sufficient reason. ‘The coming of the 
other, the arriving of the arriving one (l’arrivée de l’arrivant), is (what) who 
arrives as an unpredictable event’, Derrida explains, an event that can only 
challenge the demand for reasons, the principle of sufficient reason ‘insofar as 
reason is limited to “giving an account” (reddere rationem, logon didonai)’. The 

	
The History of Responsibility	 239
issue is not of complying with the demands of such reason rendering, but 
instead of ‘not simply denying or ignoring this unforeseeable and incalculable 
coming of the other’ (Derrida and Roudinesco 2004: 50).
The Being of Responsibility
Once a certain subjectivist bias or assumption has been abandoned, a concep-
tual work on the very sense of being responsible, on what it means to be 
responsible, becomes both possible and necessary. A genealogy of the concept 
of responsibility will reveal a wide range of senses, making clear that the pre-
vailing sense of responsibility as accountability of the subject, within a meta-
physics of will and subjectivity, is but one narrow sense of the term, and 
perhaps not even the most primordial one. In fact, a simple, schematic and 
preliminary survey of various linguistic expressions points to the plural scope 
of responsibility, opening onto various problematics, questions and domains, 
left to be explored further.
The classic understanding of responsibility is captured in the expression 
‘being responsible for one’s actions’, which speaks of the autonomy of the 
subject, of self-legislation and self-ownership. It belongs to a semantics of 
power and appropriation, as it is about owning one’s actions and owning 
oneself, about establishing an area of mastery and control. Responsibility has 
traditionally been associated with a project of appropriation, understood as 
the securing of a sphere of mastery for a wilful subject, a model one finds 
developed from Aristotle’s discussion of the voluntary and responsible deci-
sion in Book III of The Nicomachean Ethics to Kant’s discussion of transcen-
dental freedom in the third antinomy and his understanding of enlightenment 
as self-determination and self-responsibility, and culminating, although not 
without some paradoxes and reversals, with Sartre’s philosophy of hyperbolic 
responsibility. In that tradition, responsibility is understood in terms of the 
subjectum that lies at the basis of the act, as ground of imputation,13 and opens 
onto the project of a self-legislation and self-appropriation of the subject. To 
be responsible in this context designates the capacity by a sovereign subject to 
appropriate itself entirely in an ideal of self-legislation and transparency. As 
Derrida put it, ‘all the fundamental axiomatic of responsibility or decision 
(ethical, juridical, political), are grounded on the sovereignty of the subject, 
that is, the intentional auto-determination of the conscious self (which is free, 
autonomous, active, etc)’ (WA, xix), an interpretation that is to be 
deconstructed.
One also speaks of ‘being responsible for the consequences of one’s actions’, 
an important addition, for in the first instance (in being responsible for one’s 
actions), the stress is essentially on the dimension of the past, as one is asked 
to answer for his or her past deeds, whereas to say that one is responsible for 
the consequences of one’s actions implies that one is looking towards the 

240	
François Raffoul
future of the act, and that there can be a responsibility to the future and not 
only towards the past. In this sense, responsibility is being accountable for the 
future, for what has not yet happened! This is the emphasis placed by Hans 
Jonas in his famed The Imperative of Responsibility: In Search of an Ethics for 
the Technological Age (1985),14 where the author argues that responsibility 
ought to be directed towards the future (what he calls a ‘future-oriented ethics’ 
[IR, 12–17] or also an ‘ethics of the future’ [IR, 25–31]) in the sense of preserv-
ing future generations in the face of human destructiveness. The Kantian for-
mulations of ethics are said to need to include a future humanity (indeed, the 
very future of humanity!), as well as nature itself. Such future-oriented ethics 
would ‘seek not only the human good but also the good of things extrahuman, 
that is, to extend the recognition of “ends in themselves” beyond the sphere of 
man and make the human good include the care of them’ (IR, 8). In other 
words, the categorical imperative should be recast so as to include future 
humanity. As parents are responsible for their children (for Jonas, the parent-
child relation is the archetype of responsibility),15 human beings would be 
responsible for nature and for the future of humanity. Yet, there are different 
ways of conceiving of a responsibility towards the future, for it could be taken 
either as a way to calculate the effects of one’s actions in the future and thus 
within the horizon of calculability and control, or it could be taken on the 
contrary as a responsible opening towards what remains incalculable in what 
is yet to come. Derrida speaks of a responsibility to the future, to the arriving 
of the arrivant, ‘a future that cannot be anticipated; anticipated but unpredict-
able; apprehended, but, and this is why there is a future, apprehended pre-
cisely as unforeseeable, unpredictable; approached as unapproachable’ (GD, 
54). There would thus be a responsibility towards what has not yet happened, 
or to what is still coming. In Jonas’ work, this implies a relation of caring 
towards the vulnerable. Such responsibility for the future is for Jonas based on 
a fear for the vulnerability of the earth. Jonas clarifies that he is not speaking 
of a ‘duty arising from procreation’ but of a ‘duty to such procreation’ (IR, 40). 
That duty for future mankind (which ‘charges us, in the first place, with ensur-
ing that there be a future mankind’! [IR, 40]), is based on the fragility of life. 
Human existence, Jonas writes, ‘has the precarious, vulnerable, and revocable 
character, the peculiar mode of transience, of all life, which makes it alone a 
proper object of “caring”’ (IR, 98). Another sense of responsibility is here 
introduced, based on care, and no longer authorship: when Jonas speaks of an 
attitude of protection towards nature, a responsible concern for its vulnerabil-
ity or frailty, responsibility is taken in terms of respect, and care. We are 
responsible for what is in our care, not first as imputable subjects, but as care-
takers. Care or concern, or respect, belong to semantic sets that are distinct, if 
not foreign, to accountability and its problematics of subjectivity and author-
ship. For Levinas, ‘not doing violence to the other’ constitutes the very 
meaning of ethics and responsibility. Vulnerability now appears as the new 
ground of responsibility, in the call not to do harm to the vulnerable.

	
The History of Responsibility	 241
This last sense leads us to give thought to a certain excess with respect to 
the subjective enclosure of the concept of responsibility. For, in contrast with 
responsibility for one’s own actions and their consequences, and thus by 
extension for oneself, another expression speaks not of a responsibility for self, 
but instead of a ‘responsibility for the other’. In such a context, it is clear that 
one can no longer maintain that the accountability of the subject constitutes 
the main sense of responsibility, for one is longer speaking about one’s own 
actions and one’s relationship to them. Responsibility is no longer about what 
I have done, but about another for whom I care and am concerned with, 
another towards whom I have obligations. As Emmanuel Levinas puts it, 
‘Usually, one is responsible for what one does oneself. I say, in Otherwise than 
Being or Beyond Essence, that responsibility is initially for the other’ (Levinas 
1985: 96).16 This is ultimately what Levinas will call ‘persecution’: I have done 
nothing and yet I am responsible for the other. Levinas also severs the tradi-
tional relation between responsibility and the egological subject, overcoming 
the egological enclosure of responsibility, no longer assigned to the interests 
of the ego: I am now responsible for what is foreign to me, for ‘what does not 
even matter to me’ (EI, 95). What can be the ground of such an obligation? 
Certainly not my own self as subject and author: its measure is no longer the 
self-ownership of a subject, the return onto itself of the self, but the claim 
made on me by the other. The emphasis is displaced from the self towards the 
other, and the subject is overturned as subjected to the other. Thus, the ground 
of this obligation, if it is not the self, will have to be located in the other itself, 
and in a certain vulnerability of the other (his/her mortality, ultimately). This 
is of course the great divide that Levinas retraced and radicalized, between a 
responsibility for self and a responsibility for the other, leading to an ethics of 
otherness apart from all egology or egological thinking. As Derrida explains in 
The Gift of Death, 
Levinas wants to remind us that responsibility is not at first responsibility of myself 
for myself, that the sameness of myself is derived from the other, as if it were second 
to the other, coming to itself as responsible and mortal from the position of my 
responsibility before the other, for the other’s death and in the face of it. (GD, 46)
This raises the question of the scope or the measure of responsibility, as it 
appears in the question: ‘To whom or to what are we responsible?’ For which 
other am I responsible, for whom or for what? Indeed, to answer, like Levinas, 
that the other is the one I am responsible for is only the beginning of the ques-
tion: we know the Levinassian quandary discussed in its aporetic structure by 
Derrida in The Gift of Death: ‘Tout autre est tout autre’: every other is wholly 
other. I am therefore obligated to all others insofar as I am obligated to each and 
every other. How to discriminate between others if I am each time obligated to 
a singular other and thus bound in this singular responsibility to sacrifice all 
other others? For this expression, ‘tout autre est tout autre’, is a way of ‘linking 
alterity to singularity’ and ‘signifies that every other is singular, that everyone is 

242	
François Raffoul
a singularity’ (GD, 87). Are these others only human, as Levinas claimed, since 
the French word for the face, visage, is exclusively human? And how can one 
speak of determinable measure when a certain aporia, or sacrifice, seems to 
make the ethical experience impossible? As I respond to one singular other, I 
sacrifice all the other others, and I can only respond ethically by sacrificing or 
betraying ethics. ‘I can respond only to the one (or to the One), that is, to the 
other, by sacrificing the other to that one… and I cannot justify this sacrifice’ 
(GD, 70). This sacrificial space implies that as a consequence ‘the concepts of 
responsibility, of decision, or of duty, are condemned a priori to paradox, 
scandal, and aporia’ (GD, 68). The question of responsibility is thus opened from 
this aporia onto its own infinity, indefiniteness or undecidability.
This question is addressed frontally by Sartre, leading to a hyperbolic infla-
tion of responsibility in his thought of existence: My responsibility, Sartre 
claims, is boundless, extends to ‘all men’ and everything concerns me. 
However, this hyperbolic inflation of responsibility proves to be nothing but 
the hyperbolic inflation of subjectivity since for Sartre everything that happens 
happens to me, and what happens to me happens through me. I am responsi-
ble for everything and for all as I project an image to be embraced by all. I am 
responsible for ‘all men’ in the sense that I carry the weight of the world on my 
shoulders, that is, that I embrace the whole world in my will. To that extent, 
Sartre does not perturb the traditional definition of responsibility as author-
ship but reinforces and extends it hyperbolically. He writes: ‘We are taking the 
word “responsibility” in its ordinary sense as “consciousness” (of) being the 
incontestable author of an event or of an object’ (Sartre 1992: 707). For Levinas 
as well, I am responsible for everyone, but in the opposite sense of Sartre, 
because for Levinas I am responsible as expropriated and hostage of the 
other’s infinite demand.
One can take this question, ‘To whom or to what are we responsible?,’ in a 
different direction, questioning the very division between the human and the 
non-human that has structured the history of responsibility. For whom or for 
what is one responsible? Human beings, animals, things, nature, the world, the 
cosmos or universe, everything? In the words of Jean-Luc Nancy, ‘For what are 
we responsible? … responsible for being, for God, for the law, for death, for 
birth, for existence, ours and that of all beings?’ (Nancy 1999: 1).17 What is the 
scope or the range, the limits and measure of responsibility? Isn’t it always 
taken in an excessive movement leading to an exceeding of the very anthropo-
centric enclosure, disturbing the demarcation between what would be a 
human and a non-human sphere? This excess would open onto what Nancy 
calls the singular plurality of being, in which the relation to an other is no 
longer governed by the human signified, or the human as transcendental signi-
fied. Nancy explains in Being Singular Plural that in being-with it is the matter 
of a communication between singularities, where no privilege to human 
Dasein can be granted. Responsibility exceeds the anthropocentric closure, 
and designates the between of singularities: 

	
The History of Responsibility	 243
If one can put it like this, there is no other meaning than the meaning of circulation. 
But this circulation goes in all directions at once, in all the directions of all the 
space-times opened by presence to presence: all things, all beings, all entities, every-
thing past and future, alive, dead, inanimate, stones, plants, nails, gods – and 
‘human’, that is, those who expose sharing and circulation as such by saying ‘we’. 
(Nancy 2002a: 3).18
The human being does not constitute the centre of creation, Nancy insists. 
Instead, creation (that is, the way the world emerges and exists, ex nihilo) 
‘transgresses [traverse] humanity’, so that ‘in humanity, or rather right at [à 
même] humanity, existence is exposed and exposing’ (BSP, 17). To that extent, 
there is no human sphere with its accompanying anthropocentric self-respon-
sibility. As Nancy formulates it, the thought of the singular plurality of being 
would lead us to state the following with respect to the world: it is not a human 
world, but a world of the co-exposure of the human and the non-human. I 
would not be ‘human’, Nancy explains, if I did not ‘have this exteriority “in me”, 
in the form of the quasi-minerality of bone’ (BSP, 18). And we ‘would not be 
“humans” if there were not “dogs” and “stones”’ (BSP, 18). Humanity is not the 
origin, centre, or finality of the world: 
It is not so much the world of humanity as it is the world of the non-human to which 
humanity is exposed and which humanity, in turn, exposes. One could try to formu-
late it in the following way: humanity is the exposing of the world; it is neither the 
end nor the ground of the world; the world is the exposure of humanity; it is neither 
the environment nor the representation of humanity. (BSP, 18). 
As one can see, the expression ‘responsibility for the other’ can explode the 
self-centred sense of responsibility in many directions, calling into question 
our most basic beliefs in the structure of being and its composition as well as 
in our conception of what it means to be human.
One also speaks of responsibility in the sense of ‘carrying a weight’, of 
‘shouldering’ a burden. Ordinary language speaks of the connection between 
responsibility and weight, of responsibility as the carrying of a weight. 
However, what exactly weighs in the weight? Heidegger speaks of the human 
being as a being who is burdened or heavy with a weight, in a situation of care 
and concern, in contrast to the lightness or carelessness of irresponsible or 
inauthentic being. Heidegger evokes the fundamental ‘burdensome character 
of Dasein, even while it alleviates the burden’ (Heidegger 1953: 134). So-called 
‘moods of elation’, which do alleviate the burden, are said to be possible only 
on the basis of this burdensome character of Dasein’s being. The being of the 
there, Heidegger writes, ‘become[s] manifest as a burden [Last]’ (Heidegger 
1953: 134). Heidegger defines Dasein as ‘care’, as concern: being is at issue for 
Dasein, it is a task of being, and is a weight I have to carry and be ‘responsible 
for’. Responsibility as the carrying of the weight of existence is the originary 
phenomenon, and irresponsibility – making thing easy – is derivative. 

244	
François Raffoul
Ultimately, the weight designates the facticity of existence, a facticity to which 
we are assigned and have to carry as our very finitude.
In Levinas’ thought, the motif of weight marks the ethical situation of the 
finite subject as assigned (hostage!) to the infinite other, the assigning of a 
finite subject to the infinite demand of the other: what weighs in this case is 
the dissymmetry or incommensurability between the finite I and the infinite 
Other. The other’s demand is greater than my capacities to respond, as finite I, 
and yet this is how I must respond. This appears in the motif of hospitality as 
welcome of the other: the welcome of the other is the finite welcome of an 
infinite. The subject welcomes or receives the other beyond its own finite 
capacities of welcoming. The call of the other is thus ‘too much’ to bear and 
weighs on the finite subject, an excess that cannot be an argument against 
ethical responsibility: it is not because I cannot materially do justice to the 
other that I am not obligated to him or her; there is no relationship between 
my capacities as a finite subject and the ethical responsibility that is mine. In 
fact, as Levinas says, dissymmetry is the law of responsibility, as it represents 
a responsibility for an other that necessarily exceeds my finite capabilities. 
This excess for the subject is the origin of responsibility and its weight. 
Furthermore, Levinas stresses that ethical responsibility is not chosen, is not 
the result of my decision or initiative, but is assigned to me, ‘before freedom’, 
by the other facing me, putting me in a situation of obligation. The weight is 
thus threefold: it is the weight of a dissymmetry between the infinite other and 
the finite subject; it is the weight of the passivity of an ethical obligation before 
freedom and choice; and finally, it is the weight of otherness itself: the other-
ness of the other weighs on me precisely insofar as the other remains other, 
never appropriable by me, exterior to me yet calling me to responsibility.
This weightiness, which seems to exceed all limits or measure (and it is in 
fact this very boundlessness that weighs), can nonetheless take two forms, at 
least: it can take the form, as in Levinas, of the finite self becoming hostage to 
the infinite other. In this last case, as we saw, the weight is the weight of other-
ness. But it can also take the Sartrean form, in which I carry the weight of the 
world on my shoulders in the sense that I embrace the whole world within my 
will. I am responsible for everything and for all men, says Sartre, like Levinas, 
who also writes that I am responsible, and more than all the others, but for 
opposite reasons. For Sartre, it signifies the absolutizing of the wilful subject 
taking over the whole world and being responsible ‘for all men’ insofar as I am 
the ‘author’ of the meaning of the world. For Levinas, it means the subjection 
of the finite subject to an infinite other. Because the subject is exposed to an 
alterity, the very possibility of appropriation is called into question. Weight 
would thus be the ‘resistance’ of what remains inappropriable for the subject, 
either absolutizing of the subject (Sartre) or radical expropriation and subjec-
tion of the subject (Levinas): in both cases, responsibility is infinite and over-
whelming and the subject carries the whole weight of the world on its 
shoulders. The weight of responsibility can thus have the following senses: it 

	
The History of Responsibility	 245
can designate the absolute authorship of the free subject (Sartre), the dissym-
metry of an infinite obligation of the other for a finite subject (Levinas), or the 
weight of finitude as exposure to the inappropriable (Heidegger).
Such resituating of responsibility opens the thematics of answerability and 
responsiveness, responsibility as ‘responding to’ or answering a call. Derrida 
considers that any sense of responsibility must be rooted in the experience of 
responding, and belong to the domain of responsiveness.19 Responsibility is 
first and foremost a response, as its etymological origins, traceable to the Latin 
respondere, betray. Derrida distinguishes three types of responsiveness: there 
is ‘to answer for’ [répondre de]; ‘to respond to’ [répondre à]; and ‘to answer 
before’ [répondre devant]. Derrida gives priority to the ‘responding to’ as it 
mobilizes the inscription of an other to whom or to what I respond. One reads 
in The Politics of Friendship: 
One answers for, for self or for something (for someone, for an action, a thought, a 
discourse), before – before an other, a community of others, an institution, a court, 
a law). And always one answers for (for self or for its intention, its action or dis-
course), before, by first responding to: this last modality thus appearing more origi-
nary, more fundamental and hence unconditional. (Derrida 2005: 250) 
The phenomenological senses of responsibility might be closer to a problematic 
of answerability than to one of accountability, which is too dependent on a 
metaphysics of subjectivity.20 Responsibility first needs to be taken as a kind of 
response, as being assigned to a call. One thinks here, for instance, of Heidegger’s 
call of conscience in Being and Time, and later the call or address of being to 
which one has to correspond, Heidegger going so far in The Zollikon Seminars 
as to claim: ‘To be answerable to the claim of presencing is the greatest claim of 
humanity: ethics is this claim’ (Heidegger 2001: 217). The motif of the call is also 
central to Levinas’ definition of responsibility, the call of the other person, the 
other human, out of his or her vulnerability and mortality. One can also evoke 
here Jean-Luc Marion’s problematic of the saturated phenomenon, and the call 
that this excess places on the called one (l’interloqué). For Jean-Luc Marion, in 
fact, the senses of responsibility as accountability of the subject, as well as the 
Levinassian sense of responding to the other’s face, presuppose the original 
sense of responsibility as response to the call as such. In Being Given, he writes: 
Responsibility can now be redefined. (c) Nobody will deny that responsibility, 
understood as the property of a juridical ‘subject’ having to respond for his acts and 
an ethical ‘subject’ having to respond to what the face of the Other demands (to 
envisage him [de l’envisager] as such), can be deduced from the most general figure 
of the response to a call by a gifted [un adonné], and the call ‘always arises from a 
paradox (saturated phenomenon)’. (Marion 2002: 293)21
Responsibility is then a response, not a spontaneous initiating, as Kant 
claimed. The subject is the recipient of the call, not a transcendental subject; we 
are respondents, not absolute beginners. For Kant, to be responsible means to 

246	
François Raffoul
be able to begin something absolutely. But as called, the subject can never begin 
anything, only respond. The I always comes after, always comes ‘late’, and its 
responsibility is that very delay in the form of the registering of and responding 
to the call. This is where one notes the crucial importance of the conception of 
the human being which is at the basis of a conception of responsibility: Kant 
thinks of the human being as a rational subject, and thus as origin (‘transcen-
dental freedom’) and foundation. His concept of responsibility will bear these 
features. Heidegger thinks of the human, no longer as a subject, but as Dasein, 
that is, as a thrown existence (to be taken on responsibly). Similarly, with 
Levinas, the subject is understood as assigned to a call, as passivity: the subject 
is hostage of the other. Responsibility in this sense is not a matter of choice or 
inclination, but arises out of a demand placed on the subject, a demand that 
takes the form of a duty, of an ethical obligation, a call I cannot not answer. That 
demand needs to be answered: having to respond, to answer (duty, obligation), 
implies that one cannot not answer. In fact, not responding is already a kind of 
response. This is exactly how Heidegger would define inauthenticity: a not-
responding (to the call of conscience) that nonetheless is a kind of response: 
‘responding in the form of not-responding’ means being inauthentic.
This polysemic range reveals the unilateral nature of the understanding of 
responsibility as accountability of the subject, which is but one sense of the 
term, and perhaps not even the most primordial: having to respond to a call, 
exposure to the vulnerability of the other (the other as vulnerability), openness 
to the event of being as my own ‘to be’, having to take upon oneself the weight 
of responsibility, whether the weight of finitude, of otherness or of an essence-
less existence – all these senses point to the experience of and exposure to the 
inappropriable. Responsibility becomes the experience of and response to this 
inappropriable character of existence and of the other. This, at least, is what a 
history of responsibility – that is, a genealogy of its senses – allows us to see.
François Raffoul is Professor of Philosophy at Louisiana State University. He is 
the author of Heidegger and the Subject (Prometheus Books, 1999), A Chaque 
fois Mien (Galilée, 2004), The Origins of Responsibility (Indiana University 
Press, 2010) and is completing a new monograph entitled Thinking the Event. 
He has co-edited several volumes: Disseminating Lacan (SUNY Press, 1996), 
Heidegger and Practical Philosophy (SUNY Press, 2002), Rethinking Facticity 
(SUNY Press, 2008), French Interpretations of Heidegger (SUNY Press, 2008) 
and more recently The Bloomsbury Companion to Heidegger (Bloomsbury, 
2013, 2016). He has co-translated several French philosophers, in particular 
Jacques Derrida (‘Ulysses Gramophone: Hear Say Yes in Joyce’, in Derrida and 
Joyce: Texts and Contexts, SUNY Press, 2013), Jean-Luc Nancy (The Title of the 
Letter: a Reading of Lacan [1992], The Gravity of Thought [1998], The Creation 
of the World or Globalization [2007] and Identity [Fordham University Press, 
2013]). He is the co-editor of a book series published by SUNY Press, entitled 
Contemporary French Thought.

	
The History of Responsibility	 247
Notes
  1.	 Hereafter cited as GM, followed by page number. Nietzsche speaks of the ‘long history 
of the origins of responsibility’ [Geschichte der Herkunft der Verantwortlichkeit]. Earlier 
in the text, in the preface, Nietzsche had already mentioned his attempt at publishing 
hypotheses concerning ‘the origin of morality’ [Ursprung der Moral]; GM, 16.
  2.	 Hereafter cited as WP, followed by page number.
  3.	 Hereafter cited as P, followed by the page number.
  4.	 Hereafter cited as HPP, followed by page number.
  5.	 All translations are mine.
  6.	 As Larry Hatab explains, ‘The search for a decisive ground in ethics can be understood 
as an attempt to escape the existential demands of contention and commitment. Moral 
“decisions” and the sense of “responsibility” for decisions may in fact be constituted by 
the global undecidability of ethical questions’. Hatab 2008: 241.
  7.	 Kant writes: ‘The transcendental idea of freedom is far from constituting the whole 
content of the psychological concept of that name, which is for the most part empirical, 
but constitutes only that of the absolute spontaneity of an action, as the real ground of 
its imputability’. Kant 1998: A448/B476, p. 486.
  8.	 Hereafter cited as GD, followed by page number. In fact, ‘We must continually remind 
ourselves that some part of irresponsibility insinuates itself wherever one demands 
responsibility without sufficiently conceptualizing and thematizing what “responsibility” 
means; that is to say everywhere’. GD, 25.
  9.	 Hereafter cited as BGE, followed by page number.
10.	 Hereafter cited as HH, followed by page number.
11.	 In The Genealogy of Morals, Nietzsche states: ‘My desire, at any rate, was to point out to 
so sharp and disinterested an eye … in the direction of an actual history of morality’ 
[wirklichen Historie der Moral]. GM, 21.
12.	 Translation slightly modified (we substitute ‘happening’ for ‘occurring’.)
13.	 In his Doctrine of Right, Kant thus explains that a person is ‘a subject whose actions can 
be imputed to him’, whereas a ‘thing is that to which nothing can be imputed’. Kant 
1999: 378.
14.	 Hereafter cited as IR, followed by page number.
15.	 Jonas claims that the very model or paradigm for conceiving of ethics is that of the solici-
tude of the parent towards his or her children. It is, he writes, ‘the archetype of all 
responsible actions’ (IR, 39). The parent-child relation becomes the archetype of all 
responsibility of humans towards other humans, towards the world, and towards the 
future of the earth. 
16.	 Hereafter cited as EI, followed by page number.
17.	 Another translation, by Sara Guyer, is provided in A Finite Thinking, ed. Simon Sparks 
(Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2003), pp. 287-99.
18.	 Hereafter cited as BSP, followed by page number.
19.	 See for instance P, 15, where Derrida uses the term ‘responsiveness’ in English in the 
original. Also see GD, 3.
20.	 In his book, Ethics and Finitude, Larry Hatab seeks to advance a notion of responsibility 
‘that can be characterized as “answerability” (cf. the German verantwortlich), rather than 
what I would call moralistic “accountability”. With these formulations I mean to distin-
guish responsibility from autonomous agency and a related sense of accountability’. 
Hatab 2000: 185.
21.	 Translation modified.

248	
François Raffoul
References
Derrida, Jacques. 1995. ‘Passions’, in On the Name, ed. Thomas Dutoit. Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press, pp. 3–34.
 . 1996. The Gift of Death, trans. David Wills. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago 
Press.
 . 2004. ‘Jacques Derrida, penseur de l’évènement’ [Jacques Derrida, Thinker 
of the Event], interview by Jérôme-Alexandre Nielsberg’, l’Humanité, 28 January 
2004, http://www.humanite.fr/2004-01-28_Tribune-libre_-Jacques-Derrida-
penseur-de-levenement.
 . 2005. The Politics of Friendship. London and New York: Verso.
Derrida, Jacques and Elisabeth Roudinesco. 2004. For What Tomorrow…: A Dialogue. 
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Hatab, Lawrence. 2000. Ethics and Finitude. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
 . 2008. Nietzsche’s On the Genealogy of Morals. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Heidegger, Martin. 1953. Sein und Zeit. Tübingen: Max Niemeyer Verlag.
 . 2001. The Zollikon Seminars, trans. Franz Mayr and Richard Askay. Evanston, 
IL: Northwestern University Press.
Jonas, Hans. 1985. The Imperative of Responsibility: In Search of an Ethics for the 
Technological Age. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kant, Immanuel. 1998. The Critique of Pure Reason, trans. Paul Guyer and Allen W. 
Wood. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 . 1999. The Metaphysics of Morals, in Practical Philosophy, ed. Mary J. Gregor. 
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Levinas, Emmanuel. 1985. Ethics and Infinity. Pittsburg, PA: Duquesne University 
Press.
Marion, Jean-Luc. 2000. ‘The Saturated Phenomenon’, in Phenomenology and the 
‘Theological Turn’. New York: Fordham University Press.
 . 2002. Being Given: Toward a Phenomenology of Givenness, trans. Jeffrey L. 
Kosky. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. 1964. The Primacy of Perception. Evanston, IL: Northwestern 
University Press.
Nancy, Jean-Luc. 1999. ‘Responding for Existence’, Studies in Practical Philosophy 
1(1).
 . 2002a. Being Singular Plural. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
 . 2002b. ‘Heidegger’s “Originary Ethics”, in François Raffoul and David Pettigrew 
(eds), Heidegger and Practical Philosophy. Albany, NY: SUNY Press, pp. 65–86.
———. 2008. Dis-enclosure: The Deconstruction of Christianity. New York: Fordham 
University Press.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. 1967. On the Genealogy of Morals, trans. Walter Kaufmann. New 
York: Vintage Books.
 . 1968. The Will to Power, trans. Walter Kaufmann and R.J. Hollingdale. New 
York: Vintage Books, Random House.
 . 1974. The Gay Science, trans. Walter Kaufmann. New York: Vintage Books.
 . 1977. The Twilight of the Idols, trans. Richard Polt. Indianapolis and 
Cambridge: Hackett.
 . 1986. Human, all Too Human: A Book for Free Spirits. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.

	
The History of Responsibility	 249
 . 1989. Beyond Good and Evil, trans. Walter Kaufmann. New York: Vintage 
Books.
Raffoul, Francois. 2010. The Origin of Responsibility. Bloomington, IN: Indiana 
University Press.
Sartre, Jean-Paul. 1992. Being and Nothingness: A Phenomenological Essay on 
Ontology, trans. Hazel E. Barnes. New York: Washington Square Press.


Index
A
Aarhus University’s Institute of Advanced 
Studies (AIAS), 7
Acan, Sara, 104–5, 106, 109
accountability, 233, 236, 237
Acholi tradition, 102, 113
acknowledgement, ethical practice, 139–42
actions: ethical, 10; moral, 155; motivation 
of, 158
Africa, 100, 108
African American families, 49
African American men, Stop and Frisk (NYC 
police policy), 201
After Virtue (MacIntyre), 11, 12, 47
agency: ethical, 175, 176, 179, 180, 181; 
moral, 189
agent regret, 68
Ahmed, Sara, 70
Alsberg, Paul, 211, 217
Amazonian ontology, 176
anger, 67
Anglo-American moral philosophers, 44
Anthropocene, 217
anthropological literature, 9–32; approaches 
to moral engines, 20–31; history of 
core themes and debates, 17–20; 
moral engines and human experience, 
23–28; moral engines and the human 
condition, 28–31; moral engines as 
borderland inquiries, 10–17
anthropology: anti-cultural moment of, 156; 
of ethics, 17–20, 116, 117, 118–21, 
174–90; Laidlaw, James (See Laidlaw, 
James); philosophical, 211, 212, 213, 
215–18; postmodern, 120; western 
traditions of, 16
Anthropology and Philosophy: Dialogues on 
Trust and Hope (Liisberg et al.), 6, 15
anti-drug war activists, 198, 199
anti-drug war politics, 205
antipathy, 129
Antze, Paul, 150
anxiety: desire for the forbidden 
(concupiscentia), 126; and freedom, 
121–23; Kierkegaard, Søren, 123, 127, 
129
a priori conditions, 121
Arendt, Hannah, 45, 103, 106, 107, 111, 114, 
202, 211
aristocratism, 215
Aristotelian ethics, 11
Aristotelian phronesis, 140
Aristotle, 19, 22, 31, 45, 138, 139, 140, 141, 
146, 151, 239; desire, 44; narrative 
self, 40; thick moral self, 46; universal 
organon, 217; virtue ethics, 44
art, Helena and El Pescador (2000 
[Evaristti]), 118, 123–26, 127, 128–30
Asad, Talal, 138, 145
assumptions, 197
Augustine (Saint), 219, 220, 221
Austin, J.L., 143, 144, 145, 146, 151, 223, 224
B
beatings, 107
behavior: dignity, 200, 208, 209; of groups, 
119
being able, possibility of, 127

252	
Index
Being and Time (Heidegger), 17, 245
Being Given (Marion), 245
Being Singular Plural (Nancy), 242–43
Beliaev, Alex, 145
Benedict, Ruth, 187
best possible, 72–73, 75
betrayal, 101
Beyond Good and Evil (Nietzsche), 234
Bloch, Maurice, 144
borderland inquiries: definition of, 13; moral 
engines as, 10–17
Boss, Medard, 71
Brown, Wendy, 199
Buddhism, 178, 186
C
care, 67
care ethics, 49, 50
Cassirer, Ernst, 211
causality, reliance on, 238
Cavell, Stanley, 141, 144, 151
Central African Republic, 103
Central Asia, 84, 89
Christianity, 178, 215. See also religion; 
inheritance, 185; morality, 216; in 
Papua New Guinea, 164, 165, 166; 
Spirit dance, 169, 170; in Texas, 179
Christological terminology, 130
chronic illnesses, 49
cleansing rituals, 102
compassion, 67
The Concept of Anxiety (Kierkegaard), 126
concepts, 197
concupiscentia (desire for the forbidden), 
126, 129
conditions, 121. See also human condition
Confessions (Saint Augustine), 219, 220
conflicts in Africa, 100
consistency of narratives, 189
core themes, history of, 17–20
cosmopolitanism, 109
Crapanzano, Vincent, 15
creativity, 176
crimes, cleansing rituals, 102
Critique of Pure Reason (Kant), 233
Crow Nation, 14, 101, 119, 120, 121, 122
culture: concept of, 157; shared, 159
D
Daniel, Valentine, 69
dark moods, 73–76
Das, Veena, 16, 17, 111, 182, 183, 184, 185, 
218, 225, 243
dead (contact with), 102
debates, history of, 17–20
Deconstruction, 231
deficient being (Mängelwesen), 216
demand, ethical, 20, 40, 48, 55–56
Derrida, Jacques, 25, 90, 109, 222, 231, 232, 
233, 234, 236, 238, 240, 241, 242, 245
desire, 155; Aristotle, 44; for the forbidden 
(concupiscentia), 126, 129
destabilization, 14–17
diabetes, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66
dialysis, 74
dignity, 200, 208, 209
disabilities, 49
discipline, 140
doctrine of the Übermensch, 215, 220
Dolan, Chris, 101
drive, ethical, 10, 20
drives, 10
drug policy reform organizations, 199
drug wars, 198–201; New York City, NY, 
201–5; Vancouver, Canada, 206–8
Dumont, Louis, 171
Durkheim, Emile, 21–23, 42, 117, 118, 139, 
149, 155; morality, 139; theoretical 
frameworks, 157
dwelling: ethics of, 197–209; New York City 
(ethics of), 201–5
Dyring, Rasmus, 3, 27, 28, 29
E
Egypt, Muslims in, 87
elimination of the body 
(Körperausschaltung), 217
Elliot, T.S., 61
emotions, 176; moods (See moods); moral 
force of, 91–93
envy, 107
epistemology, 14
Erikson, Erik, 148
ethical agency, 175, 176, 179, 180, 181
ethical demand, 40, 48
ethical engagement, 123–26
Ethical Life (Keane), 23

	
Index 253
ethical practice, 139–42, 142–47
ethical reflection, 184
ethical subjects, 175–81
ethics, 10, 39–57; actions, 10; acts in 
everyday life, 148; analyses of, 197; 
anthropology of, 17–20, 116, 117, 118–
21, 174–90; Aristotelian, 11; care, 49, 
50; concepts of, 11; demand, 20, 55–56; 
drive, 10, 20; of dwelling, 197–209; 
ethicality of, 232; first-person virtue 
ethics (Mattingly), 179; Foucauldian, 
11; immanence of, 137–51; intentions, 
41–43; irony, 149–51; locating 
the ethical, 218–21; longer-term 
intentions, 44–46; motivation of, 198; 
New York City (of dwelling), 201–5; 
occurrence of, 183; ontology, 117; 
ordinary, 182–87; relationship between 
being human and, 28; requirement of 
freedom, 187–90; virtue, 44–46
Ethos, 69, 70
evaluation, 179
Evaristti, Marco, 118, 123–26
evil things (Uzbek: homonym narsalar), 83
exemplarity, 155, 160, 162, 187
existential freedom, 140
experience, moral, 10, 69
The Experience of Freedom (Nancy), 116
experimental narrative self, 39, 47–49
experimental narrative selfs, 50–52
F
facts, moral, 10, 21–23
families: African American, 49; betrayal, 
101, 102; forgiving, 106 (See also 
forgiveness); love, 49
Fassin, Didier, 42, 150
Faubion, James, 12, 178, 179
Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), 63
feminist literature, 49
Ferrara, Alessandro, 159, 160, 161
Feruza, 93–95
first-person virtue ethics (Mattingly), 179
the Fisherman (El Pescador). See also Helena 
and El Pescador (2000 [Evaristti])
flourishing, 44
The Force of the Example (Alessandro), 159
forgiveness, 100–114; Acan, Sara, 104–5, 
106; aftermath of war, 101–3; atrocities 
(war in northern Uganda), 100–101; 
grinding stones, 112–13; moral 
laboratories, 113–14; oral accounts of, 
103–4; words and every day actions, 
112
Foucauldian ethics, 11, 18
Foucault, Michel, 11, 12, 118, 145, 177, 187
foundationalism, 3
The Fragility of Goodness (Nussbaum), 90–91
Frankfurt, Harry, 189
Frazer, James, 16, 17
freedom, 11, 12, 43; anxiety and, 121–23; 
Augustine (Saint), 221; of choice, 40; 
existential, 140; human, 42; moral 
experience and, 121–23; political, 175; 
possibilities, 120, 127; provocation of, 
116–30; requirement of (for ethics), 
187–90; responsive, 27; self-invention, 
232; transcendental, 239
free will, 125, 237, 238
Freud, Sigmund, 151, 221
future, responsibility to, 240
G
Gadamer, Hans-Georg, 222, 223
Garro, Linda, 66
Gawa Island, Papua New Guinea, 160, 161
The Gay Science (Nietzsche), 234
Geertz, 17
Gehlen, Arnold, 211, 216, 222
Genealogy of Morals (Nietzsche), 230
German tradition of philosophical 
anthropology, 10
The Gift of Death (Derrida), 241, 242
globalization, 42
God, 86, 89
The Golden Bough (Frazer), 16, 17
good and evil, knowledge of, 126, 127, 130
Gorbachev, Mikhail, 84
greed, 107
grinding stones, 112–13
Grøn, Lone, 112
groups: attachment to, 118; behavior of, 119
Guam, 74
Guhuku-Gama’, 187
guilt, 67
Gulu University, 103

254	
Index
H
happiness, 44
haunting as moral engine, 83–96, 95–96; 
Feruza, 93–95; The Fragility of 
Goodness (Nussbaum), 90–91; 
Mahmood, Saba, 87–88; moral force 
of emotions, 91–93; Muazzam, 84–85, 
88–90; Naqshbandiyya Sufis and moral 
perfectionism, 85–86
hegemonies, 41, 117
Heidegger, Martin, 3, 4, 17, 47, 69, 70, 101, 
202, 211, 217, 218, 231, 233, 236, 238, 
245, 246
Heideggerian, 3
Helena and El Pescador (2000 [Evaristti]), 
118, 123–26, 127; responsive 
engagement, 128–30; responsive 
engagement of, 128–30
hermeneutics, 200, 208, 223
Hinduism, 186
historico-cultural realities, 117
history of responsibility, 230–46
HIV/AIDS, 205
Hofbauer, Anna Karina, 123–24, 125, 128
horizons of understanding, 4
Human, All Too Human (Nietzsche), 235
human condition, 9, 28–31, 143, 213, 222
human experience, 23–28
human freedom, 13, 42, 117. See also 
freedom
human indeterminacy, 215–18
humanitarian aid, 101
human life, ethical drives of, 198
human responsiveness, 26, 211–26; human 
indeterminacy, 215–18; locating the 
ethical, 218–21; phenomenological 
point of view, 222–26
Humphrey, Caroline, 68
Hürelbaatar, Ujeed, 68
Husserl, Edmund, 61, 70, 71, 72
I
IDF Atlas of Diabetes (6th edition), 63
illness. See also diabetes: self-responsibility 
for, 66
immanence, 11
immanent transcendence, 25, 39, 41
The Imperative of Responsibility: In Search 
of an Ethics for the Technological Age 
(Jonas), 240
impulses, 10
indeterminable otherness, 224
individualism: Urapmin Christian, 170; 
values of, 169, 170
inspiration, 237
intentions: ethical, 41–43; longer-term, 
44–46
Internally Displaced Persons (IDP) camps, 
101, 104
International Criminal Court (ICC), 102, 103
Iraq War, 68
irony, 149–51
irresponsibility, 236. See also responsibility
Islam, 178. See also religion
Islamic learning, 83
J
Jackson, Michael, 219, 224
Jainism, 178, 186
Jane, Amal, 107
Jensen, Uffe Juul, 6
jihad, 86
Jonas, Hans, 240
judgment, 139, 142, 147, 188; ethical 
practice, 139–42; moral engines, 
147–49
justification, ethical practice, 139–42
K
The Kaizo, 72
Kant, Immanuel, 40, 45, 138, 185, 212, 219, 
245; accountability, 233; moral law, 221; 
transcendental freedom, 239
Kapferer, Bruce, 169
Keane, Webb, 23, 43, 183, 185, 186, 187
Kierkegaard, Søren, 28, 118, 122, 123, 128, 
151; anxiety, 127, 129; phenomenology 
of responsive engagement, 126–28
Kinimnok (Urapmin), 165, 166, 167, 168
kinship, 179
Kohn, Eduardo, 176, 179
Kony, Joseph, 101, 107
Kyndrup, Morten, 7

	
Index 255
L
Laidlaw, James, 18, 19, 20, 42, 87, 101, 116, 
141, 176
Lambek, Michael, 21, 39, 43, 182, 183, 184, 
185, 219
Landerman, Janet, 67, 68
Latino men, Stop and Frisk (NYC police 
policy), 201
law, 139
law, moral, 221
lawfulness (Urapmin), 163, 165, 169
Lear, Jonathon, 14, 16, 28, 44, 101, 119, 120, 
121, 122, 141, 151, 177. See also Crow 
Nation
Lempert, Michael, 186
“Letter on Humanism” (Heidegger), 233
Levinas, Emmanuel, 232, 235, 238, 240, 241, 
242, 244
liberum arbitrium (free will), 125
life-denying philosophies (Nietzsche), 231
lifestyle diseases, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66
literary narratives, 48
literature: feminist, 49; value of, 174
London School of Economics, 174
longer-term intentions, 44–46
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), 101, 102, 105, 
107, 110
Louw, Maria, 5, 27
M
MacIntyre, Alasdair, 11, 12, 47, 49
Mahmood, Saba, 87–88
Makedonskiy, Alexander, 93
Malinowski, B., 160
Malinowski Memorial Lecture (2001), 174
Marion, Jean-Luc, 245
marriage, 143
Marsupial Woman (Nuk Wanang), 165, 166
Marxist Communism, 186
Mattingly, Cheryl, 26, 27, 87, 141, 176, 219; 
ethical agency, 181; first-person virtue 
ethics, 179; self-identity, 189
Mayotte sorcery, 145
Meinert, Lotte, 27
Melanesia, 163
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, 231
metaphysics, 233, 234, 236; foundationalism, 
3; humanists, 29
Meyer, Peter S., 123–24
Mirandola, Giovanni Pico della, 212
Missing Out: In Praise of the Unlived Life 
(Phillips), 90
models, scientizing, 159
moods, 61–78, 118, 187; context of, 70; dark, 
73–76; quality of, 70; responsiveness 
of, 71
moral: systems, 187 (See also religion)
moral engines, 137–38, 174, 213, 214; 
approaches to, 20–31; as borderland 
inquiries, 10–17; exploration of, 9; 
haunting as, 83–96; history of core 
themes and debates, 17–20; and the 
human condition, 28–31; and human 
experience, 23–28; judgment, 147–49; 
location of, 12; and moral facts, 21–23; 
narrative selfs and, 49–50; in social 
practice, 118
moral experiences, 10, 69; and freedom, 
121–23; responsive engagement of, 
128–30
moralists, ethics of, 125
morality, 10, 61–78, 138, 187, 190, 213, 
238; of actions, 101; analyses of, 197; 
Christianity, 216 (See also Christianity); 
concepts of, 11; differentiation from 
ethics, 43; Durkheim, Emile, 139; 
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 230; social 
constraints of, 42; systems, 42; values 
(See values)
“Moral Moods” (Throop), 91, 92
morals: actions, 155; agency, 189; choices, 
90; emotions, 176; facts, 10, 21–23; 
force of emotions, 91–93; laboratories, 
113–14; laws, 221; motivation, 
155–72; Naqshbandiyya Sufis and 
perfectionism, 85–86; pilgrims, 47; 
psychology, 118 (See also Kierkegaard, 
Søren); tracks, 137–38; values (See 
values)
morbidity rates, 63
mortality rates, 63
motivation, 155–72; of actions, 158; 
common view of, 160; of ethics, 198
Muazzam, 84–85, 88–90
Munn, Nancy, 160
Murdoch, Iris, 47
Muslims, 25, 85, 89, 145. See also religion; in 
Egypt, 87; saints, 93

256	
Index
mysticism, 83
N
Nancy, Jean-Luc, 116, 222, 232, 242–43
Naqshband, Bahouddin, 93
Naqshbandiyya Sufis, 84, 85–86, 89
narratives, 187, 189
narrative self, 39, 40, 46–47; aftermath 
(Andrena and Belinda), 54–55; 
embracing despair, 53; ethics, 41 (See 
also ethics); experimental, 47–49; 
experimenting with life and death, 
53–54; hopeful narratives, 52; and 
moral engines, 49–50; responsive, 
47–49
Native Americans, 119. See also Crow 
Nation
neglect, 107
New York City (ethics of dwelling), 201–5
The Nicomachean Ethics (Aristotle), 239
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 138, 215, 216, 218, 230, 
234, 235; life-denying philosophies, 
231; responsibility, 231, 232
nihilism, 215, 230, 231. See also Nietzsche, 
Friedrich
Nixon, Richard, 198
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), 
102
Northern Uganda, 25
Northern Uganda Transition Initiative, 102
Nuk Wanang (Marsupial Woman), 165, 166
Nussbaum, Martha, 90–91
Nyholm, Tove, 103
O
objectification, 138
Ongwen, Dominique, 102
ontology, 14, 209, 211; Amazonian, 176; 
ethics, 117
oral accounts of forgiveness, 103–4
ordinary, the, 11
ordinary ethics, 182–87
otherness, indeterminable, 224
Otherwise than Being or Beyond Essence 
(Levinas), 241
P
Pacific Island communities, 63, 64
Papua New Guinea, 108, 160, 161; 
Christianity in, 164, 165, 166; Gawa 
Island, 160, 161; Urapmin, 162–70; 
West Sepik Province, 162
parochial boundaries, 15
past, regret connected to, 76–77
paths, moral, 84
Peijnenburg, Jeanne, 67
performance, ethical practice and, 142–47
El Pescador (the Fisherman), 123. See 
also Helena and El Pescador (2000 
[Evaristti])
Peter, Otti, 108, 109, 110
phenomenology of responsive engagement, 
126–28, 230, 237
Phillips, Adam, 90
philosophical anthropology, 10, 211, 212, 
213, 215–18
philosophico-anthropological approach, 119
philosophy, 4
pity, 67
Plato, 31, 212, 214
Plenty Coups (Chief), 122
Plessner, Helmuth, 211, 217
plots, 48
political freedom, 175
political liberty, 190
politics: anti-drug war, 205; drug wars, 198–
201; Vancouver, Canada, 206–8
The Politics of Friendship (Derrida), 245
politics of worldbuilding, 197–209
Portmann, Adolf, 211
possibilities, 11, 12, 61, 62; Crow people 
management of, 121; of doing 
something, 128; field of, 119; freedom, 
120, 127; question of, 118–21
postmodern anthropology, 120
The Principle of Reason (Heidegger), 236
prohibition (of drugs), 199
Protestantism, 158
psychē, 11
psychoanalysis, 141
punishment, 236
R
Radical Hope (Lear), 16, 119, 120
Raffoul, Francois, 29, 30, 31
Rappaport. Roy, 143, 144
Ratcliffe, Matthew, 71

	
Index 257
rationalization, 138
Read, Kenneth, 187, 188, 189
reason, 188
reconciliation rituals, 102, 109, 111
reflection, 141
reflection, ethical, 184
regret, 61–78. See also mood; about eating 
better, 65, 66; agent, 68; analyses of, 67; 
etymology of, 68, 69
Regret: The Persistence of the Possible 
(Landerman), 67
rehabilitation conditions (Russia), 198
relationalism, 162, 163, 168
relationships, values, 161
religion, 138, 139, 143, 149, 178, 182, 186, 
197
resentment, 67
Resonance (Wikan), 61
responsibility: being of, 239–46; concept 
of, 246; Derrida, Jacques, 233; as a 
foundational ethical concept, 31; to 
the future, 240; history of, 230–46; for 
illness, 66; self-deconstruction of, 235; 
weight of, 244
responsive engagement: of Helena and El 
Pescador (2000 [Evaristti]), 128–30; 
phenomenology of, 126–28
responsive freedom, 27
responsive narrative self, 47–49
responsiveness, human, 26, 211–26; domain 
of, 245; human indeterminacy, 215–18; 
phenomenological point of view, 
222–26
responsive phenomenology, 47
Ricoeur, Paul, 41, 48, 49
rites of passage, 143
Robbins, Joel, 21, 22, 26, 101, 186
Rothacker, Erich, 211
rules, 139. See also morality
Russia, 186, 198
Rustam, 90
S
sadists, ethics of, 125
saints: Augustine (See Augustine (Saint)); 
Muslims, 93
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 236, 239, 242, 244
Scheler, Max, 161, 162, 211, 212, 213
Scheper-Hughes, Nancy, 67
Schielke, Samuli, 87, 88
Schnädelbach, Herbert, 157
scientizing models, 159
second changes, 112
self-deconstruction of responsibility, 235
self-description, 179
self-determination, 239
self-fashioning, 177, 184
self-formation, 40, 177, 179
selfhood, 11
self-identity, 189
self-interpretation, 177
self-invention, 232
selfishness, 107
self-making, 50
self-mastering, 40
self-responsibility, 239
self-responsibility for illness, 66
Semis (Urapmin), 164, 165, 167, 168
sexual violence, 106
shame, 67
Sidnell, Jack, 142
Silk Road, 83
single room occupancy (SRO) hotels, 206
Smith, Adam, 181, 189
Smith, Jonathon Z., 169
social control, 12
socialization, 40
social sciences of unfreedom, 120
social torture, 100–101
solidarity, 107
sorcery, 145
Soviet Union, 84, 186. See also Russia
Specters of Marx (Derrida), 90
Spirit dance, 169, 170
Steinbock, Anthony, 72
Stop and Frisk (NYC police policy), 201
Strathern, Marilyn, 108
subjectivity, 11, 237
The Subject of Virtue (Laidlaw), 176
subjects (ethical), 175–81
Sufis, 25, 83–96, 95–96; Feruza, 93–95; The 
Fragility of Goodness (Nussbaum), 
90–91; Mahmood, Saba, 87–88; moral 
force of emotions, 91–93; Muazzam, 
84–85, 88–90; Naqshbandiyya Sufis, 89
Sufism, 84, 87
Sykes, Karen, 15
sympathy, 67, 129

258	
Index
T
tabib (traditional healer), 83
Taylor, Charles, 45, 46, 176, 188
Texas, Christianity in, 179
theoretical frameworks, 157
theories, values, 171
The Theory of Moral Sentiments (Smith), 181
thick moral self, 46
thought experiments (Williams), 124
Throop, C. Jason, 23, 24, 25, 91, 92
Thus spoke Zarathustra (Nietzsche), 215
“Towards the Idea of Man” (Scheler), 212
traditional healer (tabib), 83
traditional justice, 102
traditional values, 162. See also values
traditions, 197
transcendence, 25, 39, 41, 213, 214
transcendental freedom, 239
trespassing, 106
trust after betrayal, 102
Type 2 diabetes, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66
U
Übermensch, doctrine of the, 215, 220
Uganda, 100–114; Acan, Sara, 104–5, 106; 
aftermath of war, 101–3; atrocities in 
war, 100–101; grinding stones, 112–13; 
moral laboratories, 113–14; oral 
accounts of forgiveness, 103–4; word 
and actions (forgiveness), 112
Ugandan military (UNDP), 101, 103
underdeterminism. See human 
indeterminacy
unfreedom, social sciences of, 120. See also 
freedom
Urapmin (Papua New Guinea), 162; big 
men of, 168; Kinimnok, 165, 166, 167, 
168; lawfulness, 165, 169; Semis, 164, 
165, 167, 168; values among, 162–70; 
willfulness, 163
USAID (United States Agency for 
International Development), 102
Uzbekistan, 95–96; Feruza, 93–95; The 
Fragility of Goodness (Nussbaum), 
90–91; Mahmood, Saba, 87–88; moral 
force of emotions, 91–93; Muazzam, 
84–85, 88–90; Naqshbandiyya Sufis 
and moral perfectionism, 85–86; Sufis, 
83–96
Uzbek Sufis, 25
V
values, 155–72; among Urapmin (Papua 
New Guinea), 162–70; cast of, 161, 162; 
existence of, 159; of individualism, 169, 
170; realization of, 160; relationships, 
161; sharing, 158; theories, 171; 
traditional, 162; transformation, 160, 
169
Vancouver, Canada (worldbuilding), 206–8
virtue, 11; ethics, 44–46; first-person virtue 
ethics (Mattingly), 179
voyeurs, ethics of, 125
vulnerability, 240
W
Waldenfels, Bernhard, 17, 26, 222, 224, 225
war (in northern Uganda), 100–114; Acan, 
Sara, 104–5, 106; aftermath of, 101–3; 
atrocities, 100–101; grinding stones, 
112–13; moral laboratories, 113–14; 
oral accounts of forgiveness, 103–4; 
word and actions (forgiveness), 112
wars, drug, 198–201, 201–5, 206–8
Weber, Max, 158
Wentzer, Thomas, 3, 4, 25, 29, 30, 39
Western Caroline Islands, 63
West Sepik Province (Papua New Guinea), 
162
Wikan, Unni, 61
willfulness (Urapmin), 163
Williams, Bernard, 14, 22, 45, 46, 124, 185, 
186, 213, 214
The Will to Power (Nietzsche), 231
witchcraft, 145, 150
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 16, 17, 111, 149
Wool, Zoe, 67
worldbuilding (Vancouver, Canada), 206–8
world-openness, 215–18
Writing Culture movement (1980s), 120
wrongs, 107. See also forgiveness
Y
Yap, 63
Yap State Department of Public Health, 62
Yap State Memorial Hospital, 74
yomon narsalar (Uzbek: evil things), 83

	
Index 259
Z
Zande witchcraft, 145
Zigon, Jarrett, 23, 24, 69, 70, 73, 179, 180, 
183, 185, 186, 187, 219
The Zollikon Seminars (Heidegger), 245


