Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
www.Ebook777.com

THE
MAN CATCHING
METHOD
THAT
DROPS CHAPS 
IN THEIR 
TRACKS !
H
o
w
a
S
m
a
r
t
W
o
m
a
n
C
a
n
L
a
n
d
H
e
r
D
r
e
a
m
M
a
n
i
n
6
WEEKS

E.
Jean Carroll
By
Right 
Now!
Mr. Right, 
Right 
Now!

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
www.Ebook777.com

The ﬁnal aim of all love intrigues, be they comic or
tragic, is really of more importance than all other ends
in human life. What it all turns upon is nothing less
than the composition of the next generation. It’s not the
weal and woe of any one individual, but that of the
human race to come, which is here at stake.
Back up, boy, I ain’t your toy.
Arthur
Schopenhauer
Missy 
Elliott


Contents
E-Book Extras:
E. Jean’s Absolutely Favorite 11 Questions (And Answers!)
Congratulations Darling!
Epigraph
Acknowledgments
Introduction: Genesis of the Man Catching Theory
Part One: 
The Man Catching Theory in Action
1
3 Simple Reasons the Man Catching Theory 
Will Work for You in 6 Weeks . . . or Less
3
The Mr. Right, Right Now! Promise
19
Part Two: 
The 6-Week Plan
21
Week One: Lashing Your Brain into Man Catching Condition
23
Week Two: Snow White and the 7-Day Pulchritude Plan
37
Week Three: What to Do When the Freaking-Out Thing 
Kicks In
63
Week Four: The 119 Best Places to Meet the Male Beast
77
Week Five: You See Him . . . and You Absolutely 
Lose Your Brain
129
Week Five 1⁄2: How to Ask a Man Out
155
Week Five 3⁄4: Intimidating the Poor Bastards? Good!
163
Week Six: How to Mop Up the Floor with Men
169
Farewell, Lovely Reader
179
The 79 Best Ways to Lose the Male Beast
183
Thanks!
193
ix

About the Author
By E. Jean Carroll
Credits
Cover
Copyright
About the Publisher

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Whoa, now. You are about to start reading Mr. Right, Right
Now!—How a Smart Woman Can Land Her Dream Man in 6 Weeks.
How exciting. You are whomp-whomping through the pages, eager
to get to the Man Catching Theory. Excellent! You are now faced
with a quandary:
Should you read the Introduction? Or skip it? Frankly even the
author ﬁnds the Introduction a tad long and technical. The major
themes it tackles are:
A. How all theories should be tested.
B. How it would be difﬁcult to test the Man Catching Theory
without tracking huge numbers of men and women.
C. How the aforementioned GreatBoyfriends.com is started by the
author and the author’s sister Cande.
D. How the author is surprised by the millions of hits on 
GreatBoyfriends.com.
Introduction
Genesis of the Man Catching Theory
www.Ebook777.com

E. How the author goes out on the town to celebrate with pine-
apple martinis the millions of hits.
F. How she wakes up the next day feeling like a four-inch Manolo
Blahnik heel (the open-toed, white patent-leather from three
years ago) is wedged in her forehead.
G. How she turns on her iMac, and despite being hungover, how
she looks at the screen and suddenly realizes that for the ﬁrst
time in human history, thanks to the dazzling ﬂow of Internet
code, that mystery of mysteries—how women catch men—is
being revealed to her.
H. How the bursts of zeros and ones make it stupendously clear to
the author that (1) her Man Catching Theory is being tested
and that (2) the Man Catching Method drops chaps in their
tracks.
I. How she decides to always capitalize the “M” and the “C” in
Man Catching and chuck the hyphen.
J. How the hard evidence gathered from thousands of letters sent
to the Ask E. Jean column at the fabled Elle magazine sup-
ports the massive data from GreatBoyfriends.com and bolsters
the basic premise of the Man Catching Theory.
K. How no theory is ever complete, but how if any of those other
so-called “love advice” books like The Rules actually worked,
everybody would already be married.
L. How if you’ve read this far and think this part should also be
skipped, it is already too late.
Introduction
x

Part One
THE 
MAN 
CATCHING 
THEORY 
IN
ACTION
Bum chicky, chick bum
Shake ya bum bum
Lil’ Kim
Bring me that tall,
handsome young ofﬁcer
of the Imperial Horse
Guard!
Catherine
the Great


Reason #1
Honey, You Were Born to Drive Men Mad
Mr. Right, Right Now!’s Man Catching Theory (which works so well,
it will one day have hair gels, breath mints, and contraceptives
named after it) is rooted in the fact that you are already ﬁtted-out by
nature to ﬁnd and seduce a man. You are so designed because Mom
Nature wants you out there rollicking and creating new combina-
tions of genes, and Mom gets her new gene-combinations only if
men are pestering you for sex in their $3.7-million penthouses.
3 Simple Reasons the Man
Catching Theory Will Work for
You in 6 Weeks . . . or Less

Don’t Believe You’re Fitted-Out by Nature to
Seduce a Man?
P-shaw!
Let me ask you one question: Have men gone to extravagant lengths
over the last 30,000 years to control females’ seductiveness with
chastity belts, clitoridectomies, foot bindings, veils, purdahs, ston-
ings, the rules of three Big Religions, etc., etc., etc.?
Come on, honey . . .
Let me ask you another question: Would chaps around the world, in
nearly every country, put this much effort into controlling your at-
tractions if you weren’t just unbelievably, incredibly hot?
The Mr. Right, Right Now! 6-Week Plan is going to build on
this fact.
And What Are These Natural Attractors That
Drive the Poor Buggers Insane?
They are the same from the Hamptons to the highlands of New
Guinea. Women are composed of 100 billion neurons, and when
they see a chap they like, the suckers start ﬁring with the express
purpose of torturing him. (Evolutionary biologists and anthropolo-
gists refer to this torture as “sending signals.”)
These signals consist of smiling at a man, looking away, gazing
back at him from under your lashes, ignoring him, glancing at him
again, giving off an alluring scent, displaying more curves than the
4
E. Jean Carroll

Ventura Freeway, walking with an animated fanny, and so on. All
these provocative attention-getters help cause the right man to drop
in your tracks like a bug on a ﬂystrip.
Needless to say, the Mr. Right, Right Now! 6-Week Plan did
not get off the boat with a shawl on its head and will build on these
signals.
And Whence Did Your Animated Fanny
Spring?
Why, nothing could be simpler. You inherited your ability to ﬁnd
and seduce a man from your foremothers. Let’s put it this way: If
every single one of your foremothers had not found and seduced a
man, you would not be here reading that every single one of your
foremothers found and seduced a man. Perhaps this little Time
Table will illustrate:
5
Mr. Right, Right Now!

6
E. Jean Carroll
The History of Your Sex Appeal
From the Beginning of the World to the Present Moment
4,000,000,000 B.C. . . .
A bunch of 
carbon and 
stuff is swirling 
around which 
is not really very 
interesting, 
so let’s move 
on to . . .
3,800,000,000 B.C. . . .
Your ﬁrst foremother 
appears. She is a 
heterotroph, which vaguely
resembles Diane Sawyer’s
nose/a modern bacterium,
depending on your 
perspective. Trust me 
on this.
3,799,999,999 B.C. . . .
Your foremama exchanges 
“genetic information” with
another heterotroph and is
credited with enjoying the
world’s ﬁrst snog.
2,862,997,329 B.C. . . .
Other cells and shapely
organisms join your foremothers
in a Boogie Nights–type orgy,
and snogging becomes
contagious—literally. (The case
can be made that you carry this
“infectious” snogging element in
your DNA, and if I knew
anything at all about it, I’d make
the case myself.)

7
Mr. Right, Right Now!
Okay, the next few billion years
nothing much is going on except
some Chuck Darwin–type events
with your sponges, your worms,
your mollusks, your jellyﬁsh, your
brontosauri, and, of course, your
mammals, who start up with their
humping and their yowling and
their scratching and their you-
drive-me-half-insane-with-passion
snogging as if the future of the
world depended on it . . .
7,000,000 B.C. . . .
Your foremothers 
make their debuts 
as hominids—an-
cestresses of apes 
and humans with 
the jaws of Joan 
Crawford—and 
spend their days 
copulating just all 
the damn time, like 
dozens of times a day. 
Yes, Doll, I can say, 
without exaggeration, 
there is never a single 
sperm swimming free
anywhere in the vicinity 
of your foremothers, if 
they can help it.
1,600,000 B.C. . . .
Your Homo erectus foremoth-
ers are not quite the total 
sluts as your hominids 
(though they certainly enjoy a 
little tickle-me-pickle-me 
whenever they can get it). The 
fact remains: if over the previ-
ous 6 million years your fore-
mothers had not evolved 
attraction skills . . . if they had
not adapted all kinds of be-
witching torments to lure your
forefathers into bofﬁng and
reproducing, as I mentioned 
before, YOU would not be here.
30,000 B.C. . . .
Your modern
foremothers take over.
But since a lot of
tedious events occur
after this date, like the
invention of the chastity
belt and the debut of
the Dr. Phil show—and
since the only reason I
have for writing this
Time Line is to prove
that you come from an
extremely long line of
off-the-charts-
captivating forebabes—
not one of whom failed
in attracting at least one
mate—which I ﬂatter
myself with having
brilliantly accom-
plished, I shall now
state the one date that
I’m completely certain
of: today is June 29,
2003.

Feeling more conﬁdent? Good. The Mr. Right, Right Now!
6-Week Plan is going to build on your conﬁdence. And for an ex-
tra little boost, listen to what the famous Rutgers anthropologist and
ethologist (a scientist who’s interested in the genetic aspects of be-
havior) Dr. Helen Fisher told me. Not only does she believe the per-
sistence of the opening “courtship pattern” (the gazing, the grinning,
the pupil-dilating, the blushing, the breathing, the omigod-omigod-
omigod-omigod-omigod speechless thing you naturally do when 
you meet a man you like) is “inborn,” her research has led her to
conclude:
“We evolved the ability to fall in love at ﬁrst sight from all sorts
of other creatures. All mammals feel attraction. For example,” says
Dr. Fisher, “at the beginning of the breeding season a female squir-
rel must ﬁnd herself a male squirrel. She can’t spend three months
looking around. She’s got to ﬁnd one with a rich, furry tail and nice
whiskers, and she’s got to do it now. So the attraction system evolved
to be triggered very rapidly in the brain. And I think we inherited
this system from other mammals and from our ancestors. Which
means you can walk into a crowded party tonight, see somebody
across the room, exchange a few sentences, and fall in love.”
And that brings us to the second reason that the Man Catching
Theory is going to work for you in 6 weeks, or less:
8
E. Jean Carroll

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Reason #2
Men Decide Pretty Much Everything About
You in the First 30 Seconds
(And you can be brilliant for 30 seconds, right, Doll?)
Well, that’s an exaggeration. It takes less than two seconds for men to
suck in every detail of your hair, your clothes, your shape, your style,
your status, your walk—and be driven mad with astonishment.
(And you are checking men out even more quickly. According to
the evolutionary psychologist Dr. Geoffrey Miller, a human female
can judge the “physical attractiveness” of a male face in one-seventh
of a second. Yours truly judges Dr. Geoffrey Miller to be a handsome
specimen from a one-seventh glance at his author photo on his book.)
Men absolutely lose their brains over novelty and beauty. And
even if a man simply “likes” the way you look, or is “mildly pro-
voked” by the way you look—everything after that is ﬁxed by his
ﬁrst impression.
“The impression is anchored,” says Dr. Frank Bernieri, the
Harvard Ph.D., associate professor at Oregon State University, and
the world’s leading expert on the subject.1
“We feel these other bits of information are revealed to us inde-
pendently, but no,” says Dr. Bernieri. “They are absolutely an-
9
Mr. Right, Right Now!
1. Really, this instant-love stuff is all as old as Homer. It’s Romeo and Juliet. It’s
Anna and Vronksy. It’s Tramp and Lady. It’s Michael Corleone in The Godfather
looking at Appollonia just once on that hot Sicilian hillside, high-tailing it back to
the village and asking for her hand in marriage.
www.Ebook777.com

chored by that ﬁrst sight. When a guy sees an attractive woman, he
wants to ﬁnd her interesting. He wants to discover she’s intelligent.”
In fact, when a man ﬁrst makes your acquaintance, the informa-
tion he picks up after the initial ten or twelve seconds is not added
on to. “People think they’re learning more, that their judgments are
better,” says Dr. Bernieri, “that they’re catching the nuances, but
that’s not the case. They’re interpreting information consistent with
what they already believe from the ﬁrst few seconds. And they’ll go
out of their way to look for information that conﬁrms it.”
So, Doll, it’s pretty much over by the time your ﬁngertips meet
his in the handshake.
Needless to say, the Mr. Right, Right Now! 6-Week Plan is not
going to sit on its beautiful buttocks when it comes to manipulating
(in the best sense of the word!) this primal talent in men (and
women) to take supremely quick ﬁrst impressions.
Which brings us to the third reason the Man Catching Theory is
going to help you land your dream man in 6 weeks or less:
Reason #3
When You Meet a Man, and You Like Each
Other, You Will Synchronize
This is called “clicking.”
“It’s amazing!” says Dr. Bernieri, who’s ﬁlmed synchrony in
dozens of experiments. (Synchrony occurs when two strangers meet;
they like one another; and they begin mirroring each other’s move-
ments.) “Anytime you synchronize with someone, it’s energizing,”
says Dr. Bernieri. “And that’s a powerful reinforcer. And when it
10
E. Jean Carroll

happens, I don’t care who you’re interacting with, you can’t wait for
the next time you see him, because you just love this person!”
Dr. Bernieri has also found that if two people meet and don’t
synchronize in the ﬁrst 30 seconds, chances are high, they’ll never
synchronize. What’s more, you can’t fake synchrony. (So-called
“love coaches” have used Dr. Bernieri’s research and tried to
“teach” synchronizing to hapless suckers in dating courses. It never
works. Good feelings cause synchrony. Faking synchrony doesn’t
cause good feelings.)
So what does this mean for the Mr. Right, Right Now! 6-Week
Plan?
It means you simply have to be yourself. Repeat. BE YOUR-
SELF. It means that (A) if a fellow’s crazy for you in the ﬁrst ten sec-
onds, chances are good he’ll be crazy for you in the next ten
seconds, and (B) if he’s crazy for you and you’re mad for him in the
next ten seconds, you’ll be nuts for each other in the next ten sec-
onds, and so (C) you’ll click and start synchronizing, and if you start
synchronizing, then (D) you’ll both be wild to see each other again,
whereupon (E) if you’re wild to see each other again, chances are
very very good that you’ll (F) synchronize the next time you’re to-
gether, and if you synchronize the next time you’re together, you’ll
synchronize the next time, and so on.
It means you don’t have to overthink and worry and pour your
brain through a sieve and get all freaked-out about what to say or
how to act, because Ma Nature is taking care of nearly everything.
If there’s a mantra (and why not?) of M.R.R.N. it is this:
Be yourself, Ma is taking care of everything.
Of course, you must acquire the right attitude (Week One), look
devastating (Week Two), get rid of your fears (Week Three), and
11
Mr. Right, Right Now!

place yourself where there are tons of elite men (Week Four), and
then . . .
“So, Doctor, is there love at ﬁrst sight?”
Silence.
“Uhhhhhhh . . . ,” says Dr. Bernieri.
Laughter.
“Maybe,” says Dr. Bernieri.
Laughter.
“Listen to the Harvard Ph.D.,” I say. “You big scaredy-cat.”
“[Stammering] I’m counting on it.”
“Really? You’re counting on love at ﬁrst sight? Has it ever hap-
pened to you, Doctor?”
Pause.
Dr. Bernieri is dating.
“I believe in love at ﬁrst minute,” says Dr. Bernieri correcting
himself.
“Aha. Why?”
“Because of the synchrony research. If you look at the tapes,
they’ll blow you away. People look like they’re dancing. And here’s
a fact: when we looked at synchrony over time, what we ﬁnd is that
synchrony never increases.”
“Get out!”
“You either have it immediately, or you don’t.”
“Gettheﬂuckouttahere!”
“And when you have it, you can lose it, anybody who’s gone
through a breakup knows you can lose it, but you don’t ever seem to
gain it. Or create it. So that tells me—now I’ll make a leap. You
meet somebody and in thirty seconds there’s a click. That’s how it’s
described—‘a click’—and that clicking means you’re synchroniz-
12
E. Jean Carroll

ing. You become less self-conscious. More interested. More en-
gaged. More exhilarated. Time speeds up. And that feeling I’d call
love. If you want to say that’s love at ﬁrst sight, then I’ll say, yep,
that’ll happen in the ﬁrst minute.”
The Snow White Effect
So I’m calling this love-at-ﬁrst-minute thing the Snow White Effect. I
was going to call it the Man Catching Effect, but that larky lass
doesn’t have to do one damn thing except eat a poison apple and
bivouac in a glass cofﬁn till a Prince rides by, and BOOM.2 So the
Snow White Effect it is. One glance and that princely chap’s swearing
400 oaths he loves Snow like no man has ever loved and is begging
the seven dwarfs to give him the cofﬁn, and his vassals do the whole
Princess-Di-cofﬁn-on-the-shoulder thing, and off they march left,
right, left, right, left, right, till they cover a distance of about eight
yards and one of them stumbles. The cofﬁn is jolted and the apple
core, which is stuck in Snow’s throat, ﬂies out like she’s been Heim-
liched by Big Mama Cass.
“Oh!” she cries.
That’s an exact quote.
“Where am I?”
She tips back the lid, sits up, looks into the Prince’s eyes,
and . . .
13
Mr. Right, Right Now!
2. This is the Love-at-First-Sight Brothers Grimm version, not the Disney, where
the Prince ﬁrst spies S. White sweeping and singing “Some Day My Prince Will
Come.”

“Where are you?” says the Prince.
“You’re with me, Doll.
Come to my father’s castle and be my wife.”
That a fairy tale can be true—that it can happen to you—is deliciously
unnerving, to say the least. Sigmund, the Cigar Smoker, believed fairy
tales were an expression of the sexual forces of our personality.
Social psychologists like Dr. Bernieri theorize that your Snow
Whiting skill is prerational, developed before humans possessed
language. Back in your foremama’s days when she was toasting
gazelle balls around the ﬁre, she didn’t know a lot of words, so all
she had to go on was the way people looked. After all, she couldn’t
mate with all the fellows.
You need this zippy, instantaneous character-reading talent so
you don’t end up trusting just anybody who happens to come sidling
along—not to mention, it can be marvelously handy at 1:30 A.M.
when you turn the corner on a dark street and see the silhouette of a
person coming toward you and you must decide in half a second
whether to run like hell.
Apparently this skill springs from deep within your lizard brain,
because when you apply conscious, deliberate thought to determine
whether you actually have a rapport with someone, it screws things
up. When Dr. Bernieri trains students how to make quick judgments,
what to look for, to use their upper brains, and so on, they can’t do it.
(They can only make fast judgments by ignoring his instructions.)3
14
E. Jean Carroll
3. Dr. Timothy Wilson, professor of psychology at the University of Virginia, has found
exactly the same reaction as Dr. Bernieri: that when people try to be introspective
when making judgments, they are less happy with the results than if they “just went
with their gut.” In The Wall Street Journal, Dr. Wilson said, “We should let our adap-
tive unconscious do the job of forming reliable feelings and then trust those feelings.”

“So, Doc,” I say, “when a woman has cocktails with a guy and
comes home and calls her friends and deconstructs the red-hot
molten core of every single second of the evening, does all this
thinking ruin the Snow White Effect?”
“No. It enhances whatever impression she got.”
“And what happens if she lathers up all the possibilities before
meeting a man on a blind date? Like should she wear her black taffeta
cigarette pants that give her rump a two-basketballs-bouncing-in-
satin sort of look and play the whole “I’m-such-a-daring-sauce-box”
routine, or wear the blue dress that shows her waist and do the whole
“I’m-sooooo-impressed-by-you routine, or the—”
Dr. Bernieri cuts in.
“The guy’s only going to pay attention to how she looks.”
Silence.
“That’s basically it,” says Dr. Bernieri.
(Screaming) “All the stuff we women go through and it
comes down to being cute?”
“On the ﬁrst date. Yes,” says Dr. Bernieri
“I’m going to brain you!”
I didn’t brain him and Dr. Bernieri replied, “Obviously relationships
aren’t based entirely on looks. There must be similarity in interests
and values and those must develop over time. But in the research
done on synchrony, the responsivity of a female to a male is very,
very VERY important. In other words, the woman who really laughs
at the jokes and is attentive is deﬁnitely a turn-on.”
So that’s it, Doll. The Man Catching Theory makes things so
much simpler, doesn’t it? You see? We live on quite a sexual little
rock, don’t we? And whatever else is going on, on the other stars and
planets and Wifﬂe balls in the universe, here on Planet Man Catch-
15
Mr. Right, Right Now!

ing, everything, whether obvious or oblique, is about females be-
witching males and creating the next generation.
So, relax. Just be yourself. You don’t have to try to come up
with lamebrain tricks to enthrall a man. As a matter of fact, tricks
work against you. And the best part? You already know one ele-
ment of the theory works—the Snow White. You’ve probably had
it happen in your own lovely life several times. Whenever I see
my neighbor Mayneal Wayland, a young lady of 85, I get all
thrilled and happy. It’s been like this from the moment we met 10
years ago.
And as for the instantaneous detonation with men—well, the
truth is, it doesn’t happen that often (Ma Nature is a fastidious old
trollop; she created synchronizing for one purpose, juicy new gene
combinations, and she’s nothing if not selective about whom you
lose your brain for); but when clicking does happen—one more per-
sonal example will sufﬁce:
I ﬁrst laid eyes on my second husband, John Johnson—yes,
the former news anchorman—at Elaine’s Restaurant in New York.
We were seated at different tables about 25 feet from each other. I
was with Prince Solomon, the jarringly handsome grandson of Em-
peror Haile Selassie, and a member Ethiopia’s royal family. (In-
deed the lad is the future emperor if they ever haul out the ermine
and scepter again.) Anyway, John and I pushed our chairs back at
the same instant and gave each other a look—but such a look that
John jumped up from his table and followed me and the prince (to
whom he bowed—in all seriousness) out of Elaine’s to get my
number.
It was, I can say without exaggeration, a Snow White avalanche.
(And we had a helluva great time and still jump out of our skins with
joy when we see one another. But we could not live together in the
16
E. Jean Carroll

same house . . . the same town . . . county, state, country, hemi-
sphere, world, galaxy, universe.)
The Man Catching Theory, of course, is not foolproof. Nature’s
taken only a couple billion years to develop it, so it still has some
kinks. Perhaps you will defy the Theory and meet someone and not
“click” (like Al Pacino and Ellen Barkin in Sea of Love), and the
second or third time you meet (like Al Pacino and Ellen Barkin in
Sea of Love) both your brains explode. (Actually, Woody Allen and
a greyhound-waisted Dianne Weist in Hannah and Her Sisters is an
even better example. They endure one disastrous date, run into
each other years later in a SoHo record store, and Zazzzz!) Or you
may experience a mere I’m-sorta/kinda-interested click, move on,
become engaged to another man, break up, meet the ﬁrst guy again,
and Boom! Or you may be knocked out with an I’m-fascinated-in-
spite-of myself click and it will develop into love over the next
weeks and months.
All I know for sure is somewhere between your heart and your
head is a little place where an apple core is waiting to be—well,
egads, this is an unattractive analogy—where a little apple core is
waiting to be burped up, and BOoourrP love happens; and this book
is going to show you exactly what steps to take so you will swiftly
and surely arrive at this marvelous moment.
17
Mr. Right, Right Now!


If You Get out of Your Own Way, Landing a
Man in the Next 6 Weeks Will Be Unavoidable
Let’s review:
When you meet a man, and you like one another, you “click.” The
Snow White Effect takes you by the throats and practically drags you
to the next step. And there can be no confusion or ambiguity about the
“next” step, because three billion years of evolution have given you so
many beguiling moves that if you simply remain true to yourself—just
be yourself!—chances are good the miracle (the madness, the lunacy
of lust . . . and eventually love) will happen.
The trick is to prepare yourself and be ready for it.
So here’s the promise, Doll: If you acquire the right attitude
(Week One), look good (Week Two), learn to laugh at your fears
(Week Three), place yourself where there are hordes of handsome
men (Week Four), and get out of your own way . . . Mr. Right, Right
Now! will bring you your dream man in six damn weeks.
Shall we commence?
The Mr. Right, Right Now!
Promise


Part Two
THE
6- WEEK PLAN
After
we met, I had to
be restrained by
friends so I wouldn’t
plague him with 
phone calls.
talking about her
husband, Guy Ritchie, in an
interview with the author in the
Blue Bar at the Berkeley Hotel in
London, where the author not only
spilled her cosmopolitan on
Madonna, but also stuck her
with the check
Madonna

TORN, YOU SILLY TROLLYMOG! Come, come, darling, if you’ve tried everything
possible, it’s time to try the impossible. That’s what this whole book is about. Read on . . .
DEAR E. JEAN: I’m a bright 33-year-old woman with a great career. But I’m such
a dismal FAILURE at romance, after trying everything possible, I’ve surrendered all
hope. My biological clock is no longer ticking, it’s a sonic boom. Please help!
—Torn Between No Lovers

Without Charles Lyell’s Principles of Geology and Thomas
Malthus’s Essay on the Principle of Population, young Chuck Dar-
win would not have hit on his theory of evolution.
Without Darwin’s Descent of Man and Frank Bernieri’s research
on “clicking” and “synchronizing,” yours truly would have hit on a
man catching theory, yes, but it would have been without the capital
letters and would have been built entirely on the secrets of sexual
selection being revealed to me through the millions of hits on Great-
Boyfriends.com.
As I mentioned in the introduction, I had inadvertently started
GreatBoyfriends.com, an Internet dating site, when I suggested in
my Elle column that women get together and recommend their ex-
boyfriends to each other. My God! It nearly touched off a riot! The
morning the story landed on the front page of the London Times—
causing the hits to zoom into the millions—not wishing to insult
Fate (which was obviously working overtime), I got out of bed early
(viz, before noon) and, still staggering from the pineapple martinis
Week One:
Lashing Your Brain into 
Man Catching Condition

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
I’d bathed in the night before, waddled to my iMac, turned it on,
looked—looked again—and in the silent crunching of Internet
code, I suddenly realized I was gazing at a magical transformation.
There it was: The human heart quietly oozing out its mysteries
in ones and zeros.
Yes, I—a total imbecile—even I could not fail to grasp it. What
I had always thought of as a tedious “database” designed by my
lovely sister, Cande Carroll, was translating in front of my eyes the
inﬁnite ways women enchant men. I knew how C. Darwin must have
felt sailing into the Galápagos on the Beagle. It was all vividly be-
fore me—I could track the precise kind of woman each man was at-
tracted to, the number of seconds he was “caught” by her picture,
how many women he was comparing her with, if he was crossing
tribal, economic, racial, and class lines, and on and on. It was ﬂab-
bergasting!
It was the drama of Man Catching being played out in
quadrillionths of seconds. So, as I say, I would have had a nice little
theory right there. I would have combined the rich information from
GreatBoyfriends.com with the ten years of “hard” research from the
thousands of letters ﬂooding into the Ask E. Jean column (where I
hear from readers that I should be dragged through Times Square by
my eyebrows—if my advice doesn’t work—or that I am smarter than
Socrates, if it does). Fine.
But all this stunning data from GreatBoyfriends was putting me
in a kind of Darwinian daze. I was ripe. I was very ripe. I was damn
near rotting on the bough. Then one afternoon I was looking up my
favorite Schopenhauer quote in Darwin’s Descent of Man, and I’m
browsing, and I read Darwin’s line: “Both sexes . . . would choose
their partners not for mental charms, or property, or social position,
but almost solely from external appearance”—and Kaboom! It was
like a falling into a vat of Häagen-Dazs. I saw in a ﬂash I could meld
24
E. Jean Carroll
www.Ebook777.com

Chuck Darwin with the second-by-second GreatBoyfriends.com
data. A couple days later I remembered Dr. Frank Bernieri from a
Malcolm Gladwell piece in The New Yorker.
Thus the Man Catching Theory was born. I.e. (here’s a lip-gloss
of the Theory): You are endowed by nature with certain inalienable
attractions; when you meet a man you like, these attractions draw
him to you, and if he likes you, and you like him, you “click”; and if
you click, this means you are “synchronizing”; and if you are syn-
chronizing, you will have something strong to build on; and so,
Dolls . . .
It is precisely 9:41 P.M. If you start following the principles of
the Man Catching Theory right now, six weeks from today at 9:41-
ish, men will be crawling across the ﬂoor on their hands and knees,
moaning and screaming your name.
Of course, the unspoken assumption here is that you want a
man moaning and screeching. I will disabuse you of that little folly
in a minute. For now, let’s just look at the two basic styles women
use to land men. I’m an admirer—but not a huge admirer—of both.
The Offensive Style
Your Offensive Woman is a saucy, extroverted number who behaves
like a can opener in the Man Supermarket. She never waits for a
chap to ﬁnd her, she ﬁnds the chaps wherever she happens to be.
Her conﬁdence alone makes other women ﬂee town.
When the Offensive Stylist meets a man she likes, she goes at
him like Saint Joan galloping toward Orléans. (The Bastard of Or-
léans said about “the Maid” in battle: “She at once seized her stan-
dard in hand and placed herself on the parapet of the trench, and
the moment she was there, the English trembled and were terri-
25
Mr. Right, Right Now!

ﬁed.”) If that isn’t as perfect a description of an Offensive Stylist as
you’re ever likely to see, I’ll cut my hair in a bowl like Milla
Jovovich.
We’re not just talking about sexual aggression here. We’re talk-
ing about a certain kind of smarts. Kathleen Turner in Body Heat
had poor William Hurt rolling on the linoleum in a slobbering stu-
por before she allowed him to lay one trembling ﬁnger on her. (And
like K. Turner, your Miss Off will reveal a streak of vulnerability—
even if she has to manufacture it . . . even if she ends up looking
like an H-bomb with a drop of dew rolling down the side just before
it explodes.)
It’s this “soft” streak that gives a man the delusion he’ll be able
to dominate her. He also deduces from it that she possesses mind-
blowing sexual depths.
The pitfall of the Offensive Style? It’s ﬂeeting. It’s mercurial.
Nobody can pull off total conﬁdence 24/7. It becomes a show, a put-
up job. Plus Miss Off’s impudence can be so scrotum-tightening and
frightening, the fellows often run like terriﬁed goats.
Susan Sarandon in Bull Durham is a superb example of a top-
level Offensive Woman, as are George Eliot, Missy Elliott, Princess
Diana (during her divorce), Catherine the Great, Colette, Greta Garbo
at all times, ditto Dietrich, Jane Austen’s Emma Woodhouse, Court-
ney Love, and Anne Baxter as the combat-ready Eve Harrington in
All About Eve (whilst Miss Offensive herself, Bette Davis, twatted
away playing Defensive Margo Channing.) Which brings us to . . .
The Defensive Style
Glancing, down-lashing, and the giggle-goo-goo are the hallmarks
of your traditional Defensive Stylist. Again, I think she has merit,
26
E. Jean Carroll

but not big merit. For example, a Defensive Stylist is standing in
line at Starbucks. A handsome stranger comes up behind her and,
putting down his gym bag, takes in her jeans, peasant blouse, and
Creamsicle cowgirl boots.
“Hello,” he says.
(Glance-and-down-lash from the Defensive Stylist.)
“Uh . . . ,” he says.
(Glance-and-down-lash from the DS.)
“Never saw the line this long,” he says.
(Glance-and-down-lash. Glance-and-down-lash. Glance-and-
down-lash. Glance-and-down-lash from the DS.)
“You?” he says.
“Mmm . . . ?” she says.
“Have you ever seen such a long line in here?” he says.
(Shrug-and-down-lash from the DS.)
“Wheeew,” he says.
(Giggle-goo-goo. Giggle-goo-goo from the DS.)
“I need my caffeine,” he says.
(Glance-and-down-lash from the DS.)
“I just came from the gym,” he says.
“I know.”
“You know?” he says, surprised.
“Your biceps” she says, dropping her eyes, “look like cannon-
balls.”
The long-established Defensive Style is excellent for demure,
less outgoing (or highly manipulative) women. Yes, it stinks of rotting
corset strings. Yes, it’s terribly retro and embarrassing, but, in fact, it
can be as powerful as an audacious Offensive Stylist creating an up-
roar in a ﬂy-ﬁshing shop with just a smile and an eight-foot ﬂy rod.
Indeed, Miss D is quite capable of whipping up one of the tasti-
est Battle-of-the-Sexes banquets: She makes mystery (the founda-
27
Mr. Right, Right Now!

tion of romantic love) and produces a near psychopathic need in the
male beast to tear away “the enigmatic veils,” as the dastardly Mar-
quis de Sade calls them, to discover (at last!) the smoldering
Kumquat underneath.
And just as Miss O reveals a dollop of vulnerability, Miss D (if
she’s good) reveals a streak of grit or stubbornness or elusiveness
and presents a nice challenge to the poor fellows. On the downside,
the Defensive Woman can be a doormat, a phony, and will have to
fake orgasms for the rest of her life. Agnes Wickﬁeld in David Cop-
perﬁeld is a ﬁne exponent of this classic style. Other world-class De-
fensive Players are Princess Diana (before her marriage), Bridget
Jones (a magniﬁcent competitor who masquerades as an Offensive
Stylist, but actually plays defensive), and the Four Horsewomen of
Apocalyptic Charm: Jane Austen’s Anne Elliot, Jackie Kennedy,
Halle Berry, and Cinderella.
Both your standard Offensive and Defensive Styles are dandy,
and when the two styles are used in combination, they go far beyond
either one in isolation (e.g., you get a Meg Ryanesque/Nicole Kid-
manish mash of prudence and abandon). However—and here’s the
part I’ve been working up to—a third style exists. It not only seems to
be totally disorienting to the male sex, it is also ten times better than
the Offensive and Defensive Styles put together, and it is called . . .
The Man Catching Style
For the ﬁrst time in recorded history, thanks to the stunning tech-
nology of the Internet and its ability to track and dissect a human
male’s thinking process—a database of the world’s supreme meth-
ods of man capturing is available for our examination. And it is
quite clear one style above all beguiles the male beast.
28
E. Jean Carroll

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
It is the style that wrecks a man’s power plays, blinds him, suc-
tions out his ego, and drops the poor chap in his tracks. This is the
Man Catching Style, and it is near nuclear when employed by an ex-
pert.
The most famous and brilliant avatars of this style are Cleopatra
(the woman had a nose like a coatrack and still blew away half the
leaders of the known world), Beatrice in Much Ado About Nothing,
Scheherazade of course, Princess Diana (after her divorce),
Madonna (under restraints), Jane Austen’s Elizabeth Bennet, Mari-
lyn Monroe (when she was not on the Locked Ward), Sharon Stone,
Katharine Hepburn, Jennifer Garner, and Miss J. Roberts.
The Man Catching Style is what you’ll learn in Mr. Right, Right
Now! and it will totally kick the ass of any man alive. And for this
style, Doll, it is essential you understand one thing:
How to Think Like a Man Catcher
NOTE: I understand your problems with the term Man Catcher.
It implies a rash wanton, a “snagger,” or worse, a “trapper.” 
But I use the term in the noblest sense of a nimble, witty woman
who can ﬁlch a man’s heart when he’s not even looking; 
and frankly, no other term in plain English works so well.
There are seven deep and essential truths at the core of the Man
Catching Mind-Set:
1. You live a life of purpose and that purpose is not about men.
2. You do not adopt anybody else’s way of doing things, but ﬁnd
your own way—including following/not following any so-
called seven “deep and essential truths.”
3. You do not give a big ﬂying fart blossom what men think.
29
Mr. Right, Right Now!
www.Ebook777.com

4. Whether men love you or hate you, you truly don’t care (okay,
okay, you do care, but you don’t desperately care).
5. You do not fritter away your life worrying about the male beast
and what he is “doing.”
6. You know it is completely useless to take men seriously.
7. This attitude causes men to froth at the mouth like rabid
skunks.1
The loose-ﬂuid-cool thing the Man Catcher’s got going on is
hard to describe, except . . . you know those scraggily gorgeous
Swedish girls you see backpacking across Europe with their dusty
Tevas and ice-blue sunglasses . . . the girls who pull jugs of Chianti
out of their rucksacks and, tossing back kilometers of blond hair,
gaze up at the sun and smile? Well . . . that’s the kind of nonchalant,
casual brain wave a Man Catcher is on, Doll.
Not the pathetic man-centered Dingbat-Brain-Wave vibrating
in the skulls of many American women . . . who are, by the way,
every bit as beautiful as the aforementioned sloppy Swede girls, but
who’ve become so frantic reading all the news reports about why
they don’t have boyfriends, men can pick up more laid-back vibes
in the rip rooms of Brazilian waxing establishments.
The Man Catcher is engaged with life, but detached from “get-
ting,” etc., etc., “snaring,” etc., etc., a man—consciously, deliber-
ately detached. As if she doesn’t give a big rat’s ass about the
30
E. Jean Carroll
1. Not that a decent guy can’t be snared by a woman who takes men seriously. A
pretty girl of 29 who takes men seriously will trap a $37,000-a-year assistant man-
ager of the Olive Garden, no problem. (Which is good because chicks who take men
seriously end up playing/paying for food anyway.)

“outcome” of her love affairs or where they are “going.” (And, of
course, the secret is, she really doesn’t give a rodent’s rump about
the outcomes of her love affairs, which is why her love affairs are
usually so satisfying and enduring.)
This kind of detachment, naturally, is an insanity-producing sit-
uation for your big league man.2 But if you are NOT a nonchalant,
cooler-than-a-polar-bear’s-teat-type woman, if you were born with
an extra volt of vivacity, if the blood in your veins runs at the tem-
perature of molten lava, if your excitement-detector needle is al-
ways vibrating in the “Hoo-boy!” range, it is ridiculous playing it
nonchalant. Be yourself. You can be detached and animated. It’s all
about the aura. And the aura radiates that you are not desperate.
Let Us Now Pause and 
Throw a Kiss to the Man Loser
The poor twit. Her thoughts are all about men. She sweats. She
clings. She cries after sex. Show her a pair of old Calvin Klein briefs
and tears spring to her eyes. Yes, she suffers unceasing agony on
account of the male beast. “Because of men” every black minute
she spends on earth is an unending torment. Even when she meets a
31
Mr. Right, Right Now!
2. E.g., an “interesting looking” but by no means beautiful, 38-year-old Man
Catcher who doesn’t put on an act and enters the game detached will land herself a
37-year-old, $788,000-a-year advertising VP without a blink.
Why?
There are exceptions, but generally speaking, the higher up the salary scale
the male beast is, the cleverer and more complex and cultivated he will be . . . and
the cleverer and richer and more complex he is, the more sought after he’ll be by
women, and the more sought after he is by women, the more he’ll be enticed by the
disruptive force of the Detached Man Catcher.

nice gent and she manages to contain herself, and her opening
moves are as cool as the goose bumps on Catherine the Great’s
backside, two weeks into a romance she is snufﬂing and blubbering
and only thinking about what he wants, what he wants, what he
wants. Her vision goes foggy. Her brain takes on huge rolls of Man
Fat. Her playing ﬁeld, instead of encompassing the whole world and
all its fantastic possibilities, shrinks down to a strip of AstroTurf, on
top of which somebody’s left a big hamper of jockstraps.
There is always something ridiculous about a woman who takes men
seriously. But a woman who is detached . . . un-manned . . . has
something grand and beautiful about her. The minute—the instant—
you’re hooked on men and start caring about what the buggers think,
there is not a man on the planet who won’t varnish the court with you.
Which brings us to our Number One Law in the Mr. Right,
Right Now! universe:
Man Catching Law #1
Men Want the Women They Can’t Have.
Ergo . . .
Man Catching Law #2
(Stay with me on this, Doll)
If You Don’t Want a Man,
Then That Means That Man Can’t Have You,
And If That Man Can’t Have You,
He Will Sweat
Beads of Testosterone
the Size of Ping-Pong Balls to Get You.
32
E. Jean Carroll

Men live for things they can’t have.
All day long they’re coveting things they can’t have: remote
controls large as coffee tables, Dodge Vipers, Maxim vixens, $3,800
titanium golf clubs . . .
Even in church the poor fellows hang on stories about the chap
who loses his sheep and “doth leave the 99 in the wilderness,” and
doth develop a jones for that sheep, and doth scramble all over hell
and back till he ﬁndeth his little Mutton Chop.
In fact, as a Soon To Be Big League Man Catcher, you know the
only reason a man has a brain is to whip out his Palm Pilot and
make lists of stuff he doesn’t have. So to repeat the Mr. Right, Right
Now! equation:
Quit Men = Get Men
But How Can You, a Smart, High-
Achieving Female, Detach and Quit
Men When All (all!) You Want Is Marriage
and Children?
I submit a hideous joke is being played on you personally by the
gods.
I submit to you that a woman who’s desperate to get a husband
is a woman who’s undermining her chances of getting a husband.
Ahem, I’m not a huge fan of marriage. Every morning when I
wake up and realize I’m not married, I drop to my knees and thank
God! Weird. Because my parents are deliriously happy after sixty
years together. But I’ve lost the itch to be joined (which is even
weirder because I was crazy about my husbands).
33
Mr. Right, Right Now!

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Freedom has become the main theme of my life. I’m stricken
with freedom. I’d rather snap myself in leg shackles and send my-
self to Sing Sing, than marry. (Hence, I’ve received a veritable shit-
load of proposals, and perhaps we’ll explore this shockingly
arrogant statement in a later chapter.)
As the GreatBoyfriends.com data and ten years of Ask E. Jean
letters make clear, marriage just can’t be the goal, Doll. A wedding
will happen as a consequence of a rich and glamorous life. Let me
repeat: When a nice fellow desires to settle down and start a fam-
ily—desires it with every drop of his bachelor blood—that’s exactly
the fellow who’ll run like a banshee when an overanxious husband-
hunting junior partner from the Kotex & Kotex law ﬁrm levels her
sights on him.
So, here’s the deal: Human folly does not impede the working of
the Man Catching Theory. Every woman is born with attraction
skills . . . so the Theory can work pretty much no matter how idioti-
cally a man and a woman are behaving. Whether the Theory works
as brilliantly as possible is another story entirely. If your brain is
soaked in cotton balls of desperation . . . if all you can think about
is men men men men and pulling a bunch of dingbat “tricks,”
frankly the Theory wants to get up and leave the room. The Theory
works a million times better if you un-man yourself, clear your
brain, and glory in yourself.
It’s detach or die, Doll.
Man Frenzy Detox
So let’s wrap up Week One and give you your assignment.
For the next seven days you will not think man, breathe man,
ﬂirt man, sleep man, or eat Chef Boyardee. You will go everywhere,
34
E. Jean Carroll
www.Ebook777.com

do everything, try everything, live your life, but you will not bat so
much as a left eyelash in the direction of anything that possesses a
testicle anywhere on its body. You will don only Donna (or Vivian,
Carolina, Miuccia, Jill, Anna, Vera, Nicole, or Stella). The paintings
you contemplate will be by Frankenthaler, O’Keeffe, and Cassatt. If
a movie features more than 100 human beings equipped with
penises, you will not see it. You will read female authors only. If a
male singer comes on the radio, you will switch stations. You will
not pursue, poke, fondle, or probe any masculine entity in its pri-
vates. You will not eat nuts. If you bake me a cake, it will be Betty
Crocker.
At ﬁrst you will go crazy. You will suffer several days of Man
Frenzy Detox. But never mind. Watch Roz Russell in His Girl Fri-
day (but for godsakes, look at Ralph Bellamy, not Cary Grant) and
read Jane Austen’s Pride and Prejudice (Misses Russell and Bennet
are two of the noblest examples of Detached Man Catchers in his-
tory). The fog will begin to clear after a time, and you’ll be ab-
solutely astounded at how weird and kind of festive the world looks.
Then, Doll, when you make it through the seven days and reach the
eighth morning . . . you will not stop. You will stay detached. You
will not cease being yourself. You will not shut off your color and
nuance, but you will defrickingtach. I realize it’s difﬁcult. I know it’s
going to cost you considerable emotional energy; but I believe de-
taching is your strongest shot and the bitchingest move you’ll ever
make.
35
Mr. Right, Right Now!

HOMELY: You giddy baggage! A girl with guts is never too old or too ugly to get all the at-
tention, champagne, men, chocolate, and marriage proposals she wants. We merely have to
ﬂog you into shape. Read on . . .
DEAR E. JEAN: I haven’t had a date for months. It’s not that I don’t want one, it’s
just that I’m not a beautiful woman. I’m past 30 and deﬁnitely do NOT look like a model.
How can someone like me attract a good man?
—Homely and Hating It in NYC

Now don’t tell me you’ve already forgotten what the Snow
White Effect is, Doll! It’s Instant Attraction. Clicking. Synchrony.
If a fellow likes the way you look, he will like you; if he likes you,
he will ﬁnd you intelligent and intriguing; if he ﬁnds you intelli-
gent and intriguing, he’ll feel energized, exhilarated, and sexy; if
he feels energized, exhilarated, and sexy (and you like him), you’ll
synchronize; if you synchronize, this is a fellow who’s on his way to
falling to the linoleum and rolling at your feet. So there is no get-
ting around it:
He Must Like the Way You Look.
Which means this week you will wield two opposing ideas: First,
you don’t give a tsetse ﬂy’s turd what men think. Second, you’re going
to turn yourself into a Walking Death Blow to attract men.
These two concepts do not have to be locked in mortal combat
inside your skull. As Niels Bohr, the Danish physicist, once said,
Week Two:
Snow White and the 7-Day
Pulchritude Plan

“A great truth is a truth whose opposite is also a great truth.” (And
Nielsy has a good time coming his way, compliments of old E. Jean,
if he ever comes back to life.)
Now here’s the good news:
Man Catching Law # 3
No Need to Put Yourself Through an Atom-Smashing
Beauty Regimen . . . Because to Be Detached
Is to Be Unattainable,
and to Be Unattainable Makes You “The Ideal.”
Beethoven dedicated his Piano Concerto no. 24 to a woman who was
so indifferent to him, so detached, she became his “Perfect One.”
I’ve never seen the chick, she could have had a chin like a glocken-
spiel for all I know, the point is old Ludwig could not possess her.
She therefore was a very huge, very deep deal in his eyes.
So, as per Man Catching Law #3, no need to kill yourself
“changing your look” as the lady magazines call it.1 The glorious
38
E. Jean Carroll
1. The uninterrupted stream of laceratingly perfect lovelies ﬂowing from our maga-
zines, our movies, our TVs, and our computers keeps upping the damn ante. Worse,
the lovelies keep getting more and more lovely, with the lovelies from last week being
not quite as lovely as the lovelies this week; and men, the idiots, are beginning to ex-
pect us to look like these gorgeous dipshits. It’s detestable! It’s infuriating! It’s stupe-
fying and sickening and nearly impossible to pull off. We’re forced to keep focusing
more and more on perfecting our “appearance,” with an hour scarcely passing that
some nose-hair-curling iron is not being hawked on the Style network accompanied
by an interview with Greta Van Botox (as the divine Christopher Buckley calls her).
Anyone who believes women are not run ragged merely keeping up (I work at
Elle, after all, and know the photographs of breathtaking models are tweaked to
look even more breathtaking) has been drinking too often from her Paul Mitchell
Awapuhi bottle.

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Man Catcher does a few subtle things here and there,2 and, boom!
The daffy bastards hand over their hearts. For example, one tiny,
subtle thing you could do is lose forty pounds this week. I will tell
you how in a minute, but ﬁrst . . .
Do These 8 Things and You’ll Look Better Than
You’ve Looked in a Long, Long, Long Time
1.
Sleep 10 hours a night. I know, I know, you work 14 hours a day. But,
listen, if you do nothing else on the 7-Day Pulchritude Plan, sleep-
ing 10 hours a night will give you a younger, juicier appearance—
39
Mr. Right, Right Now!
2. If you try too hard, you end up appearing desperate and silly.
Worse, the more sweat, tears, blood, and cash you put into tricking yourself out,
the more you’ll need men to ﬁnd you pretty, and the moment you need a man to ﬁnd
you anything is the moment that man will step over you like milk spilled on the Flow-
GRiP. Better to paint your buttocks green and move to the Kerguelen Archipelago.
Still more hideous, if you spend a big bag of greenbacks on French designers,
Portuguese manicures, Italian makeup, English kneecap blush, Russian armpit
sweat-gland removal, etc., actually pull together a “stunning look,” and drop a chap
in his tracks, then you’re seized with the scalding insecurity that he doesn’t like you
for the real woman you are. And of course, he doesn’t like you for the real woman you
are because he doesn’t have the ﬁrst fricking notion of the reality of the woman you
are, i.e., without your mascara, eyeliner, blush, concealer, and $88 worth of hair vo-
lumizers, so you end up hauling your hunkies out of bed every morning at some un-
godly 6:30 A.M. to stagger to the bathroom and apply the mascara, eyeliner, blush,
concealer, and volumizers before he rubs the sleep from his eyes. As Rita Hayworth
said, “They go to bed with Gilda, but they wake up with me.”
If I could just convince all women to lay the hell off (like the chic women of
Portland, Oregon), we could relax, Jesus!
www.Ebook777.com

that wide-eyed look that everything’s right with the world. Plus, I
swear to God, it will crank your wit, your taste, your energy, your
tranquillity, and your sex appeal. Rampant sleeping! If you can’t do
ten hours, do nine. (If you can only manage eight and a half, you’re a
wimp—or a saint, i.e., a single mother. In Rome, female gladiators
slept twelve hours a night.) Do it!
P.S. University of Chicago researchers have found that skipping
sleep can make you old. Sleep four hours or less a night and your
body will cease regulating hormone levels, start storing ﬂab (proba-
bly due to a drop in the human growth hormone), and when you sit
down, your thighs will spread over the chair like wafﬂe batter.
2.
Ten hours, three pillows. Elevate your head and you won’t have bags
under your eyes when you wake up. Four pillows is better (but,
ahem, not so great for your spine). Lifting the bed frame with a cou-
ple of thick phone books works. But the Craftmatic bed is best. Yes!
I’m talking the old fogy bed. The one with the grinning geezers you
see advertised on cable TV. The one that goes up and down, honey,
and vibrates (and you now know why the old gals are smiling . . . ).
But little will you suspect what ecstasy awaits you in this frick-
ing bed! Egads! After a week you won’t have a bag, circle, roll, puff
ball, or frog pouch near your baby browns. If you’re an athlete, your
back will feel better, but screw your back—you’ll look better, and
did I mention it vibrates? I purchased mine for $900. The twin size
starts around $450. And when men see the thing . . .
“Oh . . . and this is my bedroom,” you’ll say.
“Nice.”
40
E. Jean Carroll

“Yeah.”
“What’s that?”
“My Craftmatic bed.”
“Your what?”
“Craftmatic.”
“Like those old people on TV?”
“It vibrates.”
“!”
“It goes up and down.”
“!”
“See, this is the control,” you’ll say. “You press this button.”
(The bed will start bucking like a bronco in a rodeo.)
“Omigod,” he’ll whisper.
“This is the ‘wave’ button,” you’ll say.
“Let me see that thing.”
“Isn’t it unbelievable?”
“Give me that thing!” He’ll grab for the control.
“No.”
“Give me that!”
(Laughter.)
“No, sir.”
(A skirmish.)
“What do I press?” he’ll say.
(Laughter.)
“EEEEeeeeeeeK! Don’t press all the buttons.”
(Squeals.)
(Laughter.)
(Later.)
“I’m never getting out of this thing,” he’ll say.
Hell, the guy will marry you just for your bed.
41
Mr. Right, Right Now!

3.
Pull up your bra straps. Stand straight. It blasts you with radiance
and adds a whole inch in height when you do. I’m such a loser I
wear the Body-Rite Posture Pleaser—a two-pound weight slung be-
tween my shoulder blades to remind me to pull back my shoulders.
An hour or two a day, and it works like a dream.3 ($40; www.
bodyrite.com; 254-933-7483 or 800-490-7483. By the by, Body
Rite, Craftmatic, etc., are not paying me to say these things, which
really sucks.)
4.
Take a look at your so-called skin “care” regimens. Scrubbing, rub-
bing, pulling, popping, tugging, turning your face up to an exfoliat-
ingly hot shower, and so on is cruel, vicious, subhuman, dries out
your skin, roughs it up, mangles it, and causes wrinkles.
The best routine to keep yourself younger than a dew drop:
splash 98-degree water on your face. If you’re puffy or have dark
circles under your eyes—well, now, you’re not elevating your pump-
42
E. Jean Carroll
3. I started strapping on the ol’ Body Rite after I “appeared” at a Bloomingdale’s/
Kenneth Cole/Elle event to answer questions from the audience. The following
week, nice Ali McQuade from Elle sent me pictures. “Why is Ali sending me pic-
tures of Liz Smith?” I said, fanning through the snapshots. (Liz looks pretty darn
great, but she is 80 years old, for godsakes.) Then I realized the shots were of E.
Quasimodo Carroll. I was on the phone to Body Rite at once.

kin on four pillows are you?—splash chamomile tea on your face (it
reduces inﬂammation because of its anthemic acid, tiglic acid, vita-
min A, and a bunch of other fascinating chemicals listed in Pre-
scription for Nutritional Healing by James F. Balch, MD, and Phyllis
A. Balch, CNC). Brew and keep the tea in the Frigidaire. Let your
face air-dry; splash a second time with water, apply your moistur-
izer, let it set, then do your makeup, and voila! You look younger
than the Michelin Baby.4
5.
      
Don’t worry. These aren’t quadrates you’re supposed to check off
each time you drink a glass of water. No. These are Margarita Boxes.
Check one each day you drink a margarita. A woman needs fun or
she looks bad.
43
Mr. Right, Right Now!
4. I use, ahem, Vaseline as a moisturizer. I know, I know, you’re shaking your head
in horror and dismay (and when you get your book deal, you can tell me what you
use). I tell you, Vaseline is brilliant. It doesn’t have the word “line” in it for nothing.
It keeps the nasty things at bay. The Harvard Women’s Health Watch calls Vaseline
the best product against wrinkling on the market. (Eucerin is also pretty damn fab-
ulous.) I slather my entire self in Vaseline every night.

6.
Something red.
Something green.
Something purple.
Something yellow.
Something blue.
Something orange.
Something chartreusey.
Something dark green.
Something black/brown/beige.
Eat them or be ugly.
Fruits and vegetables are loaded with natural chemicals that
nourish your skin, hair, nails, eyes, teeth, keep your clitoris crisp,
and help protect against age-related hideousity. And, according to
Jane Brody in The New York Times, they can actually reverse chronic
or deadly diseases.
7.
Balls. Trust me. Giant balls, Babe. Balls you sit on. Get rid of your
chair at work. Sit on a big ball. (A) It will be terriﬁc for your back
and posture. (B) You burn more calories because you’re getting a
workout bouncing and rolling; heck, just keeping yourself sta-
ble—not falling over—works your core, that means your abs,
obliques, etc. And (C)—hold onto your seat!—your cellulite will
decrease.
Yours truly sits on a big (blue) ball to watch TV and another ball
44
E. Jean Carroll

(also big and blue) to work at my desk. Yes, I have blue balls all
over my house. I also have no cellulite. I rest my case. I have many,
many other ﬂaws, of course, huge, disastrous, deplorable ﬂaws, but
the extraordinary beauty of my thighs gets me through. (www.
Equipmentshop.com or 800-525-7681; order the physioball in 65
cm, $22.50 (if you’re under 5'5"), or 75 cm, $27.25 (if you’re over
5'6", though I think everybody likes my 75 cm best, and kids go ab-
solutely mad for it); and no, these people are not paying me either.
And buy the foot-pedal thing to blow the balls up, or you’ll burst
your lungs. BUT GET ON THE PHONE AND ORDER
YOUR BALLS! GOD KNOWS WHAT YOUR THIGHS ARE
UP TO AS WE SPEAK!
8.
And ﬁnally, look through your closets, living room, kitchen, bath-
room, and ofﬁce and throw out all the boring people.
If you only do these eight things, or even just a couple of these eight
things, or, hell, just one of these things, or, really, if you just read the
list of the eight things, you’ll be better looking. Not ridiculously
better-looking, but pretty good-looking anyway.
And now, Dolls, we may begin the 7-Day Plan. No gimmicks, no
bells, no whistles, no pets. Strike that. There will be pets.
45
Mr. Right, Right Now!

The 7-Day Pulchritude Plan
Day One
A League of Your Own
Today you will whittle your waist to the size of a whippet’s by pa-
tronizing your local batting cage and swinging at 50 baseballs. You
will wear something sporty—scarlet cap, pin-striped shorts, your
hot Irish/Spanish/Jewish/African (your ethnicity here) blood in your
cheeks. If there are any guys around (and there will be, but you
won’t care) you will swing at 75 balls. If the guys are cute and also
appear to be rich, you will swing at 100 balls . . . or until you’re
cracking home runs longer and harder than Derek Jeter, whichever
comes ﬁrst.
If you need a batting guru to help you with “technical issues,”
you will ask a 12-year-old boy. Or better, you will bring a 12-year-
old boy along as your coach, or perhaps your 8-year-old niece; it’s
up to you.
Today’s other activities: Eat nine colors and sleep ten hours
(don’t worry about falling asleep; you’ll be half-dead after your
workout).
46
E. Jean Carroll

Day Two
The Mr. Right, Right Now! 
Fabulous Food Plan!
Today you can eat whatever you wish for breakfast. For example, I
suggest blueberry pancakes topped with butter and maple syrup, a
quart of mango juice, half a honeydew with peach yogurt, two rash-
ers of English walnuts, a Mexican omelette, a wedge of key lime pie,
and a strawberry daiquiri.
There are only three rules:
1. You must be in the present moment for each bite.
2. You must actually taste each bite.
3. You must make each bite real.
Ready? Sit down in front of your pancakes. Ok. Now. Pick up
the Wedgwood pitcher of maple syrup . . . ok, ok, so it’s a brown
bottle shaped in the goddess image of Aunt Jemima, so much the
better.
Now squeeze the syrup over the pancakes. Look at it as you
pour. It’s almost like melted topaz, isn’t it? Like liquid bumblebees,
like the sunlight on the fur of a ﬂying fox . . . well, perhaps you’re
not thinking of ﬂying foxes, no, you’re thinking of a maple tree on a
hill in the spring—yes, a maple tree with a syrup bucket hanging off
her trunk collecting her sap just for you and a bluebird is sitting on
her branches and singing. And the bluebird makes you look at the
blueberries, and as you pour, you’re thinking, “Ye, gods! Nobody’s
seen a freaking blueberry till this moment!”
You ﬁnd yourself seeing—real-izing—those beautiful, beautiful
blueberries. And the pancakes themselves, why, if you look deeply
47
Mr. Right, Right Now!

enough, you can see veritable wheat ﬁelds, and the sun beating
down, and the wind blowing and the wheat tossing softly, or, know-
ing you, the wheat is tossing violently, the wheat is in quite an up-
roar.
You get the picture.
Take a bite. I hope you have provided yourself with an amusing
little napkin, because tears may come to your eyes because of the
intense—I’m talking in-goddamn-tense—pleasure, and the fact
that, perhaps, all your life you’ve been missing out. At any rate, the
bite will be a revelation. A real world-clearer. Now. Take a look at
the honeydew.
And so on.
About 10 bites like this and you’ll not be stuffed exactly, but
something will be occurring that rarely occurs inside a career-
building, overstressed American woman—a feeling that in this par-
ticular place and time is almost historically unprecedented. And
that feeling is contentment. And perhaps surprise at the realization
that you had never dared to taste your food before, and this is how
food tastes.
That’s it. That’s the Mr. Right, Right Now! way of eating. And
that’s the way to lose weight. The only thing faster would be if I
came to your house and stapled motion sensors to your jaws.
However, the Mr. Right, Right Now! method is very difﬁcult to
pull off. You’re not permitted to read the paper while you’re eating
or watch TV or listen to the radio or make notes in your journal or
talk on the phone. You must be completely and absolutely “in the
present moment.” This requires just enormous amounts of concen-
tration, and, frankly, it messes with your daily schedule. (I mean, re-
ally, when was the last time you devoted a full twenty minutes to
breakfast without scanning the headlines, checking out Katie
48
E. Jean Carroll

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Couric’s tangerine-colored sweater set, and tapping your “to do” list
into your Palm?)
So I suggest you follow the Mr. Right, Right Now! way of eating
for one, possibly, two meals a day. Three meals—please, nobody
could pull it off, except Thich Nhat Hanh himself. (Check out the
admirable monk’s Essential Writings to learn more about “being in
the moment.”)
Other weight-loss tricks that work:
1. Eat everything, just not a lot. Do not “diet.” For God’s sake.
You know there’s research showing that dieting causes a hor-
mone called ghrelin to rise in your body. Ghrelin slows your
metabolism and interferes with your ability to burn fat. It also
increases your appetite. Have you noticed that the more you
diet, the hungrier you get? According to the New England
Journal of Medicine, ghrelin may be the reason.
So do not deny yourself. The instant you deny yourself a
certain thing, say Peanut M&M’s, then Peanut M&M’s become
the chief thing you think about. You may never have thought
much about Peanut M&M’s, but when you tell yourself that
you can not have Peanut M&M’s, then that is when you lose
all control and thrash around the supermarket ﬂoor like a
shark, leaving only empty Peanut M&M’s wrappers and cello-
phane in your wake. (Read the illustrious Viktor Frankl’s
Man’s Search for Meaning. Frankl was a psychiatrist who was
imprisoned in Auschwitz. He explains that to be denied food
creates a “general preoccupation with food.” I beg you to read
this book. He has many ideas about achieving happiness and
success that can change your life in a brilliant My-Life-Is-
Changing-As-I-Read-This-Sentence kind of way.)
49
Mr. Right, Right Now!
www.Ebook777.com

2. If you go berserk and down a can of Pringles, so what? There’s
nothing in the world better than a can of Pringles. The cool
thing is to stop after one can and not beat up on yourself. Beat-
ing up on yourself warps your fragile psyche and makes you
feel like a loser, and when you feel like a loser, you will, of
course, eat another can of Pringles to make yourself feel better,
which actually makes you feel worse, so I suggest you either
call me and I will come to your house and pull out all your
teeth, or you should remove all items such as cans of Pringles
from the house.
3. Brew yourself a pot of Skin and Bones tea. I can’t prove it, but
I think my concoction boosts metabolism. Buy a pound of the
ugliest, gnarliest-looking fresh ginger you can ﬁnd. Slice it up
(about six long slivers), pour very hot water (not quite boiling)
over it, throw in a couple of green-tea-with-ginseng bags,
maybe a cranberry tea bag, and let the stuff steep for ﬁfteen
minutes. Take to work. Drink and be divine. Eventually waste
away to nothing.5
4. The easiest trick to lose three pounds is to sleep three hours
later than you normally do for three days running. It ﬂum-
moxes the old hypothalamus (the region in the brain that con-
trols appetite, sleep, thirst, etc.). Conversely, if you rise early,
50
E. Jean Carroll
5. Ha! I’m a genius! I just saw that Wrinkle Guy, Dr. Perricone, on PBS saying that
if you drink green tea for just two weeks—and do nothing else to diet—you’ll lose
seven pounds. He didn’t give a reason. I think seven pounds sounds like a lot, but
he is a god and who am I to argue? My guess is drinking green tea heightens your
awareness, lifts your mood, raises your spirits, and when your mood and spirits are
ﬂying, you discover there are more delicious things in life than food.

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
you’re famished. Unfortunately hungry people around the
world know this fact all too well. So this is what I propose: If
you try the Three Pound–Three Hour–Three Day Weight Loss
Plan, donate $20 to Oxfam (Oxfam.org) for each pound you
lose.
Today’s other beauty operation: Deﬂab your upper arms
and ﬂatten your stomach with a 90-minute rock-climbing workout.
And just let me say, if you don’t ﬁnd a rock located at an indoor/out-
door, mostly male rock-climbing establishment, I’m going to think
you are the dumbest little Doodle Brain to scramble up the pike.
When you reach the summit of said geological substance in
your Marion Jones–style, skintight, Mount-of-Venus gripping,
goldenrod-hued leggings and old baseball shirt, shake back your
hair and smile.
If you’ve never climbed before—good! Excellent! At about 22
feet, you will suddenly feel the awful pull of gravity. You will look
down. Balls of perspiration will dapple your upper lip like dewdrops
on a peach. You will hate—no, you will abominate, you will
LOATHE the book Mr. Right, Right Now! and all it’s stupid
!%#$!&!! suggestions. You will also loathe that hag E. Jean and pray
the authorities put her in Sing Sing and make her wear one of those
orange outﬁts with drawstring pants.
“Need help?”
A man’s voice. You will notice, in fact, several men ascending to
offer their services. You will laugh and refuse all assistance because
you could care less about men; but the handsomest fellow, perceiv-
ing that your lusty ego is about to get you killed, will say, “Allow
me,” and, without further ado, take you in his arms and carry you all
the way back to his $8.9-million ranch in Venezuela.
51
Mr. Right, Right Now!
www.Ebook777.com

Day Three
The Visit from the 
Three (Relatively) Wise Men
You will invite three gentlemen to your house. These gentlemen
will be your good friends, and ideally, they will come in different
ages, sizes, races, and with wildly diverging points of view. One fel-
low, perhaps a neighbor, will be over seventy. Another will be close
to your own age. And the third will be exploding with such virile
teen sap in all directions, your dog will mount his leg and enjoy
herself six or seven times before you are compelled to lock her in
the bathroom.
Seat the three men at your kitchen table and serve them your fa-
mous cheese pizza casserole or, perhaps, your F. Scott Fitzgerald
Chili (so hot that after two bites guests run and jump into a foun-
tain). Tell the chaps they are all smarter than Mr. S. W. Hawking and
that you, a mere woman, seek their advice. Then pull out your pic-
tures.
These pictures are, in fact, ripped from the pages of Allure,
Bazaar, Glamour, Jane, Elle, W, Cosmopolitan, etc. Explain to your
guests that every once in a while you like to do a little reinvention
and that you’ve selected these shots because (A) there’s something
you like about each—the model’s hair color, the ﬁlm star’s shoes,
etc.; (B) that you’re considering trying the some looks yourself, and
(C) you would be much obliged if the handsome gentlemen would
give you their masculine opinions.
“How do you think I’d look in this dress?” you’ll say, holding up
a page with Heidi Klum wearing a classic, pelican-gray caftan, very
“in” right now.
52
E. Jean Carroll

“Hmmm . . .”
“Uhhhh.”
“*&%!!”
“”
(That’s sound of the old guy’s eyebrows crashing on his cheeks
in a frown.)
“Ummm . . .”
“Can I have more chili?”
“Come on, guys . . . don’t you love this dress?”
“The color . . .”
“Yeah, the color . . .”
“You’d look terrible in this dress.”
“You mean if you saw me wearing this, you wouldn’t ask me on
a date?”
“I’m married.”
“I know you’re married, Moose Balls. I was maid of honor at
your wedding. Perhaps you don’t remember me. I was the one wear-
ing puffed sleeves the size of air bags. Now, look at this picture.
Why wouldn’t I look good in this dress?”
“Don’t like the color.”
“It’s blah.”
“It looks like bird poop.”
“Don’t you have something in a different color?”
You leaf through your folder of shots and pull out a picture of
Heidi in a gauzy, salmon-colored wrap-dress.
“Hot!”
“Yeah?”
“Hot!”
“”
“Yeah? Really?”
“Hot!”
53
Mr. Right, Right Now!

“Very sexy.”
“Yeah?”
“Jesus.”
“Yeah? Would I look okay in this?”
“Hot!”
And so on through your folder. By the end of the evening you’ll
possess a clear idea of the masculine vision.
(We once tried the “masculine vision” thing on the old Ask E.
Jean TV show. We gave a 26-year-old guy an Elle magazine and told
him to chose the hair/outﬁt/shoes/etc. he’d like to see on his girl-
friend. It so happened his girlfriend was quite a babe to begin with,
being a tall, well-built Danish girl with long, curly blond hair. She
arrived wearing sandals, a short denim skirt, and T-shirt. Her look
was effortless and sunny. Unfortunately, after her boyfriend chose
the styles he liked, we turned the poor thing over to army of hair-
dressers, makeup artists, and the Elle fashion editor to do her
“over.” By the end of the show, the young woman’s hair had been
slicked back, her eyebrows had been plucked and darkened to re-
semble turkey vultures zooming in for the kill . . . the outﬁt was per-
fect but so neoconservative George W. Bush was probably wearing it
under his ﬂight suit when he landed on that aircraft carrier. I
thought she looked a fright. The guy, however, was in ecstasies! I
was stunned. It was all I could do to keep him from tearing off her
clothes on live television. This is why I’m suggesting you only show
your guests clothes and ideas that you like.)
Now, if your three gentlemen are up for it, and nobody’s pressed
for time, throw on your three killing-est outﬁts (don’t buy anything,
just choose favorite stuff from your closet) and haul your carcass up
and down the living room for a fashion show. In ten minutes, you’ll
know what’s bewitching and what isn’t.
54
E. Jean Carroll

P.S. Make your ﬁnal outﬁt a pair of jeans, because you will need
them for your next activity . . .
Tonight’s workout: The motocross track . . . where, amidst the
lush gas fumes, you’ll see such an unbelievably dense concentration
of the opposite sex, such an unruly mass of testosterone, such a
rainbow of leather, I’m afraid you may never return home again.
If it’s not a race night—and if you’ve never straddled one of
these machines—you might be able to rent a bike (gloves, boots,
jacket) and take a lesson. The next day you’ll swagger into the ofﬁce
still wearing the helmet, smelling of motor oil, and bespattered with
blood and Band-Aids. (When you do ﬁnally remove the helmet at
lunchtime you’ll be surprised to see your hair has grown ﬁve
inches—from all the standing on end it was doing at the track.)
Guys at work will be impressed.
Day Four
Hair Day
I personally don’t know a single thing about hair. My own personal
hair always looks a mess. I can honestly say, Doll, please don’t lis-
ten to me on this topic. Here’s what you do: when you see someone’s
hair you like, ask them who cut/colored it and make an appoint-
ment.
Today’s beauty tip: Cheap hair conditioner makes a lovely shav-
ing cream for your legs.
55
Mr. Right, Right Now!

.
.
.
Today’s other beauty tip: Massage your scalp with your ﬁnger-
tips (not nails) when you get out of bed in the morning. It gives
body to your style (if unlike me you are lucky enough to have a
style).
Today’s workout: Nine holes of golf. (Males outnumber females
on the links ﬁve to one, not that you care.) Or if it’s cold, hit a $10
bucket of balls at an indoor driving range.
Day Five
Makeup Day
I don’t know a thing about this subject, either. My blush is always
somehow turning into the color of a pot roast, and I usually have so
much mascara ﬂopping about, I look like I’ve hooked mink tails to
my eyebrows. Do not listen to me about makiage, I beg you.
If you can afford it, book a makeup artist for a “play date.”
(Don’t know one? Call the top salon in town and ask for a referral.)
Or, you can schedule an appointment at your favorite department
store makeup counter and go for a free makeover. (Avoid lunchtimes
and Saturday afternoons, for obvious reasons.) Or simply leave work
at 9:30 A.M., treat yourself to a margarita, arrive at the store, scan all
the counters, and mosey up to the salesperson/stylist whose look
you admire. Bring pictures. Be nice. Tell the stylist you wish to try
something new/old/classic/less Bird of Paradise/more Catherine
Zeta-Jones/etc. If you’re “on a budget,” say so. Ask for samples. You
don’t have to buy anything.
56
E. Jean Carroll

.
.
.
Today’s beauty tip: Pink umbrellas! On a gray, wretched day, a
woman smiling under a pink umbrella looks younger than the Little
Mermaid.
Today’s other beauty tip: Slather your mouth with hydrous lano-
lin every night ($2.99 at any drugstore). Wake up with lips plumper
than tennis balls.
Today’s workout: Have you ever ﬁred a weapon? Ever shot at
anything? Wish to gain insight into the so-called “male mind”? (A
boy begins playing with weapons early in his life, and this predilec-
tion lives on in the adult man’s love of cars, motorcycles, sports,—
really, I don’t need to point out something so observable, do I?)
So today’s the day. Visit your local gun club, skeet club, or ﬁr-
ing range. (Call your local hunting-and-ﬁshing store for a referral.)
Not only will marksmanship fundamentals (i.e., taking a steady po-
sition, aiming, breathing, squeezing the trigger) teach you how to
hit a target—invaluable basic training for bringing down the male
beast—there’s also a strong probability you’ll be the only woman
there.
Day Six
Ensnaring the Dizzy Buggers
This is a big day, an exhaustive day, in many ways a hideous day.
Today you must be ready and willing to try on every item in your
57
Mr. Right, Right Now!

closet. If this means you have to empty all your T-shirt drawers,
turn the contents of your jewelry box out on the bed, pull down
your sweater shelf, go without food, without water . . . if you must
don 160 different outﬁts and ﬁnd a dazzling combination and have
to walk around outside and be followed by rich men and chased
by rock stars, and if this means the street in front of your house
will be littered with the bodies of men who’ve shot themselves be-
cause they can’t have you, then you must be prepared to make the
sacriﬁce.
These are the components of a great Man Catching outﬁt:
1. The male beast is hardwired to chase the feminine shape.
Whether you are 208 pounds or 108 pounds, curves captivate
the giddy doodlebangers. Especially the all-important waist-
hip ratio. So bait the trap. (I’m using the plain Anglo-Saxon
here.) Show your waist. You don’t have to do a whole Shakira
number—a dress that just skims your ﬁgure like the demure
dress worn by Diane Lane in Unfaithful in the café bathroom
scene is perfect.
2. Men are attracted by color. It’s love at ﬁrst sight, not love at
ﬁrst sound. So catch their eye with reds, pinks, purples, any
hue that enhances your eyes. As Chuckie D. says in The De-
scent of Man, a chap’s senses “are so constituted that brilliant
colors . . . give pleasure.”
3. If you have decent legs, wear a sarong skirt so short your fanny
thinks you forgot to get dressed. If your thighs are not your
comeliest asset, then something below the knee. Experiment.
Any skirt that wraps, swings, ﬂutters, ﬂoats, or ﬂips around
like a veil will toss a guy’s confetti.
58
E. Jean Carroll

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
4. Show the arch of your foot. A really great pair of Jimmy Choo’s
or those witty (and incredibly cheap) espadrilles from Wal-
Mart can make you look more naked than if you have on noth-
ing at all. Remember, it was the slipper that brought the
marriage proposal in Cinderella. Not the dress.
5. Pull up your (aforementioned) bra straps. If your breasts aren’t
high enough to comb your hair with your nipples, then by all
means hoist them again.
6. Smell bewitching. I recommend combining fragrances from Jo
Malone. (I realize all the magazines advise creating a “signa-
ture” scent. I ﬁnd that a bit Grandma. To be sexy, surprising,
criminally attractive, wear the same base scent like Honey-
suckle & Jasmine, then slither on a top note, like Nutmeg one
evening, and Amber and Lavender the next.)
7. Your curves/age/race are appraised by men in seconds. Then
the details of your hair/face/class/education/bloodlines are
taken in—less quickly than you are assessing their face/blood-
lines, etc.—but supremely quick nonetheless. So dress how you
wish to be perceived.
8. This last point is so important, it’s a Man Catching Law:
Man Catching Law #4
Delight in Your Own Attractions,
and You Will Attract.
It’s as simple (and impossible) as that. There’s no such thing as an
“ugly” woman. (There are geniuses at being scared of their own
beauty.)
59
Mr. Right, Right Now!
www.Ebook777.com

I once saw a plain girl at a bar in Chelsea. Everything about her
was dull as a nun’s underwear drawer, except her $300, white Ralph
Lauren shirt and her vaguely erotic tight, black skirt. She was obvi-
ously just coming from the ofﬁce (or convent), and instead of sitting
at a table, she took a position at the bar with a friend, turned, and
scanned the room with a bored expression. Her eye landed on the
man I was with.
He was famous, needless to say.
She straightened and smiled at him. He smiled back politely,
and in the next instant (my iMac keyboard is getting warm even as I
type this) she was transﬁgured into a . . . well, not a radiant beauty,
hell, not even a beauty, but something better than a beauty—a siren.
With a small, swiveling movement of her torso, she twisted
slightly away and tilted her face downward so it was concealed be-
hind her dead-leaf-brown, shoulder-length hair. Then with a lifted
hand, with a gesture of drawing back a curtain, with the slowness ﬁt
to inﬂame a dead man, she raised her head, rolled her hair back
from her face, opened her eyes wide as sandwich plates, and gazed
at my boyfriend. It was one of the sexiest moves I have ever seen in
my life.
This was a woman who wallowed in her attractions.
Then, by God, if she didn’t drop her head again, disappear be-
hind her veil of what now appeared to be a veritable mane of chest-
nut hair gleaming with indescribable luster, lift her hand, roll her
hair to the other side, and, as I’m saying to myself, “O dear, O good-
ness, somebody turn her off,” if the little Man Chomper didn’t gaze
back at him out the sides of her lashes! I was torn between admiring
her and wanting to strangle her.
Her spirit inspired me with great respect. Yes. But I lost no time
in removing the famous boyfriend from the premises, lest he fall to
his knees and propose to her on the spot.
60
E. Jean Carroll

So. Let’s wrap this chapter up by stripping off our clothes.
Yes, go ahead. I’ll wait. Ok? Now, go stand in front of the mirror.
Don’t worry—I’m not going to give you any chickenhearted crap
about “loving” and “accepting” your body. No. No. No. What I want
you to do is take a long look.
Are you looking? Fine. Now admit it. Isn’t your body the funni-
est goddamm thing you ever saw in your life? (My own body looks
like I ate my comforter for dinner.) So don’t hold back—laugh. If
you are so inclined, roll on the ﬂoor. I’m serious. One good laugh is
worth three years of hand-wringing about whether men ﬁnd your
legs attractive.
Laugh at your naked self every night for the next ﬁve weeks, and
soon you’ll be ﬁlled with joy, not anxiety, at yourself. Why? Anytime
you can laugh, Doll, you’ve got the world by the ass.
61
Mr. Right, Right Now!

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
DEAR PARALYZED: You don’t want to get over your fear, Honey Poo, you want to USE
it—distill it, bottle it, put a cap on it, set it on your dresser, and let the sight of it ﬁll you with
power. Read on . . .
DEAR E. JEAN: I had a Sleeping Beauty fantasy, but now I’m beginning to under-
stand my prince is NOT coming to wake me. I’m very attractive and quite intelligent, but
I have trouble even STARTING a conversation with a man, much less getting a date. How
do I get over my fear?
—Paralyzed in VA
www.Ebook777.com

So what if you tremble like a tomato aspic on a plate when you
meet a fellow? The Man Catching Theory works whether you’re
frightened or not (if you’re being yourself, a little frazzle makes you
slightly more stimulating, not less). It’s the BIG fears the Man
Catcher must rid herself of—the fears that come with the lifetime
warranties. So, ahem. Come out from under the bed, Fear, you bas-
tard, this chapter is about you.
After some hesitation, asking me for “a moment” (I can hear the
surprise in his voice), Fear creeps out—glides out, really—and
frowns at me. He is short and plump, sort of Danny DeVito plump,
and pale, very pale—very un–Danny DeVitoish complexion-wise.
Fear is, in fact, as pale as a maggot. Perspiration spatters his high
forehead. His eyes—one icy blue, one turdy brown—go off in two
different directions.
Fear adjusts his tie. The fellow is suavely attired, I must say!
White Armani suit, raspberry-and-cream-stripped shirt, violet tie
with a scorpion stickpin, heliotrope vest with magenta piping, bur-
Week Three:
What to Do When the 
Freaking-Out Thing Kicks In

gundy shoes with lilac spats, and sporting—is that the word? ﬂour-
ishing? wielding?—an ebony walking stick with a silver handle
carved in the image of Angelina Jolie.
I ask Fear to sit down.
He lowers his big fundament on the edge of the Craftmatic bed,
removes his homburg, and wiping back his hair, which is sticking to
his forehead, he says:
Fear: What do you want? AFRAID you won’t get this feebleminded
book done on time?
Eeee: Afraid? Don’t underestimate yourself, Mr. Nerve Rack. I’m
damn near paralyzed.
Fear: Calm down, I’ve read your ﬁrst two chapters.
Eeee: Well . . . ?
Fear: Well . . . since you ask. I’ve been puking up my guts ever
since.
Eeee: Must be careful of your lovely spats.
Fear: I’ve upset you.
Eeee: I’m not upset.
Fear: You look upset.
Eeee: I’m not upset.
Fear: You look it.
Eeee: I’M NOT UPSET!! And incidentally, fuck you.
Fear (smiling)
64
E. Jean Carroll

Eeee: Right. Here we are in Chapter Three, which is all about you,
Mr. Fearsome. So, I’d like to ask you a few questions. What would
you say about that?
Fear (shrugging, but ﬂattered): Proceed.
Eeee: I’ve got my tape recorder going. Mind?
Fear (shrug)
Eeee: Excellent! Good! This could be fun, huh? A little frisson. So!
Ahem! Please tell me about yourself.
Fear: I’ve been interviewed by writers a thousand times more tal-
ented than you.
Eeee: I have no doubt. No doubt at all. I’m extremely obliged to you
for condescending to speak with me. If you would kindly indulge
me, Fearsome, this is a list of the “Typical Fears” that besiege an
intelligent woman when she’s “looking for a mate.”
Fear: My prime area!
Eeee: Don’t I know, you naughty rogue!
Fear: You’re doomed.
Eeee: Who’s doomed?
Fear: You, Madam. Smart women, fast-track women, elite women.
Every single one of you pathetic twit-wits. Doomed!
Eeee: Now, now, now, Mr. Perspiration. Nobody’s doomed.
Fear: Horse manure, Madam.
Eeee: For the ﬁrst time in history gigantic numbers of women are
successful, rich, autonomous, and sexually liberated.
65
Mr. Right, Right Now!

Fear: Bovine excrement, Madam!
Eeee: Our clothes are stunning. Our apartments are spectacular. Our
travels make Marco Polo look like an agoraphobic. We go where we
chose, we do what we like, we snog whom we please.
Fear: Is this Tampax commercial over?
Eeee: We are F-R-E-E.
Fear: And what, may I inquire, are you doing with this freedom?
Eeee: Changing the world.
Fear: Ha! (laughing and coughing ﬁt) Stop! You’re killing me! You’re
the funniest dame I’ve ever—I hope you’re being sarcastic, Madam.
Eeee: I’m dead serious.
Fear (snorting): What you broads are really doing is running around
looking for Mr. Right so you can ditch all the freedom, settle down,
and breed.
Eeee: Oh please. American women have enough power to love men,
bear children, and thrive in brilliant careers. Hush up. Now. (sounds
of papers ﬂapping) Shall we begin with the list of “Typical Fears En-
countered by the Smart Woman Whilst Looking for Mr. Right?”
Number one—well, mmm. I see these fears are not in order. Should
we just start with the top one?
Fear (crossing his legs smugly): Whatever.
Eeee: A woman who’s thirty years old has been dating for ﬁfteen, six-
teen years. At least. That’s ﬁfteen or sixteen years of accumulating
romantic terrors—
Fear: The main terror being she’s thirty.
66
E. Jean Carroll

Eeee: But at least she now knows what works and what doesn’t,
right?
Fear: How can she know what works when I’m reducing her to such
self-hating stupors after each love affair? She makes the same mis-
takes every time! It’s magniﬁcent!
Eeee: But what happens if she doesn’t do that?
Fear: But she always does.
Eeee: But what if she simply stops being freaked-out and uses all
these frightful experiences? Don’t losers learn better than winners
in war? Aren’t mistakes better teachers than victories?
Fear: In war, yes. In the battle of the sexes? It’s my duty to pulverize
a woman’s self-conﬁdence till she loses all trace of her spine and
turns into just another tedious neurotic.
Eeee: But can’t smart women learn from that too?
Fear (rolling his eyes in two different directions)
Eeee: The more action we take, the less afraid of YOU we’ll be?
Fear: This is old stuff, Madam, really—come on.
Eeee: And taking action against you is a skill? And that it can be
learned? And that it can be increased by experience? And that—
Fear (shrieking): What . . . in . . . HELL is that?
Eeee: You’ve never seen a Great Pyrenees dog?
Fear (backing up on the bed): It looks like a Lipizzaner.
Eeee: Why, look at that. She likes you! My goodness, she really
loves—good lord! Down! Down, girl! Down, Alabaster! Well, I’ve
67
Mr. Right, Right Now!

never seen her, uh, enjoy herself so, uh, romantically, before. Well—!
Oops! Bad Alabaster! Bad! Bad! You naughty girl! Give Mr. Fear
back his toupee!
Fear (gasping): Get her off!
Eeee (laughing)
Fear: I beseech you, Madam!
Eeee: (escorting Alabaster out; shutting the bedroom door): In my
opinion you look handsomer without it. Here. Look in the mirror.
Fear (examining his bald head, unsure): Really?
Eeee: Very Vin Diesel. What a stroke of luck! Turning adversity to
victory! This calls for a bottle of champagne!
Fear: For God’s sake! Don’t leave me here alone! Shouldn’t you lock
the door?
Eeee: Don’t worry. Alabaster won’t be back. She’s run to the garden
to bury your hair. So my question is, how do we lash ourselves into
action when we’re facing you?
Fear: You’re asking ME, Madam?
Eeee: Yes. Fearsome, my man. Just give me two or three suggestions,
two or three darts from your huge arsenal of weapons. It will make
the battle so much more interesting!
Fear: I . . . I . . . I . . . I’m afraid to tell you.
Eeee: Fear dear, please. Do be serious.
Fear (tempted but hesitating): You’ll never believe me if I DO tell
you.
68
E. Jean Carroll

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Eeee: Try me.
Fear: Okay. I’m powerless against a woman who’s just eaten two
packages of Oreos and a can of Hershey’s syrup.
Eeee: Nice try, Mr. Reeking Crotch!
Fear: I’m a total pushover.
Eeee: Here’s what I’m thinking. Being in powerful physical condi-
tion gives a girl grit. Tennis, volleyball, downhill racing . . .
Fear . . . napping . . .
Eeee . . . soccer, karate, fencing . . .
Fear . . . sweater de-pilling . . .
Eeee . . . basketball, judo, softball, boxing . . .
Fear . . . pot-smoking . . .
Eeee . . . badminton—do you mind, any sport where we can project
our fears onto our opponents is good, because it trains us to ﬁght
you, Mr. Weep & Pule. Competition pushes us. Lifts us above our-
selves.
Fear (utter silence)
Eeee: Well . . . ?
Fear: Naw. Instead of batting a shuttlecock, you should bat your eye-
lashes. Smart women, Madam, are scary women. You intimidate men.
Eeee: But sports—
Fear: Forget sports. Major blocks of time must be employed in mak-
ing yourselves beautiful. That’s what men want. Worry about your
69
Mr. Right, Right Now!
www.Ebook777.com

weight more and your jump shot less. That is, if you have any sense
whatsoever, which is—
Eeee: You’re so adorable when you lie, Mr. Sweat Gland! Little
beads of blood form on your forehead. I’ll tell you what else I’m
thinking. I’m thinking that taking action against you means possess-
ing an awake brain. So we should get lots of sleep and not live on
globs of slop—dumb TV, dumb magazines, dumb grub.
Fear: Oh, please . . .
Eeee: And I think if we—
Fear: We’re getting a turdload of your thinking, aren’t we, Madam?
Eeee: Anyway, if we maintain a comic attitude toward you, toss off a
well-aimed laugh in your face, and so on, I believe you’ll run like a
diseased rat.
Fear: Look, you got any more stupid questions? This is beginning to
look suspiciously like a FORMAT to me.
Eeee: If you answer the next question without lying, Mr. Falsie Man,
I’ll let you run the Craftmatic up and down a full minute.
Fear: Three minutes.
Eeee: Two minutes, baby. Ready? Okay. In today’s society—
Fear: “In today’s society”? No, Madam. Any question beginning with
“In today’s society” is more tedium than I can possibly endure.
Eeee: Oh? And what if I just take away your walking stick and poke
you in the testicles?
Fear: Now, now. Get on with it. And don’t ask me any of your imbe-
cile questions about chasing men.
70
E. Jean Carroll

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Eeee: We never chase. We place ourselves in their vicinity.
Fear: You want a tip? Men are just as afraid as women. Maybe more.
But they present themselves as being less afraid. But it’s all a show.
Remember. All a show.
Eeee: Oddly enough that hideously repugnant news gives me hope.
Fear: Don’t mention it.
Eeee: So. Once she’s in the vicinity, how can a smart, but shy, woman
overcome you, Fear, and strike up a conversation with a man she
likes?
Fear: Naw, naw. Little Mole Women must stay in the house and not
go lurching around outdoors latching onto fellows’ pant legs and
spilling their guts nervously about the weather.
Eeee: Give me that Craftmatic control, Mr. Neck Welt! Whoa! What’s
this?
Fear: Nothing. Let go of my hand.
Eeee: No, no, no, let me see. Hold still. Why, you’ve chewed your
nails down to little slits! Little nubs! Judas! The ends of your ﬁngers
look like throw pillows. Egads! Look at your thumb, poor thing, I
can’t even see the nail. What? Come on. It vexes you that I’m hold-
ing your hand? It embarrasses you? You’re feeling a surge of trau-
matic emotions? Your hand is shaking. But, Fear dear, don’t you
know how charming you are when you let your vulnerability show?
Fear: Nawwww . . .
Eeee: Ye gods, Fearsome, you’re practically . . . irresistible. Look 
at you.
71
Mr. Right, Right Now!
www.Ebook777.com

Fear: Nawwww.
Eeee: A shy woman should do just what you’re doing now. She
shouldn’t be afraid to show she’s afraid. You know why? Shy people
possess a striking advantage. They make excellent listeners. Noth-
ing makes a chap fall in love like hearing himself talk.
Fear (taking back his hand): Would to bloody God that you, Madam,
subscribed to that theory.
Eeee: Ok. Ok. Ok. Ok. Ok. Ok. Ok. All a shy woman has to do is (A)
stop imagining the worst; (B) cease thinking about herself; (C) think
of other people.
Fear: No, Madam. She’s a Mole Woman. She’ll never give up her par-
alyzing self-obsession.
Eeee: But . . .
Fear: No buts. She’d be better off in her “spectacular” apartment,
taking a big risk and spending Self Time every morning owning her
feelings, getting in touch with her authentic person, and journaling
in a nonjudgmental, sympathetic, and centering manner.
Eeee: One more moron remark like that, Mr. Dick Quiver, and I’m
calling the dog. Wait—why are you looking at your watch?
Fear: Time to knock it off. I have work to do. People to see.
Eeee: Oh, no! Stay! We’re just beginning to become acquainted.
Stay, Fearsome. Our frisson and all that. Wait! Don’t go. I want to
run my Week Three assignment by you.
Fear (sitting reluctantly): Well, go on.
Eeee: It seems to me that this third week, the Lovely Reader should
strap on a parachute, climb to 12,555 feet, and jump.
72
E. Jean Carroll

Fear (ruminating): The Lovely Reader will never do it.
Eeee: But it’s the single best way to deal with you, Fearsome. Right?
Because once the Lovely Reader hurtles toward planet Earth at 125
miles an hour, not a damn thing can ever scare the Lovely Reader
afterward. Candace Bushnell, the dashing author of Sex and the
City, and I once did it out in California.
Fear: I was there. I recall that Candace was smashingly costumed in
a red jumpsuit. You, of course, vomited all over that blue thing you
were wearing.
Eeee: The point is, I did it. And that should be this week’s assign-
ment.
Fear: Come, come, Madam. You only did it because you and Can-
dace hired your own personal video photographers to photograph
every single second of it.
Eeee: Well, the thing is, these parachute places have professional
jumpers who hook themselves to your back so you absolutely can’t
get killed. Anyway, I think it’s a superb Week Three assignment.
Fear: Not bad.
Eeee: Because after I did it, I noticed that you, Mr. Fearsome, don’t
come around as much anymore. I mean you’re around all the damn
time, of course, to keep me sharp, but now it seems you’re a little
more laid-back.
Fear (standing, adjusting his tie): Thank you, Madam. You know it’s
rare I receive a kind word. And in return, I will tell you something
true.
Eeee (rising and gazing down at the top of Fear’s bald head): What
is it?
73
Mr. Right, Right Now!

Fear: Bend closer.
Eeee (bending)
Fear (clearing his throat): Closer.
Eeee (bending closer)
Fear (whispering): You need to lose eight pounds.
Eeee: You ﬁlthy cad, come on! You were going to tell me something
deep! Something important. I could see it in your eye. What was it?
Tell me. Tell me, you ﬁend. Or do I have to whistle for a certain hir-
sute toupee rustler?
Fear: Ok. Ok. It’s just this. People are only frightened because they
perceive things as frightening. I am perceived. I am not a fact. Look at
me. Do I look fearsome?
Eeee: At some angles you look like Supreme Court justice Ruth
Bader Ginsburg.
Fear (rising): Thank you.
Eeee: Huh? Wait a minute, don’t go. Wait. You mean if we change the
way we look at things—things change? Let me get this straight. If—
Fear: There’s nothing to get straight. Your fears of the world around
you are arbitrary. All that bull crap imprisoning you? Arbifreaking-
tary. Well, nice talking to you.
Eeee: Wait. Wait! Wait! Wait! One more thing. The subtitle of this
book is “How a Smart Woman Can Land Her Dream Man in 6
Weeks.” Every now and then I burst into big red welts when I think
of it. Is it possible? Can a woman actually land a man in six weeks?
74
E. Jean Carroll

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Fear: When a man falls for a woman, it happens in less than a
minute. The main fear, Madam, is not ﬁnding the fellow.
Eeee: Aha! That’s all in the next chapter! The 119 best places to
meet men. Hang around, Fearsome. We’ll go over it together. Wait!
Wait! No! Don’t go!
Fear: Be seeing you, Madam.
And with that, Fear crossed to the window, drew up the sash,
and after looking around for the dog, squeezed over the sill and dis-
appeared into the woods behind my house.
75
Mr. Right, Right Now!
www.Ebook777.com

MY DEAREST GIRL: By the Burly Nipples of Emily Brontë! Not even the author of 
W. Heights would look for a man in a book club. Most book club members are females. It’s a
waste, waste, waste of your time! Here’s the deal . . .
DEAR E. JEAN: I’ve spent more than $2,000 on a dating service that’s so far
brought me four Mr. Wrongs. I try to meet guys. I’ve tried the club scene, car washes,
coffee shops, book clubs, you name it. I’m conﬁdent enough to know I’m attractive. But
it’s just so hard when there’s something I want so badly (marriage and children) but
can’t ﬁnd it. How much longer do I have to tell myself “It will happen”?
—Lonely Girl

The Internet
In the ﬁrst draft of this book, which I lashed together many months
ago . . . Ok, Ok, let’s not start off with an exaggeration.
I didn’t “lash” it together exactly. It was more like I lugged it;
the point is, I was trenchant! I was on it! I’d amassed 118 groovier
and groovier places to meet the chaps and then climaxed the
whole thing like a fool with one hairless little footnote on “Internet
dating.”
And I was reluctant to include even that. I was wary of on-line
personals. The stacks of horror-infested nightmares on my desk—
i.e., letters from women who’d met men through the Internet, fallen
in love, and the louse bags turned out to be married, or worse (like
that snork-horned army colonel who proposed to ﬁfty . . . well, ad-
mittedly they must have been exceptionally naive . . . women)—
gave me the creeps. I couldn’t help picturing a short, bald,
monstrously fat wanker in his malodorous boxers hiding behind his
Week Four:
The 119 Best Places to 
Meet the Male Beast

computer screen, preying on the sweet virgin ﬂesh of etc., etc., . . .
when HIZZZZ-ZOOK!
I started an Internet dating site.
I had no idea what I was doing. I just wanted to help a few Elle
readers who’d been plaguing me (E. JEAN! YOU FEEBLE-
MINDED MORON! GET OFF YOUR FLABBY BUTT!) and ﬁnd
them boyfriends. So I simply asked women to recommend the hand-
somest, nicest, richest single fellows they knew to other women—
and kaboom, GreatBoyfriends.com was born. My sister, Cande
Carroll, an elegant geek, normally a prudent little creature, engaged
to be married to a doctor of economics, went insane, got the thing up
and running, and became the cofounder.
Now, you never saw two bigger imbeciles than Cande and my-
self, yet people fell hard for the site. They loved the idea of women
recycling (“regifting”) their men—“Take My Ex, Please” was the ti-
tle of Ginia Bellafante’s engaging New York Times article about it.
Cande and I had not yet ceased screaming and running mad over
the Times and a Newsweek article by Seth Mnookin, when The Lon-
don Times put it on its front page, and this of course completely de-
prived us of our senses. (That morning I stared at the computer
screen and my brain snapped its panty girdle. I realized I could
track—through the second-by-second translation of ones and ze-
ros—precisely how women “caught” men . . . oop, excuse me, I’ve
bored you beyond endurance with this already.)
The site was instantly perceived as “trustworthy.” It was women
doing good deeds for womankind. It was women vouching for guys
they knew for a damn fact were true-blue valiant, outstanding fel-
lows. (Viz . . . not Mr. Numb Nuts claiming to be a 6'2" triathlete
doctor—when in fact he was a 5'3" loser with bright red pimples all
over his back.)
After The Early Show AND The Today Show did big stories, fol-
78
E. Jean Carroll

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
lowed by The Los Angeles Times, 48 Hours, and a system-crashing
Oprah (so many people logged on at the same time, we came this
close to knocking the entire city of Ithaca off-line), Cande and I
have alternated between fainting on the sofa and staying awake
around the clock trying to keep up with the astonishing million and
a half hits a day.
We also did not let the gigabytes grow under our feet. GreatGirl-
friends.com was up and running soon afterward.
So, ahem, I, a onetime sourpuss, have become the country’s—
aw, hell, the planet’s—leading expert on on-line dating, and I swear
to Zero One (the goddess of the Internet), this is the cleverest way to
meet the male beast. A few years ago you may have had a choice of
twenty good guys. Now you have 200, or 2,000, or 20,000 delectable
fellows; and I’m convinced it’s as safe as meeting the buggers at a
church social. Why? Because by the time you agree to a ren-
dezvous, you should have exchanged enthrallingly large amounts of
information and know if you share the same interests and values.
Plus there’s something girlish and adventuresome about slip-
ping out the window of your tight demographic, jumping the barri-
cade of your social circle, and e-mailing a handsome stranger at
2:20 A.M. And the Internet is probably the very best way for a shy (or
reserved) woman to cut through the superﬁciality and shallowness
of day-to-day existence and allow the depth and glory of her person-
ality to blaze forth. The young evolutionary biologist Olivia Judson
has an intriguing perspective:1
79
Mr. Right, Right Now!
1. Judson is a leggy Brit with a doctorate from Oxford, author of the immensely en-
tertaining and informative Dr. Tatiana’s Sex Advice to All Creation—read it, it’s hys-
terical; she’s transformed up-to-the-minute Darwinian science into an advice
column! Also she helped yours truly set some of the dates for the “History of Your
Sex Appeal.”
www.Ebook777.com

“I can see why people ﬁnd the remoteness and yet the intimacy
of the Internet enticing. I had a collaboration that started on the In-
ternet. We wrote back and forth about a year before we actually met.
He was rather surprised when he saw me. I was slouching about in
shorts and a T-shirt. And we became very close in a lot of respects,
and it was close in a way that would have been difﬁcult, I think, if
we had met in person ﬁrst. He’s quite shy. And I don’t think it would
have gotten beyond that. There were aspects of his personality that
were very different from mine. But personal mannerisms are absent
in an e-mail, and you can see below the surface to the real person.”
So, here are the nine rules I’ve posted on the site (nothing like a
little autoplagiarism to give tone to a chapter):
The Glorious Girls’ “I Won’t Suffer Fools
Gladly” Guide to On-line Dating
#1. Put Up a Peachy Picture
Why do you think they gave Madam Curie the Nobel Prize? Because
she radiated. So, gussy up. You can do the I’m-so-hip-I-shot-this-in-
my-bathroom-mirror photo. Or, you can do what I call the Gilles
Bensimon Special. (Gilles is the genius who creates and shoots the
covers of Elle.) Hire a makeup artist. (I’m serious.—Why do you
think cover girls look like cover girls?) Or visit the aforementioned
makeup counter, have your hair blown out at a salon, don a man-
murdering dress (or riding jacket and crème-caramel-colored, cash-
mere T-shirt, whatever your style), and ask a friend to spend the
afternoon shooting you in different locales with various lighting (a
pale pink sunset can make Ernest Borgnine look like Lara Flynn
80
E. Jean Carroll

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Boyle). If Monsieur Bensimon rips through 20 rolls of ﬁlm to get one
perfect shot, why should you, a mere human, shoot less?2
#2. Create a Bewitching 
Screen Name
You’re an enticing new lass on the World Wide Web (strike that . . .
sounds ancient), you’re the new girl on-line, and the name you cre-
ate—a sobriquet that preserves your anonymity—will “brand” your
image. One caution: unless you want to engage in sex sixty or sev-
enty times a day with dozens of strapping young rakes, do NOT call
yourself anything that smacks, ahem, of the bedroom, viz, Miss Be-
havin’, The Naughty Professor, Boobalicious.
Titles/characters/poetic descriptions are excellent—“Lady-
Chat-early,” “HalleBerryTwin,” and so on.
#3. Don’t Write a Proﬁle—
Tell a Story
You’re penning the opening chapter in what could turn out to be a
big mesmerizing romance, so come on. “I like music, dogs, and hik-
ing” (oh, the drama!) strangles your allure instead of heightening it.
I adore this little “autobiography” written by a woman who recom-
mended her ex on GreatBoyfriends.com:
81
Mr. Right, Right Now!
2. Um, money?
Mad-ﬂattering portraits can be made with a little pluck, a bit of right-brain in-
tuition, one role of ﬁlm, and a fabulous personal fantasy. If you possess a digital
camera (or can borrow one), excellent! You can reel off 200 shots and chose the one
with maximum charm.
www.Ebook777.com

I love behind-the-scenes of movies. I walked onto the set of
Julia Roberts’s new ﬁlm, Mona Lisa Smile, and the director,
Mike Newell (a stranger to me), walked over and thanked me
“for smiling at (him) so dimly.” Made my week!
Just three sentences, but anyone reading it will conclude that
the writer is (A) eye-catching, (B) spontaneous, (C) bright, and (D)
witty. The rule is, Don’t tell ’em, show ’em.
#4. Spin & Spell
The I’m-just-a-little-mouse-turd-on-your-browser-so-I’m-going-to-
bore-you-with-the-dumb-ass-truth approach is the twittiest mistake
you can make. Roll your proﬁle in gold dust, darling, and spin it
like a ringed planet.
Love feeds on mystery AND honesty. Mystery keeps love eager,
Honesty keeps love real. A wise woman never lies; but she knows
how to make “reality” do cartwheels, as in this little example from a
woman on the Web site:
I’d love to write something that will capture my personality
and my zest for life—something that will make me stand out
from the rest of the crowd—something creative and original,
but instead, I’ll just say:
I’m deep and complex with an inner ﬁre that keeps me
happy and motivated. I have a wonderful group of friends
with whom I love spending time. I’m sociable, peppy, a tiny
bit sassy, loving, sometimes funny, highly energetic, and in-
telligent (at least that’s what I’m told!).
So, while I didn’t pen an amazingly hysterical descrip-
tion of who I am, I think you get the picture.
82
E. Jean Carroll

Want another?
I’m an actress. I’m hot, yet dorky. I read. I tear up the
dance ﬂoor when I’m not being a hermit. Everyone always
picks me to be on their team nowadays. When I was
younger, it was another story. But ever since I got the braces
off, look out!
Both these women have taken care to be honest and engaging,
and more important, their photos are absolute killers—elusive,
thrilling, warm, sexy (the second woman appears to be wearing a
slip! By Pan’s hairy bollocks!)
#5. If Catherine the Great Could
Seduce Voltaire with Her Letters,
You Can Drop Men at Your Feet
with an E-Mail
When you see a fellow on the site that you fancy, drop him an 
e-mail. Something short. We’ve noticed the women who receive the
most attention on our sites (aside from putting up intriguing photos)
send
A. brief
B. friendly
C. lighthearted
D. roguish
E. did I say brief?
e-mails. Mention something that caught your attention in the guy’s
proﬁle, something you have in common, something you disagree
83
Mr. Right, Right Now!

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
with, etc. Soon love letters (because this is what these e-mails are)
will be whizzing around you like Eros’ own hailstorm.3
A raucous courtship can begin with a sedate exchange about
butterﬂy hunting . . . or end when “MrWallStreet” adds a P.S. beg-
ging to suck your kneecaps. You’re writing the script, you’re running
the show. If you want a noble, true-blue guy, reveal (brieﬂy!) valiant
facets of your own character—add substance to style.
No need for Edith Wharton–grade cyclones of introspection—
just a few comical/cynical/unclichéd insights about your day at
work, or maybe how you’re volunteering at the animal shelter. After
three or four exchanges, if sparks are ﬂying, you will move to “real”
e-mail (off the site) and he’ll ask for your number. I advise you to
demur and, instead, ask him to give you his cell AND ofﬁce num-
bers (just to keep him on the straight and narrow).
(Note: If you followed my advice in #1, your picture will cause
men to bleat like goats and beg for an assignation right away. Hold
off till you’ve exchanged several e-mails—ask him (casually)
about his morning routine, where he went on his last vacation,
what he thinks of his mother, and so forth—and then, after you
converse on the phone, if you feel conﬁdent he’s not a moron, you
may condescend to appear in all your beauty and charm at Star-
bucks at 7 P.M.)
84
E. Jean Carroll
3. Just to snap the bra strap of this point one more time: We’ve discovered that
women sending long e-mails (some of them running 1,500 words!) are less success-
ful in ﬁnding romance. When they ask our advice, we show them how to shorten
their notes down to 100 words or less (for the opening serve-and-volley). They al-
ways meet with greater success.
www.Ebook777.com

#6. Keep the First Rendezvous
Short & Safe
No matter how weak with excitement you are, no matter how much
romantic tension is simmering just below the surface of your e-
mails, NEVER agree to anything more than coffee (or drinks) at a
café/museum/hot dog stand.
I don’t have to whack you over the head with my Robert Clerg-
erie black stretch boot and tell you to always meet in a public place,
now do I, Doll? Or that you should Google him before planning a
rendezvous to uncover any unadulterated facts? Or that you should
tell your best friend when and where you’re meeting him?
When you see him walk in, you will either feel a friendly (or in-
terested) click in the ﬁrst thirty seconds, or you won’t, so do NOT
waste time. The average man doesn’t have a snowball’s chance 
in hell of meeting your unattainable expectations anyway, so keep 
it short, keep it sweet. If, however, he walks in, and SWIIIIIIIIP,
your uterus wants to sail to Martinique with him, go on and have
dinner.
#7. But If You’re SERIOUSLY
Enamored, Do NOT Have Sex Until
You’ve Flogged His Trembling
Carcass into a State of Frenzy
Bordering on Insanity
If you think this could be It, wait. As Balzac says, “The duration of
passion is proportional with the original resistance of the woman.”
85
Mr. Right, Right Now!

#8. However, If You’re Using
Internet Dating for a Lusty
Romp . . .
Never in the history of the Ask Eeee column has any female ever
been advised to stop enjoying incredible sex—and the array of
queenhell sexual tastes presented on alt.com, for instance, are al-
most beyond comprehension. If you want a tryst (or several) and
won’t moan and cry afterward and act like a simp, go ahead. The
same rules apply as in #6, with this addition: PROTECT YOUR-
SELF, DARLING!
#9. Internet Dating Is Now Oh-So-
Cool It’s Hip to Be Seen Doing It
Honey, if the newly wedlocked are jabbering in the august New York
Times wedding pages about the “thrill” of meeting on-line, your
coworkers and friends (not wanting to appear out of it) will think it’s
not only NOT geeky, but will think you’re all the smarter and en-
chanting for doing it.
However, you must appear on an elite, thoroughbred site. In old
E. Jean’s opinion there are only four sites worthy of a top girl:
Match.com (a magniﬁcently broad array of choices), J-Date (if
you’re Jewish or want to date a Jewish prince, you can’t beat this
one), Spring Street Networks (these personals appear in several hip
publications like Jane, The New York Observer, New York, and on
Nerve.com and boast the most audaciously inventive members,
many of whom are panty-hose models looking for hookups) . . . and
GreatBoyfriends.com (the most trustworthy because women vouch
86
E. Jean Carroll

for the men and we have the handsomest fellows in the world, swear
to God—Cande and I personally throw all the losers off).
And now for the remaining 118 best places to meet the mon-
eyed, the talented, the single, the handsome, the brave . . .
Wait. Wait. Before we begin, you should (obviously) pick the
places you like. (E.g., you may sport more curves than Jeff Gordon’s
Chevy Monte Carlo, but revving your motor at a NASCAR event
when you have no interest in stock cars is phonier than the air bags
in Pam Anderson’s chest.) It’s best to have something in common
with the man you are about to fall in love with.4
Also, I’m glancing through my notes here . . . I see some of the
118 “places” are not places, but ideas, or—well, I can’t quite say
what they are, they seem to be concepts, or fate-shakers, or maybe
the blue sparks zigzagging off the Diamond of Destiny.
Sports
Suggestions for the Delectation 
of This Splendid Category
A. Turn to the sports pages in today’s paper.
B. Read the whole damn section. Do not skip the box scores.
C. Concentrate.
D. It’s impossible to understand how men think unless you lock
into their brain waves.
87
Mr. Right, Right Now!
4. And I’m not talking the “handsome, bronzelike Commemorative Tire Jack” from
the Milwaukee Mile.

E. Reading every single solitary detail about last night’s NBA/
NFL/NHL/MLB games will expose the beasts’ thought pat-
terns and lay bare their primal lust for power, speed, carnage.
F. Now . . . if you continue to focus—I mean focus like a highly
paid quarterback throwing a 47-yard pass to Jerry Rice—
you’ll lock onto the Male Brainscape and your own thought
rhythms will change. You’ll begin to see the routine events of
your day as not routine, but as opportunities for “coming up
big” and “scoring.”
G. Hence, you will begin “thinking like a man.”
H. Naturally, you do not care a ﬂucking fartdoodle, no that’s not
a typo, what men think. (If you do not recall this principle, see
Week One. See Week One at once!) No, you don’t give one hot
damn. But you now have the power to think like a man thinks,
and this . . .
I. Gives you a diabolical, unsportsmanlike advantage.
Shall we begin? Wait a minute. I don’t have to tell you where to
ﬁnd the times and places for games and matches in the following
categories do I? That’s right. The sports section.
Sports Venues Where Men Always 
Outnumber Women
2. Golf courses
3. Batting cages
4. Handball courts
88
E. Jean Carroll

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
5. Driving ranges
6. Squash courts
7. Gun clubs
8. Hockey rinks
9. Mountain bike trails
10. Rock-climbing establishments
11. Airﬁelds/hang-gliding centers
12. Deep-sea diving resorts
Let me interrupt here, may I? One of my ex-husbands and I va-
cationed on Bonaire—a hot little rock pile off the cost of Venezuela
positively erupting with men, every one of them a diving fanatic. On
the trip down, the plane was jammed with male divers—stockbro-
kers, doctors, lawyers, sales managers, professional football play-
ers, and so on.
Seated in the middle of the cabin were two women in their early
thirties. Neither was particularly pretty, but both possessed an un-
thinkable amount of pizzazz. Twenty-ﬁve minutes out of New York
they were toast of the plane.
They were trotting up and down the aisle, beaming with good
humor, breaking into hearty laughter at the guys’ jokes, introducing
the football players to the cardiologists, ﬁnding everyone irre-
sistible, burbling, erupting in explosions of delighted chortles—
they were completely the ringmistresses of the plane.
Now, I ask you, did either of these females so much as own a
snorkel? No. But on Bonaire they were outnumbered by men twenty
to one, their suitcases were ﬁlled with man-staggering swimsuits
(we stayed at the same place so I had glimpses), and they played
their womanly charms for all they were worth.
We were also on the same return ﬂight, and again they were feted
by the male passengers with everything but a ticker-tape parade. I
89
Mr. Right, Right Now!
www.Ebook777.com

managed to speak with them for a quick moment before we landed.
They hadn’t slept in 30 or 40 hours. Their hair was full of shells, one
had somehow lost her shoes, but they looked like two bolts of light-
ning that had been searching for a place to strike—and had found it.
Where You’ll Meet Flocks and Flocks of Men
Note: Montana’s Madison River in September (i.e., ﬂy-ﬁshing season) is not on this list
because even though men outnumber women ﬁfty to one, I’d rather poke my eyes out
with a bamboo pole than mention it because the happiest years of my life were lived in
the “ﬂy-ﬁshing capital of the world,” viz, Ennis, Montana, and when those East Coast,
Ivy League morons arrived every September, I can say, without exaggeration, I’d never
seen a bigger bunch of rich, line-tangling, trout-torturing assholes in my life.
13. The U.S. Open (both golf and tennis)
14. Baseball spring training
15. The Super Bowl
16. The Masters
17. Formula One races
18. The Final Four
19. The Kentucky Derby
20. The Belmont Stakes
Note from 2003: Spielberg and Capshaw, Parker and Broderick,
Sigourney and Goldie, I could barely see Funny Cide lose the Triple
Crown and my $1,000 through the fricking THRONGS of movie
stars.
Note from 2002: Well . . . yes. I can personally recommend the
Men’s Room in the tony clubhouse section of Belmont Park ﬁfteen
minutes before War Emblem stumbles out of the gate, loses the
Triple Crown, and my $200.
90
E. Jean Carroll

The facts:
There are about 80 emotionally intense women lined up to use
the Ladies’, so I dash into the Men’s. EGADS! The poor buggers are
so dumbstruck when I whirl in—alone, unescorted, wearing my
Vivienne Westwood thoroughbred-blue suit and matching Chuck
Taylor All Stars—nobody moves. It’s a big place and smells like
Secretariat’s fundament. Ten or twelve statues of men are standing
in front of the urinals. Then a rakish Black Jack Bouvier–type
breaks the spell by exclaiming, “GIVE THIS YOUNG LADY A
STALL, GENTLEMEN!”—whereupon the statues start moving and
Jackie’s father commences pounding on the stall doors.
“Thank you, sir,” I say.
He all but drags some poor fellow out of the ﬁrst compartment,
and with a bow lower than a jockey’s Jockeys he holds the door open
for me.
Do you think I can, under these highly adventurous circum-
stances, actually relieve my bladder?
Ha!
However, as I leave (to a gentlemanly ovation!), several fellows
follow me out to the champagne table to ask “which horse I have,”
and so on, and one rogue wants to meet me later in the paddock.
21. The Rose/Orange/Sugar Bowls (or any big-time college
game)
22. The glamour events at the Olympics (or, now that I think 
of it, the nonglam events might be better—cycling, kayak-
ing, etc.)
23. Title ﬁghts
The big title ﬁghts bring hailstorms of men. The preﬁght Show-
time or HBO parties are wall-to-wall movie stars, rap stars, basket-
91
Mr. Right, Right Now!

ball stars, Olympic stars, directors, Oscar winners, etc. If you’re
near ringside, you’ll have Denzel at your left elbow and Jack at your
right. Indeed, the last time I went to a title ﬁght, I could imagine the
headlines:
Journalist Discovered in MGM Grand Hotel Room
Undergarments Cut Off Blood to
Writer’s Cerebral Cortex
Fashionable Elle boxing reporter E. Jean Carroll was found
half-dead late last evening in her hotel room.
Carroll, who traveled from New York to Las Vegas for the
heavyweight championship bout, had been seen early in the
afternoon running around the HBO Arena shrieking excit-
edly, “I’ve never seen so many men in my life! This is a Co-
jónes Carnival! This is a Phallic Field Day!”
Frantic Emergency Medical workers and two Las Vegas
SWAT teams took 47 minutes to extricate Carroll from her
panty girdles.
When reached for comment at the Nevada State Hospital
where she is recovering, Carroll, who was eating a box of
DoveBars, said she wore the girdles “because the sport of
boxing is obviously so weight-crazed.
“Heck,” said Carroll, laughing, “not even a deranged
MODEL could come up with something as wacky as ‘ﬂy-
weight, bantamweight, featherweight, and welterweight.’”
Earlier in the evening police received multiple reports
that Carroll was “bothering” and “pestering” Shaquille
O’Neal at the HBO party. Brad Pitt, Pierce Brosnan, Justin
92
E. Jean Carroll

Timberlake, and Tiger Woods have all denied rumors Carroll
was trying to make out with them.
Off-Beat Sports Events Where You’re Sure to
Meet Even More Fellows, but If You’re a Snotty
Woman with No Sense of Humor, You Won’t
Like Any of Them, So Don’t Waste Your Time
24. Motocross championships
25. The quarter-horse races at Ruidoso, New Mexico
26. The Indianapolis 500
27. Daytona 500
28. Any NASCAR race
I know, I know, I kinda did No. 26, No. 27, and No. 28 but my
iMac has taken on a life of its own (it crashes whenever I write the
words “My pit bull is a living deity”), and I can’t ﬁgure out how to
renumber everything.
29. Professional wrestling matches (best when there’s a big pay-
per-view heavyweight championship on the line)
30. Cheyenne Frontier Days
31. Any small-town rodeo in Colorado, Idaho, Utah, Wyoming,
or Montana
32. The Laconia (New Hampshire) Motorcycle Rally
33. The Sturgis (South Dakota) Rally (500,000 Harley riders)
All women of the highest caliber have a bit of biker babe in
their blood.
93
Mr. Right, Right Now!

34. The Burning Man Festival in the Nevada desert
It’s artistic, it’s spiritual, it’s bizarre (bring your own food, water,
shelter), it’s big (25,000 people), but lately it’s being overrun with
Hollywood types—actors, agents, writers, etc.
Sports Places I Can’t Wedge into the 
Other Sections
35. While you’re waiting for You Know Who in his shining armor
to come along and idolize your ﬁnest attributes, go scout the
tents, racquets, skates, running shoes, croquet sets, basketballs,
and Swiss army knives in an upscale sports equipment store.
An LA acquaintance of mine (a rambunctious and playful cast-
ing director) says she’s been asked out by a cute guy every single
time she shops for camping equipment.
36.
You may feel profound ambivalence about this suggestion,
but if you’re in the right mood, and a championship
series/play-off/wild card game is on TV, don your
trademark—you do have a trademark, Doll, don’t you? An
outﬁt you know you look good in—and go watch it at a
sports bar.
In Hyde Park, New York, just across the road from FDR’s home
there’s a small brewery with a sports bar. I don’t know the name of
this depraved groggery, but I spent one of the most ﬂagrant, electri-
fying hours of my life there.
My friend Marsha Pinkstaff and I had been at FDR’s house
94
E. Jean Carroll

reading his love letters to Eleanor and had just hauled our shanks
onto stools at the end of the bar to watch the Kentucky Derby, when
a burst of ﬁlthy thunder assaulted our ears. We looked out the win-
dow and saw The Menace. A couple of big, evil-looking guys on
monster Harleys. Now, Marsha Pinkstaff is, without question, the
biggest snob in New York. She is beautiful, imperious, and is very,
very, very cruel to men.
At the sight of the outlaws, she turned her chin up in the air and
went back to watching Jim McKay and Charlsie Canty doing the
prerace buildup on the monitor above the bar. But suddenly there
he was: Manly Man. (Marsha later called his abrupt appearance in
the doorway “the entrance of the Blue-Collar Machismo.”)
Actually both motorcycle rogues were quite handsome, but
Marsha’s man (their attraction was so instantaneous, he immediately
became “Marsha’s Man”) was extraordinary. Tan, startling blue
eyes, a powerful build soooo NOT chiseled in the gym, extremely
dramatic hands, like God’s own ﬁngers on the Sistine Chapel where
He’s making the big mistake of creating Adam ﬁrst. In fact, I whis-
pered to Marsha, “I’ll bet he’s an artist.” She didn’t hear me. His
macho beauty had annihilated her hearing.
The two men sat down directly opposite us, about 18 feet away,
exactly under the television in Marsha’s line of sight.
The race started.
Everybody in the bar was glued to the various screens and start-
ing to yell, but Marsha never took her eyes off her outlaw’s face. Nor
did he shift his gaze from her. The race was a stunner, and the
shouting and whooping and stamping and pounding as War Emblem
streaked to the head of the ﬁeld was deafening. (Yes, the same horse
from the Belmont—the Derby is the ﬁrst leg of the Triple Crown.)
But Marsha’s Man never moved. He held a glass of brandy and
lasered his eyes into hers. The air between them vibrated. Miss
95
Mr. Right, Right Now!

Marsha Pinkstaff was his goddess. Miss Marsha Pinkstaff was his
nymph. Miss Marsha Pinkstaff was adored. Miss Marsha Pinkstaff
was within one bat of an eyelash from being thrown on the ﬂoor and
snogged and boffed till her brains fell out.
After the race was over, I got so excited watching Marsha’s Man
looking at her, I forgot I’d been a vegetarian for the last 22 years and
ordered a bloody cheeseburger! Anyway, by this time, some local tal-
ent was hitting on “my” outlaw, so I had nothing to do with myself.
And the end of this little love story?
“I’m going over there,” I said.
“No!” said Marsha.
“I want to ask if he’s a famous sculptor.”
“No!”
“I’m going.”
“Please don’t.”
“Yes.”
“No.”
“I’m going.”
“You’re not going.”
“I’m just going to ask if he’s the famous Hyde Park sculptor.”
“Sit down!”
In the end she forbade me. She’s my best friend. I did as she
asked. I’ve regretted it ever since. The reason she didn’t want me to
go was so stupid! So wimpy. So cluckish. She was wearing lightly
tinted sunglasses because her right (or left) eye was tearing a little
from an allergy and she didn’t feel she looked her best. That was the
reason. Now, Marsha Pinkstaff not looking her best is about twelve
times better-looking than anybody else (indeed, sometime in the last
century, after bribing several judges, the bat-lashing Butler Univer-
sity sophomore beat me for the title of Miss Indiana). Stupid. Stupid.
Stupid.
96
E. Jean Carroll

To this day, we argue about “Marsha’s Man”—me maintaining I
should have stepped in and introduced them, thereby forcing her to
“seize the moment”; and Marsha contending that it was “a perfect
moment unspoiled.”
“You don’t fool around with perfect moments,” she says. “Now
he can live forever in my fantasies.”
“On the other hand,” I always say, with a snort, “you could be
living with him forever.”
Sports Strategies That Will Bring 
You Personal Triumph as Well as a 
Multitude of Admirers
37. Look here, Doll, you want a madcap season? Join your com-
pany’s (or your church’s or neighborhood saloon’s) mixed
softball (volleyball, basketball, bowling) league. 100% fun
guaranteed, plus beers afterward with the scoundrels and
aces of the opposing team.
38. Reserve a tennis court at your local park for this Sunday. Ar-
rive without a partner. There will be several guys (who, natu-
rally, didn’t sign up) waiting for a court. (This is particularly
true for New York’s Central Park.) Or appear at your sched-
uled time with a girlfriend and suggest mixed doubles with
the lads-in-waiting.
39. Play golf, for godsakes! Handball! Racquetball! Take up
skeet shooting! Parachuting! Hang gliding! Mountain bik-
ing! Bull riding! Rock climbing! Scuba diving! Enough ex-
clamation points! Criminey!
97
Mr. Right, Right Now!

40. Now, I know you’re a big-time, big-money career woman, but
deep inside you have a soul, and your soul is a little girl who
wants to play badminton. Set up a net with your girlfriends
in the park near the softball ﬁelds/basketball/tennis courts.
(A badminton set complete with net, shuttlecocks, and four
rackets runs about $40 at Target.) Open your cooler. It is full
of ice and Sam Adams. Wear shorts. Start playing. Soon fel-
lows will be begging to join.
(I’ve caught ﬂack for that suggestion, but . . . come on. Your
future can only be intriguing if you have the guts to be intrigu-
ing. And if that means batting around a birdie and striking a
blow against sitting at home, then all right.)
41. Yacht clubs/marinas/sailing clubs—if you don’t know any-
one who owns a boat, call up/drop by and offer to help crew.
42. Aspen. Vail. December. Rich assholes in fur coats. Crested
Butte, Tahoe, Alta, Park City, Telluride—January. Febru-
ary. March. Cowboys and cool guys in such high concentra-
tions as to become actually lethal.
43. Frisbee. Now, Sweetie, please. If you don’t run to the park
this very moment and hit a man in the back of the head with
your dog’s Frisbee, I’m going to refuse to speak to you.
44. If you are a mother with young children, volunteer to help at
swim meets, soccer games, Little League, etc. These are prime
places to meet single fathers (and women who know single
fathers).
My neighbor Andrea, a divorced therapist with two little kids,
was introduced to a lovely fellow by a woman she met at her child’s
98
E. Jean Carroll

gymnastics class a couple of weeks ago; and yesterday Andrea came
screeching to a skidding halt in front of my cottage, leaned out her
Jeep window, and yelled for me to come with her to look at wedding
dresses, swear to God.
45. Roller-skate to work.
46. Ditto scooter.
47. Ditto moped.
48. Ditto bike.
(It’s impossible for chaps to succumb to your manifold charms
unless they see you. No.’s 45, 46, 47, and 48 put you outside. Plus,
these modes of transport have an exhilarating, purifying effect and
you will arrive at work with fresh ideas.)
49.
Forget polo. Too many high-grade bitches. Of course, if you,
yourself, are a high-grade bitch . . . enjoy!
50.
You’re in the park, right? You’re at the ﬁeld, the grounds, the
court, correct? Upon the conclusion of the rugby match
(cricket, lacrosse, soccer), stroll up to the nerviest, cunningest
player, smile, and hand him a cold beer from your bag.
The Street
Ok. Ok. I take that back about the Internet and sports events being
the best places to meet the male beast (did I say that, or was I just
thinking it?). The street is a damned delightful place too. This is the
one where you’re walking down to the corner to pick up The Econo-
mist, and you grab that old whore Fate by the ankle bracelet and
vow, “By God, from this moment on, I’m cutting myself a swath!”
99
Mr. Right, Right Now!

In other words, you’re going to do what Marsha Pinkstaff did
not do:
51.
Seize the moment!
Moments occur as you run around living your life. Viz, on the
walk to Wing Sun’s Dry Cleaners on South Main, when you see a
man and there’s a ﬂash of recognition . . . you’ve never laid eyes on
him before, but you seem to know each other 5 . . . instead of letting
him pass, instead of glancing down at the pavement, instead of
years from now looking back on your life and wondering why you
never found your “true love,” instead, instead, instead . . . look him
in the eye and smile.
It may turn out to be nothing but a three-second saucy intrigue,
but why should your future existence be at the mercy of not giving in
to an impulse?
Friends
52. Work the phones. Call everyone you know and, in the spirit of
100% (endearing) candor, ask them to ﬁx you up.
53. You’ve heard all the ladies’ mag stuff about giving parties
and asking your friends to bring eligible men. Uh-unh. You
should hold a regular poker night with the boys.
100
E. Jean Carroll
5. I can’t prove it, but I think your DNA is reading his DNA, and the sudden jolt
you feel is Ma Nature telling you, WHOA!

54. Pull a Peggy Siegal. The slender, dark-haired Manhattan
public relations maven (with an acclaimed wardrobe) told
her friends she’d give a new Mercedes-Benz to the ﬁrst person
to ﬁnd her a man.
Not a bad idea. But the smarter move would have been to offer a
Mercedes to anyone who’d keep men AWAY from her. It would have
made Peggy irresistible.6
Speaking of Which . . .
55. If you live in a city of over 200,000 and can afford $2,000 a
month, hire a PR agent. He/she will arrange for you to be in-
vited to the parties, introduce you to posh people, get your
name in the papers, turn you into a socially huge phenomenon
with appropriate hangers-on, and generally push you over
the edge so every man in town sees you “properly ampliﬁed.”
Work
56. I’ve said it a thousand times. One of the main reasons for go-
ing to work is to get involved with your co-workers. Where
else are attractive persons of all ages and both sexes thrown
together in seductive struggles for money and power two
thousand hours a year? What other locale allows you daily,
101
Mr. Right, Right Now!
6. She is still single.

repeated, incessant, perpetual chances to fall in love and get
paid for it?
The Gym
57. Best of Irish luck diverting the attention of anybody in the
forbiddingly crowded and sweaty Monday/Tuesday-night time
frames. Instead, work out on Friday and Saturday nights.
You’ll be glowing when you meet friends at ten-thirty at Balt-
hazar.
My friend Helen Marien, the New York handbag designer, is a
former personal trainer and she says:
“I can tell you the health club is an excellent place to ﬁnd a
man. BUT a woman should not go on overcrowded Monday nights
when everyone goes (guilt-ridden after weekends), nor Tuesday.
Wednesday and especially Thursday and Friday nights are the best.
That’s when the only members who come in are the committed ones
(to their health anyway). They are earnest, physically ﬁt men.
Everyone else is out doing the club scene—including all the young
women!”
Dogs
58. Adopt a dog from the ASPCA, Petﬁnders.com, or your local
shelter. Walk the dog four times a day, and your chances for
a romantic encounter shoot up to 28 times a week. Twenty-
eight chances to meet someone divine! Now. You are a ca-
102
E. Jean Carroll

reer woman? You do not possess a grotesque amount of time
to “beat the bushes” for a man? A dog is the solution.
And if you’re not walking that dog past the Porsche dealerships,
basketball courts, medical centers, and ﬁre stations, I’m going to
give you a ﬂea bath.
As a matter of fact, the other night I was driving up Riverside
Drive in New York and kept seeing men—some of them damn good-
looking—with dogs. I was so struck, I stopped and looked at my
watch. Eleven. Men, straight men, with dogs were bloody EVERY-
WHERE between 73rd and 110th. Riverside Park looked like the
Canine Unit of the U.S. army. And not a female in sight. (My guess
is women don’t want to walk in the park at night.)
The editor of this ﬁne book, Mr. David Hirshey, has Fred, a gi-
gantic imbecile of a rescued retriever, the color of Cheez Doodles,
who shoves (shoves!) David out of bed every morning at 6 A.M. so he
can sleep with Miss S. Squire, David’s shapely wife.
Now, I posit that a woman, even a small woman, even a very
small woman, even half an Olsen twin, could walk naked through
Riverside Park at night with Fred and not only not be hassled . . . but
would meet some lovely, honest, nonmanipulative men—nonmanip-
ulative because these are men walking their dogs instead of sitting in
a bar telling lies to women.
Get a dog! You’ll enjoy sleeping with the only creature on earth
who will love you more than it loves itself.
Art
59. You know this: gallery openings, estate sales, art museums,
blah, blah, blah. Go, but please, none of your I’m-so-arty-I-
103
Mr. Right, Right Now!

can-only-wear-black, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. The idea is
to look like a brilliant artwork, not a worn-out stub of charcoal.
60. Set up your easel in the park, even if you can paint only ab-
stract smudges. Inspire curiosity.
61. Poetry readings in cafés are excellent, particularly if you are
the poet.
My extremely happily married friend, the poet Marilyn Johnson,
who met her husband, Rob Fleder, when they were both editors at
Esquire, wears a see-through Cosmic Pink shirt at her readings.
62. Poetry slams are good places to meet mercurial, heart-ripe
young Chris Carrabba types.
63. Don’t forget ﬁlm festivals.
Music
64. The other day on The Early Show on CBS Bonnie Raitt was
asked why she had taken up guitar. Her answer: “Because it was
a cool way to meet guys.” The National Guitar Workshop (which
has sites all over the country) holds seminars for jazz, pop, clas-
sical guitarists, etc. I’ve never been, but I hear it’s 90% men.
65. If you have a dress . . . the opening night of opera season.
(You will meet a nice gay man and HE will ﬁx you up with
his straight friends.)
66. Any concert in the park. Many music lovers pack complicated
ﬁve-course meals into wicker receptacles replete with the droll
104
E. Jean Carroll

linens they’ve brought back from Aix-en-Provence. You bring
Budweiser and hot dogs. Men of Taste will run from all direc-
tions and fall upon your basket like starving badgers.
67. Form your own band. Start playing clubs. Why not? Can’t
the hopes of a generation surge through YOU as well as
through Eve’s life buoy–sized buttocks?
68. Music festivals. My friend, Sarah Lazin, the literary agent,
says, “The New Orleans JazzFest is huge and cruisy. There are
forty thousand to seventy thousand people who go on any given
day, and many, many of them are single. Also there are hunky-
looking guys with women who could use immediate makeovers,
but that’s another book—shows you don’t have to be beautiful.
And if you hang out where the guys are (i.e., the Blues Tent), it’s
impossible NOT to meet a man. There are other music festivals
across the U.S., and also internationally, but JazzFest is the
daddy of them all—two four-day weekends of great music on
the racetrack, with the intervening week ﬁlled with music in all
the fabled legendary clubs of New Orleans.”
Churches, Synagogues, Professional
Organizations, Causes—Especially Animal
Rights, Save-the-Jungle/River/Mountain,
Political Campaigns, Yadda, Yadda, Yadda
69. All come highly recommended by my friends, and I can
vouch for the best-looking men in Montana working for the
Nature Conservancy, Sierra Club, etc., etc. As for church . . .
the very lovely Sarah Lazin (again) says, “I’m sure there are
105
Mr. Right, Right Now!

ways of meeting guys all over the U.S. no matter what your
religion, but in New York City, Friday-night Shabbat services
at B’nai Jeshurun are known as the singles services and sev-
eral thousand people cram into the church each week. (It has
to be held at a church, since the synagogue is too small to ﬁt
everyone in!)”
70. Join your city’s Junior League. Terribly snotty, but these
women do some decent charity work, they’ve opened up to be-
come more inclusive, and they know all the rich eligible men.
Drinking, Smoking, Eating
71. Met my ﬁrst husband, Steve, at a nightclub in Chicago. (Actu-
ally, we had gone to school together, and he’s a great, funny,
magnetic guy and is now editor in chief of his own imprint at
National Geographic.) Met my second husband, John, the
aforementioned anchorman, at Elaine’s in New York.
72. Meeting friends for dinner at a prestige restaurant is expen-
sive, but Ok. Meeting friends at the last minute for interest-
ing $12 litchi martinis at seven-thirty at the bar in Citarella
is better than Ok. It’s sexy, and if you order ﬁve baskets of
french fries, it’s dinner with a delicious lack of stress. Thank
you, George Bush. Your recession has created a popular new
way to meet men—an evening out over cocktails at the bars
and lounges of hip restaurants.
73. Tasting parties sponsored by wine shops and vineyards can
turn out to be more amusing than the Lucy grape-stomping
scene.
106
E. Jean Carroll

NOTE: Now that smoking is banned everywhere but your own
personal bathroom, the sidewalks in front of elite bars and restau-
rants are generating wonderfully ditzy preemptive-strike-type Meet-
Cutes.
Cars
74. The single most vital material possession of a Man Catcher
(after a thrilling wardrobe) is a sweet ride. I’ll brook no ar-
gument about this. The car has always been the ultimate
American dream machine—it’s an image, a fantasy, an
identity. I don’t need to go into how cars are a really, really
giant deal with men, now do I? Buy a classic car and drive
it. By classic I mean anything older than 1984 or less than
$900. The chaps cannot keep their hands off an old ’67
Dodge Cornet. (Too bad they don’t feel the same about old
women.)
A ’66, butter-yellow Cadillac convertible sits in yours truly’s
driveway because yours truly was absolutely forced to stop driving it
in Manhattan because guys would ﬂing themselves on the hood at
stoplights and wish to engage yours truly in long conversations
about “What year is this beauty?” and so on. Yours truly also must
invest about $12,000 to get said Caddy out of said driveway after
sitting so long.
75. Car shows are good. So are boat shows, come to think of it.
107
Mr. Right, Right Now!

Mano a Mano
76. Cigar bars. Dress: unsettling. Open-toed, open-heeled, open-
arched shoes tied on with black ribbons. Short cocktail frock.
Awed crowds will form.
77. Pool halls
Dress: as above.
78. Any army post, air force, marine, or navy base
After nine weeks following young Jersey girl Tonya Bey through
basic training for CBS at Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri, I highly (oh,
quite, quite highly) recommend army posts.
NOTE: Don’t worry about getting on the post—the clubs,
restaurants, and sports bars just outside the gates are swarming with
sergeant majors, lieutenants, captains, coloniels.
The Man Trip
79. Grab a friend, load up the car, roll back the roof, throw a kiss
to the local lads, and hit every burg between Clarence, New
York, and Maxwell, California, named after a man . . . or if
you prefer . . . every town between Craig, Colorado, and
Pierre, South Dakota . . . or between Stevens Point, Wiscon-
sin, and Vernon, Texas, etc. (Well, you can’t very well visit
every town named after a man—there are at least 200 places
named after former presidents alone.)
108
E. Jean Carroll

If you do it right and stop by the baseball game in Gary, Indiana,
and the Firemen’s Breakfast in Hannibal, Missouri, you won’t even
make it to wherever you were heading. You’ll be engaged to three
different men before you hit Cecil, Pennsylvania.
Guys You Already Know and Wish to Turn 
into Your Own Personal Male Concubines
80. If there’s a man of your acquaintance who gives you a sharp
ping of pleasure every time you see him (but you sort of re-
main anonymous or invisible to him), then “run into” the un-
suspecting bugger at the next Cubs game. Send an amorous
shock down his spine by not appearing as he’s accustomed to
seeing you appear. Viz, if he always sees you in tight, black
bull-ﬁghting pants, gauze blouse, and chiffon Kangol cap,
then show up at Wrigley Field in a suit so prim and civilized,
the umpire stops the inning and orders both teams to bow in
your direction.
That will stir things up. And when things are stirred up? A
Man Catcher succeeds.
Ideas/Places I Didn’t Think of, 
Though Luckily My Girlfriends Did
81. The Appalachian Mountain Club
Christy Marshuetz: The AMC has a chapter in most
states, and the men are yummy! Fit, outdoorsy types. I’m
a 31-year-old assistant professor at Yale, and pitifully
109
Mr. Right, Right Now!

still single, so maybe you should take this suggestion
with a grain of salt.
Kara DiCamillo (Kara is a self-employed public rela-
tions professional): I’m a member of the Connecticut
chapter. I’ve been on several hikes (there’s one just about
every weekend all year round), and they also have bike
rides, kayaking, etc. It’s a great place to meet men because
you already share a common interest. The best thing
about going on these social hikes, etc., is that everyone
WANTS to be there and everyone is so friendly!
82. Habitat for Humanity
Brenda Ellis (Brenda owns a business that provides
sentencing support to criminal defense attorneys. She
enthusiastically recommends scuba diving and under-
water photography and adds the following): Certain vol-
unteer efforts lead to meeting men. Politics, especially
fund-raising, but not party-planning. And Habitat for
Humanity is great, or Christmas in July, or any short-
term construction project.
83. Geek meets
Amyjane Schrader (Amyjane is a programmer for Mi-
crosoft, which is how she discovered “the untapped sea of
geeky boys”): Quake parties, software releases, hardware
swap meets, openings of electronic stores. Many beneﬁts!
A. Not too many women there—if any (besides you).
B. There’s a pretty good chance the men will be intelli-
gent.
C. Since you’re there, they’ll suspect you’re smart too.
110
E. Jean Carroll

D. Geeky guys don’t grow up with women throwing them-
selves at them—this makes them respectful and honest.
E. Most have great jobs AND they are loaded.
84. The Rainy Day Umbrella Maneuver
Marian Pereira (a corporate marketer who likes poetry
slams—Marian is the one who vouched for #66—and
Flemish art): When there’s a downpour, ﬁnd a handsome
guy with a large umbrella, scoop in under it, and say,
“I’m going a few blocks, can you give me a ride?” I’ve
done it and it works.
85. Home Depot
Ms. Sterling Odom (currently studying for her MBA at
Carnegie Mellon; also volunteers as a mentor to female
inmates in prison and says prison is NOT a place to
meet men): Any big home-improvement store is good.
My favorite strategy is to ask a perfect, broad-shouldered
male where the “naval jelly” is. He’s always so impressed
that I know this product is for rust removal and not an
accessory to foreplay.
86. Airports
Jennifer Wills (a buyer for a department store): I’ve met
two of my past boyfriends while waiting to catch a ﬂight;
and I met my current beau and Love of My Life at the
baggage terminal in a foreign airport.
87. Sign-up boards in parks
Kate Brame (a strategy—you can say that again!—ana-
lyst for an investment bank): Central Park has a board
111
Mr. Right, Right Now!

full of names of people who are looking for tennis partners.
The names are color-coded by beginner/intermediate/
advanced. All you have to do is decide which category
you fall into and write down the names/numbers (prefer-
ably those of the opposite sex), call them, and see if
they’d like to play!
(Yes, this was mentioned earlier, but I thought it was so charm-
ing, I wanted to note it again.)
88. Join AA
Candice (Candice recently bid melodious adieu to Sili-
con Valley and now lives on the East Coast): I’ve gotten
on the sober track and have noticed some interesting
men at the gatherings. I look forward to meeting some-
one with the same mind-set as mine. It’s a different tack,
but as much as I want to meet a great guy, I want some-
one nice and lasting. Not ﬂashy/ﬂash in the pan.
By the way, my friend just met the best guy in her
new church group. She joined with strictly spiritual in-
tentions, but lucky her! She’s landed a very sweet guy in
the process.
89. Get yourself on the board of an organization
Marilyn Johnson the poet (again): I know a widower of
some means who met his second wife serving on a hospi-
tal board. My Writer’s Center Board has an interesting
mix of married and the newly divorced. Plus, usually if
you serve on a board, you’re rich.
112
E. Jean Carroll

90. Always talk to strangers on the train
Amy Knoll: My dear friend, let’s call her “K,” met her
man on the PATH train from Jersey City to New York. He
was with a group of young men and kept looking at K
and smiling a sad, wan smile. K was intrigued.
Soon he sidled over to her somewhat shakily, but still
smiling. The train was swaying from side to side. He
stumbled and sat down next to her. After initial pleas-
antries, K inquired where the man was going.
“Going out,” he said.
He was clearly drunk. His breath smelled of alcohol
even though it was barely past noon on a Saturday.
“Well,” K ventured, “are you really sure that’s a good
idea? It seems you’ve had quite a good time already.”
“Yes,” he said, “I must go out. I’m really depressed.”
K peered at him sternly over her Jackie O dark
glasses, looking straight into his eyes.
“Why are you so depressed?”
“Well,” he said, “my dad has cancer, my mom died,
my brother died, and my other brother’s an asshole.”
Some pickup line.
When the train came to a stop, the young man’s
friends got up to leave and held the door for him. “Come
on! This is our stop!”
“But I’m trying to talk to the pretty lady,” he slurred.
So K, ever the efﬁcient corporate lawyer, handed him
her business card. “What the hell?” she thought. “This
guy will never call anyway.”
But he did. He called the next day completely em-
113
Mr. Right, Right Now!

barrassed and took her out to dinner. He was a nice man,
a contractor who was nursing his sick father and kept a
house in the country. They were married the next year
and are now awaiting a baby boy.
91. Bagel places at 8 A.M. on any random Sunday
Christina Consolé (Christina adores everything French
and is, of course, in fashion): They come in to get their
pregolf fare, dahlink! I’ve met a few charmers this way.
92. Karaoke bars
Francis Baker: I’m no songbird (I work in investments!),
but I was having a blast singing a Madonna tune. A re-
ally wonderful guy came up to me and complimented my
performance. We ended up having a very nice relation-
ship.
93. The software, science ﬁction, and business sections of
bookstores
Kim Watts: These are hotbeds. I know, I’m an executive
editor of a national magazine. I’ve spotted cuties but,
alas, never knew how to approach or let myself be ap-
proached.
94. Never judge a book by its etc., etc.
Kimberly Kirkendall (owner of a management consult-
ing ﬁrm): While parking my car at a restaurant, the
valet starting talking to me. He wouldn’t give up! Even
when a couple of handsome lawyers joined me. While we
were waiting for our table a friend of mine had a per-
114
E. Jean Carroll

sonal emergency, and I had to rush out. When the valet
handed me the keys, I put my business card in his pocket
(but no tip). He was handsome, direct, and he called the
next morning. Turns out he owns the valet business and
was ﬁlling in for someone. He’s national sales manager
for a biotech ﬁrm. We’ve dated for almost a year.
95. Cooking class
Damiana Vance (pursuing a culinary arts career): My
latest interest is a man who helped rescue my sheet pan
of biscotti from crashing to the ﬂoor in pastry class.
We’ve only been on one date so far, so I’m not picking out
china. But we’ve set our second date for this coming
weekend. Crossed ﬁngers!
96. Acts of God
Kristi Walker (Kristi is vice president of client services
for a software company; and as her personal trainer is
staying for a couple of weeks in her guest room, Kristi
is being forced to sneak pizza): I was living in San
Francisco when the ’89 earthquake hit. I was home
alone watching the World Series. My area was hit partic-
ularly hard. I ran outside to see if I could help and
started talking to this guy. Turns out he lived in Berkeley
and had no way of getting home. After determining he
was “normal,” I invited him over. We ended up playing
Trivial Pursuit by candlelight. He then had to leave to
go to his hospital. (He was a doctor.)
I didn’t think I’d see him again. It was such a horri-
ble event that it seemed inappropriate to even think of a
115
Mr. Right, Right Now!

“date.” But he showed up on my doorstep the next day
with champagne and roses! We dated for two years and
are still great friends.
97. Buy him a martini
Robynn Ferguson (a surgical nurse): When you’re
enjoying a happy hour cocktail, and there’s a gorgeous
guy at the end of the bar loosening his tie, send him a
drink via the bartender.
98. Feed your local engine company
Yinka Abdurrahman (Yinka is an “ex-geek” who now
makes and markets skin creams . . . “Moisturizer hand-
made from scratch; gnarly skin is never in”): Show up
with a basket of cookies/goodies for your neighborhood
ﬁre department.
99. Medical center cafeteria
Cindy Diakow (an event planner): Lots of hotties in sur-
gical. Made some great friends.
100. Let your friend ﬁnd you Mr. Dazzling
Jennifer Williamson (just graduated from law school—
“Hopefully I’ll be a lawyer when bar exam results come
out!”): Jessica, my friend, has this 10-year habit of ﬁnd-
ing me men by identifying the best-looking one around
and literally calling them over—as in, “Hey, you coming
out of the Porta Potti!” She then proceeds to introduce me
to him. It’s always embarrassing but effective. I’ve met sev-
eral boyfriends this way! Her success rate is 100%!
The last occasion was at a wine-and-polo weekend.
116
E. Jean Carroll

The guy was a sales executive and former model named
Bill. He was HOT. He ended up ditching his friends and
hanging out with us. He stayed with me in my hotel that
night and we went to the polo match the next day. As it
turned out, I lost my plane ticket—not on purpose, I
swear—so we spent not only my remaining time to-
gether, but an entire week!
Then he visited me in San Diego two weeks later. I
returned to the East Coast to go to his sister’s wedding
two weeks after that and met his family. We dated seri-
ously for two years!
101. When you got it, ﬂaunt it
Marianne Segashes (a computer consultant who loves
France, photography, champagne, ﬁve-star hotels, and
300 thread counts): You know how you always feel like a
million bucks after you get your hair cut and styled and
everyone stares at you because you’re feeling beautiful
“within”?
I make sure I have a few hours free after I get my
hair done to go out and around. I meet men everywhere.
Mostly I’ve noticed that men react to what I’m feeling in-
side. If I’m feeling beautiful and sexy, that’s what I ex-
ude. So it’s not the locale, it’s what’s going on inside me.
I’m part French, so I never go out as a frump because I
know the man of my dreams can be ANYWHERE, even
at the gas station.
102. Admire his car
Jennifer Paquette (writer): This may come across as a
bit egotistical, but I have absolutely no problem meeting
117
Mr. Right, Right Now!

men. I met my current “on and off” at the Beverly Con-
nection parking garage. I was eyeing his Aston.
103. Take up home brewing
Julianne Gebhard (Julianne is senior application devel-
oper for an e-commerce site; she volunteers as a crisis
counselor for rape victims): It helps if you actually like
beer. The home-brew supply places are crawling with
men, as are the beer fests. These are connoisseurs, not a
bunch of drunk frat boys throwing up around a keg. I’m
always surprised to be one of the few women at these
events. And if you don’t like beer, it could be because you
haven’t tried all the different varieties.
104. Buy two tickets to the theater, the symphony, the museum
Julianne (again): I’m a single woman and make a fair
amount of money. I often ﬁnd there’s a show I’d like to
see, but don’t always have a date. I’ve started purchasing
two tickets to whatever I want to go to, and then when I
meet some interesting man, I invite him along.
Because I do volunteer counseling of rape victims in
the ER, I get mounds and mounds of invitations to charity
events and I always meet someone interesting. Or some-
times I just go with girlfriends—especially those who try to
make ends meet on the paltry amount of money that’s paid
to teachers and social workers, and afterward we go to
some downtown martini bar in our little black dresses.
105. Ski lifts
Ignacia de Pano (Ignacia is a lawyer from Barcelona
who sent this note from a beautiful little Mediterranean
118
E. Jean Carroll

village by the sea): A wonderful place to meet men is
waiting at a ski lift. The more difﬁcult the slope, the bet-
ter. The line is always full of nice-looking men and very
few women. Then you take the tele-chair together, and
while you’re in the air, you get to know each other. He
can’t go away!
106. Seduce a guy at work
Martha (does not wish her last name used because she
works with a heart-lung machine [keeps people alive
during bypass surgery] company and advises everyone
to “have no heart attacks anytime soon please, because
there are lots of ‘quality’ issues”): I’d been working for
about nine months with FH (Future Husband). We’d
been pals, going out in groups and hanging around. I
ﬁxed him up with a few single women and he listened to
me whine about the three-month relationships I seemed
to be the master of.
One night a bunch of us went out to a bar/pool hall in
downtown Denver, very upscale and yuppie—I’d recently
been dumped, and here I was again, talking to morons in
a bar that I was way too old to be in. So this one fellow is
chewing my ear off about how great he is, while I’m fran-
tically gulping down my chardonnay, and I see FH across
the room looking as miserable as I was feeling. I start
jumping up and down, waving to get his attention, any-
thing to get away from Moron Man Who Loves Himself
Too Much, and FH comes over. Perfect excuse to excuse
myself. I asked him if there was any chance he was ready
to leave, and he said he was so ready to leave!
So I suggest we go for a swim at my place. When we
119
Mr. Right, Right Now!

get there, I slip on my suit and off we go to climb over the
fence (avec more alcohol! Quelle horreur!). I jump in the
pool and watch FH strip down to his white Calvin Klein
boy’s briefs—hang on, need to collect my thoughts after
remembering that one—cyclist body and all—okay, I’m
back.
As we’re swimming around and having fun, for the
life of me I can’t ﬁgure out why he isn’t trying to kiss me.
So I ask him, “Mind if I kiss you just once?” FH nods the
afﬁrmative and I kiss him. After a marathon of kissing,
absolutely no touching, he’s still hanging around and
says to me, “Well I can’t wait forever to catch you between
boyfriends.” After that, he never went home. Last Monday
was our two-year celebration of that evening, and in less
than two months we’re getting married!
107. The Seattle Speedway
Cathy Robertson: I have an idea for meeting men and it
had never occurred to me before even though it’s so to-
tally obvious. I am married, though not blind, and I
work for an tax and accounting ﬁrm in Washington
State. I took my ﬁrst trip to SIS (Seattle International
Speedway) for some big race with a bunch of famous
drivers in it. I am telling you, I was totally and com-
pletely surrounded by men men men. Everywhere I
turned there was a good-looking guy within reach, and I
made a mental vow to take my best single friend there
next time she visits. The best thing about it was that be-
sides the fact that there were so many good-looking guys
around, they were all acting like themselves, in an area
that they felt comfortable in, and so you could easily see
120
E. Jean Carroll

what type of person they were. If I’d been single, I
would’ve jumped at the chance to walk right up to one of
those hunks, summon interest in the sport, and ask ques-
tions. So much easier than meeting some dork in a bar!
(NOTE: We will not hear about car racing ever,
ever again in M.R.R.N. So, take a last look at Miss
Cathy’s idea now.)
108. Sit on the dock of the marina
Diana Richards (a sales professional, lives in Southern
California): The best place to meet men, California style,
is to go where they keep their boats—the marinas. Also
Landmark Meetings. Has this hit the East Coast yet? It’s
the new version of est for those touchy-feely men.
109. Internet parties
Jen Diebel (starting an on-line networking business
called NetWorkNetPlay): I was single until I was 32, so I
tried all the ways to meet men—church, expensive
matchmaking services, blind dates, personal ads, teleper-
sonals, hanging out at the apartment pool, friends’ par-
ties, etc. Some worked, some did not, mostly not.
Then I tried the Internet. Like most single girls I had
a list of “criteria” that men needed to meet in order to
even be considered. In my selections, I always seemed to
end up with very similar people—engineers, account-
ants, or other similar straightforward, safe, secure-type
men. They were all nice enough but not necessarily
121
Mr. Right, Right Now!

right. Along the way I weeded out those who didn’t seem
to be what I was looking for.
As it turns out, my current husband (of three years)
was one of those “deletes.” In fact, I “deleted” him four
or ﬁve times. My reasons: he was too young (eight years
my junior to be exact—three years pushed the envelope
for me), he didn’t have a picture, and he just didn’t get
into enough detail in his proﬁle.
Fast-forward past the “deletes” to a local Internet
party, and for the ﬁrst time I met THUMPER101 (aka
Mike, my husband). He was there with a date (who
drank too much and basically passed out). He was quite
charming, and although I was 100% sure I’d never date
him, I enjoyed talking to him, and he made me laugh.
Somehow at the end of the evening he ended up with my
number. He called, e-mailed me often, and over a short
time, he quietly won over my heart. I still to this day
don’t know what happened. We’ve been together ever
since (four years) and will be married three years this
November.
110. Ask for the middle seat
Holly Grubs (an attorney who volunteers for the home-
less): I always opt for the middle seat on an airplane. I
met a great guy this way. We had a distraction-free chat
for the entire trip and since then have dated when we’re
in the same place/same time. Unfortunately our sched-
ules and locations have not allowed much more . . . yet.
Betsy Odita (an investment adviser): I was heading
with some friends to the JazzFestival and was late
122
E. Jean Carroll

boarding, so my friends were already ensconced. I was
assigned a middle seat, but sat in the window seat. A
man (we’d hit it off when we conversed brieﬂy before
boarding) followed me onto the plane and came to-
wards my row. I assumed I was in his window seat and
moved to the center seat. He took the window; we con-
versed for the entire two-hour ﬂight and made plans to
meet up again in New Orleans.
We’ve been together ever since. He moved from
Chicago to New York City to be with me. We plan to be
married next May.
111. The beach
April Martin (an ex-ballerina, ﬂamenco dancer, a
shoe/clotheshorse “with a third-degree black belt in
shopping,” April is a program manager at Sun Mi-
crosystems): Hit the waves. The beach. It’s a wonderful
thing with or without men. I happen to live a ﬁve-minute
bike ride away, so I’m lucky. When the sea is really brew-
ing, I can hear her waves crashing and she lulls me to
sleep.
I’ve been “approached,” shall we say, at the beach
while sunning and reading, but I normally just politely
“shoo” the ones who are trolling. What can I say? I’m a
tough nut to crack, and those surfer types always seem a
bit sophomoric.
However, one time I was running, at sunset. An at-
tractive specimen came towards me on his run and
smiled. I waved back (it’s the polite thing to do round
these parts), and within 10 minutes I could hear steps
padding, plodding, and thudding behind me.
123
Mr. Right, Right Now!

I whipped my head around to make sure the plodder
behind me didn’t have a blunt object and saw that it
was, in fact, smiley-pants. I kept running until I had no
more beach left (!!) to run on and had to turn around.
As I did, he smiled again and said, “Aren’t you ever go-
ing to stop running so I can ask you out?”
The poor thing was knackered and looked as if he
might drop! But I had to decline. You see, I’ve been spo-
ken for (no, not married) and am one of those faithful
types. He was darling and I just might have taken him
up on his offer if . . .
There’s so much more, but I have a slab of fresh tuna
waiting for me to sear it.
112. Know how to handle your stick
Stephanie McDonald (a medical-ofﬁce manager who’s
currently applying for Baylor College of Medicine’s
egg-donor program because she’d “like to help an in-
fertile couple achieve their dream”): In my personal
experience, pool halls are the best place—and the high-
testosterone guys who inhabit these places are always
impressed with a woman who can handle her stick.
(NOTE: You may now bid melodious adieu to the
pool hall idea.)
113. Go for the shy ones at parties
Christie Haney (a single mother and a Ph.D. candidate
in international peace and conﬂict resolution, Christie
works construction during the summer and rock climbs):
124
E. Jean Carroll

One of the best ways to meet men is to single out the ones
who hang near the outskirts of a party or club. They are
the shy ones, instead of the really boisterous ones I usu-
ally go for. The quiet fellows are just as cute, but are not
the “players” I end up falling for and then hating.
114. Take up motorcycling
Lou Iannone (is from British Columbia and works with
the Interior Health Authority): Last weekend my friend
and I had to halt at a rest stop to use the ladies’ room.
When I came out, my friend was talking to a very good-
looking man who also happened to be riding a motorcy-
cle. He also happened to turn out to be a doctor. He
called her the next day. They have a date scheduled this
very evening.
115. Weddings
April Morris (art consultant): Just met the man o’ my
dreams at a close friend’s wedding. We were both in the
wedding party. And during the reception we were enrap-
tured with one another. All dressed up and strolling
through the city park late at night—bliss, sheer bliss.
Yes, weddings it is! Wish me luck! He’s scrumptious!
Thank you, my friends!
The One-Mile Limit
Statistics predict you’ll marry a man who lives within a mile of your
house, so . . .
125
Mr. Right, Right Now!

116. Eat your lunch at the same time on the same park bench near
your ofﬁce every day. (That way the God of Statistics knows
where to ﬁnd you.)
117. Nature hikes/bird-watching near your home. The writer Sue
Halpern, in an op-ed piece in The New York Times, quotes
Camilla Blackman: “People go all over the world to see
giraffes, but take them into their backyards and they don’t
know what they’re seeing.” Exactly.
118. Your town meetings about environmental “issues.” These are
weirder than you can ever imagine. Earnest men shouting
about the new Wal-Mart taking away vital swampland. Such
passion! Such shouting! Such drama! Great place to meet
guys!
119. Any street fair, farmers’ market, pumpkin festival, etc., near
your abode.
Uh. About that “mile from your house” statistic. I don’t have the
foggiest idea where it originates. I’ve seen it printed in several
books. Nobody gives the source. I detest and loathe them all! It
seems to me three miles would be more in the zone of probability.
That’s the range, according to AAA, in which most accidents occur.
Okay. Doll, let’s wrap it up. This is not the time to stay in the house
watching Friends reruns. Not the time to rigidly adhere to the same
strategy day after day. One bold stroke and you win! And if you lose
a few times, so what? There are hundreds of ﬁne opportunities for
you to run amok with. Did I say hundreds? Pooh, 6,244,938,437
people live on this planet, which means roughly 3.5 billion men ex-
126
E. Jean Carroll

ist. Of those 3.5 billion men, 850 million will be in your age range.
Of those 850 million in your age range, about 70 million will pos-
sess many of the high-grade Olympian-ish attributes you’re looking
for in a man—70 million!
The secret is to place yourself where the highest numbers of
those 70 million live right here in the old U.S. of A. Which is what
the last 50 pages of this book have been about. (Also, because Ma
Nature is choosy about ﬁnding her novel gene combinations, the
more men you meet, the higher your chances Ma will select the per-
fect chap for you to click with.) Or, hell, junk the whole thing and
follow your gut. Because here’s what, Kumquat:
With the right attitude (Week One), the right look (Week Two), a
little bit of grit (Week Three), huge numbers of eligible chaps (Week
Four), meeting your dream man becomes inescapable. And what
happens next?
127
Mr. Right, Right Now!

YOU TWITTERING FRET-WAFFLE: You’re SUPPOSED to be nervous, Miss Totally.
Butterﬂies are the sign—didn’t you see the Disney classic, for Gawdsake?—your Snow White
Moment may be about to happen . . .
DEAR E. JEAN: I’m 25, funny, sophisticated, and appealing. But for some reason,
whenever I meet a guy I’m interested in, I end up stammering nervously and making a
complete fool of myself. Of course when a guy I’m NOT attracted to comes on to me, I
have NO butterﬂies. The ﬂirtatious remarks ﬂy out of my mouth. Help!
—Totally Mystiﬁed

OK. So.
You’re heading toward Rocco’s Shoe Repair shop and you’ve got
your squirrel-chasing-garbage-eating-crotch-snifﬁng dog on a leash
and your cowgirl boots under your arm, and now it starts to rain.
Your hair, which was a frizz ball when you left, is now exploding in
all directions, looking like three pounds of packing peanuts are
growing from your scalp. And because you’re glancing at your re-
ﬂection in the shop windows and wishing to heaven you could send
your hair back to your apartment to be ironed, you nearly run over a
baby in a stroller. When you reach Rocco’s Repair place,
SWOOSH! JINGLE JINGLE! the door opens, a man comes out—a
man ineffably delicious, a man of exactly the right height, a man
Week Five:
You See Him . . . and You
Absolutely Lose Your Brain
Or
You Meet and You Sorta Like Him

with dark eyes, and he pauses to hold the door for you . . . and be-
cause you know that falling in love is your major errand in life . . .
and because you don’t lack heart . . . and because you’re ready to
seize that trollop Fate by her topaz belly ring and because . . .
Your Brain Is an Expertly Curated Museum, It Recognizes
a Masterpiece When It Sees Him
. . . and since it only takes a fraction of a second for him to recog-
nize you as his Dazzling Princess Charming, then, by God, the next
thing you must do is . . .
?
Let’s review. You remember the Snow White Effect? You re-
member Dr. Frank Bernieri and his bleeding-edge research,
which shows that when two people meet and “click,” their bodies
ﬂow into synchrony, and it’s so indescribably delightful it looks
like a dance? And you remember the Snow White Effect happens
in the ﬁrst 30 seconds, or it pretty much doesn’t happen ever? You
recall this, don’t you, Doll? And since you possess an IQ of blind-
ing altitude, you also remember the old gals, your foremothers,
may not have been a wholesome lot, but they knew about males
and sex and the power to enthrall because every single one of
your foremoms aroused every single one of your foredads, or you
would not be here reading this annoying “you remember” para-
graph?
Right?
So, now all you have to do is:
130
E. Jean Carroll

Man Catching Law #5
Get Out of Your Own Way.
The whole thing is being handed to you. So . . . as you stand there in
the doorway of Rocco’s with your cowgirl boots and your crotch-
snifﬁng dog, glance up at the dark-eyed fellow and at least not TRY
to pull off an act.
Because, believe me, Honey, you’re already in the midst of giv-
ing a Hepburn-grade performance:
1. You’ve launched into a natural sequence of head-tilting,
eyebrow-lifting, pupil-dilating, and eyeball-glistening.
2. In a blinding ﬂash you’re taking in the man’s shoulders,
hair, eyes, teeth, chin, jaws, beard stubble, pallor/ruddi-
ness, symmetry of features, height, biceps, shoulder-waist
ratio, hips and doodlebanger; you’re evaluating his age,
sexual prowess, and health.
2a. His wardrobe is giving you his income, background,
parentage, probable occupation, emotional maturation,
and God knows what other galvanic personal turn-ons—
his banana-cream-colored shirt is setting off the blinding
(well, why do I keep saying blinding? You’re seeing as
clearly as you’ve ever seen in your life at this moment), set-
ting off a sudden, prescient intuition that you can not go on
living without the man in Rocco’s doorway.
3. As quickly as your pupils dilate, you down-lash and look
away. This is innate.
4. Your lips grow redder, redder, redder, redder . . . you burst
into a smile.
131
Mr. Right, Right Now!

Note: Dr. Monica Moore, a psychologist from Webster
University in St. Louis, observed women’s “attraction ma-
neuvers” at parties, restaurants, and bars for two thousand
hours. (My dear Dr. Moore, that’s a lot of chardonnay
spritzers!)
And what did the doctor discover? That women send
“initial” signals to men two-thirds of the time—i.e., ﬂirt
ﬁrst. And here’s the fascinating part: The women who en-
ticed the most chaps were not the prettiest, but the ones
who sent the most signals.
5. You angle your head down and sideways—and here
comes the man-killer—you glance up again, through your
lashes. (A ﬂagwoman signaling a 747 on the runway for
takeoff is nothing to YOU, darling.)
6. You are picking up his scent. You’re reading each other’s
racy passages in your DNA diaries.
Note: #6 is just a hunch of mine. But Dr. Martha Mc-
Clintock of the University of Chicago has found hard evi-
dence that you’re a sucker for a man who smells like you
do, but not exactly like you do; and that you’re catalyzed
into a near lust-craze by a man who smells like your
dad—but, again, not precisely like your dad.
Dr. McClintock’s theory is you’re searching for an im-
mune system that is compatible with your own, but differ-
ent enough to provide your offspring with protection
against infection.
Hence, my friend Marsha Pinkstaff (you recall Mar-
sha and the Kentucky Derby Man-Staring Adventure)
came home from a ﬁrst date the other night with a tall,
handsome, rich, M&A guy with a house in the Hamptons,
132
E. Jean Carroll

$600,000 a year, and a twelve-room apartment on 71st
and Madison; and left the following message on my ma-
chine:
“Uuulllk! I didn’t like his smell!”
6a. Charles Wysocki, adjunct professor at the University of
Pennsylvania, writing in the Journal of Biology of Repro-
duction, has discovered that “male perspiration had a
beneﬁcial effect on women’s moods.” His study suggests
that male sweat helps women feel less tense and raises
reproductive-hormone levels. Researchers collected sam-
ples from the undeodorized armpits of male volunteers,
mixed them into a cocktail, and applied it to the upper lips
of 18 women. Will these researchers stop at nothing?
Lawzy!
7. Meanwhile, the air running through his voice box at 500
cycles per second is notifying you (your unconscious is
quite the little Hilton sister) of his position in society.
NOTE: Yes, things have come to such a pass that psy-
chologists are now studying the air in your windpipe. Drs.
Stanford W. Gregory Jr. and Timothy J. Gallagher of Kent
State University discovered this little microbrew of social-
rank-revealing wind. John Schwartz of The New York
Times, reporting on the phenomenon, compared it to the
“hum of bagpipes.” So if the guy in the doorway occupies
a social sphere above you, you will alter your bagpipe hum
to match his. If you are above him, he will adapt his.
8. And if that isn’t enough, your poor brain, which just a
second before couldn’t give two aesthetic shits who was in
the damn shoe-repair shop, is now busy soaking itself 
133
Mr. Right, Right Now!

down in a phenylethylamine bath of lust and exhilara-
tion (this may actually be the chemical that causes
“clicking”—it speeds up the gush of information be-
tween nerve cells, which is why falling in love “at ﬁrst
sight” is so euphoric), your stress levels (heartbeat, blood
pressure) are rising . . .
9. The fabulous Dr. Helen Fisher is putting lovers through
MRI brain-scanners (probably as you read this) to prove
levels of dopamine and norepinephrine elevate when you
see someone you love.
Plus Dr. Fisher believes “naturally occurring am-
phetamines pool in the emotional centers of the brain”
and that’s why lovers feel they are “speeding.”
10. So thank God you’ve got the dog. The little cur is as good
as a Xanax.
NOTE: People in the company of their dog or cat
dealt better with stress than people who were alone or
accompanied by a friend or spouse in research con-
ducted by Dr. Karen Allen of the State University of New
York.
And may I just say this whole doorway scene with the “un-
deodorized armpits,” etc., etc., is becoming quite stressful to old
yours truly—with the phenylethylamine baths, etc., etc., and the
bagpipes, etc., etc.,—which is why I am now going to turn things
over to beautiful Dr. Nalini Ambady, head of the Interpersonal Per-
ception and Communication Laboratory at Harvard. [Ambady and
Frank Bernieri, close friends, are the Watson and Crick of “thin
slices”—spontaneous social judgments we make from very brief
(less than ﬁve seconds) observations of behavior.]
134
E. Jean Carroll

E: Doctor, how can a woman make a dazzling ﬁrst impression on a
member of the opposite sex?
Dr. Ambady: It depends on what the member of the opposite sex is
looking for. Is he looking for someone who is extroverted, kind of
peppy with lots of energy? Or is he looking for someone who is more
thoughtful and reserved? But, of course, she wouldn’t know if she’s
never met him. So I’d say, be true to yourself. When you fake it, peo-
ple see through it really fast, because you’re uncomfortable, right?
E: I’ve had some long talks with Dr. Frank Bernieri.
Dr. Ambady: He’s a very good friend.
E: He seems to believe that if you don’t hit it off pretty quickly in the
beginning, it’s extremely difﬁcult to correct that. Do you agree?
Dr. Ambady: At that time, yes. But on subsequent interactions, I be-
lieve it is possible. We can all think of people we misjudged and we
got to like them a lot later.
E: Ok. This is good news. So let’s say we make a terriﬁc ﬁrst impres-
sion. Kaboom! The hearts are racing, the eyes are twinkling, piz-
zazzy chemicals are coursing through our brains. How can we
maintain that lovely feeling for the second, third, fourth times we
see each other?
Dr. Ambady: If you have that initial very good rapport, chances are
excellent that it can be re-created. It will follow. It can be reestab-
lished.
E: How do we do that?
Dr. Ambady: There’s no “how to.” These behaviors work best when
they are nonconscious. It can’t be created intentionally. So that
135
Mr. Right, Right Now!

makes it really hard to answer the “how to” questions. Because you
can’t.
E: So you’re saying if we’re just ourselves—
Dr. Ambady: Yes. Be natural! Because what happens if you plan too
much and you’re very strategic and you’re worried about, I don’t
know, how your hands are placed, or whether you’re having good
eye contact or not, then you’re worried about that and you’re not
paying attention to the person.
E: Exactamo!
Dr. Ambady: And that’s what is going to come through. So letting
you’re natural instincts guide you is important. If we overthink
things, there’s a lot of evidence that we fall on our faces. [NOTE: Dr.
Ambady is leading the ﬁeld in studying this “fall on your face if you
overreﬂect” phenomenon.] We’ve found that if people overthink, they
tend to make worse decisions than if they just go with their in-
stincts. Those are better.
E: Do you know how many romance self-help books are out there
telling women how to “think”?
(Dr. Ambady chuckles. We are on the phone. Her voice is soft and
melodious and her chuckle is like crinkling back the cellophane
wrapper from a stick of licorice.)
Dr. Ambady: If you’re manipulative—if you start a relationship being
manipulative, it doesn’t forebode a happy ending.
E: And the poor schmo you’re manipulating falls for the phony
you’re playing so . . .
136
E. Jean Carroll

Dr. Ambady: You have to keep up the charade.
(Excited pause.)
E: Can we adore someone at ﬁrst sight?
Dr. Ambady: Yes. You can be very attracted to people at ﬁrst sight.
E: But how is it possible? Can you explain it to me?
Dr. Ambady: Getting back to Frank’s work, it’s probably a matter of
rapport or a spark or simply a match.
E: Why are we so worried, then?
Dr. Ambady: Because we know that ﬁrst impressions count. The best
thing is to just enjoy who you are, enjoy the moment you’re in, and
feel that things will take care of themselves. [Surprised at herself] I
sound like a—
E: You sound like a brilliant woman, Doctor. Thank you!
Ok. Now. There you are in the rainy entrance of Rocco’s Shoe
Repair shop with your hair twice the size it was before reading the
Nalini Ambady interview. Your eyes—is there something wrong
with your eyes?—your pupils have expanded to the size of Floren-
tine olives. Your cheeks are as ﬂushed as a ﬁve-year-old’s after play-
ing with her mother’s rouge. Your dog is going at the pants of the
handsome banana-cream-shirted stranger as if there’s a sirloin sta-
pled in his boxers. What now?
Well, now you will hold the chap there for 30 seconds.
Why?
Because your affair with this man will inspire the world to great-
ness . . . and for synchrony to occur—and synchrony is what starts
137
Mr. Right, Right Now!

everything boiling furiously, or, excuse me, synchrony is the result
of everything (love/lust/intrigue/interest) beginning to boil furi-
ously—you need to be body-to-body, cherry-red-smile-to-cherry-
red-smile, DNA-to-DNA, for several moments. I don’t need to
explain why you absolutely must synchronize, do I, Doll?
Because when you syn (from the Greek meaning “coming to-
gether”), you’ll prolong the chron, i.e., the time. And when you’re
synching and chroning, you’ll both feel the rush-rush and the gush-
gush of happiness, and then chances are excellent neither of you
will be able to resist the impulse of exchanging phone numbers.
But he is coming out of Rocco’s. You are going in. This is not go-
ing to be easy. It’d be a snap if you were standing in the Hertz line
at the Detroit airport, or loading up your enchiladas in the commis-
sary at NBC . . . anywhere but in this wet doorway. And how do you
stop him? Well, Doll, you have to say something. Yes. You must
make a remark. You must grab this moment, grasp it at its zenith,
and its zenith is now. Even if you’re not good at moment-grasping,
even if you’ve never thought of yourself as a grasper of moments,
you must grasp this one, open your mouth and speak.
“Emph!” you say—the last thing you need to do at this point is
send your brain, which is already soaking with weird sex chemicals,
careening around your skull like a Ping-Pong ball to try to come up
with a “witty” remark—so, you say:
“Emph! This rain!”
“Really coming down,” he says, and keeps walking out the door.
!
1
138
E. Jean Carroll
1. Shiiiiiiiiiit!

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Let’s back up. You are going into the shoe repair shop. He is
coming out. Oh, look. He’s holding the door for you. Now for god-
sakes, THIS time if you’re completely paralyzed, if you have the
brain of a newborn, an imbecile, a ﬂea, if you become suddenly
aphasic, please refer, for strength and sustenance, to The All-Time
Queenhell Showstoppers:
I. The Shirt Salutation
This is just ridiculously successful.
A. You see him.
B. You like him.
C. You say, “Lawsamercy! Love your shirt!”
D. You don’t have to say lawsamercy; but you honestly must like
the shirt.
E. He’ll be charmed. He’ll be enchanted. He’ll say something like
“I’ve got a man in England who buys my shirts. He sends over
a selection at the beginning of each season, spring and fall.”
F. You will now do one of two things:
1. The Great Gatsby: Bend your head into his chest like
Daisy Buchanan and begin to cry stormily. “This is such
a beautiful shirt. It makes me sad because I’ve never
seen such—such a beautiful shirt before.”
2. The Mr. Right, Right Now!: With a bewitching murmur,
you will say you wish to buy one exactly like it for your
brother/father/boss—and where did he purchase it.
139
Mr. Right, Right Now!
www.Ebook777.com

G. Enthralling conversation ensues.
H. Also works with shoes and watches.
II. Drop Him a Curtsy
This little maneuver is so unexpected, so surprising, so new, so old,
so amusing, so charming, so Michelle-Pfeiffer-Dangerous-Liaisons-
delicious, you can’t get any more appealing. I am serious. If you can
be yourself and manage it—i.e., if you possess a drop of the dra-
matic—you can pull it off. Now don’t sit there, Doll Face, and tell
me you don’t know how to bob a damn curtsy . . .
A. You smile.
B. You incline your head.
C. You bat lash.
D. You place your right leg slightly behind your left, with the tip
of your right toe placed about four inches to the left of your left
heel.
E. You sweep your arms out prettily to either side about the width
of a farthingale.
F. You bend your left knee four inches—and dip.
G. Your eyes ﬂutter up to his face as you rise.
H. The whole thing—lash bat, arm-sweep, bob—takes maybe a
second and a half.
140
E. Jean Carroll

I. The man will stand in front of you, his mouth hanging open like
a ham, absolutely staggered. He will feel that something strange,
something extraordinary, something magic, has just occurred.
J. The author wishes to acknowledge she is a very big fan of this
one; but it is showy and not many women can follow the main
premise of Mr. Right, Right Now!—be yourself—and fricking
curtsy.
III. Hem and Haw like Annie Hall
Stammering, blushing, repeating yourself, forgetting what you were
about to say, swallowing, snorting, gagging, coughing, yelping, gig-
gling—all are enchanting in a Drew-Barrymore-Never-Been-Kissed,
Sandra-Bullock-While-You-Were-Sleeping kind of way. The truth is,
as many men are inﬂamed by lack-of-conﬁdence women as are in-
ﬂamed by your chock-full types. So don’t fret if you’re not pulling off
an extremely happening hello—just stand there and stammer.
IV. The Hair Hi
Men are weak and ﬂighty when it comes to their hair. If they are sus-
ceptible to the beguilements of Hair Clubs, what might not the
breezy Hair Hi do to their fragile psyches? So . . .
A. You see a man you’ve never seen before.
B. You raise your eyes to his hair and almost gasp at its virility,
its beauty; and then stepping slightly backward:
141
Mr. Right, Right Now!

You: I like your haircut!
Him (surprised): Thanks!
You: Who cuts it? I’d like to tell my brother/boss/father.
Him (realizing at last he’s found the woman who will provide
the stability, the joy, the serenity, the purity of life, he’s al-
ways searched for): May I take your clothes off immediately?
Of course you’ll make these little “stoppers” your own. You’ll
bend them and twist them; but you won’t believe how incredibly
well they work when you’re loading a hot dog with relish at the
Blackhawks game, or strolling into the Executive Dining Room, or
buying Don Giovanni at Tower Records, or standing in the wings
wearing a pair of unprecedentedly high heels waiting to give the
keynote speech at the Nature Conservancy fund-raiser, or walking
into Rocco’s repair shop on a rainy Saturday with your dog and
you’re both shaking the water drops from your hair and you
stop . . . and you say to the dark-eyed man holding the door for you:
“Hey, uh, I like, you know . . . nice shirt. Where’d you get it?”
And the man smiles.
And you smile.
And he smiles.
“Honey,” he says, raising his voice slightly, “where’d we get this
shirt?”
And the woman with the baby in the stroller on the sidewalk be-
hind you, says:
“I think we got it at Banana Republic.”
.
.
.
142
E. Jean Carroll

And all that dramatic dopamine that has burst loose and has been
running riot, overﬂowing your neural banks, begins to recede, your
pupils dwindle to tiny specks, a ﬁtz of regret rolls around your
spinal column, and Ok. At least you did it. You got in some practice.
“Certainly not a wasted effort,” you’re saying to yourself as you walk
into the shop, glance through your hair (which is now the size of
Iowa), and are suddenly dragged over the counter and into the shoe
shelf by your comical, mud-ﬂecked cur, who has just spotted the
cobbler’s cat.
You drop your boots on the counter.
“Ah, she love my Caesar!” says Rocco, the shop owner, laugh-
ing pleasantly and handing you (you’ve been through this before
with Rocco) the pickup receipt. You retrieve the panting hound. She
is scowling at you with an expression that says, “The very ﬁrst
meaningful relationship I’ve come across all day and you spoil
everything,” and out the door you hurry, scolding, “You incorrigible
strumpet”—and down the street—“you insolent baggage”—the dog
adores this kind of talk—“you jilt, you saucy chops . . .”
Just as you reach the corner you hear running steps behind
you . . . and turn.
“You dropped this,” he says.
He is holding a wallet.
“Oh!” You’re all amazement.
“I . . . I . . . I . . . I . . . ,” you say.
You’ve rarely seen such ﬁne exterior attractions—height, ele-
gance, build, beat leather jacket—all the more interesting because
the combination looks fantastic in the midst of this heavy rain.
“I . . . I . . . I . . .”
Your poor cake of a brain, which just had all its candles blown
out a minute before, is suddenly refrosted, relit, put back on the
143
Mr. Right, Right Now!

platter, while the neurons that were in no mood are now ﬂicking on
and starting to sing.
“It’s yours, isn’t it?” he says, smiling.
You can barely drag your eyes away from his teeth. Dazzling!
Gleaming! You glance at the thing in his hand.
It looks familiar, vaguely, you seem to remember the color,
dimly, the shape is . . . well, no doubt it’s your wallet, but you don’t
care if it’s your wallet, you don’t care if you ever see another wallet
again as long as you live, because all is over. The gods have smote
you. Smote? Lord.
What a day—huh?—when you’re thinking of things like being
smote.
But whatever your atavistic gut reaction is, whatever ancient
combination of sexy foremother instincts, whatever the lessons con-
tained in your corpuscles, whatever that combination of elements—
they all kick in, KABOOM! You don’t have to do a damn thing. 
Just let it happen. And your face lights up with a nectared radi-
ance, and—
“Thanks!” you say.
“That’s all right,” he says.
“Really!”
“Yeah.”
“Thank you!”
“You’re welcome.”
(Laughter.)
“It’s incredible.”
“What?”
“Oh—” You shake your head.
“What . . . ?” he says.
“Nothing.”
“What?”
144
E. Jean Carroll

(Laughter.)
“Nothing.”
“What?”
“I—can’t . . .” You shake your head again.
“What?”
(Laughter.)
“No.”
(Laughter.)
“What?”
(Laughter.)
This is ﬂirting.
All you need is a pair of eyes, a tight sweater, a tube of
spankin’-red lipstick, and you’ll squash the hearts and mangle the
brains of three-quarters of the men on the sidewalk. Hell, you don’t
even need the sweater or the lipstick. The Corpus Juris of Flirting
can be contained in . . .
Man Catching Law #6
Torture Your Victim.
Vex him! Thrash him! Keep him off-balance! Even if you possess
not a cc of CC (coquetry courage), throw a mischievous smile in his
direction while you’re saying “Thank you,” then drop your eyes.
(This will come naturally to you; just don’t squash it. It’s what li-
onesses, tigresses, and nanny goatesses do. It’s one of the opening
moves of your inborn courtship pattern.) While he’s saying “You’re
welcome,” tilt your head away and gaze back at him through your
lashes. When his eyes meet yours, look away and laugh. A moment
later, open your eyes wide and gaze straight at him. By this time the
poor fellow (who never knew or cared to know you were on the
145
Mr. Right, Right Now!

planet and who was only doing a good deed by returning your wallet)
will be rather excited.2
A protracted afternoon of this torment and the man will be ﬁlled
with such unbearable longing for your next glance, he’ll try to give
you his wallet.
Why?
Man Catching Law #7
The Goal of Flirting Is Love.
(All right, all right, the goal of ﬂirting is also sex.)
&
Man Catching Law #8
The Essence of Romantic Love (and Sex) Is Uncertainty.
Uncertainty will be created if, when you converse with the chap,
you show not the slightest concern whether he lives or drops
dead—while at the same time entrancing him with your ﬁre-
apple-red lips and saucy ﬂicks of real admiration, as in “My dog
likes people; but I’ve never seen her tear the zipper off anyone’s
jeans!”
146
E. Jean Carroll
2. This is just the old inborn look/look-away courting behavior. Formal name: The
Coy Look. It entices just as well with some distance—e.g., across a crowded law li-
brary, executive sales conference, hotel gym, Bergdorf’s Men’s Store, Sing Sing’s
visitors’ waiting room.

Questions? Yes, you.
You: When you say “you,” as in “when you converse with the chap,”
who do you mean? Who’s you?
Eeee: I mean you. You, the incredibly charming reader of Mr. Right,
Right Now!
You: I thought so. Cool! Ok. So, I’ve kept him there for 30 seconds.
Now what?
Eeee: Well . . . are you clicking?
You: I think so.
Eeee: Then don’t stop.
You: Don’t stop what?
Eeee: Don’t stop what you’re doing.
You: What am I doing?
Eeee: You’re doing plenty, believe me.
You: But what should I do?
Eeee: Tell him what you’re doing next.
You: What am I doing next?
Eeee: Getting some coconut cream pie.
You: Pie? I tell him I’m getting some coconut cream pie? Should I in-
vite him along?
Eeee: No. Just state the fact: “I’m on my way to get some coconut
cream pie.”
147
Mr. Right, Right Now!

You: Then he’ll say he wants pie too?
Eeee: Exactly. You turn it into an occasion.
You: You mean a ﬁrst date!
Eeee: No such thing as “ﬁrst dates.”
You: Whew.
Eeee: Just clicking and synchronizing.
You: What if he doesn’t like me?
Eeee: Would you stop? You’re going for coconut cream pie. No big
deal. If you expect nothing, if you want nothing, you’ll be full of power.
You (apprehensively): Ok.
Eeee: Ok?
You: . . . Ok.
Eeee: Don’t think. Forget yourself. Think of pie.
You: Coconut cream pie?
Eeee: Correct.
You: One thing.
Eeee: What?
You: How do I know he’s Mr. Right?
Eeee: You don’t.
You: Humph! How can you go around calling this book Mr. Right,
Right Now! and—
148
E. Jean Carroll

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Eeee: Because Ma Nature’s telling you he’s Mr. Right and she’s
telling you he’s standing in front of your eyes right now.
You: Ok, so he is Mr. Right.
Eeee: Shhhush! The moment you start thinking he’s Mr. Right—
that’s the DEATH MOMENT. You may as well give up men and start
ordering the $279 dolls from Marie Osmond on the Home Shopping
Network. Because when you begin believing he’s Mr. Right—just a
minute. This is a big deal. I better make this a law:
Man Catching Law #9
Never Decide He’s “The One.”
You: Never? Why not?
Eeee: Because the moment you decide he’s The One, the moment you
make-up your mind and tell yourself that he is, indeed, Mr. Right,
that’s the moment you totally lose it and start focusing all your de-
sires on him . . . and when you focus all your desires on him, you
become kind of paralyzed. And when you’re paralyzed, you dribble
away the ﬂirtatious mystery that attracted him to you in the ﬁrst
place. And when you lose your attraction, he starts to turn off. And
when he starts to turn off, you act with less conﬁdence. And when
you act with less conﬁdence, he pulls away. And when he pulls
away, you go crazy because you think he’s Mr. Right, and you start to
cling. And when you cling, he leaves. So stop thinking about it.
You: But shouldn’t I have a checklist? I mean, shouldn’t I check if
he has at least some of the qualities I want in my Mr. Right?
Eeee: Well . . . how many qualities are on your list?
149
Mr. Right, Right Now!
www.Ebook777.com

You: I’m excessively picky, you know. I have at least 40 things I’m
looking for.
Eeee: Phooo! Mother Nature has 44 thousand items on her list—
maybe more—and Ma’s checking every single gene on every one of
his 46 chromosomes. She’s checking his IQ, his life expectancy, his
sperm count, his allergy to marshmallows, his cholesterol, how far
he can throw a football, his love of children, and his tendency to
adore women with small breasts. The old dame wants her smart,
strong, sexy new gene-combinations and she’s obviously nuts about
this guy.
You: Why do you say obviously?
Eeee: ’Cause you’re acting giddier than Carmen Electra in a tattoo
parlor.
You: Yeah [giggling], I feel like I’m ﬂying.
Eeee: That’s Ma ﬁring your dopamine circuits.
You: What about his circuits?
Eeee: Your circuits are playing off his circuits. The more rapidly his
dopamine system ﬁres, the more rapidly yours will ﬁre. And vice
versa. A neuroscientist, Dr. P. Read Montague, calls this “entrain-
ing.”
You: But . . . but . . .
Eeee: Now what?
You: I don’t have a dog. What’s with this stupid dog you’ve given me?
Eeee: An event on the level of birth or death is happening and you
are complaining about a dog?
150
E. Jean Carroll

You: Well . . .
Eeee: Her name is Fortuna de la Spunky. You rescued her last win-
ter. She’s the best dog in the world. Are you going to be an anecdote
in this book, or not?
You: Ok. Ok. Ok, don’t get hissy.
So, you say:
“Gee, I was going to go to Pet’s Mart to get this totally brilliant
dog a new Frisbee, but this rain puts me in mind of banana cream
pie.”
And he says, because he’s not certain (and the essence of love is
uncertainty) if this is an invitation:
“Banana cream pie! Man, I love banana cream pie. I even love
banana cream pie when the bananas turn all brown. I’ll eat the
whole pie when it’s banana cream pie. Everything about banana
cream pie, Jesus, just mention banana cream pie and I’m a goner.”
Now you say:
“Oop! I didn’t mean banana cream pie, I meant coconut cream
pie.”
“Coconut cream pie!” he says. “Even better. If God ate pie,
She’d eat coconut cream pie.”
“I wonder where somebody could ﬁnd coconut cream pie?”
Again. Not an invitation.
And he says: “Betty’s Café over on Twelfth Street. You want to
walk over?”
And you say: “Sure.”
And he says: “If you don’t mind going out of the way two blocks,
we could pick up my dog, Charlie.”
And you say: “What fun!” Because you’ve just followed . . .
151
Mr. Right, Right Now!

Man Catching Law #10
Turn the First Encounter into an Event.
You: And now what?
Eeee: Pie.
You: But how do I act?
Eeee: No acting.
You: Could you get off your ass and help me here? What am I sup-
posed do.
Eeee: You’ve done it. You met someone. You completed the Supreme
Moment. The old world is destroyed. The new world is now.
Everything from this moment on is fresh, green, new, cool.
And here you are outside Betty’s Café, at a table on the sidewalk, in
the rain, eating pie. The dogs are also eating pie. Your cell phone
rings.
“Hi, Dad!” you say, laughing. . . . “Oh, nothing. Having a bite.
How’s Mom?”
“Let me talk to him,” says the guy, putting down his fork and
smiling.
“At Betty’s Café,” you say.
“Let me speak with him,” says the fellow, wiping his lips with a
blue Betty’s napkin.
He is so good-humored and handsome, even the pigeons on the
street seem delighted with him.
“No, over on Twelfth Street,” you say.
“May I speak with him?” says the fellow.
152
E. Jean Carroll

“Dad, there’s someone here who wants to talk with you,” you
say, laughing.
You hand him the phone.
“Hello, Mr. Smith,” says the guy. “How do you do, sir? I admire
your daughter more than I can say. She’s everything I’ve been look-
ing for and I would like to ask you, sir, for her hand in marriage.”
153
Mr. Right, Right Now!

BLOCKERS, YOU BEAUTY: First, let’s set the record straight: IF my mother had not
asked my father to her sorority ski weekend in the Sierra Nevada, I would not be here writing
about asking a man . . .
DEAR E. JEAN: How do I ask a man out? Now that I know I must go out and FIND a
man, I realize I may even have to do the asking. But how do I go about it? It’s a com-
plete mystery to me. I’ve spent the better part of my 29 years learning to be “a lady”
and waiting for MEN to ask ME. HELP!!
—Needing Beta-Blockers

Before we commence, let’s get the phone stuff out of the way:
Man Catching Law #11
Handing a Man Your Number Is Dumb.
Why Don’t You Just Go Down on Your
Knees on the Sidewalk and Beg
the Bugger to Call You?
When you meet a man in person (not on-line), if there are any num-
bers given out, you will exchange them, and not a numeral less.
(That way you can call him, if he doesn’t call you.1) And when you
write the numbers down, don’t be stingy. Take up space. Write on
something unforgettable:
Week Five 1/2:
How to Ask a Man Out
1. Oh, pick yourself up off the linoleum, Doll. Yes, you can call him. As many men
are lathered up by being called by a charming woman as are not lathered.

1. The windshield of his car in topaz eye shadow.
2. Trees. All kinds of lovey-dovey can blossom in the 19 or 20
hours it takes to whittle the suckers into the bark of an oak.
3. His biceps. And if you don’t make a fuss over your “8s and
6s” growing “bigger than cantaloupes” when he ﬂexes his
muscles, you don’t deserve to fulﬁll your destiny. Meanwhile
ask him to write his number on the bill of your Seahawks
cap—it will become a talisman for your courtship. Every
time you wear it, he’ll remember bells ringing in his head
and how the pen shook in his hand with excitement as he
wrote.
4. Your sock. Take off your boot and Sharpie your number on
your pink argyle and hand it to him. And ask him do the
same—if he refuses to write on his sock, make him remove his
T-shirt.
5. A $10 bill. Jot your number on one half, ask him to write his
on the other half, tear it in two—it’s even more memorable if
it’s a $50 bill.
6. All this is sounding very Ladies’ Magazine to me.
7. If you’re hot stuff in the conﬁdence department, do the oppo-
site—write on something ﬂeeting and mercurial: form the
numbers with seaweed, sand, etc., etc., if you’re at the beach
(on the wind and stars if you’re elsewhere), and the chap will
gallop all over hell and back looking for something “perma-
nent” to write with/on like a hot-dog-bun wrapper and a piece
of charcoal.
156
E. Jean Carroll

8. I always liked Ladies’ Magazines.
9. I’m avoiding the obvious here—punching the numbers into
your cell phone—because I’ve received just one too many let-
ters where numbers have been lost.2 Go ahead and do it. But
make certain the digits are saved.
And then . . .
Man Catching Law #12
Do Not Care If He Calls.
In fact . . .
157
Mr. Right, Right Now!
2. DEAR E. JEAN: HELP! EMERGENCY! TRAGEDY! Last night I met the hand-
somest, most charming Irish fellow. It was one of those chance encounters people talk
about. When I least expected it, I met the man of my dreams. I was so smitten, I ac-
tually asked for his number. (Something I’ve never done before.) He gave it to me on
the condition I PROMISE to call him. I punched it into my cell phone before I left the
bar. Today I discovered his number’s not been saved!
I can’t accept that I’ll never see him again! I’ve had a long run of bad luck try-
ing to meet a “quality” man. It’s unbearable living on the hope we’ll happen to catch
the same subway train or pass each other on the street. He said he lives only ten min-
utes from me. What should I do? He was right in front of my eyes, and now he’s out
of reach!—Desperately Seeking in Brooklyn
I told Miss Desp. that assuming she’d downed a half-pint of Finnian’s Red (to
honor the fates) and tried calling the bar to interview the bartender, I believed I could
absolutely guarantee that if she returned to the saloon where they ﬁrst met, she’d see
the lad again, because being Irish myself, I could conﬁrm that an Irishman is as
loyal to his favorite pub as Bono is to his blue glasses, and that NEXT time, for God-
sakes, write the phone numbers on something MEMORABLE.

Man Catching Law #13
Do Not EXPECT Him to Call.
Indeed . . .
Man Catching Law #14
You Will Lower Your Frustration Level
If You Never Expect Men to Do ANYTHING.
The reason we become so angry at men (and exasperated with “dat-
ing” and peeved at “love”) is that we possess perilously optimistic
ideas about what men and “romance” are like. Really now, we’ll
only stop being pissed off when we stop hoping (and what an evil,
suckery thing hope is) men will turn out to be perfect.
One more thing.
If you’re going to call him, call him at a time when you’re pretty
certain he won’t be tired or with a patient or watching a game or en-
tertaining a girl named Twirly. Sometimes it’s wise to send him an 
e-mail with a couple of charming lines and a “call me” and your
number. Then if he doesn’t call, you call him.
How to Ask a Man Out
Forget the total bushwa about not asking men out.
If those two charming dingbats3 who wrote The Rules (i.e.,
“Don’t talk to a man ﬁrst, don’t ask him to dance,” don’t open your
158
E. Jean Carroll
3. I’m sorry to harp on these two deluded old ladies, but they mangled many
women’s brains, and wrecked years of havoc, fakery, and unhappiness upon the hu-
man race by telling women to shut up and act dumb.

mouth, don’t move, don’t breathe, don’t blink, don’t live) had both-
ered to talk to any anthropologists, zoologists, primatologists, evolu-
tionary biologists, or psychologists, they’d know females do as much
pursuing (and “asking”) as males. Indeed, chasing a man is such a
successful tactic, the world is overpopulated. Hell, I may propose to
the U.N. they start distributing copies of The Rules to employ as
birth control.
Anyway, Doll, you already know how to ask a chap out. When
you were a little girl of four, you’d pirouette up to Great-Uncle Bob
and exclaim in the most conﬁdent, adorable tone, “Take me to the
Dairy Queen!” And you knew he would do it. No man could say no
to you. Because you simply demanded it.
So speak to men with the conﬁdence you had at four. Practice a
little by asking men any damn thing. (My mother asked my father
his opinion of skiing. Soon she had whisked the dazed chap up to
the High Sierra where he was forced to spend the night in a hostel
with her former boyfriends, freezing his kneecaps off because he
was too “gentlemanly” to knock on my mother’s door and ask for a
blanket. The next day on the drive back to UCLA, they fell in love
at a roadside avocado stand. I was born shortly afterward with an in-
satiable yearning for guacamole.)
A couple days of practice will demonstrate to you that men ﬁnd
being asked questions very stimulating; and then next time you see
the guy you like, grab his arm and, instead of “hello,” exclaim,
“Mike, you handsome rascal, I’ve got tickets to Usher. Let’s go!”
159
Mr. Right, Right Now!

Or,
If You INSIST
on Calling
and Asking Him Out . . .
When he answers, get right to the point:
“Michael, darling! Poker night. Next Thursday. My house. Do
come!”
Or . . .
“Michael, hi. This is Eleanor Dashwood. Next Wednesday night
I’m having a dinner party. Please bring your handsome self.”
(Lord! These examples suck. You’ll do it ten times better.)
Or, if you want to guarantee he’ll say yes . . .
“Michael, are you sitting down? Swear you’re sitting down. No.
Testify—put your hand on your testicles—and swear you’re sitting
down. Good. I have ringside seats for the Lennox Lewis ﬁght.
Wanna go?”
160
E. Jean Carroll

161
Mr. Right, Right Now!
NOTE: No “assignments” these last two weeks except
the assignment where you ﬁnd and seduce a mate, pro-
duce the next generation, and guarantee life’s never-
ending blossoming and unfolding and marching onward
to the everlasting glory of the earth, the galaxy, the uni-
verse, and all the billions of universes beyond.

POWER, MY GIRL: Let me tell you a story about men and “dull” females. A few years
ago, the writer Jay McInerney and his then wife, Helen Bransford, invited the 40 most eligible
bachelors in New York and the 40 most intriguing single women to a posh affair, which Jay po-
etically referred to as a “Meet-the-Love-of-Your-Life party.”
I was agog when I arrived (the guest list needed one bumbling clod—hence my invitation).
The McInerney drawing room looked like a holding pen for Grand National Champion breeding
bulls. “Ye gods!” I cried. “Testosterone-charged millionaires specially delivered for my own per-
sonal beneﬁt!”
You know what? I like writing in this box so much
I just may do the whole chapter in this thing.
Anyway, ten minutes later I was standing by the bookcase, my mind fogged with one thought:
“Is it possible no man is talking to me? Is it possible no man’s even noticing me? Is it possible
I’m the biggest loser in the room?” I glanced around to see whom the men were talking to.
Were they ﬂocking to Martha Stewart, looking bright and horsey in khakis and hacking
jacket? Were they making passes at the playwright Wendy Wasserstein, poised in Edith Sitwell
black, holding a tiny plate of cheese blintzes? No. All 40 of the giddy bastards were buzzing
around one small, chestnut-haired creature in a periwinkle frock (periwinkle!) perched like a
butterﬂy on the McInerneys’ giant, log-brown sofa.
Mort Zuckerman, the owner of the New York Daily News, looked like a eunuch on his knees
before Cleopatra. Robert Morton (at the time executive producer of Letterman) was bringing her
a glass of something—the whole room had suddenly been turned into the barbecue scene from
Gone With the Wind. Hell, I myself felt a strong desire to bring the young lady a chicken leg. And
the moral of this little story?
The girl was not a raving beauty, Miss Power; but she clearly possessed the same traits you
do (independence, creativity, humor) or she would not have been at this party. The difference?
She was smart enough to use ALL her assets—to put it crassly, including the ones at her ad-
mirers’ eye level. (If Wendy Wasserstein had been wearing that low-cut periwinkle number, God
knows what erotic chaos would have ensued—men muscling each other to the ﬂoor to get to
her blintzes, Martha softly crying in the kitchen . . . scenes too marvelous to contemplate!)
Now, back to that debate: Do smart women intimidate (exhaust, frighten, annoy, repel) the
men they want to attract? Yes, they do. And what tactics can an enlightened woman like you,
Miss Power, employ to get around this? Read on . . .
DEAR E. JEAN: I’ve been noticing recently that many of my male friends have
been marrying stupid women. The girls are pretty, but dull, dull, dull—so lacking in
spunk and originality! I guess my real anxiety is: Will I ever ﬁnd a guy to love the traits
I possess—independence, creativity, humor? I’m pretty darn cute & successful as well.
—Power Girl

Let us leave the McInerney party for a moment and visit Oprah.
She had a show recently about . . . well, I never found out what the
topic was because a confused mass of “successful females” kept
lunging out of their chairs and grasping, metaphorically speaking,
the hem of Oprah’s trousers and telling her how they “intimidated
men,” and how they “didn’t want to intimidate men,” but how they
were so powerful and conﬁdent and beautiful and quite a lot of other
things that their love lives were a hell on earth.
“We’re gonna fricking love this show!” I said to the dogs, and
turned up the volume.
One of the women, a strapping Midwestern blonde with pink
cheeks like candy apples—superintelligent, super well-dressed,
aqua-blue cashmere sweater, pearls—stood up in the audience, and
as she started to speak, her face took on the expression of a woman
who’d been tossed into a sawdust pit with wolverines, fought her
way out, and crawled to the Harpo studio.
“Here’s Miss Coup de Gracie,” I said to the dogs. “Mark my word.”
Week Five 3/4:
Intimidating the Poor Bastards?
Good!

Her voice was pleasant but sounded a tad pinched, like it was
strained through Barbara Walters’s panty girdle. The list of reasons
why she thought she intimidated men—devised after withstanding
tortures previously unheard of, apparently—was the best yet: she was
too smart, too good-looking, too happy with her life, too educated, too
outgoing, and too successful. Also her “self-esteem” was “too high.”
“E. Gads!” I said to the dogs. “This calls for a couple of pints of
H-Dazs!”
It was clear to me, as I ripped back the lid of strawberry (for the
curs) and pistachio (for myself), the poor lady had lost her mani-
cured grip on reality.
My guess was early in her “amazing” career, she’d met a couple
of nice blokes who, for whatever reason, ran from her like vampires
from a garlic press. She’d explained their reaction to herself by say-
ing, “I’m just too much for these guys.”
And so, the next bloke she meets, she hardly says hello before
she starts a mental rundown of her incredibly overpowering person-
ality and the reasons she might be just too much for him, and
kablam! She actually does become too much for him, because she’s
standing there assessing her self-presentation instead of listening
and responding to the bloke.
It was a real overload of brass-busted idiocy.
Because anybody who’s ever met a man knows if anything is a
lethal attitude, the “I’m just too much for this guy” is a lethal atti-
tude, as inevitably—in about one and a half seconds—the guy will
grok that Miss Cashmere is so totally concerned with her own per-
formance that she’s not even noticing his dry wit, his big chest, his
GQ cover-boy celery-green eyes, his etc., etc.
Now this is a very different attitude from the Man Catcher’s sly
“quit men, get men” attitude. That’s a challenge to a bloke. That rouses
his competitive instincts and vibrates in his very gizzard. This “I’m too
164
E. Jean Carroll

much for him” hurts the bloke’s feelings. It stings his ego because the
bloke has the same insecurities that the blokette, Miss Cashmere, pos-
sesses. And when a bloke is stung, it completely closes down any
chance of the bloke surprising/delighting Miss Cashmere. And when
the bloke can’t surprise/delight Miss Cashmere, then she can’t re-
spond in a captivating/enticing blokette manner—and that is death to
clicking. And of course the bloke moves on, and Miss Cashmere ﬁnds
yet another reason she’s “just too much for guys” and adds it to her list,
which is now so long, she has to crawl on TV and unbosom herself to
Oprah—OPRAH!—who in addition to being the most intimidating
and richest woman on earth is also just about the most adored.
The Truth
Look, men do like nonthreatening, soft little creatures. Who doesn’t?
We all slavered over the Periwinkle Girl at the McInerney party. But
so what? Are you supposed to be a human speck the rest of your life?
Play it safe forever? Just because a few nincompoop guys roll up like
dishrags at the sight of you? (Actually Periwinkle Girl was a hero be-
cause she not only possessed a Mistress of the Universe career as a
consultant, she understood the ﬁner points of real estate by placing
herself in the exact center of the room under the most ﬂattering light.)
But Miss Cashmere? The poor lady was fading into the shadows
so badly her problem was not that she was intimidating men, but
that she was not intimidating men enough. A little fear in a chap is
a good thing. Fear (F) rides in the same pair of wing tips as awe.
Awe (A) leads to Love (L). Or to state the Man Catching’s Theory of
Relativity:
F + A = L
165
Mr. Right, Right Now!

The more accomplished and brilliant you are, the more men (not all
men, but most men) will be intrigued. If Miss Cashmere had just
thrown a cheeky grin at Oprah’s audience (or the bloke); if she’d just
winked as if to say, “Oh, I know this stupid list of why I’m so intim-
idating is impossible,” and laughed at herself, everybody would have
loved her straightaway. She’d have given off a whiff of potent female
charm. And there would have been hope.
I also suspect Miss Cashmere and some of the High Altitude
Women at the McInerney party were blocking their opening court-
ship signals. Ma Nature went to a tinkly damn ton of trouble devel-
oping their androphonostic (man-slaying) skills—honing the suckers
over the last 200 million years to guarantee chaps fall for them in the
first few seconds. But these signals can get in the way of business,
and so we get in the habit of blocking them. E.g., when a Miss High
Altitude arrives in the conference room with the multibillionaire CEO
and the VPs in their vivid yellow ties, what does she do? She in-
sures she’s not being “too feminine” by being a brass-busted twit.
Anyway, I’ll wager many of us are working overtime to throttle our
inherited arts . . . or, at least . . . endeavoring to control our shimmy-
shammy in “business situations.”
Rutgers anthropologist Dr. Helen Fisher (the Empress of Re-
search on the whole sexual-attraction/innate-courtship-behavior
question) told me (as you no doubt remember from Part One) that
the opening courtship signals are inborn.
“There is something called the coy look,” said Dr. Fisher. “You
cock your head and look up to the side and then look down and
away—it’s the characteristic courtship look. It’s innate. Horses do
it. Dogs do it. Human females do it. And it’s very interesting how af-
ter a business meeting somebody will be embarrassed that they ac-
tually did some courtship gestures by mistake! I do think you learn
166
E. Jean Carroll

to control these kinds of things and present yourself in a busi-
nesslike fashion.”
I don’t believe I’m throwing the Conair into the bathtub here
when I posit that Miss Cashmere and the McInerney Women (in-
cluding myself) (A) may have become so accustomed to batting
down The Coy (and perhaps all opening courtship signals) in sales
meetings, client gatherings, movie pitches, etc. that we are experi-
encing difﬁculty ﬁring them off when we need them, and therefore
(B) men are thinking about us what Tom Robbins once said:
“She has a mind like a steel trap and a vagina to match.”
So let’s wrap this up.
You scare the chaps? Excellent! You probably don’t scare them
enough. So for what remains of this week, pull off the veils—now
don’t lie there in bed reading Mr. Right, Right Now! with your bowl
of popcorn (have you tried drizzling maple syrup over it when it’s
hot . . . heaven!) and pretend you don’t know about the damn veils.
I’m talking about the veils you hang between your “real” (i.e., power-
ful, intriguing) self and the actress “playing” the High Altitude Ball
Thrasher (or the Timid Puss) you. The veils you hang in such profu-
sion and thickness, in fact, men can’t see through to the “true” you.
Man, my sentence structure is just going straight to hell, here.
So this week yank ’em off. Give the beasts a taste of all the charms
of your personality—your daring, your tenderness, your inquisitive-
ness, your rebelliousness, your spirituality, your cantankerousness,
your impetuousness, your go-to-hell hilarity, your “goddess and
your nymph” to paraphrase Willy Shakespeare. In other words, be
yourself and you’ll be more fabulous, more attractive; and please,
don’t go ﬂapping your gums about what you “want in a man.” It
makes you look like you’ve spent too many long, torturous nights
thinking about it.
167
Mr. Right, Right Now!

CRAZED, MY DEAR: You have managed to ask the single most useless and idiotic
question known to woman. Let’s give you the answer. Then we can bring Mr. Right, Right Now!
to a swift conclusion and go out and have a party!
DEAR E. JEAN: When should I go to bed with a guy? Do I wait till after three dates?
After four dates? How am I supposed to know when it’s “right”? I’m afraid to say NO be-
cause I don’t want to lose a potential mate. But I’m afraid to say YES for obvious rea-
sons.
—Crazed with Confusion

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
You know what happens now.
You’ve met a chap. He’s handsome. He’s rich. Lord! This makes
a terrible story. You’ve heard it so often, yet it is the best story of all.
You’re wearing your Anna Sui turquoise minidress with your $15,
marigold, plastic ﬂip-ﬂops and your ﬁve-inch-long garnet bead ear-
rings and you’re walking with the chap in the park eating cotton
candy after a dinner of minestrone soup and vanilla ice cream with
hot chocolate sauce (the chap had a chop), and the chap is looking
at you with life-consuming passion, and lowering his voice, he says:
“Why don’t we go back to my place?”
Or perhaps he says, “During dinner I ardently longed to rip that
dress from your twisting torso.” Either way . . . may we have a blast
on the Mr. Right, Right Now! trumpet, please . . . we’ve arrived at
the magic moment:
Week Six:
How to Mop Up the Floor 
with Men
www.Ebook777.com

Bedding the Male Beast
Since, as Artie Schopenhauer says, “nothing less than the composi-
tion of the next generation” is at stake here; since, in fact, the future
of the human race to come hangs on your answer, the last thing Ma
Nature wants is for you to stand in the blue-and-green park ﬂashing
your garnet earrings and mashing your cerebral cortex through a
cheese grater, ﬁguring out if this is your third date . . . or if you
should count the time you ran into each other at the 50 Cent con-
cert, so this would make it your fourth date . . . but if you subtract
the time you had to leave the movie early because your boss called
and asked you to ﬂy to Houston, it would make it still the third
date . . . but then if you added the time you spent together driving to
the airport, it would be the fourth date.
“Dates” are for reality TV shows. Ma Nature doesn’t do dates.
Ma Nature does clicking and synchronizing and snogging and bond-
ing and babies. That’s it. So your answer to the chap’s question is
perfectly simple. Viz, have you clicked with him?
(A) If You Have Not Clicked . . . well, then, you are not
synchronizing. And if you are not synchronizing, chances are high
you will never synchronize. (You do remember Dr. Bernieri, don’t
you, Doll?) So if you are not synchronizing, and will never synchro-
nize, it doesn’t matter when you go to bed with the fellow, you will
never end up as a couple anyway—so what the hell. If you fancy a
romp in the begonias, say yes . . . and enjoy!
On the other hand . . .
(B) If You Have Clicked . . . there’s an excellent chance
you’re synchronizing right now, and if you’re synchronizing right
now, that means all is well, and if all is well, that means things
170
E. Jean Carroll

couldn’t be better, and if things couldn’t be better, then you are a
couple already, so what the hell. If you’d love a begonia romp, say
yes . . . and enjoy!
I sense your astonishment.
I assure you, Doll . . .
Man Catching Law #15
A Man Catcher Is Free to Romp in the Begonias
Whenever She Pleases.
You are free. Free. Free. Free. Free. Free. Free. Free. Free. Free.
Free. Free. Free. Free. Free. Free. [Note to editor, David Hirshey:
Can we have the word “free” printed for an entire page? ] From now
on you can forget what men want. You can do what you want. You
can be yourself. You are either synchronizing with the chap or you
are not synchronizing with the chap. (And if your are synchronizing
with the chap, enjoying a romp in the begonias together will only
enhance and deepen your feelings for each other.)
And as for that platitudinous, money-sucking advice-book
malarkey about “holding off” to increase the chap’s desire . . . har!
Now I realize I advised this myself in Chapter Four, but there is not
one scrap of evidence showing that a modern American woman who
“holds off” will get herself snapped into the $9,500 Vera Wang wed-
ding number faster, better, or more often than a woman who jumps
right into the begonias. Repeat. Not a shred of proof.1
171
Mr. Right, Right Now!
1. Yours truly is, of course, not alone in pointing this out. Natalie Angier, the bril-
liant Pulitzer-winning science writer for The New York Times, whom yours truly
worships, says in her stupendous book Woman: An Intimate Geography, “But where
is the evidence that women who ‘give in too easily’ do not get married, while those
who remain chaste do?” If Natalie can’t ﬁnd the evidence, nobody can.

But you have a major question:
What about that dark-haired, velvet-eyed VP of sales you went
out with last year and had a “great” time, went out with again, had 
a “great” time, went out with a third time, leapt into bed, had a
“great” time, and you never heard from him again—what about that? 
I submit to you that you did not click in the ﬁrst place.
Clicking does not happen every day, ya know. Week Four lists
so many places to meet because it’s paramount you bump into large
numbers of high-caliber men. Why? Because Ma Nature is choosy,
choosy, choosy, when it comes to causing you to click with a fellow.
The click is precious. The click is powerful. (If you’ve ever clicked
with a married man and had the very devil of a time getting out of it,
you know how potent the click can be.) Ma Nature has been perfect-
ing the click for 200 million years because she wants her pretty new
gene-combinations; and she will drag your shapely bottom through
the ﬁre and ices of hell to bring you, breathless, raging-haired, and
feisty, to Click City. That did not happen with Mr. Velvet Eyes.
I submit to you the “great” times you experienced with Velvet
happened because you went to lovely restaurants, your short, green
tulle skirt received admiring glances, your new haircut made you
look better than Cameron Diaz, and you drank a bottle of Cristal.
But Beware the Chastity Belt–
Bible Belt Bull Hockey
You can click with a fellow; but he may be a fellow who believes a
woman should “hold off” for religious/philosophic/masculinist-
centered ﬂapdoodle. The poor chap may not even know he believes
this. Hell’s bells, the poor bastard may believe he believes exactly
the opposite. If you invite this fellow for the begonia romp too early
172
E. Jean Carroll

in the game (or if he keeps nudging you toward the begonia patch
and you “give in” and say yes), he’ll go for it, he’ll revel in it, yes;
but it will boil his brains and it could blow your whole synchroniza-
tion deal right out of the water.
(Note: Rent Hitchcock’s Notorious and watch Cary Grant come
unhinged over Ingrid Bergman. It is one of the sublime movies and
one of the ﬁnest demonstrations of how the “Clicking—Oop! She’s
A Slut!” deal works.)
But here is the good news. Since you do not know beforehand
whether the fellow is this kind of fellow, and since even the fellow
may not know he is this kind of fellow, again, be yourself, do as you
please. Enjoy!
The Man Catching Caveat
(The Only Such Dire Warning in Mr. Right, Right Now!)
It is your attitude after sex that is key. If you are clingy and whiny
and burst into racking sobs and try to mess with the bloke’s head,
forget it. If you are a Man Catcher down to the tips of your Donna
Karan bedroom slippers . . . if you stretch on the Porthault like a ti-
gress and demand he go fetch you oranges, then everything’s cool,
and the male beast will desire you even more madly.
So that’s it, Doll. Be yourself. [Hirshey, my darling, could we
have “be yourself” ﬁll the rest of the page? If the lovely reader is not
herself the whole Man Catching Theory ﬂies out the door.] Nothing
could be simpler. If you place yourself where there are high numbers
of men, it is a mathematical certainty you will meet several lovely
beasts. Then Ma Nature, who has created you as a veritable mantrap,
excuse the plain English, will see to it that you attract a chap, that
173
Mr. Right, Right Now!

you click, and that you synchronize. And if you are synchronizing,
all you have to do is be yourself and keep doing what you are doing.
And if you are yourself and keep doing what you’re doing, you will
roar straight through the engagement (if that is what you want), up
the aisle, down into your dream house, over to the hospital for your
ﬁrst child, and so on and so forth, until death do you part . . . or until
the chap starts acting like a jerkball, whichever comes ﬁrst.
The point is, the Man Catching Theory gives you a powerful
foundation on which to build something marvelous. So, Doll, I wish
you now melodious adieu. It’s been delicious spending these last six
weeks with . . . whoa!
Aphrodite: Move over, moron. Thou screweth up this book.
E: Ye gods, Goddess! Uh . . . Er, I’m not sure how to address Your
Highness, Your Goddess-ship. You . . . are, you’re the, uh, the God-
dess of Desire? Right? You make us mortals lose our brains? Make
us run around falling in love with each other? That’s you?
Aphrodite: Thou puny twat!
(Aphrodite, who has suddenly appeared in my parlor in a swirl
of foam and shells, turns her aquamarine eyes on me, and sparks ﬂy
from—well, I’m not sure from where . . . her hair? Her forehead?
Most likely she expects me to faint. She is—I can say without exag-
geration—the most beautiful creature I have ever laid eyes on in my
life. A thousand times more ravishing than Halle Berry. Does that
describe it? Aphrodite goes about six foot six, wears a bloodred Do-
natella Versace and little strappy, gold Christian Leboutin sandals
from which her toes peek like dainty mushrooms. Indeed, wherever
she treads, ﬂowers spring up in my carpet. There is also a live dove
in her hair, and my dogs—who always jump on visitors, pin them
174
E. Jean Carroll

against the doorjamb, and attempt to have sex with them—immedi-
ately lie down at Aphrodite’s feet and turn their eyes up at her in to-
tal adoration.)
Aphrodite: Thou hast not ﬁnished with Mr. Right, Rightest Now!
E: No? Well . . . I’m delighted that you . . . would you take a seat,
please, O Lady? May I bring you a—
Aphrodite: Taketh this dictation, thou half-wit.
E: Well . . . of course, my pleasure, Lady.
Aphrodite: Thou wert wrong about thy begonia-romping.
E: Listen, before you start on how wrong I was—I beg your pardon,
Lady, but you’re not planning on making me irresistible are you?
Aphrodite: Type!
E: You see, I have to get this chapter done today, ya know. And I
don’t have time to become any more attractive.
Aphrodite: Type, sow teat!
E: Yes, Lady. But for goddess’s sakes, watch those sparks.
(With a disdainful glance around the room, Aphrodite puts a
hand on her shapely hip, which juts out like Brazil, and, shaking
back her ankle-length hair, pauses a moment to ruminate.)
Aphrodite: If a mortal woman—type! If a mortal female wanteth a man
to falleth for her, she must weareth his nerves to shreds in suspense.
Shreds! The Male Muttonheads must beggeth for the smallest favor!
E: But research shows, excuse me, Lady, the research—
175
Mr. Right, Right Now!

Aphrodite: Pegasus crap on thy “research!”
E: But . . .
Aphrodite: Type! The longer a Muttonhead is madeth to coolest his
heels, the harder and further he fallest.
E: Now, now, Lady. Let’s not go telling the Lovely Reader, whom I
adore, to start behaving like a dim-witted spinster from the 1950s—
Aphrodite: Wilt thou apply thy fat ﬁngers to thy iMac, or shall I smite
thine underwear drawer and turneth thy silken lingerie to snotrags!
E: You can’t—I beg your pardon, Lady—you can’t tell the Lovely
Reader to be a “tease.”
Aphrodite: Minotaur Fart! Every mortal woman hath the instinct of a
tantalizer. It runneth in her blood like wine. Speaketh of which, hath
thou no nectar?
(I cease taking dictation, go to the refrigerator, return, and sac-
riﬁce to the goddess two six-packs of Guinness.)
Aphrodite (downing three bottles, and burping): Women art more in-
terested in sex than the Muttonheads, anywayest.
E: Yes, indeed. A toast! Women are more interested in sex. Well,
thanks for dropping by, Your Highness. I have to print your dictation
now and drive the manuscript to HarperCollins.
Aphrodite: Nay! Thou’s book canst not end. Thou must telleth the
Mortal Reader how to weddeth the Muttonhead.
E: No, Lady. Landing a chap is one thing. It’s based on primal
forces. Clicking, synchronizing, and so on. But marriage? Har! Men
invented marriage. And, frankly, they can keep it.
176
E. Jean Carroll

Aphrodite (opening the second six-pack and draining two bottles):
But the Mortal Woman not feeleth she getteth her drachma’s worth.
E: No, Lady. The Mortal Woman should be very suspicious of anyone
who tells her “how” to get married. Each Mortal Woman is unique.
And each one of her chaps is unique. There’s no single strategy that
works. I’d have to confer with each individual. The best thing is what
I said earlier: if the Lovely Reader is synchronizing with the chap
she loves, she should just be herself and continue doing what she’s
doing. It will lead to what she wants.
Aphrodite: Fie! Fie! At least telleth the Mortal Reader not to rompest
in the begonias with the Muttonhead until the Muttonhead rolleth
on the linoleum and sweareth he loveth the Mortal Reader.
E: I disagree, Lady.
Aphrodite: Zazz! And whenst thou’s worshiped as the Goddess of De-
sire thou canst dictate to a moron. Now, offereth me more sacriﬁces.
E: I’ll make us a stack of peanut butter and Fluff sandwiches, how’s
that?
Aphrodite (festively throwing the last bottle through my living room
window): And bringeth me four hogsheads of macaroni and cheese.
I tireth of speaking of men. 
177
Mr. Right, Right Now!


Good-bye, Doll!
My! How fast the time has gone. Six weeks! I’ve had such a de-
licious time, I wish we didn’t have to part.
What’d you say?
Oh. Your new ﬁancé is asking you to close the book? He wants
you to turn off the light and come to bed? Just tell him, “In a minute,
Moose Balls, you darling! I’m just reading the last sentence of Mr.
Right, Right Now! and then E. Jean wants me to give you a big kiss!
Farewell, Lovely Reader


Could you please switch the light back on, Doll?
Thanks.
This won’t take a moment. I just want to alert you to a momen-
tous—a stunning!—discovery that’s reported today on the front
page of The New York Times. The differences between men and
women are much (oh, much!) greater than previously thought.
Yes.
The genomes of humans and chimpanzees match right down 
the line—our genes and chimps genes are 98.5% identical. The
genomes of men and women match, uh, only about 98%.
That means you, an elegant human female, have more in com-
mon with a female chimpanzee than you do with a human male.
Explains a lot, doesn’t it?
Until this discovery, of course everybody thought male-female
differences were due to sex hormones. Ha! There’s considerably
more going on. “The reality is,” says Dr. David C. Page, leader of
the team of researchers at the Whitehead Institute in Cambridge,
Massachusetts, which announced the ﬁnding, “the genetic differ-
Oop!

ence between males and females absolutely dwarfs all other differ-
ences in the human genome.”
Indeed, we’re so different, the miracle is that men and women
ever get together, let alone get together long enough to have sex to
make more men and women.
Now it’s clear why Ma Nature forces the chaps to fall for you so
quickly, isn’t it? If you didn’t arrive on the scene loaded with inborn
attractors . . . if the mere sight of you didn’t cause a fellow’s
dopamine circuits to start ﬁring . . . if you both didn’t feel that
“click,” why, Doll, you’d have a better chance at a beautiful friend-
ship with Miss Chimpy Lips than with a man.
I think it may also explain (at least partly) why men and women
break up so quickly.
Ma Nature is interested in pushing you together to get her fancy
gene-combinations—not in keeping you together. So you and the
beau may start out wildly enamored, then discover you possess so
little in common it’s a torment to stay together. This is not to say you
and a man can’t enjoy a world-shattering, unnamed, untamed, ever-
lasting love affair . . . or an exceptionally happy friendship; I’m just
saying this 98% thing makes it difﬁcult for some of us.
Bearing that in mind, I’ve drawn up—Lord! I loathe ending Mr.
Right, Right Now! like this, but it’s an emergency—certain facts
must be pointed out, cautions given. Crashing fellows into your
arms without alerting you in advance to particular pitfalls would be
criminal. May my left eyebrow be ripped from my head if I don’t
properly forewarn you!
So. Now. You know The 119 Best Places To Find The Male
Beast, not to mention how to land him once you’ve found him, it is
now imperative that you ponder:
182
Farewell, Lovely Reader

Best Way #1. Always end arguments by turning some deeply
private secret he’s conﬁded to you . . . against him. Then add,
“Screw you, you slobbering half-wit!”
#2. Beg him to read your journal.
#3. Don’t mince words. If he asks, reply, “Why, yes, dear, now that
I look at it, your penis is the smallest I’ve ever seen in my life.”
#4. You know you shouldn’t call him too much, so say to yourself,
“I’m an adult. He’s an adult. I refuse to play stupid games.”
#5. Call him repeatedly.
#6. If he doesn’t call back, e-mail him. If he doesn’t return your e-
mail, fax him a funny little joke. If he still doesn’t call, drop by
his ofﬁce and surprise him with a “cute” card. If he’s not at his
ofﬁce, drive to his house, wait for him at his front door, and,
when he arrives, tell him he can do anything he wants with you.
The 79 Best Ways to LOSE the
Male Beast

#7. Ask him once a week, “So, where do we stand?”
#8. Or, if you prefer a more dramatic scrotum-tightener, ask,
“So, where do we stand as a couple?”
#9. Just happen to have tickets to a play. Convince yourself the
man loves plays. Call him and say, “I have two tickets to
Frozen Eggs where the actress harvests her eggs onstage and
delivers a fascinating monologue about it!” Whatever you
do, don’t have tickets to anything exciting like a play-OFF.
#10. Rarely wear high heels to bed.
#11. Be the ﬁrst woman in recorded history to actually tell a man
exactly how many chaps she’s slept with.
#12. Every time he makes a joke, roll your eyes and say, “Very
funny. Ha ha.”
#13. Count the number of days since the last time you saw him.
Get so freaked-out about the number of days since the last
time you saw him, spend all the time when you actually see
him telling him there’s been too much time since the last
time you saw him and you think he’d see you more often if
he only got to know the “real” you.
#14. He may not want to know about the real you, but never mind.
Keep telling him about the real you anyway. Chase him
down the street if necessary, claw at his trousers if you must,
but by all means, keep telling him all about the real you.
#15. Make him watch the Ya-Ya Sisterhood.
#16. Fixate on the future. Focus on his taking you to the Ba-
hamas for Valentine’s Day.
184
The 79 Best Ways to LOSE the Male Beast

#17. If he does not take you to the Bahamas for Valentine’s Day, act
real light and breezy and then suddenly collapse in a heap,
burst into tears, and inform him he has “intimacy issues.”
#18. Speaking of which, always cry after sex.
#19. Better yet, cry during sex.
#20. Criticize his mother.
#21. Borrow $2,300 from him.
#22. Maintain a ladylike air of digniﬁed seriousness when
snogging.
#23. Ask him about his “personal feelings concerning the relation-
ship” while he’s watching the ﬁnal two minutes of the seventh
game of the NBA championship series. If he doesn’t hear you,
snap off the TV and hurl the remote out the window.
#24. He’ll refuse to speak to you after you’ve hurled the remote out
the window, but so what? This is an excellent opportunity to
confront him about his “fear of being inferior.”
#25. Do you own an old pair of baggy maroon sweatpants? Wear
them.
#26. Every night.
#27. Blind yourself to his faults. (Of course, if you happen to see
a fault by mistake, immediately point it out to him.)
#28. Is he feeling a tad overwhelmed by the serious turn your af-
fair is taking? Surprise him with loads of expensive gifts for
no reason.
#29. Say sweetly, “Either your idiot dog goes . . . or I go.”
185
The 79 Best Ways to LOSE the Male Beast

#30. Withhold sex for two weeks.
#31. In the ﬁrst month of your affair, tell him you love riding in
his Jeep with the top down. In the second month, tell him
you sometimes like the top up, but you love all the windows
down. In the third month, tell him to roll the top and the
windows up, or he can stick his frickin’ Jeep up his
frickin’ . . . (you get the picture).
#32. Don’t pay back the $2,300.
#33. Make complicated plans for the two of you to spend lots and
lots and lots of time with your parents.
#34. Nag.
Nag.
Nag.
Nag.
Nag.
#35. Wear his favorite shirt without asking and spill Cherry Coke
on it while driving his new Lexus, which you accidentally
crash into the car in front of you at a stoplight.
#36. Wrap your whole life around him.
#37. Reassure him that all men, uh, have, uh, difﬁculties in the
sack, but not to worry—you’ve discussed his problem with
his friends, and they all think it’s hilarious.
#38. Giggle at his receding hairline.
#39. When he calls you at your ofﬁce to say he loves you and that
he’s going to go shoot baskets with the guys after work, in-
form him, “No, Humpfart. The only shooting going on will
186
The 79 Best Ways to LOSE the Male Beast

be me shooting you if you don’t take that Pilates class with
me at seven!”
#40. Keep pestering him to explain what the Matrix is—in the
middle of it.
#41. Stop shaving your legs, except when you shave your legs for
“special occasions,” and then use his new razor.
#42. When he asks you and your kids to attend a religious service
at his church/synagogue/mosque, snicker and say, “Please.
Your religion is a form of child abuse.”
#43. Tell him oral sex makes you gag . . . except when he does it.
#44. Believe he won’t mind if you’ve gained 37 pounds.
#45. When he’s conducting an important client presentation, call
him with an “emergency.” When he comes on the line, tell
him excitedly that your psychic just told you that you and he
were married in a former life in 16th-century Scotland, and
that you’re destined to be together forever and ever and ever
and ever!
#46. Festering resentment. Try it.
#47. Continue to hold the opinion “men are babies.”
#48. Never tell him he makes you happy. Never say that some-
times you’re so proud to be with him you want to weep for
joy.
#49. Drink too much at a party and vomit on his shoes.
#50. Inform him that his ﬁve-year-old daughter “needs to see a
therapist” because she refused to kiss you hello.
187
The 79 Best Ways to LOSE the Male Beast

#51. Never cook anything for him.
#52. Refer to his car as “a piece of shit.”
#53. Don’t let him miss you. (I.e., spend every blessed moment
with/near/on/under/over him—particularly those blessed mo-
ments when you feel bloated and paranoid.)
#54. Let him miss you too much. Rarely come home from the of-
ﬁce till after 10:30 P.M.
#55. Invite your most attractive girlfriends over to play croquet.
#56. When dining with friends, if he begins talking about his
dream of taking poor, underprivileged kids sailboating,
snort and tell him he’s “full of crap.”
#57. Get old. (I don’t mean chronologically.)
#58. Keep yourself informed about his activities. Call around to his
friends and check up on him. When he walks in the door, sniff
him over like you’re a pit bull looking for a Quarter-Pounder.
#59. Make him take the quizzes in Ladies’ Mags.
#60. Explain that if primal man could learn to walk upright in a
mere 2 million years, a moron like him can walk to the in-
cinerator with the garbage.
#61. Make him go to couples therapy with you if his LMQS (Ladies’
Mag Quiz Score) is lower than your sister’s boyfriend’s.
#62. Act like the challenge before you is not to become someone,
but to become someone’s wife.
#63. Rarely be in a playful mood.
188
The 79 Best Ways to LOSE the Male Beast

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
#64. You know everything there is to know about him, so just
smile and mentally plan the outﬁt you’re wearing tomorrow
while he’s talking.
#65. Never have your wallet with you.
#66. Trick him, dupe him, deceive him with every breath you
take—i.e., follow The Rules.
#67. When you’re at a formal dance and you bump into an old
beau, throw your arms around the beau’s neck, hold your
pelvis against his, and squeal, “Oh, God! Oh, God!”
#68. When you run out of things to ﬁght about, invite his mother
over to help you “organize” his closets.
#69. Recently met the man of your dreams on-line? When you meet
him in person, bring along the sweater you’ve knit for him.
#70. Refuse to tie him up and play Slaveboy and Empress because
it may “put wrinkles in your good scarves.”
#71. Spend as much time with your hair and makeup as you
need . . . particularly when he’s waiting in the car to take
you to dinner with his boss.
#72. If he’s experiencing career difﬁculties (see #71), gently point
out that when he loses this job, he’ll probably never get an-
other one.
#73. If you went to a better college than he did, never let him for-
get it.
#74. If you’re worried he’ll discover how “unlikable” you are once
he gets to know you, start acting really, really obnoxious
right now.
189
The 79 Best Ways to LOSE the Male Beast
www.Ebook777.com

#75. After going out four times, instruct your children to call him
Daddy—even if they are over 25.
#76. If you earn more money than he does, make sure you boost
his ego by letting him pay for absolutely everything.
#77. When you’re driving home from a party, refer to every single
woman he talked to as “a famous slut.”
#78. Take yourself very very very seriously.
#79. Let him know that every day is Judgment Day as far as you
and he are concerned and that you’d rather be right than
happy.
Well.
Egads.
That’s done. Whew. Lord! Look at the time! Must dress! There’s
a party tonight—an exceedingly posh, foul one—a veritable hive of
writers, movie stars, politicians, prominent and extremely beautiful
people, and so on, and it so happens I possess an exceptionally
charming new dress with gold spangles around the hem—so must
ﬂy, Doll! Will drop Mr. Right, Right Now! off at HarperCollins, and
then nothing but dissipation and mandarin martinis . . . so, again, I
embrace you, I kiss you, I bid you melodious adieu!
Wait—
Am I forgetting something? What else is there to say? Oh, that
98% business about having more in common with female chim-
panzees than human males . . .
It’s good to know. But, really, love doesn’t love laws, now does
it? And you can make love last. How? Preserve your mystery. And if
you’ve clicked with a man, all (all!) you must do is follow . . .
190
The 79 Best Ways to LOSE the Male Beast

Man Catching Law #16
If You Like a Lad,
and He Likes You,
Just Keep On Doing . . .
What You Do.
Keep doing what you’re doing, Doll, do what works, and don’t do
what doesn’t work. Simple as that! So, here’s old E. Jean wishing you
health, happiness, and worshipful hordes of handsome lovers!
P.S. I also have a stunning dress, Armani, pale blue, perfect for
wearing to a ceremony, so I’d appreciate a wedding invitation, ya
know.
191
The 79 Best Ways to LOSE the Male Beast


Now, isn’t it just like that ungrateful wench to go running off 
to a party and not thank anybody. The silly twit would be nobody
without:
David Hirshey
Megan Newman
Jane Friedman
Alex Postman
Michael Solomon
Robbie Myers
Shelby Meizlik
Jennifer Swihart
Kate Stark
Katie Couric
Cande Carroll
Tom Robbins
Thanks!

Marsha Pinkstaff
Marilyn Johnson
Carol Martin
Jesse Kornbluth
George Clooney
Nanci Ross
Oprah Winfrey
Karen Collins
Andrea Brown
Leah Carlson-Stanisic
Rob Fleder
Tom Carroll III
Ginia Bellafante
Miss Squire
Greg Talenfeld
Danielle Mattoon
Melanie Rock
Joe Terry
Barbara Carroll
Sarah Lazin
Nick Trautwein
David Quammen
Beth Tilson
Roger Ailes
Hannah Storm
Joanne Mazzella
Tom Carroll
Betty Carroll
Matt Lauer
194
Thanks!

If there are any foul-ups, gaffs, or errors in this so-called book
(or anywhere else in the universe for that matter), the individuals
listed above are 100% responsible. Carry on.
(Signed)
Mother Nature
195
Thanks!

DEAR E. JEAN: My boyfriend and I live together. Three
months ago I found him on the Internet looking at porn. I
was shocked! We discussed it and decided that if either
of us were going to view porn it would be together and it
would be a movie. I felt this arrangement was perfect. He
gets his porn AND his own porn star — me.
Last month I found him viewing Internet porn AGAIN!
We talked about it, he said he was sorry; but I was so
upset, I couldn’t even bring myself to sleep in the same
bed with him. He promised all porn would stop.   This
month we celebrated our fifth anniversary and fell in love
all over again. Then I come home last week and guess
what?????? He’s viewing porn on the Internet again!
This hurts me!  I told him it makes me feel that I’m not
good enough in bed for him. He assured me I am a great
E-Book Extra
E. Jean’s Absolutely Favorite 
11 Questions (And Answers!)

lover, but I’m ready to leave this relationship.   I love him,
he’s fine in all other areas, I own 50% of the house, but
isn’t it time to move on? 
—Ready To Go in Colorado
HONEY, HONEY, HONEY, HONEY, HONEY, has the heat from
Jenna Jameson’s Brazilian bikini wax melted your brain? Calm
yourself, for heavens sakes. Here’s the hideous truth: almost every
guy you know is looking at this odious tripe. And the reason? Your
man (he sounds like quite a nice chap, actually) is simply following
the plan Mother Nature devised. To insure the next generation, Ma
created a rabid desire in the male beast to gaze at (and poke the
blazes out of) naked women. 
Now, when you take your nice guy’s natural bent and mix it with
beautiful, willing, round-the-clock broadband-speed strumpets per-
forming just ridiculously outrageous hard-core sex acts, you arrive
at our current situation — I-Porn, the repulsive wallpaper of our
culture.
Yes, it’s foul. Your cyber floozy isn’t asking your guy to pick up
his socks (unless, of course, it’s to use the argyles to tie her to the
bed post), isn’t even hinting he should please her; and while per-
forming feats of debauchery so lewd it would make Prince Charles
blush, she looks fabulous! If your man watches too much (more than
two hours a week in my opinion) he’ll begin wanting your breasts to
jut out like toilet plungers, and for you to perform that debauched
little trick he just saw. So you are exactly right in attempting to limit
your lover’s viewing.
So what do you do? I love your anti-bourgeois “Baby, Let’s look
dirty movies together,” idea. An erotic film directed by avant-garde
woman such as Candida Royalle can be a delicious treat. (I once
2
E. Jean Carroll

interviewed Candida.  What a hoot!  Her movies actually develop
plots! More importantly, they show women being pleased by men.)
Or, go to sexsites4women.com, a witty guide to various intriguing
(non-stupid) romps on the Internet.  
But I don’t think you should try to totally confine the ways your
lover conducts his erotic life. That’s why severing all high-speed
internet connections into your house (and then setting up a secret
wi-fi connection on your own lap top) won’t work; it will only cause
more sneaking and lying, plus your chap will lose his job because
he’s looking at porn at work. So have a heart-to-heart with your
wanker. Oop!  Did I say that? I mean, your man, of course. Agree on
how much erotica is good for both of you.
DEAR E. JEAN: I’ve been dating Mr. Man for eight years. I’m
twenty-five, so doing the quick calculation, you’ll see
we’ve been together since high school. In my heart I
always knew he was THE ONE. A short time ago, Mr. Man
decides he has a wonderful business idea and needs seed
money. I believe in his potential and give him $5,000,
which is $5,000 more than I have to spare. I work in New
York as a director of fabric merchandising and sourcing
— great title, but my salary is $50,000 a year; and taking
out a $5,000 loan on my credit card was not a smart thing
to do (incurring the interest, et cetera), because my story
now gets very sad. 
Mr. Man, as it turns out, did not fancy me as the Love
of His Life. He’d been having an affair; and the “business
3

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
idea” was a farce. He wanted the money (as I’ve now
learned) to purchase an engagement ring for Miss Soon-
to-be-Mrs.-Man. 
Then he leaves me, flat-out. Just gone. As for our
apartment, I’m the only one on our lease, thus I’m
responsible for the entire rent, and it’s twice what I can
pay. E. Jean, my diary can help only so much. I’ve no idea
what to do. I’m so sad and embarrassed. How blind I was!
I’m tempted to file for bankruptcy. But that would ruin my
credit history, and I have plans for my life — a dream and
a career I wish to follow. Please give me some of your
wisdom. Or send me a joke. I need to laugh! 
— Jaded in New York 
JADED, DEAR GIRL: Congratulations on ridding yourself of one of
the filthiest money-sucking swine ever to soil the pristine pages of
Elle. Indeed, Mr. Man is such a vile Valentine that, for the first time
in the annals of advice columning, I’m calling down the dreaded
Ask EEEeeee Curse of the Cullions: the sacred command to women
around the world to don golf shoes and kick the Accursed One in
the balls whenever they run across him. 
Everybody place your hand over your left bra strap and repeat after
me: 
“In the name of the Goddess of Male Appendages, we hereby
command that the insect specimen Mr. Man is smitten with said
Curse, not to be lifted until February 14, 2008, or until he sends a
check for $7,000 (the extra is for emotional damages) to Miss Jaded,
whichever comes first.” 
4
E. Jean Carroll
www.Ebook777.com

Now, Jaded dear, let’s give your poor diary a few pages it won’t
forget. First, get a roommate to help pay the rent. Better, get two
roommates. (Forget subletting: the last thing you need now is a
move.) You can either try a roommate service, or you can avail your-
self of the roommate-matching programs provided by your college
alumnae Web site, your church, or my Girlfriends Network
(www.GreatGirlfriends.com). 
Second, get in touch with the Consumer Credit Counseling
Service (800-966-3328). They’ll help you create a debt-repayment
plan, draw up a budget, and teach you how to pump so much money
back into your life, you’ll have to hire Suze Orman to carry your wal-
let. 
And now, Miss Jaded, about that laugh you asked for. Invite
your girlfriends over, whip up the Valentine Punch, and each of you
propose a toast to Mr. Man, celebrating his physical defects.
(“Ladies I give you Mr. Man’s zit-embroidered butt — it’s so flat it
had to declare bankruptcy!”) Then move on to the defects of his
brain, and by the time you reach his sexual shortcomings, you’ll all
be rolling on the floor. And that’s your greatest weapon, Miss Jaded.
Every time you laugh at Mr. Man, he dies a little.
DEAR E. JEAN: Okay, I haven’t met the man I want to share
my entire life with yet. So what’s a dignified way to
respond to people who ask if I’m married and make con-
descending remarks regarding the matter? For instance,
I get this quite a bit: 
Other Person: So, are you married? 
5

Me: No. 
Other Person: How old are you? 
Me: Thirty. 
(Pause) 
Other Person: Oh. Well, that’s okay. I have a friend
who’s thirty, and she’s not married yet either. 
Did I ask for validation? No! Many people just assume
I must be lonely, depressed, not worthy, et cetera. And
God forbid I attempt to defend myself. The look on the
person’s face becomes one of pity, as in, “Awww, you
poor thing.” I even had one woman say to me, “Well,
don’t worry. You have the rest of the year to find some-
one.” E. Jean, what should I say? 
—Sick of the Wedding March 
YE, GODS! A foul alternative is before you, dear Sick. You must
either suffer the evils of being asked if you are married, or find a
husband and suffer the evils of actually being married. 
So hold your head up! Don’t answer like you’re in goddamn Sunday
School. You are one of the Free Dolls. A member of the Divine
Darlings, one of the cool, the strong, the beautiful! What should you
say when asked if you are married? Here are some suggestions;
choose based on the impression you’d like to make: 
6
E. Jean Carroll

Combative: Am I married or not? Either way, fart blossom, you’re
going to regret having asked me that question. 
Forthright: I’ve made many mistakes in my life. Thank God mar-
riage isn’t one of them. 
Materialist: I plan to elope soon. Yes, indeed. Just as soon as I can
find a very rich dead man. 
Practical: As a matter of fact, I’m not married. Whenever I feel a
yearning for wedlock, I hire a big fat guy to come to the house,
remove all his clothes, hold the remote control between his legs,
and refuse to talk to me. 
Self-sufficient: Why do you ask if I’m married? Have they stopped
selling vibrators? 
Remember, life is not about being married, Miss Sick. It’s about out-
witting annoying people who ask if you are married. One additional
choices might prove useful. You can reply with the great line attrib-
uted to Kate Hepburn: “Why should I give up being adored by many
men to be ignored by one?”
DEAR E. JEAN: I’m a working model, an entrepreneur and
Playboy’s June playmate, yet I’m still home alone every
night. 
My problem isn’t meeting men, it’s keeping men. My
last boyfriend of six months decided he didn’t want to be
7

with a “phony model” or someone “who wants the whole
world to see her naked.” I won’t even mention, or rather,
elaborate, on the fact that I’ve modeled full time for five
years and did Playboy before him (shot it, that is); and he
knew about it before our first date. 
In the almost two months I’ve lived in New York, I’ve
yet to meet anyone — unless you count my very nice
doorman. I’m not looking for a man to be a wife to, or to
take care of me; just someone to hang out with once a
week. Am I to remain dateless and single till I’m tired of
achieving and ready to be a caretaker? What can I do to
make men more secure with me and my job? Please help! 
—Karin
MY DEAREST KARIN: Thank you, sweetheart! At this moment, I
confess, I feel ecstasy. Ye Gods, I mean, what’s the use of having an
advice column unless I get a letter every now and then from one of
the most splendid females on the planet saying she’s sitting home
just like me? 
But enough of this exultation. Let’s see what we can do to make
you happier. First of all, my darling, you are so beautiful (I have a
subscription to Playboy) that just looking at your face would send a
normal man into a state of near-panic. Second, a glance at your body
would finish him off. So, third, take advantage of your advantages.
When you meet someone you like — someone strong, smart, cheer-
ful, ambitious, gentlemanly and kind (remember, you’re rising fast
in the world, set your sights high) ask him out. The point is, you can
have any man you want. (For a time. To keep him you must possess
8
E. Jean Carroll

an invincible confidence in yourself and a good mind.) After all,
who wrote “If your ship doesn’t come in, swim out to it,” on her
Playmate Data Sheet? Now, as for making “men more secure” . . . .
You can love a chap gigantically, eternally, madly and stamp his
initials in fire on your heart, but if he’s not secure in himself, hon’,
you could be all the months of the year, and he won’t feel safe for a
minute.
DEAR E. JEAN:  I’ve been corresponding with a man on an
internet dating site and we’ve made a date for two weeks
from now. He’s fantastic! Funny, handsome, great career,
etc. I told a close friend, via instant messaging, to go to
the site and try to guess who my new fave guy was. Here’s
our conversation which I have copied and pasted.  (I’m
BEBE.  She’s GOO — not our real monikers.)  When she
found him on the site, she instantly messaged:
GOO: He says he wants a “down-to earth”….
“preppy” girl 
. . . that’s me!
BEBE: And me!  
GOO: I wouldn’t have thought he was for u. He
seems to want a “less fabulous” type.
9

BEBE: Gee, thanks.
GOO: Not an insult!  You’re just not what anyone
would call “down to earth” that’s all. You’re kind
of high-maintenance.
BEBE: I like to think I’m complex. Anyway we have
a date coming up.
GOO: Can I e-mail him?
BEBE: No!
GOO: Why not? You’re not involved with him!!!
People all over the country are e-mailing him.
BEBE:  But I only wanted to tell you about him.
GOO:  I didn’t know u owned the rights to this site!!
So let me get this straight: You’ve put your stamp
on every guy in the 5 state area?
BEBE: Are you kidding with me?
10
E. Jean Carroll

GOO:  No.  Why can’t I e-mail him too? Just for fun.
What he says he’s looking for in a woman
describes me to a T!  Let’s both e-mail him and let
him choose.  Fair?
BEBE: But you already HAVE a boyfriend.
GOO:  You don’t even KNOW this guy. Have u slipped
over the edge? This is supposed to be fun. We
could both do it!
BEBE: You would write to him, knowing I’m inter-
ested in him and that we have a date? You don’t
see a problem in this?
GOO: No. What are u so worried about?
E. Jean, I am now questioning my sanity.  Help!  What
should I do now? I really like this guy 
—Tormented in New York
MY DEAR TORMENTED: Drop her. A “close friend’s” duty is to
exaggerate your perfections, turn your faults into virtues, encourage
your romantic adventures, and not steel your future husband. She’s
a viper. Out with her! I don’t like Miss Slithery leaving a trail of poi-
son in my column!
11

DEAR E. JEAN: I’m extremely self-conscious and it’s caus-
ing problems for an otherwise beautiful relationship. The
facts:
1.  I have a tall, skinny body that looks great in
clothes, but flabby, shapeless and disgusting out
of them. I find my naked body so repulsive I
absolutely can’t let anyone see me naked in the
light of day. This is NOT sexual shame. I just think I
look ugly. 
2.  Because of this I refuse to let my boyfriend see
me naked. I won’t have sex or shower with him
unless every single light is out.
3.  My boyfriend is the most loving, adoring man.
He loves everything about me, my intellect, my
sense of humor, my wit, and every inch of my body.
He’s not superficial and I know that in reality, he
could never find me ugly. Nonetheless, I can’t let
him see me naked. The thought of him gazing at
my cellulite and every other flaw terrifies me no
end!  
The problem is this is really hurting him. He feels our
sex life isn’t intimate and honest because I won’t expose
my nakedness to him. He’s frustrated and sad. What
12
E. Jean Carroll

should I do? Please don’t suggest therapy. I can’t afford
therapy right now — anyway, intellectually, I know I
should love my body. 
—Obsessed
MY DEAREST OBSESSED: You’ve fallen prey to the foulest form
of lying — the falsehoods you tell yourself. Disgusting? Repulsive?
Ugly? Come, come, Honey Cake, nobody said you have to “love”
your flab balls. But you must learn to see yourself in truer light and
not give a damn about your imperfections, or your life will be
destroyed. And for that, you must see a therapist. I realize you can’t
afford a fancy Park Avenue shrink, so contact the largest Medical
school or teaching hospital near you. Many psych departments run
free group therapy sessions and/or body image treatment programs
at lost cost. 
And here’s the best part, while you’re in therapy, you can be
enjoying fabulous sex! Yes! Your boyfriend will freakin’ love it!
Here’s what you do:
A master lighting technician can make Lennox Lewis look like
Alicia Keyes. So buy one of those 25-watt stained-glass light bulbs
and a package of six votive candles. (Lighting: total cost $4)  Return
home, light ‘em up and stage a run-through. Try combinations all
over the bedroom.  If you have to haul around a cheap wall mirror
to test the effects, do it. Note: I just tried the above advice. In day-
light my body looks like a dynamited bridge abutment. By stained
glass/candle light — EGADS! I belong on the cover of Elle Girl.
Next, rent the movie Tom Jones and study what a multitude
of petticoats, corsets, and riding boots can be worn whilst poking
like blazes in the hay. The fact is nobody, not even your boyfriend,
13

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
wants you stark naked. A dress pulled half-way off —  Diane Lane
in the Unfaithful bathroom scene — creates a frenzied desire in
men (and women) to play with what’s hidden/ forbidden underneath.  
So start with thigh-high stockings with lace tops. If you have to
yank them up to pubis level, so be it.  (That takes care of your legs.)
Add a blouse three sizes too small and tie it just under your bust
(which has the effect of lifting your nipples to your shoulders.) What
else? It’s up to you. Lingerieavenue.com offers stretch lace catsuits
that cover nearly every milimeter of your body; but I suggest a
school girl’s pleated skirt which you’ve hemmed so short, your tail-
bone thinks you forgot to get dressed.  
These items stay on while making love, because the main rea-
son your boyfriend wants the lights on is not to see your body, Miss
O; it’s to drink in all the pleasure and love pouring from your half-
closed eyes. 
DEAR E. JEAN: A few months ago I was fired from my job.
It was a shock. I had previously received excellent per-
formance evaluations. My surprise was exacerbated by
the fact that on my way out, they said very hurtful things
that indicated to me that they disapproved of not only my
work performance, but my entire life — from my choice
of friends to my fashion sense. 
It’s very unnerving to think there’s a group of people
across town who’ve convinced themselves I’m a demon.
I’m twenty-nine, and up to this point my career has been
14
E. Jean Carroll
www.Ebook777.com

stellar. I’ve held jobs that, as a younger woman, I’d only
dreamed of. Yet being fired has left me filled with shame,
hate, and revenge. 
I now work at a boring, lifeless job just to pay the bills.
I’m planning an exciting career change in a couple of
months, but before that happens, I need to figure out how
to let go of the anger and hurt. 
— Shattered 
MY DEAR SHATTERED: Let go? No. 
No. No. No. No. No. Remember the anger, doll. Your “shame,
hate, and revenge” will fuel your future triumph faster than three
Harvard degrees. In fact, I wish all Elle readers, whom I love, the
shock of being fired at least once in their lives (and then, of course,
the good fortune to be hired at three times the salary. Nothing gives
a woman new ideas, courage, and strength like being canned by a
pack of imbeciles. 
What did you think: that success can be achieved without diffi-
culty? That great women are never tested? Do you imagine your
“exciting career change” would have occurred to you without this
savage jolt? 
Your former employers believe you are a “demon.” I salute you!
Better a dangerous dingbat than a prissy little conformist. I’m not
advising you to hold the anger forever. But use it while you got it,
honey. It will lead you toward a victory so outrageous your old firm
will be forced to flee town. 
15

DEAR E. JEAN: Since birth, I’ve been afflicted with a skin
disorder that has defined my life — all twenty-seven
years of it. From my neck down to my feet, my skin is fur-
rowed and badly discolored (it looks like burns mixed
with scars and is a dark bluish color). 
I’ve seen many doctors, herbalists, etc., all with no
cure. Somehow, my face was spared. (I guess God has a
sense of humor, mercy, or something.) I’ve never been on
a date, had a boyfriend, or been intimate with anyone. I’m
always covered up, even in the 105 degree San Diego
heat. My friends say, “Hey, wear short sleeves,” but I’d
rather sweat than deal with people’s reactions. If I had a
wish, it wouldn’t be for riches or dazzling beauty, it would
be to wear a tank top, shorts, and sandals for one sum-
mer day. 
When I hear women griping about not wearing some-
thing because of five extra pounds, all I can say is
“Wanna trade?” No one in this world would be a taker. 
E. Jean, I want your help. Recently, my dentist deter-
mined that I need extensive dental work (crowns, root
canals) or I’ll lose my teeth (this is linked to my condition
— gums are a tissue like the skin). I’ve tried to get insti-
tutional loans or borrow from my friends and family, all to
no avail. 
I’m perpetually broke. I’m in veterinary school, my job
is low-paying, and my credit cards are maxed out. E. Jean,
as strange as it sounds, my face (including my teeth) is
16
E. Jean Carroll

all I have. It’s the only factor of my appearance I have any
control over. My face allows me to function (albeit as an
imposter) in day-to-day life. 
E. Jean, I’m at my wit’s end. I can’t handle a crisis of
this magnitude. I can’t deflect another blow from life.
How much can one person take? Can you help me figure
out a way to get the dental work done? Please, E. Jean, I
can’t be toothless by twenty-eight! I’m at a point in my
life where I’m broken into irreparable pieces. I’m ready
to simply lie down and die. Just no more. 
— Help 
MY DEAR ONE: Good God! How much you’ve suffered! I believe
many readers will agree when I say I’ve never appreciated my veri-
table truckloads of blessings till I read (and reread) your letter.
Thank you, thank you, from my heart. And now let’s get your teeth
taken care of. 
You have an appointment at 4:00 Monday with Dr. Avi Donitza.
He’s a senior resident in the prosthodontics program at UCLA
School of Dentistry. (A friend of mine swears by his work and
reports his healing powers are remarkable — not to mention that he
is “tall, blond, green-eyed, and absolutely gorgeous.”) I’ve spoken
with the affable Dr. Donitza and he told me he’ll consult with his
program director, Dr. Cooney, and perhaps they’ll be able to waive
all costs in your case. (Note to other dentally deprived readers:
University dental schools across the country charge about half of
what private dentists charge.) 
And speaking of school, as soon as you finish, Darling, I sug-
gest you bid adieu to that oven you live in and move to Montana (I
17

lived there for twelve years and never put on a sleeveless anything)
or, even better, Alaska. Get the hell out of California. It’s an
absolute goddamned asylum of body-worshiping idiots. 
HANG ON, READERS! I’d just gotten off the phone with the
young woman who wrote the letter (and what a dear, sweet-tempered
soul she is) when another wonderful dentist called. Dr. Kevin
Frawley, in Beverly Hills, also wants to help. See, kumquats, you
never know what the next day will bring. 
Hello, dolls, let me tell you a little story about Tits. I got Tits at
the Bozeman, Montana, dog pound. I said to the pound attendant,
“Which dog is up next to be croaked?” The attendant said, “That
one.” I turned, and there in a cage was a short, fat, blue-haired
dingo grinning at me like Little Richard. I took her home. Tits was
the most educated dog I’ve ever known. Why? Tits knew how to cut
her losses. Example? One time, Tits toiled two hours digging up an
elk bone (don’t worry, the elk had been around Montana seven times,
met Meg Ryan twice, and expired happy), and just when Tits got the
bone wedged between her paws for a comfortable chew, I held out a
cheese sandwich. Tits dropped the bone and took the sandwich. 
You never saw Tits screwing up her life, flogging an old bone just
because she’d invested a lot of time and trouble in it. When some
Jarlsberg came along, Tits was wise enough to grab it. So remember
the fat blue dog the next time you find yourself going down the sink-
hole of a boring job or hideous love affair. Just stop and ask . . . 
WHAT WOULD TITS DO? #1 
18
E. Jean Carroll

DEAR E. JEAN: I’m a graduate student in anthropology. I
have a young son from a first marriage. I don’t believe
women need men to be happy, but I’ve found myself in an
unsatisfying relationship. 
I’ve been dating a man for three and a half years. He
has no goals in life other than to play pool, watch sports,
drink beer, and smoke pot. Believe it or not, he is nice to
his mother and loyal to his (partying) friends. 
But he doesn’t want to go anywhere other than the
local bar. I have begged him to go to a play, a movie, hik-
ing, ANYTHING, but he won’t. He even complains that I
have “too many” books! He has no car, so the few times
we go anywhere, like his mother’s house, I drive. He has
no phone and refuses to get one. Therefore I have to wait
for him to call at appointed times (from a phone booth). 
I’ve rebelled several times and broken up with him.
Why on earth do I always go back? I miss him when I don’t
hear from him. I dream of what my son will be when he
grows up. I dream of traveling and reaching my academ-
ic goals. I dream of stimulating conversation, and a man
who has a sense of purpose in his life. I can’t even talk to
my boyfriend about these things because he has no
interest. What should I do? 
—Torn 
MY POOR, DEAR TORN: What should you do? Send me the
address of that poolhall, first of all, I want to dispatch a pack of
Tits’s sisters to tear the seat out of Mr. Wacky Weed’s pants. 
19

Meanwhile, just let me say as gently as possible, in the quietest,
softest whisper … your Boyfriend is a LOSER! Lumphead! Dud!
Nincompoopl Floperool Washout! The only balls in his possession
are the ones he shoots with a cue stick. You are being tortured with
spiritual, emotional, financial, conversational, theatrical, telephon-
ical, and probably sexual (because of all the reefer he smokes) dep-
rivation. But it’s your choice. Somebody has to take the blame for
putting up with all this crap. I beg your pardon for being harsh, Torn
dear, but you are who you date. 
It’s time to do what Tits would do: Cut your losses. 
The fellow (nice as he may be) is a pathetic example for your
son. Not only that, you’re preventing yourself from meeting the
“man who has a sense of purpose in his life,” because you’re going
down, excuse me, on a stinking ship. 
Fortunately, you’ve had a bit of practice breaking up with the
clod, so this time you will prepare yourself for “miss[ing] him when
[you] don’t hear from him.” Write out a list of his flabbergasting
drawbacks. Make many copies of the list. Tape them to your refrig-
erator, your toilet seat, your dashboard, your desk, your bed, your
brassiere, your mirror. 
You have tons of talent, tons of brains, tons of dreams, Torn.
Don’t let this loser hold you back. 
P.S. Be ready: He may whip himself into such paroxysms of
action when he realizes you’ve left him, he might actually go so far
as to talk about getting a phone. Don’t fall for it. 
DEAR E. JEAN: I can’t stop eating. It’s been an issue ever
since I can remember. I recall being on diets since I was
ten. I’m about twenty pounds over weight and it troubles
20
E. Jean Carroll

and preoccupies my mind every day of my life. I’m a col-
lege student and do accounting for a living. I’ve had a
good childhood and all of that, so I don’t understand why
I do this to myself. 
I’m either day-dreaming of the next time I’ll be alone,
left to eat whatever I like, or worrying about how many
days I’ll have to starve and go to the gym to make up for
the pounds I’ve eaten. It’s not that I’m ignorant about
nutrition; when I’m binging, my attitude is, “I’ll worry
about it later.” 
Another thing is that I measure practically all happi-
ness and success with how much the scale reads. When
I’ve gained weight, even if it’s just two pounds, I feel like
staying in and not facing anyone — as if they too will rec-
ognize the failure I am. I feel as though I have no will
power. I’m only 5’2” tall and currently weigh 140 pounds.
I’ve practically stopped wearing all of my fitted skirts and
wear only loose clothing, hoping no one will notice,
including my boyfriend. 
E. Jean, I’m asking for some encouragement. I know
I must eat less and exercise more! I just need a few
words to get me started and feeling optimistic. Thanks.
—Weighing In 
P.S. I plan to start a diet again tomorrow. Wish me luck
and I hope to be a few pounds lighter by the time I read
your response. 
21

Dear Weighing: Mother of Delectable Cheese Doodles! Don’t you
understand that it’s the diets that make you so desperately unhap-
py? That it’s the diets that make you feel like a “failure” and send
you off on binges so bad you can’t even move your eyeballs? Now,
listen, my luv, I’m going to tell you the truest thing you’ll ever hear
about losing weight: 
DIETS DON’T WORK. 
Why? Because after a couple of days of dieting, or as you call it
— “starving” — your brain begins to lose its grip. It starts to
believe it’s wired into the Incredible Shrinking Woman and starts
shouting: “HAAGAN DAZ! HAAGAN DAZ! YOU DINGBAT! And
when that doesn’t work, the crazy little bugger lowers your metabo-
lism; and when that doesn’t work, it sends out waves of hideous
cravings so powerful you suddenly find yourself in the middle of the
kitchen with your jaws locked around a can of Betty Crocker Deluxe
Frosting. So, the question is, aside from beating your tongue to
death with a stick, how do you get to a healthy weight? Here’s how: 
1. Eat. Any food you want. (Miraculously when you’re
“allowed” everything, you’re not tormented. Just don’t over-
do it.) 
2. Take a big hammer and annihilate your scales. (Your
success and failure in life does not depend on a number.) 
3. Accept yourself as you are. (And forget that foul- looking
“loose clothing.” Buy something dazzling in your size
tomorrow. You’ll look great, and when you look great, you’ll
feel too fantastic to fall face down in a pizza.) 
22
E. Jean Carroll

4. Drink a couple of glasses of skim milk every two or three
hours. (This is my personal trick. The protein stokes your
brain, keeps you alert, improves your memory, hikes your
mental performance and kills the “hungries.” Buy it in the
instant non-fat dry form, and mix it with water. It’s cheap-
er.) 
5. If you go berserk and down a can of Pringles, so what?
There is not a thing in this world better than a can of
Pringles. The cool thing is to stop after one can. 
6. If you can’t stop after one can, call me. And I’ll come to
your house and pull all your teeth out. 
Other than that, my dear dove crumpet, life is too short to worry
about your weight. Let that lovely 5’2” carcass of yours whoop it up
— dress it in fine clothes, ply it with margaritas, give it some good
books to read, some grand music to listen to, some great deeds to
do, and some marvelous friends to make merry with. And good luck! 
DEAR E. JEAN: You’re going to laugh at this one! I feel a bit
stupid writing to you, given the many serious problems
people come to you with, however I’ve been more and
more distressed lately. So here goes: I can only reach
orgasm orally or manually, and men’s expertise being
what it is, it’s rare that I ever climax with a man. 
Believe me, it’s not from lack of trying. I’ve been with
guys who do it for hours and go to all lengths, but to no
23

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
avail. (Even when I touch myself during sex, it can be
really difficult and take a long time.) Usually after a cou-
ple of hours the guy gives up, and an orgasm is something
I get for myself, furtively in the bathroom afterward. 
Other times, I just lie there frustrated next to a guy
who’s satisfied. Honestly, E. Jean, I’ve never, ever, been
uptight about sex or considered if “bad” or taboo. In fact,
I enjoy it very much, except for the bit at the end when
the guy climaxes and I don’t. 
My last lover was great in bed, very adept with his
hands, but it was just impossible to get it right. He
inquired what he had to do for me to finish, and I asked
him to stimulate me orally. Later he said, “You should
become a dyke if that’s the only way you can get off!” He
then told me about the multiorgasmic girlfriend he had
before me who always came three or four times whenev-
er they had sex. It literally made me want to hide some-
where and cry. 
I feel so humiliated and inadequate. I’m unfortunate-
ly one of those doomed to be labeled “clitoral.” 
— Feeling Like a Freak
MY DEAR FREAK: Doomed? Did you say “doomed” and “clitoral”
in the same sentence? You giddy little ingrate! I hope to God your
clitoris didn’t hear you. Your clitoris is a princess . . . a witch, a
genius, a goddamn star. And it’s going to piss her off mightily if she
hears you turning up your nose at her. 
Not to mention that your clitoris has feelings. 
24
E. Jean Carroll
www.Ebook777.com

There she stands, wrapped smugly in her furs, a glorious mas-
terpiece of 8,000 nerves. The pitiful penis has a paltry 4,000.)
Devoting herself exclusively to your personal eyeball-rolling joy,
she’s ready to whip your ungrateful ass into biting-scratching-
shrieking ecstasies thirty or forty times a day . . . and what are you
doing? Moaning about feeling “humiliated and inadequate.” 
Do you think Queen Klee Tore lz (puissant ruler of the
Whooopeeeee Empire) gives a royal fig for fumbling morons who
brag about ex-girlfriends? Pooh! The Queen exists solely and only
for your pleasure. 
But here’s the deal. She expects you to take charge of certain
matters. When you make love with a man, she’ll reward you with her
richest fireworks, forsooth, but only if you provide her with the best
real estate (the top position, for instance), slather her with attentions
(which do not include a superfluous goofball banging up and down
on you “for hours”), and for chrissakes don’t bustle her along like a
peasant. The Queen likes lassitude. 
Anyway, you can stop driving yourself crazy. Sex researchers
report only about 30 percent of women experience climax with
intercourse. Anecdotal evidence puts the figure even lower. Indeed,
according to my mail, only fort-seven women since the beginning of
recorded history have enjoyed such a thing. 
P.S. The best book on women’s anatomy, sexuality, and power is
the perfectly fabulous Natalie Angier’s Woman: An Intimate
Geography. Read it and you’ll have — OMIGOD! That rat bastard
Hurricane Floyd! Water is roaring into my basement, turning over
my Fuel tanks, filling the house and garden with oil. . . Lordy! The
power lines just went down! Live wires are snapping back and forth
25
Mr. Right, Right Now!

in the wind... throwing sparksl Ye, Gods! ThIS Ask
EeeeeeeeeeEEEEEEE question is going to explode any sec-
onnnnnnnnnnnnnnn…
© 2003 E. Jean Carroll 
26
E. Jean Carroll

Congratulations, darling! 
You are now a certified Man Catcher, 
and ready to be unleashed on the 
world of willing men. 
Find them at GreatBoyfriends.com for
ONE FREE MONTH, when you type 
the promotional code 
k406-WPPz-Q684j-MrLeP3.
Please use the “Promo Code” above (it is case sensitive)
to redeem your one month’s FREE subscription to
GreatBoyfriends.com. Expiration date is 12/31/2004.
If you are not already a “Registered User” of
GreatBoyfriends.com, go to
www.GreatBoyfriends.com and click “Register,”
after registering, click “Subscribe.” 
If you are already a “Registered User” of
GreatBoyfriends, simply LOGIN to
www.GreatBoyfriends.com, then click “Subscribe.”

1. Dolls, the author acknowledges there are too many self-help
books.
2. The author acknowledges the main reason there are too many
self-help books is that self-help-book authors raise hopes to
such ridiculously high levels by presenting such diabolically
alluring success stories, the poor reader feels worse than before
he/she bought the self-help book. The reader, being a mere hu-
man and a lovable chucklehead, is of course incapable of
achieving such success, so the reader must buy another self-
help book to pep him/herself up after the hellish depression
he/she suffered from reading the last self-help book, and so on.
3. The author wishes to acknowledge this book is written for
smart, successful women and that these women are just way
smarter and more successful than the author.
4. The author also wishes to acknowledge there’s going to be a
problem with Mr. Right, Right Now! because the 6-Week Plan
Acknowledgments

is so wickedly effective at bagging men, in two years the au-
thor will be ﬂooded with letters from women beseeching the au-
thor to tell them how to get rid of the fellows they landed by
following it.
5. The author is just dying to acknowledge this book was initially
subtitled How a Smart Woman Can Land Her Dream Man in
10 Weeks.
6. But then the author and the author’s sister accidentally started
GreatBoyfriends.com, an Internet dating site, and The New
York Times and The Today Show and Oprah made a big
whoop-dee-doo over it and thousands of women signed up and
men began crashing into their arms like felled timbers.
7. This stunned the author, so the author began conducting ma-
jor forehead-slapping interviews with bleeding-edge Harvard
psychologists, Rutgers anthropologists, and Oxford evolution-
ary biologists and learned about “clicking” and “rapid attrac-
tion systems” and “inborn courting behavior” and discovered
that 10 weeks was just insanely wide of the mark. So the au-
thor changed the subtitle to How a Smart Woman Can Land
Her Dream Man in 6 Weeks, which, indeed, the author wishes
to acknowledge is still pretty long, because if a woman meets
the right man, it takes about six seconds to land the bugger.
Acknowledgments

About the Author
E. Jean Carroll’s “Ask E. Jean” column has appeared in
Elle for more than a decade and reaches nearly 5 million
readers a month. Her stunningly successful dating site
GreatBoyfriends.com receives millions of hits each week.
Nominated for an Emmy for her writing for Saturday Night
Live, E. Jean’s funny and wise counsel lands her regularly
on the morning TV shows. She lives with her four rescued
dogs in Nyack, NY.

By E. Jean Carroll
Mr. Right, Right Now! : How a Smart Woman Can Land Her
Dream Man in 6 Weeks  
A Dog in Heat is a Hot Dog: And Other Rules to Live By 
Hunter: The Strange and Savage Life of Hunter S. Thompson 

Credits
Design by Judith Stagnitto Abbate/Abbate Design
Jacket design by Andrea Brown/Mucca Design

MR. RIGHT, RIGHT NOW! HOW A SMART WOMAN CAN LAND HER DREAM
MAN IN 6 WEEKS. Copyright © by E. Jean Carroll. All rights reserved
in the Northern Hemisphere, the Southern Hemisphere, the earth,
the solar system, the universe, which, come to think of it, is prob-
ably merely the creation of a superior race of women on another
planet, in another solar system, in another universe, so I would like
to reserve rights on that planet, in that solar system, and that uni-
verse too.
MR. RIGHT, RIGHT NOW! How a Smart Woman Can Land Her Dream
Man in 6 Weeks. Copyright © by E. Jean Carroll. All rights reserved
under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By
payment of the required fees, you have been granted the non-
exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of this
e-book on-screen.  No part of this text may be reproduced, trans-
mitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in
or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in
any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now
known or hereinafter invented, without the express written permis-
sion of PerfectBound™.
“E. Jean’s Absolutely Favorite 11 Questions (And Answers!)” © 2003
E. Jean Carroll.
PerfectBound™ and the PerfectBound™ logo are trademarks of
HarperCollins Publishers, Inc.
Adobe Acrobat eBook Reader December 2003 ISBN 0-06-058876-4
FIRST EDITION
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
Any resemblance to an actual living person is intended, and that
actual person is you, Doll; and you’re going to start living Right
Now!

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
About the Publisher
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia 
http://www.perfectbound.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900
Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada
http://www.perfectbound.ca
New Zealand
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited
P.O. Box 1
Auckland, New Zealand
http://www.harpercollins.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www.uk.perfectbound.com
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
10 East 53rd Street
New York, NY 10022 
http://www.perfectbound.com
www.Ebook777.com

