Arabic
Vocabulary Course
Jane Wightwick and
Mahmoud Gaafar
www.michelthomas.co.uk
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 1

Contents
Introduction
5
User guide
15
Track listing
15
English–Arabic glossary
33
Bonus words
39
Arabic signs
42
3
To find out more, please get in touch with us
For general enquiries and for information about the Michel Thomas Method:
Call: 020 7873 6354
Fax: 020 7873 6325
Email: mtenquiries@hodder.co.uk
To place an order:
Call: 01235 400414
Fax: 01235 400454
Email: uk.orders@bookpoint.co.uk
www.michelthomas.co.uk
You can write to us at:
Hodder Education, 338 Euston Road, London  NW1 3BH
Visit our forum at:
www.michelthomas.co.uk
Unauthorized copying of this booklet or the accompanying audio material is prohibited,
and may amount to a criminal offence punishable by a fine and/or imprisonment.
First published in UK 2009 by Hodder Education, part of Hachette UK, 338 Euston Road, 
London NW1 3BH.
Copyright © 2009. In the methodology, Thomas Keymaster Languages LLC, all rights reserved. 
In the content, Jane Wightwick and Mahmoud Gaafar.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic
or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publisher or under licence from the Copyright Licensing Agency Limited.
Further details of such licences (for reprographic reproduction) may be obtained from the Copyright
Licensing Agency Limited, Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS, UK.
Cover image © Tom McGahan / Alamy
Typeset by Transet Limited, Coventry, England.
Printed in Great Britain for Hodder Education, an Hachette UK company, 338 Euston Road, 
London NW1 3BH.
Impression
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
Year
2012  2011  2010  2009 
ISBN 
978 0340 98323 2
Succeed with the
and learn another language the way you learnt your own
Developed over 50 years, the amazing teaching method of the world’s
greatest language teacher completely takes the strain out of language
learning. Michel Thomas’ all-audio courses provide an accelerated method
for learning that is truly revolutionary.
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 2

Introduction
Welcome, to those of you who have completed the Michel Thomas Method
Arabic courses and to those of you who are about to experience a uniquely
exciting way to learn and improve your Arabic!
My name is Rose Lee Hayden, and I had the distinct privilege of working
closely with Michel Thomas for several decades, in particular, teaching what
he referred to as his ‘second phase’ language courses. This ‘second phase’
built upon the structural knowledge of the language that Michel Thomas so
brilliantly provided in his foundation courses. As Michel Thomas himself
often said, ‘I built the house, but it is up to you to decorate it!’
And decorate it we shall in this Michel Thomas Method: Arabic
Vocabulary Course that reinforces and expands on what you have already
learned having completed the Michel Thomas Method Arabic courses.
And for those of you who have not done these courses, I urge you to do so.
You will be surprised at how painlessly they will teach or reinforce your
Arabic and will introduce you to a unique method of language learning.
At the outset, let me stress what this course does not attempt to do and
how it may differ a little from your previous experiences with the Michel
Thomas Method Arabic courses. First, this course does not and cannot
re-teach the original courses, but rather builds directly on them. Therefore,
you may wish to review and keep reviewing your Michel Thomas Method
Arabic courses to re-familiarize yourself with structural items and basic
vocabulary previously introduced by Jane Wightwick and Mahmoud Gaafar.
Second, it is important to state that learning vocabulary is not the same as
learning structure, even though this course teaches vocabulary the Michel
Thomas way. You may find it helpful to review course content more
frequently. But let me reassure you that this more frequent review is no
reflection on your ability, but rather relates to the fact that you have moved
on to another level of instruction with vocabulary acquisition as its basic
goal. Throughout his ‘second phase’ instruction, Michel Thomas frequently
5
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 4

Michel Thomas dedicated his long professional life to probing the learning
process. He focused on the teaching and learning of foreign languages as a
perfect test case for his revolutionary learning system, one that made him
the world’s foremost language teacher to the celebrities, diplomats,
corporate executives as well as others seeking to acquire or enhance their
proficiency in another language. 
What is the Michel Thomas Method?
The Michel Thomas Method is unlike anything you have ever experienced,
especially when you compare it with how languages are traditionally taught
in schools or universities. It produces startling results within a remarkably
short period of time, all without the need for books, drills, memorizing, or
homework. Michel Thomas believed that anyone can learn another
language having learned their own, and he developed his unique
methodology that proved this to be true for many thousands of students.
Learning a language the Michel Thomas way builds proficiency, self-
confidence and engages you right from the start. The Michel Thomas
Method breaks a language down to its component parts and presents these
structures in carefully planned sets of exercises that enable you to
reconstruct the language yourself, to form your own sentences that say what
you want, when you want. Almost without you realizing it, you will retain
and apply what you have learned and will be motivated to learn more.
Without the stress of memorization, note taking and homework, you can
relax and let language learning take place as nature intended. 
But you have to experience the Michel Thomas Method to believe it. Within
hours you will be creating sophisticated sentences in a wide variety of
situations, as those of you know who have completed the Michel Thomas
language courses. These courses provided you with functional proficiency
in your chosen language and are the foundation upon which this Michel
Thomas Method: Vocabulary Course series builds, phrase by phrase,
the Michel Thomas way. 
7
asked his students to review and reinforce the basics before moving on.
Because his methodology is cumulative, you must never rush ahead. Each
building block in some way relates to previous content and uses it in a
carefully constructed way.
Third, those of you who expect drills of each and every word in a category –
family members, days of the week, and so on – don’t! Michel Thomas
actively discouraged memorization, rote learning, writing out lists and any
and all related activities of this type. He knew that we do not learn this way,
and that the stress generated by these means actually impedes learning.
And while we would have liked to have been able to include more words in
a category, space on audio recordings is limited, and we had to make hard
choices with respect to what we could and could not include on the
recording, and so we have included many ‘bonus words’ only in this User
Guide. We did not want to waste valuable learning time at the expense of
introducing more strategic content designed to help you create words,
structures and habits of learning on your own.
I dedicate this course to the memory of Michel Thomas and to all of you
who have chosen to build your Arabic vocabulary the Michel Thomas way.
Dr Rose Lee Hayden
Series Editor
Who was Michel Thomas?
Michel Thomas was head of the Michel
Thomas Language Centers and taught
languages for over 50 years, primarily in New
York, Beverly Hills and London until his recent
death, aged 90. A graduate of the
Department of Philology at the University of
Bordeaux and student of psychology at the
Sorbonne, his harrowing wartime experiences
escaping Hitler and fighting with the French
Resistance made mastering languages a
matter of survival for Michel Thomas. 
6
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 6

help you with revision or to re-motivate you to dust off your Arabic and
improve your proficiency. Either way, the Michel Thomas Method:
Arabic Vocabulary Course will introduce you to a unique way of
acquiring language proficiency that will provide dozens of helpful ways to
build on what you already know. You will be able to increase your
vocabulary exponentially, will learn or review over 350 words and everyday
expressions, and will significantly boost your confidence in your ability to
speak, listen to and understand Arabic. 
You may find that it takes a while to get used to the Michel Thomas way of
teaching. It is innovative and quite unlike any other method you will have
come across. But once you have experienced the excitement of painless
learning the Michel Thomas way, you will be hooked!
What does this pack contain?
The pack comprises over five hours of recorded material on CD, plus this
User Guide that contains all the concepts, words and phrases presented in
the course. In these recordings, Jane Wightwick and Mahmoud Gaafar will
introduce concepts that you will be learning, one by one, and will present
helpful hints and handy tools that you can then use to create your own
phrases and increase your Arabic proficiency. 
How are the recordings best used? 
• Relax! Make yourself comfortable before playing the recordings and try
to let go of the tensions and anxieties traditionally associated with
language learning.
• Do not write or take any notes. Remove notebooks, pens,
dictionaries and anything else associated with traditional, school-based
language learning.
• Do not try to remember. While participating in the recording and
afterwards, it is important that you do not try to memorize specific words
or expressions. It is a basic principle of the Michel Thomas Method that the
responsibility for the student’s learning lies with the teacher. Your learning
is based on understanding, and what you understand you don’t forget. 
• Interact fully with the recordings. Use the pause button and
respond out loud (or in a whisper, or in your head if you are in a public
9
How did we come to develop this Michel Thomas Method:
Vocabulary Course series?
With nearly 1 million copies of Michel Thomas language courses sold in
the UK alone, and with thousands of enthusiasts who never thought they
could ever learn another language wanting ‘more Michel’, we at Hodder
Education are particularly pleased to offer this new course series that
preserves and extends the language teaching legacy of ‘The Language
Master’, Michel Thomas. Working with us right up to the moment of his
death aged 90, Michel Thomas was in the process of creating a series of
vocabulary courses building on his very successful language courses.
Reflecting his prior input, this series is the product of a new team of authors
and presenters who have either taught for Michel Thomas, or have utilized
his methodology in their own classrooms and professional courses.
With this series we hope to provide what Michel Thomas and his ever-
expanding number of ‘students’ would expect of us, both as educational
publishers and professionals who love languages, teaching them and
learning them. We dedicate this series and others that we will be developing
for schools, businesses and individuals from all walks of life to our much-
esteemed and beloved ‘Language Master’, Michel Thomas. 
Who is this Michel Thomas Method: Arabic Vocabulary Course for?
People who have already learned Arabic with Michel Thomas 
This Michel Thomas Method: Arabic Vocabulary Course does just what
its name suggests: builds on the content Jane Wightwick and Mahmoud
Gaafar presented in the Michel Thomas Method Arabic Foundation and
Advanced courses. This course covers over 350 words and everyday
phrases within the context of essential building blocks already presented by
Jane Wightwick and Mahmoud Gaafar. You can both reinforce what you have
already learned from your Michel Thomas Method Arabic courses and
substantially increase your Arabic vocabulary the Michel Thomas way.
People who have learned Arabic using other methods
You may have learned Arabic before and want to brush up on it for a
holiday or business trip. Perhaps you are looking for a new approach to
8
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 8

sentences and use the language naturally. With this additional practice and
review, plus over 350 words covered and the tools to create hundreds
more, your proficiency in Arabic will be reinforced and strengthened as will
your self-confidence and desire to use your newly acquired Arabic.
How can I go on to improve further?
Obviously, nothing compares with first-hand contact with native speakers.
And while you may not think that this is possible for you, think again. There
are most likely many Arabic speakers, Arabic language clubs and
associations in your local area. You need not go to Egypt to find them. A
simple advert in the local newspaper or on a relevant website offering to
exchange English for Arabic instruction may locate someone you will enjoy
knowing and practising with – but do think about your own safety before
giving away any personal details. As Michel Thomas noted, we learn a lot
more about our own language when we learn another. 
Michel Thomas also recommended a little daily practice – 10–15 minutes –
and knew that this was worth more than several hours of cramming after a
period of time has gone by. 
One last suggestion here. For really authentic practice, try to listen to radio
and television programmes that you may be able to receive if you 
live in a city or have satellite TV options. Relax and listen for gist, not word
by word. You can do it! And little by little you will understand what is 
being said. We know that you will find it both rewarding and exciting to
practise your ever-improving Arabic!
What do Michel Thomas’ students have to say?
Academy award winning director and actress, Emma Thompson (as
quoted in The Guardian): 
‘The excitement of learning something new was overwhelming.
Michel not only taught me Spanish, he opened my eyes to the
possibilities of a completely different kind of learning. Michel takes 
the burden off the student and upon himself … Learning Spanish with
Michel was the most extraordinary learning experience of my life – 
it was unforgettable.’
11
place) before hearing the correct response. This is essential. You do not
learn by repetition but by thinking out the answers to each question; it is
by your own thought process that you truly learn and retain structure
and vocabulary.
• Give yourself time to think. You have all the time you need to think
through your response. Your pause button is the key to your learning! Be
sure to use it. We have inserted standard-length pauses for your
responses so as not to waste valuable recording time with long silences.
• Start at the beginning of the course. Whatever your existing
knowledge of Arabic, it is important that you follow the way the Michel
Thomas Method builds up your knowledge of the language. The
methodology is cumulative and recursive so you must not rush ahead
before you feel comfortable that you have mastered a concept, phrase or
word. This vocabulary course also encourages you to take additional time
to create similar examples of your own to reinforce what is being
presented. 
• Do not get annoyed with yourself if you make a mistake.
Mistakes are part of the learning process; as long as you understand why
you made the mistake and you have the ‘aha’ reaction – ‘Yes, of course, 
I understand now’ – you are doing just fine. If you made a mistake and
you do not understand why, you may have been daydreaming for a few
seconds. As noted, the course is structured so that you cannot go on
unless you fully understand everything. So just go back a little and pick
up where you left off. 
• Stop the recording whenever it suits you. Breaks in the CD
recordings reflect the numbering and content listings in this User Guide.
This will help you locate items you wish to review and will enable you to
locate where you left off and where you wish to begin once again.
What can I expect to achieve?
The Michel Thomas Method Arabic courses provided you with a
practical and functional use of the spoken language. Using the Michel
Thomas Method, this Arabic Vocabulary Course introduces everyday
conversational language that will improve your communication skills in a
wide variety of situations, empowered by the ability to create your own
10
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 10

Irish dance and music sensation, Michael Flatley (as quoted in The
Linguist): 
‘He [Michel Thomas] was a genius … a born teacher and thinker.’
Customer feedback on the Michel Thomas Method
‘I am writing to congratulate you on the highly original and successful
language courses by Michel Thomas; I am currently working on
German and French, while my daughter, at my suggestion, has
bought the Italian course.’ 
R. Harris
‘I have now finished the eight cassette Italian course and would like to
say how pleased I am with it. I am a scientist, with all my neurons in
the side of my brain that deals with understanding, and next to none
on the side that deals with memory. This has meant my ability to
retain vocabulary and learn a language has been about as bad as it
comes. Against all odds, the Michel Thomas course has left me with a
real sense of achievement, and a tremendous basis for further
progress in learning Italian.’ 
T. A. Whittingham
‘He doesn’t put words in your mouth, he makes you work out the
words to say yourself.’
Angie Harper
12
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 12

User guide
Track listing
Note about transliteration
This course teaches you Egyptian spoken Arabic. The Arabic words are
transliterated in this track listing, so that you can read them even if you
don’t know the Arabic script. To show some sounds that don’t exist in
English we’ve had to use some extra symbols:
c
This represents the sound called cain. It’s like a deep “aah” sound,
that comes from the stomach rather than the throat.
’
This shows that a “q” sound has been omitted. It’s like the sound a
Cockney makes when s/he says “butter”, leaving out the “tt”:
“bu’er.” 
D, S, T
We use these capital letters to represent the “back” versions of
these sounds. Arabic distinguishes between pairs of sounds such
as the English “s” of “sorry” and the “s” of “silly.” The “s” of “sorry”
is said at the back of the mouth, while the “s” of “silly” is said at
the front. In English these don’t represent separate letters but in
Arabic they do, and in this track listing we show them by using the
capital letters. 
H
We use this capital letter to represent the “breathy” version of the
“h” sound. Arabic distinguishes between the “h” sound as in the
English “hotel” and a breathier version, a little like the sound made
when you’re breathing on glasses to clean them. In Arabic these
are separate letters. 
CD 1, Track 1
Introduction
CD 1, Track 2
Most Arabic words are based on three root sounds, always in the same
order. Root carries fundamental meaning. Several ways to find the root. 
15
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 14

CD 1, Track 4
Descriptive words: the kareem pattern. 
Pattern = first root + a/i + second root + ee + third root.
kibeer “big”; gameel “beautiful”; gideed “new” (root = g-d-d).
giddan “very” (put after descriptive word): gameel giddan “very beautiful”;
kibeer giddan “very large.”
CD 1, Track 5
Arabic words in kareem pattern that are also names: gameel “beautiful”;
fareed “unique”; shereef “noble”; ameen “honest”; saceed “happy/lucky”;
kareem “generous.”
Female equivalents: gameela, fareeda, shereefa, ameena, saceeda, kareema.
Taweel “tall/long”: root = T-w-l.
CD 1, Track 6
niDeef “clean”: root = n-D-f.
fingaan “cup”: il-fingaan dah mish niDeef “This cup isn’t clean.”
CD 1, Track 7
’adeem “old.”
First root is dropped q; original word qadeem; root = q-d-m.
baab “door/gate”: il-baab dah ’adeem giddan “This door is very old.”
Cannot use ’adeem to refer to “old people”; kibeer fis-sinn “big in the tooth
= old in age.” 
’adeem applied to people = “old hand”: ena ’adeem lu’Sur “I’m an old
hand at Luxor = I know my way around Luxor.”
CD 1, Track 8
Descriptive words: the kasbaan pattern. 
Pattern = first root + a + second root + third root + aan.
tacbaan “tired”; caTshaan “thirsty”; cayyaan “ill/sick” (root = c-y-y; second +
third root the same = “double” root).
Pattern often connected to emotions/character attributes: kaslaan “lazy”;
zaclaan “upset/angry”; sarHaan “dreaming/distracted”; saHraan “staying up
late”; kasbaan “winning.”
17
First: take away vowel sounds to find the root.
dars “lesson”: root = d-r-s.
walad “boy”: root = w-l-d.
kibeer “big”: root = k-b-r.
faahim “understanding”: root = f-h-m.
caarif “knowing”: root = c-r-f.
laazim “necessary”: root = l-z-m.
shirib “he drank”: root = sh-r-b.
shahr “month”: root = sh-h-r.
root s-l-m connected to “peace”, “safety”, “submission.”
is-salaamu calaykum “peace on you.”
islaam “Islam = submission to God.”
Second: take away -een/-aat plurals, tags, verb flowers and tails to find
the root.
naDDaaraat “pairs of glasses”: root = n-D-r.
sifaaraat “embassies”: root = s-f-r.
yiktib “he writes”: root = k-t-b.
tifhamee “you (female) understand”: root = f-h-m.
sharibna “we drank”: root = sh-r-b.
fallaaHeen “farmers”: root = f-l-H: root meaning “success/getting reward
from land”; faaliH “successful person.”
Third: take away other common additions, e.g. ma/me, to find the root.
madrasa “school”: root = d-r-s.
mektab “office/desk”: root = k-t-b.
mashghool “busy/occupied”: root = sh-gh-l.
mabsooT “happy/pleased”: root = b-s-T.
CD 1, Track 3
Two things carry meaning: root = fundamental meaning; modified by
pattern = specific meaning; plus general context. 
Root order very important: s-f-r connected with “travelling”; f-s-r connected
with “explaining”; r-f-s connected with “kicking.”
One root can have many patterns, but not all roots have all patterns.
Familiar roots can be put into new patterns, and new roots into familiar
patterns to expand vocabulary.
16
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 16

“double” root (second and third root sounds are the same).
libnaan “Lebanon”; fayrooz maHbooba fi libnaan “Fairuz is popular in
Lebanon.” 
Can use pattern to work out meaning, for example mafshoosha, root = 
f-sh-sh “let out/vent”; cajala mafshoosha “flat tyre.”
Descriptive words can also be used to mean “the thing or person that has
the attribute”: il-mafhoom “the thing that is understood = the concept”; 
il-maktoob “the thing that is written = destiny/letter (correspondence)”;
il-mashroob “the thing that is drunk = the drink”; il-kaslaan “the lazy
one/person = the sloth”; il-maHboob “the popular one/person.”
CD 1, Track 12
Descriptive words: the Kuwaiti pattern. 
Familiar from nationalities in English, for example “Kuwaiti, Yemeni, Saudi.”
-ee ending can be used to turn wide range of words into descriptive words.
il-kuwayt “Kuwait”; kuwaytee “Kuwaiti.”
Kuwaiti ending and -ee “my” tag sound similar but different meanings.
Context should make it clear.
Kuwaiti pattern often used for colours from natural features: lamoon
“lemon,” lamoonee “lemon-coloured”; mishmish “apricot,” mishmishee
“apricot-coloured”; bunn “coffee beans,” bunnee “bean-coloured = brown.”
burTu’aan “oranges.” burTu’aan connected to burTuqaal “Portugal” called
by early Arab sailors: balad il-burTuqaal “land of the oranges.” burTu’aanee
“orange (-coloured)”; il-burTu’aanee “the orange one”; 
it-teeshirt il-burTu’aanee “the orange T-shirt.” 
Words for western items of clothing mainly adopted from European
languages. Egyptians use short “shorts”; jaketta “jacket”; banTalohn
“trousers/pants”; teeshirt “T-shirt”; blooza “blouse”; boot “boots”; karavatta
“tie.” There are regional variations. 
’ameeS “shirt” (originally qamees and became “chemise”): ’ameeS bunnee
“a brown shirt.”
CD 2, Track 1
bikaam “how much?” (kaam “how many” + bi “by/with”): bikaam il-ameeS
il-burTu’aanee? “How much is the orange shirt?”
Kuwaiti pattern is one of most useful ways of instantly adding to vocabulary. 
19
CD 1, Track 9
kasbaan “winning”; root = k/s/b. ibnak kasbaan? “Is your son winning?”; 
il-bint(i) dee kasbaana “That girl is winning.”
kaslaan “lazy”; root = k-s-l. huwwa ameen giddan bass(i) kaslaan “He’s
very honest but lazy.”
zaclaan “upset/angry”; root = z-c-l. enti zaclaana leh? “Why are you upset?”
(to a female).
CD 1, Track 10
Descriptive words: the maHmood pattern. 
mashghool “busy/occupied”; mabsooT “happy/pleased.”
Pattern = ma + first root + second root + oo + third root. 
Equivalent of English “-ed” (“pleased”) or “-en” (“broken”).
mashghool “busy/occupied”; root = sh-gh-l.
mabsooT “happy/pleased”; root = b-s-T.
saceed “in luck/happy” similar meaning to mabsooT. saceed more formal
and connected with luck: ceed saceed “happy Eid = happy holiday”/HaZZ
saceed “good luck.”
Arabic words in pattern that are also names: maHfooZ “protected,” root =
H-f-Z (famous Egyptian writer, Naguib Mahfouz); manSoor “victorious,” root
= n-S-r; mascood “lucky/charmed,” root = s-c-d; maHmood “praised,” root =
H-m-d.
maktoob “written”; root = k-t-b. ismuh maktoob hina “His name is written
here.”
cala “on”; cala + il = calal “on the.” ism id-doktoor maktoob calal baab “The
name of the doctor is written on the door.”
maktoob also used to describe “destiny/fate”: maktoob calal gibeen “written
on the forehead = destined to happen”; maktoob kitaabee “my book is
written = officially married.”
mafhoom “understood”; root = f-h-m. aywah, mafhoom “yes, understood
= yes, I understand.”
CD 1, Track 11
maksoor “broken”; root = k-s-r (connected with “breaking”). il-baab
maksoor “The door is broken.”
maHboob “loved/popular”; root = H-b-b (aHibb “I like”). H-b-b is a
18
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 18

m-g-d); ascad “luckiest/happiest” (root = s-c-d).
kibeer “big/large”; akbar “bigger/biggest.”
ashraf pattern words do not need to add the feminine -a: il-blooza dee
akbar “This blouse is bigger”; mafeesh Haaga akbar “There isn’t anything
bigger.”
akbar min “bigger/larger from = bigger/larger than”: baghdaad akbar min
il-baSra “Bahgdad is larger than Basra.” 
CD 2, Track 4
taani “another/again”; it-taani “the other one”: il-maHall(i) dah akbar min
it-taani “This shop is bigger than the other one.”
akbar also means “older” (kibeer (fis-sinn) “old”): bintik akbar min ibnik?
“Is your daughter older than your son?” (to a woman).
Can use tags with min; akbar minee “older than me.” huwwa akbar minee
“He is older than me.”
ukht “sister”: ana akbar min ukhtee “I’m older than my sister.”
For meaning of “the …-est” (“oldest/biggest”), comparative word is put
directly in front of what is being described: akbar madrasa “the biggest
school”; akbar maTcam “the largest restaurant.” 
CD 2, Track 5
More comparisons with ashraf pattern: gameel “beautiful”, agmal “more
beautiful”; Taweel “tall/long”, aTwal “taller/longer”; niDeef “clean”, anDaf
“cleaner”; gideed “new”, agdad “newer”; saceed “happy/lucky”, ascad
“happier/luckier.”
’adeem “old”, a’dam “older”; a’dam masgid “the oldest mosque.”
kiteer “many/a lot/often”; aktar “more/more often.”
CD 2, Track 6
nahr “river”; nahr in-neel “the river Nile.”
ifriqiya “Africa.” in-neel aTwal nahr fi ifriqiya “The Nile is the longest river in
Africa.” 
ifriqee “African”; nahree = ‘of the river’ as description: in-naql in-nahree
“river transport” (government body in Egypt); rayyis nahree “river chief”
(specialist river guide). 
21
Can be done with most words of Arabic origin.
Compare to English “oil, oily”; “sugar, sugary.” But Arabic -ee equivalent to
many more English endings, for example, “-ic, -ian, -y, -al, -ese,” etc. 
Colours ending with -ee do not generally add -a for feminine words:
il-blooza il-lamoonee “the lemon-coloured blouse.”
carab, carabee “Arab, Arabic”: il-kitaab il-carabee “the Arabic book.” 
islaam, islaamee “Islam, Islamic”: bank islaamee “an Islamic bank.”
bayt, baytee “house/home, home(made)”: il-bizza dee baytee? “Is this
pizza homemade?”
Kuwaiti pattern can be used to make almost all nationalities from their
countries: is-soodaan, soodaanee “Sudan, Sudanese.” 
soodaanee also means “peanuts.”
fallaaH, fallaaHee “farmer, rustic”: bayt fallaaHee “a rustic house.” 
CD 2, Track 2
Kuwaiti pattern at end of female words, remove -a or -ya before adding -ee.
madrasa, madrasee “school, scholastic/school”: il-yohm il-madrasee Taweel
“The school day is long.”
soorya, sooree “Syria, Syrian”: enta sooree? “Are you (male) Syrian?”
Nationalities need to add the feminine -a if describing a female: enti
sooreeya? “Are you (female) Syrian?”
asbanya, asbaanee “Spain, Spanish”: film asbaanee “a Spanish film.”
moosiqa, mooseeqee “music, musical.” moosiqa is one of a handful of
words that do not drop the q in Egyptian spoken. Another is qarya “village.”
Root H-k-m = “govern/rule”; Hukooma “government”; Hukoomee
“governmental”;
mektab Hukoomee “government(al) office.”
CD 2, Track 3
Comparing: the ashraf pattern.
In English we use “more/most” or “-er/-est” to make comparisons.
Arabic puts root into ashraf pattern: a + first root + second root + a + third
root. ashraf means “most noble” (root = sh-r-f, as shereef “noble”).
Other names in this pattern: aHmad “most praised” (root = H-m-d); akram
“most generous” (root = k-r-m); akmal “most complete” (root = k-m-l);
anwar “most luminescent” (root = n-w-r); amgad “most glorious” (root =
20
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 20

malcab tennis “a tennis court”; malcab it-tennis “the tennis court.” malcab
awlaad “a children’s playground”; malcab il-awlaad “the children’s
playground.”
CD 2, Track 10
Other interesting patterns exist, each with their own meaning indicators. 
fallaaH pattern = connected with professions or something you do
habitually.
Pattern = first root + double second root + aa + final root.
Tabbaakh “someone who cooks for a living = chef/cook” (root = T-b-kh as
meTbakh “kitchen”).
shaghghaal “someone who works for a living = worker” (root = sh-gh-l as
mashghool “busy/occupied”). Also used for “switched on/working.”
bawwaab “doorman” (root = b-w-b; same root as baab “door” but middle
root sometimes changes into vowel.
Other examples: gammaal “camel attendant/herder”; wallaada “mother of
many children”; zannaana “whinger”; carraaf “know-it-all.”
CD 2, Track 11
Pattern connected with the “instrument” of an action.
Pattern = mu- + first root + second root + aa + final root.
mufTaaH “instrument of opening = a key” (root = f/t/H connected with
opening);
fayn mufTaaHee? Where’s my key? Also from same root mafTooH
“opened”: il-maHall(i) maftooH? “Is this shop open?”; fattaaHa
“(bottle/can) opener.”
Other examples: munshaar “saw” (root = n-sh-r); muzmaar “flute” (root =
z-m-r); munfaakh “pump” (root = n-f-kh).
CD 2, Track 12
Pattern connected with the “expert” of an action, doing something well. 
Pattern = first root + a + double second root + ee + final root.
kasseeb “high-earner” (root = k-s-b); shaghgheel “hard worker” (root = 
sh-gh-l); lacceeb “(expert) player”; sharreeb “(expert) drinker”; Habbeeb
“(expert) lover/Casanova”. Important to pronounce double letter: 
Habbeeb, Habeeb “Casanova, darling/loved one.”
23
CD 2, Track 7
Places: the madrasa pattern. Pattern for place where something happens. 
mektab “place of writing = office/study/desk” (root = k-t-b); madrasa “place
of study = school” (root = d-r-s); maTcam “place of food = restaurant” (root
= T- c-m); masgid “place of prostration = mosque” (root = s-g-d).
Pattern = me/ma + first root + second root + a/i + third root.
Pattern sometimes masculine, sometimes feminine (with additional -a).
maghrib “place where sun sets = west” (root = gh-r-b “to set (sun)/go west/
go away”). il-maghrib “Morocco” (sometimes called the “Maghreb” in
English). Morocco is in the West of Arabic-speaking world. il-maghrib 
il- carabee larger area stretching across North Africa (modern Morocco/
Algeria/Tunisia). 
maghribee “Moroccan.”
maHkama “place of ruling/judgement = court(house)” (root = H-k-m);
a’dam maHkama “the oldest court(house).” 
maHall “shop” (doubled root = H-l-l). Not connected to Halaal “legitimate”,
as in Halaal meat. Sometimes roots have two separate meanings. H-l-l
connected with slaughtering animals according to legitimate religious
practice and also with arriving after travel.
CD 2, Track 8
Other places in the madrasa pattern:
meTbakh “place of cooking = kitchen” (root = T-b-kh); il-meTbakh niDeef
giddan “The kitchen is very clean.”
meTbakh il-maTcam “the kitchen (of) the restaurant.” No equivalent of “of”
and no il- on the first word when put directly together. 
metHaf “place of precious things = museum” (root = t-H-f); fayn il-metHaf
il-islaamee? “Where’s the Islamic museum?” 
CD 2, Track 9
malcab “playing place = court/pitch/playing field” (root = l- c-b); present
verb = lcab: binilcab squash kull(i) yohm “We play squash every day.” 
malcab tennis “tennis court,” malcab golf “golf range/course,” malcab
il-madrasa “school playground,” malcab awlaad “children’s playground,”
malcab squash “squash court.” Many different words in English, all malcab
in Arabic.
22
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 22

CD 3, Track 3
Shorter words “no frills” closer to 3-root pattern usually made plural using
“internal” plurals.
Internal follow number of different root patterns. A dozen or so significant
internal patterns. Five or six most common.
No automatic way of telling which word will use which pattern. But will start
to hear similarities and develop an ear.
CD 3, Track 4
The bunook plural pattern, e.g. bank, bunook “bank, banks”; bayt, buyoot
“house, houses.”
Pattern = first root + u + second root + oo + third root.
shaykh, shuyookh “sheikh/elder, sheikhs” (root = sh-y-kh connected to age);
mashyakha “place where sheikh lives = sheikhdom”; shaykh il-Haara “old
man of the valley = local government representative”; shaykh il-balad “old
man of the village = government village representative”; maglis ish-
shuyookh “council of sheikhs/senate” (maglis “sit down”, root = g-l-s).
dars, duroos “lesson, lessons”; duroos mooseeqa “music lessons.”
CD 3, Track 5
shahr, shuhoor “month, months”; sitt shuhoor “(for) six months.”
khamsa “five”; shorter version is khamas: khamas shuhoor “(for) five
months.”
malik, mulook “king, kings.” Root m-l-k connected with
“possessing/controlling”. m can be root sound. milk “property”; milk 
il-Hukooma “property of the government = government-owned”; milk
khaaSS “private property.” mamlook “Mamlouk,” medieval rulers of Egypt
and Syria, originally slave soldiers. mamlook “possessed/controlled =
enslaved.” 
magnoon “possessed by the ginn (Djinn) = mad.”
CD 3, Track 6
mamlaka “place where king rules = kingdom”: il-mamlaka il-carabiyya
is-sacoodiyya “Kingdom of Saudi Arabia”; il-mamlaka il-mutaHida “United
Kingdom.” malika “queen.”
il-urdunn “Jordan”: malik il-urdunn “The king of Jordan.” 
25
CD 2, Track 13
Speakers of a language have a plural antenna which responds to certain
stimuli. English plural antenna will respond to “(e)s” on end of words, and
respond to sounds such as “-ice” (“lice/mice/dice”).
Arabic antenna responds to external plurals (-een/-aat), but also to certain
word patterns which indicate plural. Native speaker will hear these patterns
and plural antenna will respond.
-een plural only used with some words describing people, e.g. professions:
fallaaH, fallaaHeen “farmer, farmers”; Tabbaakh, Tabbaakheen “cook,
cooks”; mudeer, mudeereen “manager, managers.”
-een plural also used with words in kasbaan pattern: humma zaclaaneen
“They are upset.”
CD 3, Track 1
Other words in kasbaan pattern can be made plural with -een:
kaslaan “lazy”: il-awlaad kaslaaneen “The boys are lazy.”
tacbaan “tired”: iHna tacbaan een “We are tired.”
Not all words referring to people are made plural with -een, e.g. awlaad
“boys/children.”
Other external plural is -aat; often used with longer words, e.g. sandawitch,
sandawitchaat “sandwich, sandwiches”; banTalohn, banTalohnaat “pair of
trousers, pairs of trousers”; blooza, bloozaat “blouse, blouses.”
Need to take off feminine -a ending before adding plural -aat: Hukooma,
Hukoomaat “government, governments”; naDDaara, naDDaaraat “pair of
glasses, pairs of glasses”; carabeyya, carabeyyaat “car, cars.”
CD 3, Track 2
-aat plural is used with many loan words:
balkohna, bakohnaat “balcony, balconies”; motosikl, motosiklaat
“motorbike, motorbikes”; tilifizyon, tilifizyonaat “television, televisions.” 
Hammaam, Hammaamaat “bathroom/restroom,
bathroom(s)/restroom(s)” (familiar as Turkish Hammaamaat): 
il-Hammaamaat fayn? “Where are the restrooms?” Double sound
important: Hammaamaat “bathrooms”; Hamaamaat “pigeons.”
24
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 24

CD 3, Track 10
The gimaal plural pattern, e.g. gamal, gimaal “camel, camels.”
Pattern = first root + i + second root + aa + third root.
SaHara “desert” (the “Sahara”): shufna gimaal fiS-SaHara “We saw camels
in the desert.”
kelb, kilaab “dog, dogs”: akhooya canduh talat kilaab “My brother has 
three dogs.” 
gabal “mountain/large hill.” jabal Ali = Mount Ali in Dubai; jabal Tareq =
Gibaltrar (Tareq ibn Zeyaad mountain); jabal moosa = Mount Moses in Sinai.
gabal, gibaal “mountain, mountains.”
sabca “seven” (short version sabac).
Hawalayn “around”: feeh sabac gibaal Hawalayn roma “There are seven
hills (mountains) around Rome.”
gibaal aTlas fil-maghreb “The Atlas mountains are in Morocco.”
CD 3, Track 11
The falaafil pattern. 
A few Arabic words have four root sounds: sulTaan “sultan” (root = s-l-T-n);
fingaan “cup” (root = f-n-g-n) .
Words with four roots are sometimes repeated pair: filfila “pepper” (root =
f-l-f-l); filfila, falaafil “pepper, peppers.”
TamaaTim “tomatoes”; baTaatis “potatoes”
Pattern = first root + a + second root + aa + third root + i + fourth root.
fundu’ “hotel” (root = f-n-d-q, q dropped); fundu’, fanaadi’ “ hotel, hotels.”
Arabic can also impose root system on loan words with four consonants:
futbul, fataabil “football, footballs”; tankir, tanaakir “tanker, tankers.”
CD 3, Track 12
Words such as words of place made by patterns which add m-, also use the
falaafil plural, because now resemble words with four roots. Apply same
pattern: madrasa, madaaris “school, schools”; maTcam, maTaacim
“restaurant, restaurants”; metHaf, mataaHif “museum, museums”; malcab,
malaacib “court/pitch, courts/pitches”; mektab, makaatib “office, offices.”
CD 3, Track 13
Same words with four roots have final long vowel, e.g. sulTaan “sultan.”
27
malik walla kitaaba “king or writing = heads or tails.”
Short loan words with three consonants can be adopted into root system:
yakht, yukhoot “yacht, yachts”: feeh yukhoot kiteer fil-mareena “There are
many yachts in the marina.”
CD 3, Track 7
The ahraam plural pattern, e.g. walad, awlaad “boy, boys/children”;
haram, ahram “pyramid, pyramids.”
Pattern = a + first root + second root + aa + third root.
Other examples: film, aflaam “film, films”; nahr, anhaar “river, rivers.”
CD 3, Track 8
SaaHib “friend/owner” (root = S-H-b connected to “friendship/ownership”).
Arabic word came into English through India as “sahib” (“Mr/Sir”). SaHba
“female friend” (i drops out).
SaaHib, aSHaab “friend, friends”: candaha aSHaab fil-urdunn “She has
friends in Jordan.”
Native speakers can work out meaning of unusual/unfamiliar word such as
afraash “beds” from root (f-r-sh “spread out/lay out”), pattern (plural) 
and context. 
CD 3, Track 9
The kutub plural pattern, e.g. kitaab, kutub “book, books.”
Pattern = first root + u + second root + u + third root.
Kuwaiti words (ending in -ee) often stay the same when describing
feminine and plural words in spoken Arabic (although always add –a in
more formal Arabic): kutub ingleezee “English books” (more formal
equivalent = kutub ingleezeeya).
Other examples of kutub plural pattern: madeena, mudun “town, towns”;
safeena, sufun “ship, ships.”
meena “port”: feeh sufun kibeera fil-meena “There are some large ships in
the port.”
gazeera “island” (as in Al-Jazeera satellite TV).
Egyptians pronounce j as g: gameel/jameel “beautiful”; gideed/jadeed
“new”; gamal/jamal “camel.”
gazeera, guzur “island, islands”: zurna guzur kiteer “We visited a lot of islands.”
26
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 26

“Do you want to play squash?” (to a female).
New stem for present vase fatH “open” (root = f-t-H): aftaH il-baab? “Shall
I open the door?” 
b- added for routine: b-ashrab shaay kull(i) yohm “I drink tea every day.”; 
b-yirooH il-maktab is-saaca sabca “He goes to the office at 7 o’clock.”; 
b-yiftaHoo l-maHall is-saaca tisca “They open the shop at 9 o’clock.”;
saacaat b-tilcab tennis maca abuhaa “She sometimes plays tennis with 
her father.”
(yohm) is-sabt “Saturday” (the “Sabbath”): saacaat b-alcab skwaash yohm
is-sabt “Sometimes I play squash on Saturday.” (Don’t need “on” for “on
Saturday.”)
CD 4, Track 2
Review of future: H- + present verb: H-nirooH (= HanrooH) il-metHaf
bukra “We’ll go to the museum tomorrow.”; H-yishoof (= Hayshoof) 
id-doctor bukra “He’ll see the doctor tomorrow.”
CD 4, Track 3
Review of past verb: katab “wrote”; shirib “drank.” Hollow stems zaar/zur
“visited”; shaaf/shuf “saw”; raaH/ruH “went.”
New stem for past vase: licib “played”: licibtu golf fi esbaanya? “Did you play
golf in Spain?” (to a group).
New stem for past vase: daras “studied.” darastee carabee fil-madrasa?
“Did you study Arabic at school?” (to a female).
New stem for past vase: fataH “opened”: fataHt il-maHall is-saaca sabca 
wi-nuSS “I opened the shop at seven thirty.” 
CD 4, Track 4
New stem for past and present vases connected with “cooking.” Present
stem = Tbukh “cook.” Flowers yi/ti/ni = yu/nu/tu if stem vowelled with u:
nuTbukh ruzz? “Shall we cook rice?”
Flower for “I” always a-: b-aTbukh baTaaTis kull(i) yohm “I cook potatoes
every day.” 
Past stem = Tabakh “cooked”: Tabakhna falaafil imbaariH “We cooked
falafel yesterday.”
29
Emphasis also put on end of plural with longer -ee as final vowel: sulTaan,
salaaTeen “sultan, sultans”; fingaan, fanaageen “cup, cups.”
Some words with additional m- also have final long vowel, e.g. muftaaH “key.”
muftaaH, mafaateeH “key, keys”; mamlook, mamaaleek “Mamlouk,
Mamlouks”; mafhoom, mafaaheem “concept, concepts.”
CD 3, Track 14
Many words for people can add -een for plural. But some have internal
plural pattern.
Words with kareem pattern in singular, often have plural in “Oo la la!”
pattern: kareem “generous person”, kurama “generous people.”
Pattern = first root + u + second root + a + third root + a.
ameer “prince/emir” (first root is ‘half letter’ hamza like a short pause),
umara “princes/emirs.”
wazeer, wuzara “minister, vizier, ministers/vizier.”
Can learn to recognise plural patterns even when not sure of meaning, e.g
bukhala plural of bakheel “miser”; suyoof plural of sayf “sword.”
Some singular patterns more likely to take a particular plural route: 
bayt, buyoot “house, houses”; sayf, suyoof “sword, swords.”
madeena, mudun “town, towns”; gazeera, guzur “island, islands”; safeena,
sufun “ship, ships.”
wazeer, wuzara “minister, ministers”; kareem, kurama “generous (person),
generous people.”
Arabic-speakers will generally try to work out meaning if you use the wrong
plural pattern. If comes from another native speaker, would probably
assume this is a regional difference.
CD 4, Track 1
Review of present verb ‘vases’ and stems.
Present stems already met: shrab “drink”; fham “understand”; ktib “write.”
Hollow stems rooH “go” (root = r-w-H); shoof “see/look” (root = sh-w-f);
zoor “visit” (root = z-w-r).
New stem for present vase: dris “study” (root = d-r-s).
Suggestion = verb by itself: tishrab shaay? “Do you want to drink tea?” (to a
male); nidris carabee? Shall we study Arabic?”
New stem for present vase: lcab “play” (root = l-c-b): tilcabee skwaash?
28
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 28

walla “or”: tifaDDal shaay walla ‘ahwa? “Would you prefer tea or coffee?”
(to a male).
k/l/m is the root to do with speaking/talking: kilma “word.” kallim “speak to
someone”: laazim akallim il-mudeer “I must speak to the manager.”
Arabic can absorb loan words and put them into word patterns to make
new words, e.g. yidallit “delete”; yisayyif “save”; yipaasi “pass”; yisarfis “wait
on”; yitfabrik “fabricate.”
CD 4, Track 9
it- in front of past and present stem carries meaning of doing something
yourself.
itkallim “speak or talk” (yourself rather than with or to someone else). 
yi- + it = yit: yitkallam “he speaks”; titkallam “you (male) speak”. b-yitkallim
carabee “He speaks Arabic.”
a- + it = at. Plus routine b = bat: batkallim carabee “I speak Arabic.”; 
b-titkallim ingleezee? “Do you speak English?” (to a male).
it + kabbar = itkabbar “to be enlarged”: iS-Soora itkabbarit “The picture
was enlarged.”
mushkila “problem”: il-mushkila itkabbarit “The problem got bigger.”
CD 4, Track 10
Root from maksoor “broken” is k-s-r. Present stem ksar/past stem kasar
“break (something)”: kasart naDDartee “I broke my glasses.”
it + kasar = itkasar “to be/to get broken”: naDDartee itkasarit “My glasses
broke.” il-fanaageen ma itkasaritsh “The cups didn’t get broken.”
CD 4, Track 11
There are other varieties which you can learn to recognize over time. 
Pattern adding in- before root: inbasaT/yinbasaT “enjoy yourself” (same
root as mabsooT “happy/pleased”).
Pattern adding ista- before root: istafhim/yistafhim “seek to understand = 
to ask about/to enquire.” 
Verbal varieties have their own patterns for ‘-ing’ words and descriptive
words. Put mu- on stem for verbal varieties. Many familiar through Arabic
names starting with mu-. 
muHammad “praised” (middle root doubled). 
31
CD 4, Track 5
Arabic verbs have “varieties,” often called “forms.” Forms have the same
root but related, modified meanings.
Five or six common varieties in spoken Egyptian. Most verbs have some
varieties. No verbs have all varieties. 
CD 4, Track 6
One of most common form of verb = making middle root double, e.g.
present stem dris “studies” becomes darris “cause someone to study =
teach”. Vowels on stem change slightly: nidarris “we teach”; b-nidarris
carabee “We teach Arabic”.
fham “understands” becomes fahhim “cause to understand = explains”:
mumkin tifahhimnee? “Can you explain (to) me?”
Past stem the same as present: fahhim “explained”: enta fahhimt(i)na “You
explained to us”; enta mafahhimt(i)nash “You didn’t explain to us.”
CD 4, Track 7
Root k-b-r connected with “largeness” can be made into verb. Present stem
kbar “get bigger/grow”: ibnak b-yikbar kull(i) sana “Your son gets bigger
every year.” Past stem kibir “got bigger/grown”: bintak kibrit “Your
daughter’s grown.” (to a female). 
Can double middle root of k-b-r to make stem kabbar “make (something)
big = enlarge”: mumkin tikabbar dah? “Can you enlarge this?” (to a male).
Soora “picture”: mumkin tikabbaree iS-Soora dee? “Can you enlarge this
picture?” (to a female); kabbaru iS-Soora “They enlarged the picture.”
kabbar raasak “make your head bigger = don’t be so petty.” raas
“head/cape.”
This verb pattern can also have meaning to do to someone else: yiSabbiH
“say ‘good morning’ to someone”; yimassee “say ‘good evening’ to
someone”; yicayyid “to say ceed mubaarak (‘happy Eid’) to someone.”
CD 4, Track 8
Root f-D-l as in min faDlak “from your grace = please” connected with
“favour/preference.” yifaDDal “give favour to = prefer”: ena afaDDal 
il-mishmish “I prefer apricots.”; (iHna) nifaDDal nirooH il-mataaHif “We
prefer to go to the museums.”
30
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 30

33
Africa ifriqiya
African ifriqee
again taani
angry zaclaan
another taani
apricot mishmish
apricot-coloured mishmishee
Arab carab, 
Arabic
carabee
around Hawalayn
ask about istafhim/yistafhim
balcony, balconies balkohna,
balkohnaat
bank, banks bank, bunook
bathroom/restroom,
bathroom(s)/restroom(s)
Hammaam, Hammaamaat
beautiful gameel
beds afraash
big kibeer
bigger akbar
bigger than akbar min
biggest akbar
blessed mubaarak
blessed Eid ceed mubaarak
blouse, blouses blooza, bloozaat
boat, boats markib, maraakib
boatman marakbi
book, books kitaab, kutub
boots boot
boy walad
boy, boys walad, awlaad
break (something) kasar
broken maksoor
brown (bean-coloured) bunnee
busy mashghool
camel, camels gamal, gimaal
camel attendant/herder gammaal
cape raas
car, cars carabeyya, carabeyyaat
charmed mascood
cheat at cards rakkib/yirakkib
chef, chefs Tabbaakh, Tabbaakheen
children awlaad
children’s playground malcab awlaad
chosen mustafa, mukhtaar
clean (adj) niDeef
cleaner anDaf
coffee beans bunn
concept, concepts mafhoom,
mafaaheem
congratulations mabrook
cook, cooks (n) Tabbaakh,
Tabbaakheen
cook (v) Tabakh/yuTbukh
cooked matbookh
council of sheikhs/senate maglis 
ish-shuyookh
court(house) maHkama
court, courts malcab, malaacib
English–Arabic glossary
(adj) = adjective; (n) = noun; (v) = verb
musharraf “honoured” from sharraf/yisharraf “honour.” tasharrafna “We
have been honoured = pleased to meet you.”
mubaarak “blessed” (from root b-r-k). ceed mubaarak “blessed Eid”; allah
yibaarik feek “May God bless you”; mabrook “Congratulations.” 
mustafa, mukhtaar “chosen” also come from verbal varieties. 
Most famous mu- word muslim from verbal variety yuslim “to submit yourself.”
mu- can sound like mi- in spoken Arabic. 
mufaDDal “preferred/favourite” from yifaDDal “prefer”: il-mashroob 
il-mufaDDal candee ish-shaay “My favourite drink is tea.”
CD 4, Track 12
Some roots can be put into many patterns. Looking at two common roots will
show how can many words can be weaved from three basic root sounds.
r-k-b the “riding” root.
markib, maraakib “place where riding happens = boat, boats.”
markoob “ridden = mount” (archaic “shoes”).
raakib “riding = passenger.”
rakkeeb “expert rider.”
marakbi “boatman.”
rikib/yirkab “ride (bus/horse, etc.)”
rakkib/yirakkib “invite to ride, mount, fix,” also “cheat at cards.”
itrakkib/yitrakkib “be mounted/fixed.”
CD 4, Track 13
kh-r-g the “exiting” root.
makhrag “place of exit = exit, way out.”
khaarig “going out, exiting.”
kharag/yukhrug “exit, go out.”
itkharrag/yitkharrag “exit out of university = graduate.”
khirreeg “graduate.”
istakhrag/yistakhrag “seek to take out = extract.”
mustakhrig “extractor.”
mukhrig “director (of film).”
CD 4, Track 14
Conclusion.
32
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 32

35
34
honest ameen
honour (v) sharraf/yisharraf
honoured musharraf
hotel, hotels fundu’, fanaadi’
house, houses bayt, buyoot
how much? bikaam
ill cayyaan
invite to ride rakkib/yirakkib
Islam islaam
Islamic islaamee
island, islands gazeera, guzur
jacket jaketta
Jordan il-urdunn
key, keys mufTaaH, mafaaTeeH
king, kings malik, mulook
king of Jordan, the malik il-urdunn
kingdom mamlaka
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia il-mamlaka
il-carabiyya is-sacoodiyya
kitchen meTbakh
knowing caarif
know-it-all carraaf
Kuwait il-kuwayt
Kuwaiti kuwaytee
large kibeer
larger than akbar min
lazy kaslaan
Lebanon libnaan
lemon lamoon
lemon-coloured lamoonee
lesson, lessons dars, duroos
like, I aHibb
local government representative
shaykh il-Haara
long Taweel
longer aTwal
look (v) shaaf/yishoof
lot, a kiteer
loved maHboob
lover/Casanova (expert) Habbeeb
luckier ascad
luckiest ascad
lucky mascood; saceed
mad magnoon
Mamlouk, Mamlouks mamlook,
mamaaleek
manager, managers mudeer,
mudeereen
many kiteer
may God bless you allah yibaarik
feek
minister, ministers wazeer, wuzara
miser, misers bakheel, bukhala
month, months shahr, shuhoor
more aktar
more beautiful agmal
more often aktar
Moroccan maghribee
Morocco il-maghrib
mosque masgid
most complete akmal
most generous akram
most glorious amgad
most luminescent anwar
most noble ashraf
most praised aHmad
mother of many children wallaada
cup, cups fingaan, fanaageen
desert (n) SaHara
desk mektab
destiny il-maktoob
director (of film) mukhrig
distracted sarHaan
dog, dogs kelb, kilaab
door baab
doorman bawwaab
drank shirib
drink (n) il-mashroob
drink (v) shirib/yishrab
drinker (expert) sharreeb
embassy, embassies sifaara,
sifaaraat
emir, emirs ameer, umara
enjoy yourself inbasaT/yinbasaT
enlarge kabbar/yikabaar
enquire istafhim/yistafhim
enslaved mamlook
exit (n) makhrag
exit (v) kharag/yukhrug
explain yahhim/yifahhim
extract (v) istakhrag/yistakhrag
extractor mustakhrig
farmer, farmers fallaaH, fallaaHeen
favourite mufaDDal
film, films film, aflaam
five khamsa
fix rakkib/yirakkib
flute muzmaar
football, footballs futbul, fataabil
friend, female SaHba
friend, friends SaaHib, aSHaab
gate baab
generous kareem
generous person, generous people
kareem, kurama
get bigger kibir/yikbar
Gibaltrar jabal Tareq
glasses, pair of, glasses, pairs of
naDDaara, naDDaaraat
go out kharag/yukhrug
go raaH/yirooH
golf range/course malcab golf
good luck! HaZZ saceed
government Hukooma
government-owned milk il-Hukooma
government village representative
shaykh il-balad
government, governments
Hukooma, Hukoomaat
governmental Hukoomee
graduate (n) khirreeg
graduate (v) itkharrag
grow kibir/yikbar
happier ascad
happiest ascad
happy Eid ceed mubaarak; ceed
saceed
happy mabsooT; saceed
hard worker shaghgheel
head (n) raas
heads or tails malik walla kitaaba
high-earner kasseeb
home bayt
homemade baytee
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 34

37
36
ride (a bus, horse, etc.) rikib/yirkab
rider, (expert) rakkeeb
river, rivers nahr, anhaar
river, of the nahree
river chief rayyis nahree
the river Nile, the nahr in-neel
river transport in-naql in-nahree
rustic fallaaHee
sandwich, sandwiches sandawitch,
sandawitchaat 
Saturday (yohm) is-sabt
saw (n) munshaar
saw (v) shaaf/shuf
say ‘good evening’ to someone
yimassee
say ‘good morning’ to someone
yiSabbiH
say ceed mubaarak (‘happy Eid’) to
someone yicayyid
scholastic madrasee
school, schools madrasa, madaaris
school playground malcab il-
madrasa
see yishoof
seven sabca
sheikh, sheikhs shaykh, shuyookh
sheikhdom mashyakha
ship, ships safeena, sufun
shirt ’ameeS
shop maHall
shorts short
sick cayyaan
sister ukht
Spain asbanya
Spanish asbaanee
speak itkallim/yitkallim
speak to someone kallim/yikallim
squash court malcab squash
study daras/yidris
submit yourself aslama/yuslim
successful person faaliH
Sudan is-soodaan
Sudanese soodaanee
sultan, sultans sulTaan, salaaTeen
switched on shaghghaal
sword, swords sayf, suyoof
Syria soorya
Syrian sooree
talk itkallim/yitkallim
tall Taweel
taller aTwal
tanker, tankers tankir, tanaakir
teach darris/yidarris
television, televisions tilifizyon,
tilifizyonaat
tennis court malcab tennis
thirsty caTshaan
tie (n) karavatta
tired tacbaan
tomatoes TamaaTim
town, towns madeena, mudun
trousers/pants banTalohn
T-shirt teeshirt
understand fihim/yifham
understanding faahim
understood mafhoom
unique fareed
United Kingdom il-mamlaka
il-mutaHida
motorbike, motorbikes motosikl,
motosiklaat
mount (n) markoob
mount (v) rakkib/yirakkib
Mount Ali (in Dubai) jabal Ali
Mount Moses (in Sinai) jabal moosa
mountain, mountains gabal, gibaal
mounted/fixed, be itrakkib/yitrakkib
museum, museums metHaf,
mataaHif
music moosiqa
music lessons duroos mooseeqa
musical mooseeqee
necessary laazim
new gideed
newer agdad
noble shereef
occupied mashghool
office, offices mektab, makaatib
often kiteer
old ’adeem
old hand (applied to people) ’adeem
old in age (‘big’ in the tooth) kibeer
fis-sinn
older a’dam; akbar
open fataH/yiftaH
opened mafTooH
opener, (bottle/can) fattaaHa 
orange (-coloured) burTu’aanee
oranges burTu’aan
other one, the it-taani
owner SaaHib
pair of glasses, pairs of glasses
naDDaara, naDDaaraat
pair of trousers, pairs of trousers
banTalohn, banTalohnaat
passenger raakib
peace on you is-salaamu calaykum
peanuts soodaanee
pepper, peppers filfila, falaafil
petty!, don’t be so kabbar raasak
picture Soora
pigeons Hamaamaat
pitch, pitches malcab, malaacib
play lcab
player (expert) lacceeb
playing field malcab
please min faDlak (to a male); min
faDlik (to a female)
pleased mabsooT
popular maHboob
popular one/person, the il-maHboob
port meena
potatoes baTaatis
praised maHmood; muHammad
prefer faDDal/yifaaDDal
preferred mufaDDal
prince, princes ameer, umara
private property milk khaaSS
problem mushkila
property milk
protected maHfooZ
pump (n) munfaakh
pyramid, pyramids haram, ahram
queen malika
restaurant, restaurants maTcam,
maTaacim
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 36

Bonus words
The following sets of words will enable you to expand what you can say by
varying slightly the structures you already know. Substitute similar words to
create many more new sentences and questions. 
Numbers
1 waaHid 
2 itnayn 
3 talata
4 arbca
5 khamsa
6 sitta
7 sabca
8 tamanya
9 tisca
10
cashra 
11 hidcashar 
12
itncashar 
13
talatcashar
14
arbcatcashar 
15
khamastcashar
16
sittcashar 
17
sabactcashar
18
tamantcashar
19
tisctcashar
20
cishreen 
21
waaHid w-cishreen (“one and twenty”)
29 tisca w-cishreen (“nine and twenty”)
30 talateen
31
waaHid w-talateen (“one and thirty”)
36 sitta w-talateen (“six and thirty”)
40 arbaceen
41
waaHid w-arbaceen (“one and forty”)
45 khamsa w-arbaceen (“five and forty” )
39
38
upset zaclaan
very (after descriptive word) giddan
victorious manSoor
village qarya
visit zaar/yizoor
vizier, vizier wazeer, wuzara
way out makhrag
went raaH/ruH
west maghrib
whinger zannaana
word kilma
worker shaghghaal
write yiktib
written maktoob
wrote katab
yacht, yachts yakht, yukhoot
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 38

Words for describing position
fee “in”
cala “on/on top of”
taHt “under”
foh “above”
wara “behind”
bayn “between”
ganb “next to”
udaam “opposite/in front of”
Hawalayn “around”
Question words
fayn? “where?”
eh? “what?”
imta? “when?”
meen? “who?”
izzay? “how?”
leh? “why?”
kaam? “how many?”
bikaam? “how much?”
Other useful verbs (present/past)
yinzil/nizil “get off/go down” (root = n-z-l)
yilbis/libis “wear/put on” (root = n-z-l)
yudkhul/dakhal “enter/go in” (root = d-kh-l)
yuTlub/Talab “ask for” (root = T-l-b)
ycamil/camal “do/make” (root = c-m-l)
yidfac/dafac “pay” (root = d-f -c)
yishtiri/ishtara “buy” (root = sh-r -y)
yi’aabil/’aabil “meet” (root = q-b -l)
41
50 
khamseen
60 
sitteen
70 
sabaceen
80 
tamaneen
90 
tisceen
100
mia
1000 elf
Days of the week
il-Had “Sunday”
il-itnayn “Monday”
it-talaat “Tuesday”
il-arbca “Wednesday”
il-khamees “Thursday”
il-gumca “Friday”
is-sabt “Saturday”
Months of the year
yanaayir “January”
febraayir “February”
maaris “March”
abreel “April”
maayo “May”
yoonyo “June”
yoolyo “July”
aghusTus “August”
sebtembir “September”
oktobir “October”
nofembir “November”
deesembir “December”
40
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 40

43
42
Your guide to the Michel Thomas Method courses
• No books     • No writing     • Just confidence
Introductory course (2 CDs)
• First 2 hours of the Foundation course
• A taster of the Michel Thomas Method
• £14.99
Foundation course (8 CDs)
• 8-hour course for beginners
• Track listing
• £70.00
French, German, Italian, Spanish 
Language Builders (2 CDs)
• Increase word power and learn 
colloquial phrases
• Track listing
• £20.00
Advanced course (4 CDs)
• 5-hour follow-on to Foundation course
• Track listing
• £50.00
French, German, Italian, Spanish
‘New’ languages
Vocabulary course (5 CDs)
Vocabulary course  (4 CDs)
• Learn 1,000 words – painlessly 
• Learn hundreds of words –
– in 6 hours
painlessly – in 5 hours
• Track listing
• Track listing
• £30.00
• £40.00
Arabic signs
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 42

The Language Builders take the form of a ‘one-to-one’ lecture with Michel Thomas,
building on the words and phrases in the Foundation and Advanced courses. The courses
provide confidence in pronunciation, increase your word-power and consolidate your
knowledge in just two hours. 
Language Builders (2 CDs) £20
French 
ISBN: 978 0 340 78969 8
German 
ISBN: 978 0 340 78973 5
Italian 
ISBN: 978 0 340 78975 9
Spanish 
ISBN: 978 0 340 78971 1
The Vocabulary courses carry forward the Michel Thomas Method teaching tradition
and faithfully follow this unique approach to foreign language learning, with the all-audio
and ‘building-block’ approach. 
Vocabulary courses: French, German, Italian, Spanish (5 CDs) £30
French
ISBN: 978 0 340 93982 6
German
ISBN: 978 0 340 93984 0
Italian
ISBN: 978 0 340 93983 3
Spanish
ISBN: 978 0 340 93973 4
Vocabulary courses: ‘new’ languages (4 CDs) £40
Arabic 
ISBN: 978 0 340 98323 2
Mandarin 
ISBN: 978 0 340 98358 4
Russian 
ISBN: 978 0 340 98324 9
Background reading
The Test of Courage is Michel Thomas’s thrilling biography. Written by acclaimed
journalist Christopher Robbins, it tells the story of the world’s greatest language teacher
and of how his experience at the hands of the Gestapo fuelled his passion for language
teaching. 
ISBN: 978 0340 81245 7; paperback; £9.99
In The Learning Revolution renowned instructional psychologist Dr Jonathan Solity draws
on professional experience and lengthy discussions with Michel Thomas to explain how
and why the Michel Thomas Method of language teaching works where so many 
others fail.
ISBN: 978 0340 92833 2; hardback; £19.99
45
The Michel Thomas Method product range
Introductory course (2 CDs*) £14.99
Arabic 
ISBN: 978 0340 95728 8
Dutch 
ISBN: 978 0340 97170 3
French 
ISBN: 978 0340 78064 0
German 
ISBN: 978 0340 78066 4
Italian 
ISBN: 978 0340 78070 1
Japanese 
ISBN: 978 0340 97458 2
Mandarin 
ISBN: 978 0340 95722 6
Polish 
ISBN: 978 0340 97518 3
Portuguese 
ISBN: 978 0340 97166 6
Russian 
ISBN: 978 0340 94842 2
Spanish 
ISBN: 978 0340 78068 8
*These are the first 2 hours of the Foundation course.
Foundation course (8 CDs) £70
Arabic 
ISBN: 978 0340 95727 1
Dutch 
ISBN: 978 0340 97169 7
French 
ISBN: 978 0340 93891 1
German 
ISBN: 978 0340 93892 8
Italian 
ISBN: 978 0340 93894 2
Japanese 
ISBN: 978 0340 97457 5
Mandarin 
ISBN: 978 0340 95726 4
Polish 
ISBN: 978 0340 97517 6
Portuguese 
ISBN: 978 0340 97167 3
Russian 
ISBN: 978 0340 94841 5
Spanish 
ISBN: 978 0340 93893 5
Advanced course (4 CDs) £50
Arabic 
ISBN: 978 0340 95729 5
Dutch 
ISBN: 978 0340 97171 0
French 
ISBN: 978 0340 93898 0
German 
ISBN: 978 0340 93913 0
Italian 
ISBN: 978 0340 93900 0
Japanese 
ISBN: 978 0340 97459 9
Mandarin 
ISBN: 978 0340 95723 3
Polish 
ISBN: 978 0340 97517 6
Portuguese 
ISBN: 978 0340 97168 0
Russian 
ISBN: 978 0340 94843 9
Spanish 
ISBN: 978 0340 93899 7
44
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 44

46
These Michel Thomas Method products are available from all good bookshops
and online booksellers.
To find out more, please get in touch with us
For general enquiries and for information about the Michel Thomas
Method:
Call: 020 7873 6354  Fax: 020 7873 6325
Email: mtenquiries@hodder.co.uk
To place an order:
Call: 01235 400414  Fax: 01235 400454  Email: uk.orders@bookpoint.co.uk
www.michelthomas.co.uk
You can write to us at:
Hodder Education, 338 Euston Road, London NW1 3BH
Visit our forum at:
www.michelthomas.co.uk
Download and learn a new language anywhere
Download the Michel Thomas language courses straight to your PC or
Mac. Listen as you travel, while you drive, or any time your ears are free
but your hands are busy.
For more information, visit www.audible.co.uk/michelthomas
Have your say! Listener response form
1. What is your name?
2. Are you ■male or ■female?
3. What is your age?
4. What is your occupation?
5. What is your address (email and/or postal)?
6. How did you hear about the Michel Thomas Method?
7. Why are you learning a language?
8. Which language are you studying?
9. Which of the Michel Thomas Method courses have you done?
10. Where did you buy/borrow them from?
11. Have you tried another method before? If so, which product?
12. What’s the best thing about learning with the Michel Thomas Method?
Please send this form to our FREEPOST address: 
Hodder Education Consumer Marketing, 338 Euston Road, 
FREEPOST NW6148, London NW1 3BH
If you would like to be put on the Michel Thomas Method mailing list to be kept 
up to date with the latest offers and new products, please tick the box ■
The Michel Thomas Method aims to offer a great learning experience. If you have
any comments or suggestions please email us at mtenquiries@hodder.co.uk
✁
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 46

Learn another language the way you learnt your own
Press reviews for the Michel Thomas Method 
language courses
The Times
‘the nearest thing to painless learning’
The Daily Telegraph
‘works like a dream’
Sunday Business
‘…ideal for any business traveller who needs to be able to get around
confidently’
Time Out
‘…five minutes into the first CD, you already feel like you’re winning’
Red
‘Hugely inspiring’
Daily Star
‘Michel’s methods will teach you effectively and easily’
The Daily Telegraph
‘a great way to learn; it’s fast and it lasts’
www.michelthomas.co.uk
MTM ARABIC VOCABULARY:ARABIC  3/4/09  11:26  Page 48

